THE Lawful Preacher: Or a short DISCOURSE: PROVING, That they only ought to
preach who are ordained MINISTERS, Occasionally delivered in some Lectures at
Epping.

By John Ferriby Minister of Thoydon-Garnon in Essex.

Now printed upon the Anti-preaching of some against it in the same Pulpit
about the latter end of November last.

AS ALSO, The Pulpit-Guard-Relieved: In a short Appendix in Answer to a late
Book called The Pulpit-Guard-Routed, written by Tho. Collier.

Convenit and scriptis nomen, carbone notatum
Nigro --
The second Impression corrected and amended.

LONDON, Printed for William Roybould at the Unicorn in Paul's Churchyard near
the little North-door, MDCLIII.

To my dearly Beloved FRIENDS, The Parishioners of Thoydon-Garnon, and others
my Hearers at my Lecture at Epping.
Beloved in the Lord,
I Told you the reason of my Preaching, you know the reason of my Printing
these Sermons; I Preached them voluntarily to establish you, I Printed them by
a kind of constraint to satisfy others. I Preached them to manifest the truth
to prevent others misleading you; I Printed them to defend the Truth, I wish
they may help you to reduce others. What my Public labors (and open
oppositions from some) have been among you, you are the best witnesses; what my
secret trouble has been, partly from a sense of mine own weakness, partly from
some incapacity to do what I desired among you, God and mine own conscience can
best testify. I cannot but wonder at Gods providence in this, to put me to
assert the outward Call of a Minister in Public, who (it may be) have so often
questioned mine inward Call in private. But hitherto has God brought me.

Some of you may have heard what solicitations I have had to other places of
greater profit; most of you know what resolutions I had to return to the place
whence I was driven, of less means, had not your importunity, procuring their
consent, held me here. Many have been the scandals I have suffered about it,
through the confident reports of bold adversaries, for which I could willingly
have Printed both your engagement to me here, and their testimony thence; the
one to free me from the murmurings of some against mine abode here, the other
to clear me from that false imputation of receiving profit thence, while that
Living lay unresigned in mine hands; but to have done it without consent might
not have been civil, to have done it at all (besides the swelling of the book)
might have savoured of arrogance: wherefore I forbear, my conscience bearing me
witness, and many upon the private sight of the Papers being already satisfied.

I did intend (if I had been in Print at all) something that might have been
more for your practice, although I hope this may be for your profit: But since
God has called me out in this, I will improve it what I can. If by what I have
already suffered, or may by this further undergo, you may receive any
advantage, I shall think my labor well spent, and my sufferings abundantly
recompensed.

I shall therefore beseech you, 1. That you would not esteem or be contented
with any light or heat, but what is caused by the rising and efficacy of the
Sun of Grace in you. There are a sort of people, who being dead in sins and
trespasses, never stir at all, but lie senseless in the grave: I speak not
this to them, although I could be glad they might hear the voice of the Son of
God and live: that Jesus Christ would effectually call them (as once Lazarus)
out of that deadly sleep that has seized on them. But there are others who
seem to stir, yet not from a principle of true life in them: who continuing in
sin, think it Grace enough to pretend to an opinion: who neglecting the Power
of godliness, content themselves to talk of some Disciplinary parts of
Religion; I never liked their building, who begun the Fabric at the roof, (but
indeed he that intends to draw only the picture of an house, needs not care at
which end he begins) I never fancied their Religion, which begins (and ends
too) only in opinion. To hear drunkards talk of gathering Churches, and
swearers question the Call of Ministers, etc. (although that is something more
then Disciplinary) is such a Paradox in Religion, that the Churches of Christ
have not usually bin acquainted with all. When men out of a desire to appear
something, yet for want of any true work of Grace upon their spirits, shall
take up only that fashion of Religion, which may suit best the times in which
they are, they may be good talkers, but seldom are sound practisers of
godliness.

I would have you labor to find the work of Grace upon your spirits, which
may make you new creatures, for in Christ Jesus neither circumcision, nor
uncircumcision avails any thing, but a new creature, Gal. 6. When that spring
once moves the wheels, although the work may seem to go more slowly, and with
some more trouble, yet it goes more surely, and with much more truth. Practice
more the power then the show of godliness: let your lives, rather then your
tongues declare your Religion. Old-fashioned, unskilful Limners; were
constrained to underwrite the name of what they Painted, that people might know
what it was rather by the inscription then the draught. Such is the
new-fashioned Religion of some men, that if they did not tell you, it was
Religion they professed, men would scarcely deem it such by their profession.
People are apt to think well of being Religious, but they are often mistaken in
what is Religion: they will grant godliness to be great gain, but they are not
convinced what is godliness. If I find a man once shaken, who has been truly
rooted; misled, who has been set right in Gods way; as I am apt to be much
troubled for him, so I desire to be very tender of him: but when I see a loose
and light body tossed with every mind, I am little affected with it; It is as
much wonder to see the one stable in blustering times, as the other shaking.

2. I shall entreat you, That you would now be conversant in the study of
Fundamental Truths. When Fundamentals are questioned, we had need to be well
satisfied about them: when the foundation is aimed at, the greatest defense had
need to be made there. Paul desired to see the Romans, to establish them, Romans
1. 11. it is from (...) which is rendered (by one) ruitur a suffulcio: surely if
ever people had need to be established in the Truth, it is now; when truth (in
this sense) decays, and its very foundation begins to be shaken. When men build
their Religion upon props set up by their own fancy, they may quickly be
carried besides the Truth. It is a strange thing to see how men now adays
delight most in the loose notions of their own conceiving, but little in the
standing. Truth laid by Gods Word. This is to lose Truth in the mist of their
own making, and to put out their own eyes by the dust they themselves have
raised; they that fly so high in their affected, although confused notions,
frequently leave the Truth behind, when through the coldness of the second
region, they are so frozen in their affections, that (if ever they return) they
seldom pursue Truth with much love after. This is to lay up a man's Religion in
a Castle built in the Air, when every wind of Doctrine may toss it to and
fro. It is an unhappy thing, that some men are guilty of, to delight in
expressions they understand not, and to be lost in the pursuit of those cloudy
notions they cannot reach: when they are always pointing at what they have but
small ken of themselves, although they cannot discover them to others. By this
the growth of true Religion is much hindered in them, and the profit of
Christian conference much prevented in their meetings, when much is proposed, a
great deal talked of, but little gotten, nothing agreed on. There is more
advantage to be gotten in one hours conference with him, who understands and
will speak of a Fundamental in Religion, then in many days with those; for
although there less may be talked of, there is more discovered.

I would have you much in the study of faith, repentance, Justification, etc.
To that end read much of the Scripture, and of those other good Books (written
by godly men) which God has helped this age withal. I could wish (besides
others) you would be all well versed in that little Carechisme I use among the
younger people: The Assemblies ((...) chism^
which although small in bulk, is as full stuffed with sound Truths as ever I
saw any so closely comprised. Enquire after the good old way, and walk in it.
The most of our new lights are but old darknesses, which are caused rather by
the privation, then the increase of true Light: most of our new truths are but
old errors, rising afresh out of the bottomless pit; the hand of liberty
having rouled away that stone, which the arm of Government had before laid to
stop the mouth of it.

Beware of controversies that are either above your reach, or less necessary
to Religion: the former may puzzle and perplex you; the later but disturb and
unquiet you: the former often ends in defection from the Truth; the later only
in difference and contention among (seeming) brethren: By both men are
frequently so forced or persuaded from the Truth, that if they are not hurried
into one, they are cheated into another error. When Peter would prevent
peoples falling from their stedfastness, he presses them to grow in Grace, 1
Pet. 3. 18. A low house settled upon a good foundation, will stand longer then
an high tottering edifice upon a weak basis. Not that I would have you
contented with small measures, low statures in Grace; build as high as you
will, as you can, only let the foundation be firm and proportionable.

3. I would beg you to measure all the Doctrines you hear by the line of Gods
word: seeing there are false spirits gone forth into the world, it is good to
try the spirits, whether they are of God or not, 1 John 4. 1, 2. It is an evil
thing (in this) to have men's persons in admiration. If the best of men on
earth, if an Angel from Heaven should bring any other Doctrine, then what is
left by Christ for your direction, let him be Anathema. Tout human
proposition, etc.
Gal. 1. 18. Charron in his book of wisdom tells us, that every humane
proposition is of equal Authority, unless reason make the difference. No
Religious doctrine is of any reputation further then the Scripture speaks it
true. When men's words are only taken, it is no hard thing to be deceived: when
men believe only with a probable Faith, they are easily mislead. Non exploratis
rationibus traditionum probabilem tantum fidem portant, Cyprian.
The Apostle bids the Thessalonians try all things, because they should (...)
hold fast (as by violence) what was good, 1 These. 5. 18. What weapon or beast a
man has well proved, he will carefully preserve, when what may be as good (if
he know it not) may be more easily parted withal. It is a great advantage the
Devil has given him, when men hold Truth upon too slender grounds, Gold and
silver is not valued, if not known to be such. Children may have gold in their
hands, when (if children, whom you may persuade it is brass) it is no hard
matter to cheat them out of it. They were Children that were tossed to and fro,
Ephesians. 4. If a stone be loose, although upon a good foundation, it is no
difficult thing to remove it: that will most probably continue, which is well
fastened.

When men pin their faith upon others sleeves, whithersoever those sleeves are
stretched out, their Faith must follow: when doctrines are judged of by the men
that bring them (be it what it will) it can only be so prevalent, as the man
that vents it is of Authority with them that hear it. The Corinth. were
accused as carnal that they pretend, some to Paul, others to Apollo, 1 Cor. 3.
4. when yet they were both Ministers, v. 5. (Good God!) what are they, who are
some for this, others for that gifted brother, who are no Ministers, only
intrude into that Office entrusted unto others. Thus men best like, and most
cry up those Preachers who are of that party they most affect, and then the
Doctrine they bring, whether true or false. This is to judge of things by the
men that do them (a false rule) and not of men by the things they do. Hence the
Prevailing party has always most followers, such Powerful Preachers can
command Audience. It is the practice of our late Astrologers to gaze only on
those Stars which are ascendant, and still speak best of those Constellations
which have the strongest influence, especially if they have but a favorable
aspect toward them: whose Prognostics are calculated for the Meridians of
strength and weakness, of power and impotency. I vvish it were not too much
the fault of our new-fashioned hearers, who love not the light of the
brightest Star, if not of their party.

But I shall hope, and ask better things of you: let truth and falsehood be the
cause of your esteem or disrespect of what you hear: let that have best
reception with you, which has most Authority from Scripture, although least of
the power of men with it. When false coin is abroad, all men will look to the
money they receive: Seeing it has been foretold, that in the last days
(which are these) there should come seducers, and our experience tells us it is
fulfilled, let us try before we trust, and examine the Doctrine we hear,
before we believe it.

4. I would have you suspect, and be shy of whatsoever doctrines please the
flesh; of whatsoever it is that indulgeth corrupt nature. Flesh and blood are
no more apt to love, then they are able to enter into the Kingdom of God: the
flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these
are contrary one to the other, Gal. 5. 17. It is very unlikely that should be
from the spirit, which is delightful to the flesh. Many smooth the way, and
widen the gate to heaven, I pray God they lead not people that way to hell.
Facilis descensus Averni, etc.
The down-hill passage is most easy. Where Christ says, The way is narrow,
and the gate is strait that leads to life, Mat. 9. 13, 14. he presently
subjoyns a seasonable warning; to take heed of false Prophets. The way may be
paved with Agates, which yet may be painful to the feet of the traveller; the
gate may be made of Diamonds, which yet may be strait in the passage.

It has been the general practice, and constant sign that God has given of
false Prophets, to preach smooth things: they promise peace, Jer. 23. 17. they
seduce my people, saying, Peace, when there is no peace, and daub with
untempered mortar, Ezekiel. 13. 10. they see visions of peace, ver. 16. they sow
pillows to All armholes, ver. 18. they save the souls alive, ver. 19. they
strengthen the hands of the wicked, promising life, v. 22. It is the duty and
delight of true Prophets, to promise life, to preach peace to those who are
entitled to it. Yea they would that the peaceful promises of the false
Prophets might be fulfilled; as Jer. 28. 6. Amen, the Lord do so, the Lord
perform the words which thou have prophesied: but to speak pleasing things to
him that lies in sin, is so far from preaching Heaven, that it may occasion
men's running to hell. What ease, what advantage can it be to godly Ministers to
threaten judgment against sinners, were it not for Gods command, and their
profit? What probability is there, that people should receive advantage by
those doctrines that continue their carnal peace? They were false Teachers,
who by their lies caused profane people to reproach the true Prophets with the
burden of the Lord, Jer. 23. 33. they thereby refused the words of the true
Prophets, because they spoke of the judgment of God against them: but men that
are proclive to sleep need no rocking.

Let me in the Name of the Holy God, warn you of any doctrine that favors, or
tends to sinful liberty. Indeed Christ has purchased liberty to his Saints,
but we must not use our liberty as an occasion to the flesh, Gal. 5. 13. To be
Christ's freemen and sins slaves at the same time, is impossible. I cannot but
wonder at some new Preachers, who cry up mercy and grace, as if there were
nothing of justice or truth in God at all: who dare promise mercy to sinners,
and by their promise of life, strengthen their hands in wickedness? It is one
thing to offer mercy to people upon repentance; another to promise mercy to
them while sinners. It is one thing to hold out Christ to them that will
receive him; another, to promise Christ to them that refuse him.

Religious Greenbam speaking how God had joined godliness and the means of
godliness together, calls them frantic heretics that neglect the means, etc.
Beware of them, who dare persuade you to a neglect of duty, who by their
preaching can intimate it as needless to be pressed, as unnecessary to be
practiced. If there are Impostors under heaven, if there are any upon earth,
that bring another Gospel then what Christ left, these are the men; who under a
pretense of preaching Christ and free grace, brand all those with the name of
legal Preachers, who but endeavor to convince people of sin, or persuade them
to their duty. As if discovering to men their need of Christ, were not
preaching of Christ; and that the Spirit had not been sent by Christ, who came
to convince the world of sin, Joh. 16. 8. As if pressing men to the duty the
God of mercy requires, were to deny the freeness of grace; and that Peter had
abridged the free grace of God, when he commanded people to repent and be
converted, that their sins might be blotted out, Act. 3. 19. As if there were
no difference between duty and desert, between means and merit. There is a vast
difference between what God requires as a means, to which ex gratia he
promises a reward, and the doing of a work which ex debito deserves its wages.
In this there is a proportion between the work and the reward, yea, the man
performing it does the work by his own strength: but in the other, besides the
disproportion between the thing required, and the reward promised; and besides
his love (in whose power it was) to impose no harder a task upon us, he that
out of grace promises the reward, out of the same mercy gives strength to
perform the means. So that in this, the doctrine of free grace is much
advanced. Can it be thought that man must be only passive in the work of his
salvation? To what end had he a reasonable soul given him, if not to employ its
faculties (especially) for that better part which cannot be taken from him?
Hezekiah might have been cured without the application of figs: Naaman might
have been healed without going to Jordan, yet the not use of commanded means
might have prevented their desired deliverance (but of that infra.) It is a
pretty observation of learned Perkins upon Rev. 3. 20. If any man will open,
etc. man's will is not like a piece of wax, only passive, which without any
action receives impression; but as fire, which as soon as it is fire, it
burns, and as soon as it burns it is fire.

It is the sad effect such preaching has produced in many hearers (in some
that I dare not but hope well of) that they scarcely endure to hear any thing of
duty pressed. They can be content to hear of believing as a Gospel-duty, but if
repentance or obedience be mentioned, that is, what we cannot perform, these
are but legal duties. As if believing were less a duty, then repentance; or
that we were of our selves more able to perform one then the other. Or as if
repentance were less a Gospel-duty then believing: when it is manifest that
repentance could have no place under the legal Covenant. The Covenant of works
was to do or die: under which, as we are unable to perform, so neither could we
be profited by repentance. For this observe that of Mar. 1. 14, 15. Note it
well: Christ is said to preach the Gospel when he preached repentance.
It is only the Covenant of grace through Christ that admits repentance. That
came in through Jesus Christ, it was one of the new laws given us by that Lord,
and then can be nothing else but a Gospel-duty. How easy is it for people to
mistake? and then with violence to pursue what through-mistake they propose as
good? like some hotmettal'd dogs, which over-hunting the true sent, are either
quite beaten out, or follow what is false.

Friends! Is duty more out of fashion now than it was? Is it the liberty of
Christians to be free from Gods service? To be free from sin, was to be
servants to righteousness, Romans 6. 18. Can the increase of mercy free us from,
or should it engage us more to duty? May I not say to those who are guilty, as
Paul, Gal. 3. 1. Oh foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should
not obey he truth? Do but observe what an unchristian liberty some have made
use of (even some professors of godliness) since this doctrine of liberty has
been so much preached: unto what an height of grossest profaneness, of ranting
wickedness some have run, who began but at the neglect of duty! Tender
consciences would be afraid of such occasions of evil. Duty helps to pinnion
the wings of the flesh; take off that pinnion, give the wings but liberty,
whither (short of heaven) may it not fly? Duty lops off the exuberant branches
of the old stock; neglect that, the sprouts may quickly grow long and thriving.

Good God! what hardships do not only the Ministers, but the truth of Christ
suffer from men of contrary minds? It has been the Ministers work formerly to
vindicate their Ministry against Papists, because not ordained in their Sea: It
is now their business to uphold their Ministry against those, who would null
their Call, because (as they say) received from Rome. It was not long since
that our great contest was against the Pelagians, who from the Scriptures
pressing duty, would have inferred a power in man's Will to perform it: We have
now to do with them, who because man has no power in himself naturally to
perform it, would have no duty pressed at all. Thus are we ground between two
milstones: But neither extreme is good, when virtus is in the middle. The Truth
is, men love not Duty, and therefore dislike the pressing it: they delight in
sin, and therefore hate the reproving it, They would stand still all the day
idle, yet willingly receive the penny, as if they had wrought in the vineyard.
Ephraim loves to tread out the corn, but not to break the clods, Hos 10. 11.
people are willing to receive the profit, but love not, like not the burden of
the work: they would feed upon the corn of the blessing, but love not the yoke
of obedience: Love then that preaching best that most discovers your duty; Be
willing to perform whatsoever God requires of you: Let this prevail with you to
set up Duty in your families, to practice obedience in your persons: The Lord
knows how many families there are in which duty was never yet set up, and
observes where it has been begun, but is now neglected. The Lord grant that
none of you be found in the number of those enemies that will not have Christ
to rule over them.

But because reproving of sin, and threatening judgment against it; pressing
duty upon the people, and promising mercy upon the performance of it, is looked
on as so legal, so unsuitable to Gospel-preaching; as what too much straitens
Gods grace, and enlarges man's power beyond the rule, I Will lay down some things
briefly to vindicate it from all mistakes.

1. There is less probable deceit, not so much palpable danger in reproving
sin, and threatening judgment against it, whereby people are convinced of their
misery; than in holding out large and inconditionate offers of grace, from
which men groundlesly may expect mercy. There may be more pain in searching of
the wound, but there is less danger; there may be more ease in skinning of it,
but less safety. We find the Scripture very often condemning false Prophets
for preaching smooth things, promising life, and thereby strengthening the
hands of the wicked in sin (in many places, as was touched on before,) but
where do we find any prohibition of, or reprcof for an endeavor to convince the
people of their sin, that they may afterward be convinced of righteousness? The
Scribes and Pharisees are said to bind heavy burdens upon others shoulders,
Mat. 23. 4. they pressed a strict observance of the Law, a burden too heavy to
be born by men's own shoulders; but their fault was not in pressing of the Law,
but in pressing it as a meritorious cause of life, not showing them the way,
how Evangelically through Christ to perform it. Thus to press the law is
blameworthy. But secondly, Their fault there reproved was not so much in
pressing the Law as the rule of obedience, but not practicing themselves what
they pressed upon others, not walking by the same rule themselves. For you see
Christ gives it as a charge to people, to obey what they commanded, ver. 3.
Whatsover they bid you observe, that observe and do. How often was Christ and
his Apostles in reproving sin, and threatening punishment! Luke 13. 3. 5. Except
ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. unrighteous,
drunkards, extortioners, etc. shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, besides
many other places.

2. (Not to name the practice of Moses and the Prophets,) it has been the
unquestioned method of Christ and his Disciples, to press those duties upon
people, which by their own strength they are not able to perform. Christ
preached repentance, which was not in man's power (of himself) to practice,
Matthew. 4. 7. John preached it, Matthew. 3. 2. The Disciples preached it, Mark 6.
8. 12. Nay, it was part of the work he prescribed them after his resurtection;
that repentance and remission of sins should be preached to all Nations in his
name, Luke 24. 47. The command Peter gave a people unable of themselves to
perform it, was, repent and be converted, Act. 3. 19.

Surely that is the best preaching that is nearest the pattern given in the
Mount; that is the most Gospelway of teaching, that is most agreeable to
Christ's method. One upon Mark. 6. 1^. calls repentance, the very sum of the
preaching of John, of Christ, of the Apostles. Summa and caput praedicationis,
Johanuis, Christi and Apostolo^^m.


3. What duty people are pressed to from the word, it is their sin not to do;
through their own default they are not able to perform. So that if it were for
no other end, but to show Gods right that he has to our obedience, our
wickedness that we are not able to practice it, our duty, what we ought to
perform, this were sufficient cause of pressing it, and from this good use
might be made of it. Disobedience to the Law is sin, 1 John 3. 4. it is called
(...). Although the observance of duty can deserve no reward, yet the not doing
it deserves severe punishment. Note.
The great end of God's giving Scripture was, to reprove, to instruct, 1 Timothy
3. 16. What must we reprove if sin must not be spoken of? What instruction must
be given, if duty must not be pressed? Yea, it is intimated, that who would not
hear reproof, rebuking, exhortation, would not endure sound doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.
2, 3.

That people cannot perform what God requires, is from their own defaults: so
that it is no injustice in God to require it. God made man righteous, Eccles.
7. 29. he may justly require according to what he gave, not according to what
we have. The Master that gave many talents, may require the whole sum,
although the servant (through his idleness) is not able to pay it. It is mere
mercy, that God accepts according to what a man has, 2 Cor. 8. 12. he may in
justice require according to what he first gave.

4. The pressing of duty upon people unable to perform it, is the ordinary, and
may prove the efficacious means to enable men to do it. The Ninevites repented
at the preaching of Jonah, Mat. 12. 41. Peter preached repentance, Acts 1. 9.
and some thousands were (by Gods blessing on it) enabled to perform it, Cap. 4.
4. The few that were truly chosen, were of the number of them who were
outwardly called before, Matthew. 24. 14. I confess the means is not effectual to
all, but must it be therefore used to none? nay, because we know not to whom it
may be effectual, therefore it must be used to all, that it may be profitable
to those to whom God intends it. People are much mistaken in the pressing of
duty, who look upon it only as a command of obedience, not at all as a means
of profit: in the commands of God, there is not only a discovery of duty, but
an offer of power and strength to perform it. It were but vain to bid a
grovelling child arise, which of it self is unable; but if at the same time I
hold forth my hand to help it, it may be a means to raise it. It had been an
hard injunction of Christ, to bid Lazarus arise, when he had been dead four
days and not able to stir: but when the voice carried with it a secret power
to enable him, he was able to come out of the grave: it was the Angel that
stirred the water, whereby the diseased were cured at Bethesda; must not
impotent people be advised therefore to go to the pool, because of themselves
they could not work the cure?

But where commanded duties are not practiced, they leave them without excuse
that neglect them. God sent Ezekiel to a stubborn people who (he knew) neither
would nor could practice his commands, that they might know that there was a
Prophet among them. Ezekiel. 2. 5.

5. Duty is not pressed by Ministers as a meritorious cause of salvation, but
as the condition which God requires in them to whom he will give it. When we
have done all we can, we are unprofitable servants, Luke 17. May not God, who
in free love gives the reward, propose what condition he pleases? nay, which
is more, he that proposes the condition, makes people to perform what he
requires: (as was touched before) which is very plain, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26. 27.

The result of all is, To beseech you to consider, how they cheat you of the
Truth, and may deceive you of your Souls, who preach the neglect, or
needlesness of that Duty God commands and will have (though he himself work it)
in those to whom he will show mercy: such who call the way easy and broad, which
Christ calls strait and narrow: that promise life to men in sin, and strengthen
the hands of the wicked in their iniquity.

6. I shall desire you: That you would be more in judging of yourselves, then
in censuring others. It is (now) a great part of some men's Religion, to find
or make faults in others, when they observe not their own: Magis utimur
spectacillis quam speculis.
they use spectacles to look on others whereby their faults are multiplied, but
endure not a looking glass to reflect upon themselves that their deformity
might be discovered. Indeed men's eyes are naturally placed to look outward on
others, when they need the help of some reflecting glass to take an inward
view of themselves. But surely there is (besides nature) some wicked art,
whereby they are helped, notwithstanding the undiscovered beam in their own
eye, to observe so clearly a smaller moth in their Brothers. People are so
busied to espy faults in other men's houses, that they neglect the cleansing of
their own.

You may observe others faults privately to reprove, not publicly to reproach
a Brother: you may take notice of others sins, to be warned by their falls, not
to make it an occasion of sinning to you: yet in this, as I would not have you
judge them by the reports of others, so neither to measure them by the line of
malice. As report like an evil spirit often presents that which never was in
substance: so malice like a false glass presents double what is.

Be chiefly in the examination of your selves, with what face will you reprove
others, when your own faults are more eminent? Romans 2. 21, 22, 23. A dirty
brush seldom makesclean clothes. If your brother be guiltless when you accuse
him, it manifests malice, at least too much credulity, if faulty; yet when you
are guilty, it argues too little sincerity. Prove your selves, was Paul's rule,
2 Cor. 13. 5. The best Christian is most at home; the best husband is most
conversant in his own books.

Is it that there is not work enough at home, that you are so busy abroad? Is
not the sin of your life enough to employ you in the examination of, and
mourning for it? will not the making sure your title to Eternal happiness find
you work enough in private? (poor souls!) If you have not work enough to day,
you will be sure to make more before the morrow. Observe your own sins, and
endeavor to avoid them: mark your own temptations, and endeavor to resist
them. Let your own tempations make you pity others if they do fall: Let your
own aptness to fall plead excuse, if it be but an infirmity: I would not have
you too rigid against the (only) infirmities of others, yet I would not have
you too indulgent toward your own. I would have you do with infirmities, as
modest Housewives do with some lesser pieces of sluttery, although they will
not endure it in their own, yet they will excuse it in their neighbors house.
Then shall I think you religious indeed, and that the Lord intends good to your
souls, when you accuse not others, but your selves; when your endeavor is more
to amend your own, then observe others deformities.

I thought to have spoken a word to you about the Sacrament, but I have been
too long in the porch already, besides, that concerning mine own Congregation
only, I shall refer it to a more private occasion: You may conceive upon what
grounds I administer it; you know for what reasons I have for some time forborne
it; some of you have been informed what course I am about in our future
preparation for it. Only I cannot but observe that those who before made it
their argument against us, that we administered it to some, whom we had then no
power to debar; are now as apt to reproach us, when they think we have as
little power to reform it. But I am comforted in this providence, that I had
declared my resolutions about it, before it was objected against us. I see it
is hard to be free from blame, when men love to find fault.

All I have now to speak to you, is that you would not turn your back upon the
Truth. Some may neglect the reading, from a want of desire to know Truth;
others may cast a way all as false, because not suitable to their fancy. This
will prove a lasting record against you, if I shall not now prevail with you.

If the Preaching of Ordained Ministers be the Ordinance, then wait upon it;
run not up and down after unprofitable Teachers; the Prophet Jeremiah says,
They shall not profit (as in the book:) And one of their great penmen in part
confesses that they cannot convert, nor beget faith: as shall be showed in the
Appendix after it. God (through his great mercy) has not left me wholly
without witness (I mean some seal of my Ministry among you) the Lord increase
the number, that I may give up mine account with joy. It has frequently
troubled my soul in private, to think what hopeful Reformation among us has
been hindered by the false aspersions, and causeless opposition of some: But the
Lord will require it at their hands. The good God pardon it.

Beloved, Let not such things discourage you; it is a sign God has some work
to do, where the Devil stirs opposition against it. I would beseech you to
contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints, Jude ver. 3. and with Paul,
I shall beg you to be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of
the Lord. The Lord appear so upon you and me, that we may order our
conversation according to his will, that we may all walk that way he has
prescribed us to heaven. That when the great day of account shall come, we may
all have our names written in the Book of Life, which is the earnest prayer of,

Your affectionate and willing servant in the Work of the Lord, JOHN FERRIBY.

To the Reader.
READER;
APologies of (this nature) are so customary, that when most sincerely and
needfully used, they are judged but Complements. The needless requests of
sturdy beggars make many wanting medicants go without their alms. Such is this
Subject, of which many have spoken so much, and some so well, that it is hard
to say any thing that has not been touched on before; such my sense of
weakness (of which too much is discovered in this) that it is hard to say any
thing at all worthy. Wherefore I might plead sufficient and real excuse, were
it not that I fear the excuse it self would again need to be excused: For, if
it be fruitful, why should not the Sun shine on it, without the Gentleman Usher
of a Complement to bring it forth? if not, why had not the darkness still
covered it? But there being a kind of necessity laid upon me, which, although
no fair pretense for absolutely unlawful, may be a just plea for seemingly
inconvenient things; I shall give you a short and inoffensive narrative of the
occasion, and then be willing to bear what blame you shall justly lay upon me.

In my Lecture at Epping, which (at first) I voluntarily and freely set up, and
now (for sometime) have constantly and gainlesly maintained; I lately handled
the neglect of the Gospel, on HEB. 2. 3. In which, pressing the Congregation to
receive the Gospel, I gave (amongst others) this Direction; (viz.) That they
would esteem and acknowledge the Ministers that brought it: which was urged
from 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. My reason was, Because people seldom receive profit by
any message, unless they look upon him as Commissioned that delivers it. From
this I conceived my self engaged to discover who were Commissioned to preach
the Gospel: not only because the Office of the Ministry in these days, and
about that place, has been so much decried, and that I was so much importuned
by godly people to speak something of it, but in regard of the profit people
might receive by being satisfied and settled in it: for I am apt to apprehend,
that a great cause there is so little profit by hearing of the Word, is, that
the preaching of it is no more looked upon as an Ordinance: this I was
resolved, and labored to do with as much candor, and as little provocation as
might be. I had preached three of the Sermons before they came and when I was
to preach the last Sermon they were brought to oppose me. They took the Pulpit
before I came, both this day and the next. Which three things are intimated in
that place from which they take their liberty to speak after others have
preached (viz.) 1 Cor. 14


But before I had finished the subject, some (I conceive) through the secret
misinformations, and impetuous solicitations of others, (who could not deny,
yet would not grant what was delivered) were brought to oppose what I preached:
and if it were possible, either by the favorable in sinuations of themselves,
and their way, or the harsh misrepresentations of us and our Calling, to
subvert or prevent the reception of my Doctrine. Which was attempted not only
by a long discourse to the people before I preached but by a short opposition
of me after. I told the Gentleman (who spoke) that I conceived he ought not to
speak there, unless he were a Prophet, nor then unless he had a Revelation, nor
then but when he may be subject to the Prophets: but proffered to justify what
I had delivered, either by a private communication, or a public printing of my
Notes; thinking by that way Truth might be examined to more profit, and with
less passion, than by a tumultuary conference amidst an overpassionate
multitude, than by a doubtful disputation among prejudiced and unknowing
hearers. But that was not taken.

The next Lecture-day the like attempt was made again, there having two spoken
successively, before I went into the Pulpit. When although I was loath to
provoke, yet I was resolved to have accepted any way that could have been
proposed as most tending to love and edification, for the debating, and (if
possible) for the deciding the controversy between us: to which end I had
bespoken a Notary to prevent present mistakes, and after misreports. But
through Gods goodness we ended peaceably. Not yet that I expected to convince
engaged men, nor by any such public dispute to reduce wilful men ignorantly
mislead (there have been too many sad and fruitless examples of such
conferences already) but merely to prevent their boastings, that we dare not
stand an Argument; or a suspicion in others, that our cause would not endure a
trial. The most peaceable is the most Christian way; where Gods honor, not our
own interest is intended: that course is most to be pursued, which may probably
end in most advantage, in least difference. Good Corn is best winnowed in a
gentle gale, when a blustering wind blows away chaff and Corn too. The high
winds of passionate debates oftentimes blow up storms and clouds, seldom
produce any clear or fair agreement.

Upon this I was much strained, I love peace, but I dare not forsake truth. Not
to Print the Sermons, besides the inconvenience of misreports already raised,
and too readily received about it, were to lie under the suspicion of
cowardice, and (with some men) to yield them the victory that never got it; for
although the offer was not taken by them, it might have been objected against
me. To Print them, besides the discovery of mine own weakness, might produce
further contest, which I have no leisure to attend, being sufficiently toyled
with the constant labor of three times a week Preaching (besides something
else:) yet I am willing to undertake any task to find out or discover truth.

Besides, to hang them upon the same Text, would have taken up too much time to
transcribe, and would have puzzled the Reader to have found out the business, I
having preached many more Sermons upon it: to have tacked them to another,
might have given suspicion that they were not the same: It is no hard matter to
find or make an accusation. But, which increased my trouble, I was to print,
with the same weakness I preached them; The ear tries words, but the eye
observes writings; what infirmity might pass the sudden hearing of a transient
voice, is soon discovered by the more serious view of a discerning eye. Had I
intended the Press, I might have taken more pains: but I may be sorry, that
what was intended only for a private Auditory, should now come to public view;
that what was prepared in so little time (I am ashamed to say how little)
should now undergo the censure of a more deliberate examination. Nor do I
conceive it fit to alter them, least that should be objected, if not against
the truth of what was printed, yet against the repute of what was preached: and
indeed so great was the opposition, and so many have been the false reports
about it, that I am willing (for this) to let you see what it was I preached.

Such as they are I commit to your judgment and Gods blessing, take them (I
may almost say) as I preached them; I have altered nothing of the method,
scarcely any thing of the Scripture or Argument, and but little of the
expression; I remember but one Scripture that I have added, nor that added,
only again urged in one place, where it was not before. (What I have added
about the Oaths that Ministers take before their Ordination, I tell you of in
the margin;) I scarcely used then any Authors (which might easily have been
done) but for the illustration of those Scriptures I urged; nor many of them
neither, only such which are eminent for piety, which might be easily examined
by any that should doubt the quotation, which my short time would afford the
search of, and which might not overburthen the Auditory, the Press not being
then intended: nor have I named any more now; you shall have it in the same
nakedness, or with very little more covering, then it was first brought forth
with.

I was constrained to introduce it some other way (for the reason before
mentioned) but the margin directs to the beginning of the Sermons. I have cast
it into Sections, not to distinguish the Lectures, but to help your reading
only; where some little Use has been made, it has been (for the most part) at
the end of Lectures.

I am conscious to my self of many weaknesses, and should sure have blushed to
be thus generally observed, had not constraint (in a manner) offered violence
to modesty. I should have been induced rather to have suffered the dishonor of
cowardice, in not appearing in the field, then the reproach of insufficiency by
a too weak undertaking: but this chiefly relates to mine own person, the other
reflects more upon the truth. Besides, cowardice can but suffer, he that for
fear forsakes one piece of ground at first, may after be quite driven out of
the field: whereas weakness may prevail, yea being assisted by the God of
strength may get the conquest; when truth must appear more glorious, and God
himself receive much more honor. I shall be glad if I find (among men) rather
the loving conjunction of Shem's and Japhet's shoulders to cover my nakedness,
then the open mouths of cursed Hams to proclaim what they discern.

Sr Walter Rawleigh mentions some Books that speak much, but say little: I
would not willingly be reckoned in that number; if that little I have spoken,
may be so much, as to conduce in any measure, to the satisfaction of doubting,
the establishment of standing Christians, but the least tittle to exalt the
truth, and support the Ministry of Jesus Christ; especially if in these days,
now the axell-tree of the Ministerial function is so much struck at, and
begins (here) to crack, I might by this providence be made isntrumental, to
clap one band to strengthen it, but to put one spoke into the wheel to help it,
I should esteem it a superabundant recompense. If you (good Reader) shall
receive any advantage, I will cheerfully take the interest of your prayers, for
the principle of your profit; and (besides) acknowledge my self

Your indebted and engaged servant J. F.

THE Lawful Preacher: Or a short Discourse About the Call of MINISTERS,
PROVING, That they only ought to preach, who are ordained to that Service.
SECT. 1.
Posito uno absurdo sequuntur mil^^a.
DIsorder seldom ends where it begins; an inch awry in the foundation, where
it is scarcely discerned, may be a yard before the top stone be laid, when it
will be more visible. Evil is of a multiplying nature, and needs no other
foetation, but liberty, for its production. Error like an ill weed requires
nothing more for its infinite increase then toleration, then not to be plucked
up. Who would have thought that contempt of the persons, grumbling at the
maintenance, would have ended in disputing, yea, denying the Office of
Ministers? Fortiter calumniare, aliquid haerebit.
It Is some men's greatest policy, to cast dirt on all hands, that something may
stick. It is much if in a large Bill, something does not (at least) appear, if
not prove true. I shall not stand to justify their persons, although I could
quickly excuse them from many of those scandalous aspersions cast upon them,
yet I dare plead for their Calling.

What wickedness is in that? Can that Office be evil that is ordained by God
himself? Were not the Prophets and Priests instituted by him under the Law?
Were not the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, substituted by
Christ under the Gospel? Ephesians. 4. 11. Mat. 28. 19, 20 Ephesians. 4. 12.
And has not he promised to be with them to the end of the world? Can that
Calling be unnecessary, which was appointed for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the edifying of the body of Christ? A desire of Dominion is objected
against their persons, and (which is worse) a Title to power is suspected in
their Offices: What Authority God has entailed upon the Office, it is a sin in
any to cut off, unless there could be a Fine and Recovery acknowledged in the
Court of Heaven: And I wish that the accusers of the Brethren knew with what
unwillingnesse they receive that Power others think they affect; and what a
burden that is to their shoulders, which some conceive they delight in.

Ye take too much upon you ye sons of Levi, is the renewed complaint of Corah's
successors; but did not Corah, Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Belial, take
too much upon them too? Was it not only their desire to share in what they
pretended evil in others, that was the cause of the outcry? Malice is as blind
as Love, they equally, although in a different manner, darken the judgment; we
must never expect right Sentence, where Passion brings in the Evidence, and
Malice gives in the Verdict Where malice is in the sediment, a little heat will
raise the scum of false accusations, and unjust reports: where that lies under
the earth, there will not want an Aetna through which to breath forth the flame
of railings, or 'twill shake the whole Island: if that fire be but kindled, it
will quickly burst out: when it is resolved the dog must be beaten, is is no
hard matter to find a staff. And truly impotency is a sufficient crime, when
violence sits in judgment.

Typhoem is feigned to lie under Sicily, which is the cause of so many
earth-quaks there; and that the flames of Aetna are but the breathings of his
mouth.
When I consider how great the cry, and how little the cause is, how strong the
plea, yet how weak the proof is, against the Ministry, I can scarcely find any
other sourse of it. I cannot see what accusation zeal, unless overheated with
passion; can bring, nor what strength judgment, unless blinded by malice, can
reise against it. The Anti, trinitarians want a word, the Anti-sabbatarians
would see a command, the Anti-Poedobaptists would have some example produced in
Scripture (all which are easily answered;) but what proving argument the
Anti-Presbyters can urge, who may find word, precept, practice, and all for
the Office of Ministers, it is hard to discern; what they produce shall be
spoken to in the following discourse.

Genesis 3. 1.
It is the devils common policy, who was subtle enough in his infancy; and
surely has lost nothing of his cunning by age and practice, to strike at the
foundation of the adverse Kingdom, knowing that the building cannot stand long,
if that be weakened: sometimes he violently batters, but delights more in secret
underminings, not only as what is least discerned, but as what is most
conducible to his advantage: the roof may be shattered, the branches may be
lopt, when yet the tree may live, and the house stand firm; but kill the root,
take away the foundation, and there will need no farther endeavor to ruin the
one or destroy the other.

The Ministry is one of the great parts of Religion's foundation; this will
suddenly fall, if that be rooted out, When there was no King in Israel, every
man did what seemed him good in his own eyes; and when there is no Priest, nor
Prophet in Israel, every man may offer his own Corban, and teach the vision of
his own brain. It is observable that Satan in his strongest oppositions against
Religion, has constantly raised his greatest batteries against the Ministers:
some have been planted against their repute, others against their maintenance,
others against their lives, and others (which are not the weakest) against
their Office, if this were but laid low, the work were half done. Luther tells
Melancthon, If the Ministry fall, the Kingdom of Christ must not stand long:
says Christ to Peter, Upon this Rock will I build my Church. It is properly
meant of that doctrine, and confession that he made and preached: surely the
Apostles (in whose name he spoke,) and their successors have a share in the
work. Sinos ruemus, ruet Christus una scilicet ille regnator mundi: matlem ego
eum Christo ruere, quam-cum Caesare stare.
Hence it is said, that the Gentiles when drawn nigh by the blood of Jesus,
Mat. 16. 18. Ephesians. 4. 20.
are built upon the foundation of Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the
chirf corner stone, Ephesians. 2. 20, It was not Peter's person on which the Lord
Christ promised to build his Church; but in hac Catholicae fidei confessione
statuo fideles ad vitam, upon the confession he made. Ambrose. Si quis
intelligat ipsas Apostolorum and Prophetarum personas, nimis faede
halluciuatitur, Zanch. in loc. Super fundamentum, etc. hoc est super vetus and
novum Testamentum collocati, Amb. 1 These. 5. 12, 13. Agnoscere (i.) Pro
Pastoribus nostris a^ patribus revcrenter amplecti, Zanc. in loc.
Nor is it the persons of the Prophets and Apostles called here the foundation,
but the doctrine preached by them, which Ambrose calls the Old and New
Testament. It is the constant practice of the Mahumetans, to have their Mu^^i
in great reverence, for it is a received principle among them, That no one
thing preserves and improves Religion more, then a venerable high esteem of
their chiefest Ministers. I would Christians were not (in this) less
Christian. Upon the like ground it may be conceived, that S. Paul commands the
Thessalonians, That they would know them that are over them in the Lord, 1
These. 5. 12, 13. and esteem them very highly for their works sake, (That ye
know,) indeed the Vulg. Lat. renders it, ut noveritis, but Beza translates it,
ut agnoscatis, that ye acknowledge them: it is (...), which Zanchius explains,
to acknowledge, and reverently to esteem them as their Fathers and Ministers.
The English word is used in the same sense, Mat. 7. 23. which place I find
urged both by Beza and Zanchy, to prove their exposition of this; I know you
not, I never acknowledged or knew you as mine.

Abundantius vulg. Lat. quam maxim. Beza. Leigh. Beza in Ephesians. 3 20. Let them
ob serve this who abuse the persons, traduce the Names, the gifts of Ministers.
That you very highly esteem them in love, (...): some read it more
abundantly, others exceedingly: the word is very significant: I doubt whether
it may please to give the full signification of it It is (as a Critic)
exceedingly, yea: more then exceedingly; it is as if you would say excessively.
Beza renders the same expression in another place, supra quam redr^danter.
Which yet is not referred especially to an admiration of their persom, nor
chiefly to an esteem of their gifts (although both of these are required in the
Text,) but to the respectfull acknowledgement of their Ministry, they coming
in the Name, and by the Authority of God; for it is (...), (in the Lord:) Which
Beza and Zanchy both refer to their Ecclesiastical Office: but Diodate
glosseth it (in the Lord) (i. e.) in the name, by the Commission and Authority
of the Lord.

He well knew that if the Messenger were slighted, the Report would not be
received. He derides the Embassy, that looks not on the Deliverer of it as
Commissioned. Is not this the Carpenters Son? was that which prevented the
believing of Christ's Word. When (at other times) they looked upon him as a
Devil, they were unlikely to hearken to him as a God. He casts out Devils
through Beelzebub. It was no wonder that the Jer. 43. 1, 2.
proud men rejected Jeremiah's Meslage, when they could say, God has not sent
him. I know nothing that more powerfully preventeth the efficacy of the Gospel,
then disputing their Commission, denying their Office that bring it. Limbs of
Antichrist, are unlikely to be Christ's Messengers; it is not probable, that the
tail of the beast should be employed in Gods service.

SECT. II.
Here begin the Sermons which were then introduced in the same manner as here;
for handling the neglect of the Gospel on Heb. 2. 7. I pressed the Congregation
(as a means to help them to receive it) that they would receive and esteem the
Ministers of the Gospel, which I urged from that of 1 These. 5. 12, 13. and
explained it as here; although I have not inserted the direction at large as
then I handled it: so that, although I intended not to have touched this string
in that lesson; yet being so providentially brought upon it, I could not
without suspicion of cowardice retreat.
BUt the great Objection is: That those who thus labor in the Lord, and are
thus highly to be esteemed, are not the Black-coated Ministers, Ordained by
men, furnished with learning at the Universities, to neglect them is not to
refuse Messengers of God: nor is it to slight the Gospel, to cast off what
they preach. But for Answer,

What is spoken against their Coats, reflects upon their Function; not the
color of their Cloth, that is not worth a Reply any further then as it will
fall under the other afterward.

That they are Ordained by men (me thinks) cannot injure them: Many mistake the
matter, and therefore ignorantly cry out against the use of Ordination. It is
not to infuse new, gifts, it is only to try their gifts formerly acquired,
whether they are (therein) competently qualified for such an Office. Can this
be hurtful? Who, unless such as dare not stand a trial, would not desire the
approbation of judicious men in a service of that importance, were it not
otherwise necessary? A modest spirit, a tender conscience will be rather apt to
suspect, then cry up self-ability, when it remembers Paul's question, Who is
sufficient? It is not to send any forth contrary to Gods mind, or whom God
would not have sent, (as far as men can discern;) but to set those apart for
the work, whom they judge God has sent to labor in his Vineyard. Can this
lessen their gift, or render their persons more offensive? That they have their
learning at the University, I am apt to think should not make them less able:
If by learning they intend that especial gift of grace, whereby they are
supernaturally furnished with abilities, experimentally to divide the Word
aright, they are mistaken; but if they mean that skill in Arts and Sciences,
knowledge of Tongues, which although acquired by the use of means; yet are the
common gifts of God, this must rather help then unfit them for the Ministry.
Are any gifts of God to be contemned? can any gift of God unfit men for
service? Shall the gifts of Fortune (so called) be embraced, and shall the
gifts of the mind, which are more excellent, be accounted less worthy? It is
fit the Mistress should rule in the house; yet the handmaid may be
serviceable. Befides, they who object this against Ministers, learn to read
English at home (although I do not know whether all that undertake to be
Preachers are so well learned, yet) I believe few will judge him sufficiently
qualified for a Minister who cannot read English. They learn to read the
Bible as it is translated, others learn it in the Original: Can this indispose
them to that work! It was but a false conceit of a wicked man, that Act. 26. 24.
much learning made Paul mad. If learning be good and useful, then the more
the better; there cannot be excess of what is good in it self: a good thing
may be abused, but if good, the measure cannot be offensive; the nearer to
perfection, the better it must be still. But these things, as they are of
little strength, so I use but little force to repel them; I shall hasten to
the main business, which is of greater concernment.

Only (in transitu) If it be proved that the preaching of Ordained Ministers
only be the Ordinance; then it will follow, that to neglect them, is to refuse
the Gospel: but that I shall labor to prove presently. Then I must tell you,
that although other may speak pleasing things, they only can in Christ's stead
beseech you to be reconciled; although others may take pains, they only labor
among you, and are over you in the Lord. Although others may promise salvation,
they only can preach the Gospel. Hence I conceive it is that Paul calls it his
Gospel, Romans 1. 16. Romans 2. 16.
according to my Gospel. Which is (in Diodates words) according to the Gospel
of which I am a Minister. Romans 1. 16.
It is Christ's Gospel as given by him, as through him life is offered in it; it
was Paul's Gospel as it was preached, as it was promulgated by him: It is (in a
sense) their Gospel, who have authority from God to preach it. The most strict
threatening of a private person to another; That he shall return to the place
whence he came, thence to the place of Execution, and there shall hang till he
die, is but vain and ridiculous; when the same words out of the mouth of an
Authorized Judge, are the dreadful sentence of death. Not is the promise of
life to a condemned person at all esteemed from him that has no power to give
it; when the same promise from him who is Commissioned for the service, is
certain life.

I shall now then labor to prove, That the Ordained Ministers only are those
who (by the Apostles command) are to be highly esteemed, and that to neglect
them and their preaching is to neglect the Gospel. It was the profession I made
when I preached it.
Which I profess, I undertake not out of any love to Controversy, nor any
desire to exalt my self or Function, above the rule of Jesus Christ; but (being
through an unexpected Providence brought to it) out of a desire, if not to
reduce the mislead, yet to establish those that yet stand; especially receiving
their entreaties about it, and observing their endeavors to seduce them.

The Method I propose in the handling of it, is, to show you. 1. That those who
preach must be called or sent to that service. 2. That this Sending or Calling
is not only a gifting of men; but (besides that) a setting them apart for that
Office. 3. What calling or setting men apart for this Office, the Scripture
ordinarily mentions. 4. I shall answer those most proving Arguments that are
urged against it.

SECT. III.
1 These. 5. 11.
1. THose that preach must be Called or Sent for that work. To this purpose is
the Exposition (I before gave you) of those words (in the Lord) 1 These. 5. 12.
in the Name, by the Authority and Commission of the Lord. Romans 10. 14, 15.
But other Scriptures are plain, Romans 10. 14, 15. How shall they preach except
they be sent? The Apostle speaks of that preaching that begets faith, faith
comes by hearing. Observe the place well.
It is very observable, how the Lord seems to hang the salvation of people
instrumentally upon the preaching of Sent or Called Ministers. Prayer depends
upon believing, believing upon hearing, hearing upon a Preacher, and preaching
upon Sending, How can they preach? The Interrogation does vehementius negare,
they cannot preach. Are they not able to speak some things the word holds out?
Can they not exhort to what God commands, and reprove the acting of what God
forbids? (...) (i. e.) Ex Dei mandato, a quo mittuntur qui Evangelium
praedicent, Beza quum in istisverbis sit compendium superior is gradationis,
commodius videtur hoc accipere de mittendis ex Dei vocatione, Id.
Yes, but they cannot preach Authoritatively unless sent. So ver. 17. Hearing
is by the Word of God. Some expound this of the matter of the Word: but then it
should have been another word in the Original; (...) not (...) (as Beza
Critically, yet well observes) and without a Praeposition; but it is (...),
which he explains by the command of God, that faith comes by hearing that word
which is preached by the command of God; and takes this verse but as a
Compendium of what was spoken before. But what need we trifle in Expositions,
when the word is so clear? In how many places does God complain of them that
preach, yet are not sent; that run, yet he sent them not? Ier. 14. 14. They
prophecy, but God sent them not. So (besides very many other places) Ier. 23.
21, 32. It is the observation of One, He is a false Prophet, not only that
teaches lies, but that teaches without a Commission, whether the thing he
speaks be true or false. There are many things worth marking in that of Ier.
23. would I stand upon them: They cause the people to err, Verse 13. If the
Leader command without a Warrant, the people may wander besides their path: Nor
do I know in all the ages of the Church, that error ever marched more
victoriously into the world, then under the conduct of uncommissioned Leaders.
The Barrel never runs more profusely to the intoxicating of the Drinkers, then
when the Tap is in the hand of (no true Butler, but) an intruding Stranger.
They strengthen the hands of evil doers ver. 14. 17. Never were the hands of
men more strengthened in their wickedness, then by the peaceful deceitful
preaching of unsent Teachers. They speak the vision of their own hearts, verse
16. who pretend more to strange Revelations, make more use of their own
fancies, and less of Gods Word, then those that make use only of their own
power to call themselves to that Office? They steal my Word, everyone from his
neighbor, verse. 30. Either they take some parts and pieces of true Prophecies,
that they might the better vent their false ones: men put off ill commodities
best, under the mixture of some good with them. The Devil deceives with less
suspicion, when his false mouth is filled with mixtures of some of Gods truths;
Children are most easily cousened into the taking of bitter Seeds, under the
covert of sweet Plummes. Or else they steal (as Diodate glosseth it) they
fraudulently take upon them to preach the Word, and steal from the called
Prophets all Authority and credit. Never was the Authority and credit of
faithful Ministers more weakened, then by the pretended Authority of unsent
Teachers. Paul was never put more to justify his Ministry, then when the
false Apostles labored to steal away his repute among the people, They shall
not profit this people, verse 32. Here is the cause that people hear so many
uncommissioned Preachers with so little profit: The Lord will not bless their
labor; he has hanged a curse upon it, as once upon the fruitless Figtree,
Never fruit grow more on it. There Is but one thing more, the evil effect of it;
The people shall say, The burden of the Lord, verse 33. (i.) the profane
people encouraged through their lies, leaning on the Pillows sowed by them
under their elbows, were apt to accuse the true Prophets for preaching the
burden of the Lord against them; they would scoff at, and despite the
faithful servants of God, as speaking of curses and threatenings; as if that
had been none of their Message, or they not the persons to whom they belonged.
Was ever this Text made good, and is it not this day fullfilled in our ears?
But to return, 2 Timothy 3. 6. The Apostle complains of those that creep into
hanses. They go in by stealth, and they work by subtilty. The lawful Shepherd
enters in at the door; they are but sneaking Pastors, who come without a key,
who run without a commission, that creep into houses: Of what sort these were
ye may see verse. 9, 13. He calls them Seducers, ver. 8. He compares them to
Jannes and Jambres, who were some of those Magicians, that opposed Moses in his
working of Miracles, in which these are not unlike them; for they resist the
truth.

Look over the whole Book of God, and then tell me whether you can find the
example of any that thrust themselves into this Office, either of Priesthood
under the Law, or of Ministry under the Gospel without sharp reproof from God.
Will the example of Vzzah prevail, who out of an honest intention but attempted
what belonged to the Priests Office only, yet was severely punished? Or will
the fierce wrath of God upon Corah, Dathan, and Abiram affect you, who upon a
fair pretense (that all the Congregation was holy) would have thrust themselves
into the Offices they were not called to, on whom the earth opened and
swallowed them up? They who exalt themselves above their measure, were cast
down below their expectation.

Think you that Aaron might make himself a Priest? if you view him, you would
judge him a fit man; yet he would not adventure without a Call. Noman takes
this honor unto himself. Heb. 5. 4. Heb. 5. 4.
Or suppose you that Christ might put himself into the Office of the
Priesthood; and surely I know not who should attempt it, if he might not: yet
he would not glorify himself to be made an high Priest, Hebr. 5. 5. Heb. 5. 5.
He, as he was man, did not put himself into the Office, but was called to it
by the Everlasting Father, who said, Thou art my Son, yea, he was made a Priest
after the Order of Melchisedech: The Apostle there answers an Objection that
might be made against Christ's Priesthood, because he was not of the Tribe of
Levi; therefore he tells you what Call he had, he was of the Order of
Melchisedech: For no man takes this honor; it is (...), which is often used
to used take by violence, as Job. 19. 1. (and as a Critic referring it to this
place) it is spoken of Callings and Offices: Vsurpatur de vocationibus and
functionibus. Non disputat quales sint Pontisices, sed de coram officio agit;
Beza. Act. 20. 28.
Such must not be taken by violence, but received by a Call. Much more might be
spoken of this, but that will refer properly to the next thing; I hope it is
manifest that there must be a Call. Whence else is it, that they are said to be
made Overseers over the Flock of God by the holy Ghost, Acts 20. 28?

Says Apostle concerning Christ, To which of the Angels said he at any time;
This is my Son, this day have I begotten thee? I may say, Unto what unsent
Minister, or or self-made Prophet, did God at any time say, Take care of the
Flock, feed the Church of God, over which the holy Ghost has made you
over-seets.

Besides, which I wonder at, Those who think men may run without a Call into
this Office, (or rather employment, for it scarcely now acknowledged an Office)
will plead for a Call, a Commission for any other undertaking: Strange I that
this which is the most excellent employment, should be adventured on with the
least warrant: as if God had only neglected his own service: or rather that men
were resolved to be careful of himself when Gods work shall be carelessly
undertaken. He must not sit in the place of a Judge, that has no Commission,
but is guilty of murder that puts a man to death (be the cause what it will)
without just Authority. The common Soldier will not receive the Commands of
his fellow, only of a Commissioned Officer; nor will one Officer take the Word
of Command from another, unless by Order he be empowered to give it: Nay, in
your Cities, men are not suffered to manage a trade, but after serving an
Apprentiship, and being made free of the Company. Such are generally conceived
to have least skill, and to sell the worst wares, and then pernicious to
Societies. And is the Ministry the only Office to be run upon without a Call?

Again, If one man may go without sending, why not another? why not more? why
not all? else what number is assigned, and what measure of gifts is competent?
Truly, people love the power of Heads, would cast off the subjection of
Members: So then, we should have all Priests, and no people; all Teachers, and
no Hearers; all the Members would become Head; all the Flock would be
Overseers, and at last none left to be overseen but by their own eyes.

How then should men fear and tremble that dare take this honor to themselves;
who go without a Call, run without a Commission; who go not in at the door, but
creep into houses, who need no other power but their own to make them
Preachers! I mean such, who have no Flock to oversee, but go from place to
place venting their errors, sowing their seeds of Heresy; as if there were no
Duty well done, nor any Office well discharged, where their Gift is not
exercised. Indeed there is among wiser and more religious men, dispute about
the Call, which I shall speak to afterward; but what must we think of those who
pretend to no Call at all, but what their Gifts, which they call extrordinary,
confer upon them? Such (me think) should fear the judgment of God, who speak
in his Name, yet have of his Authority. Christ sends forth his Disciples as
Sheep among Wolves, but then promises to be with them; whom he sends he is
engaged to defend; but what protection can they expect, who have none of his
Commission?

Nay, how should people that fear the Lord be afraid to run after such
Teachers; not only in that they countenance, and say God speed to them that are
not in Gods way, and then may partake of their plagues: as Numb. 16. 21. 22.
but in that their doctaine is dangerous; they make people to err; the leaven
of their doctrine is to be avoided. Such as steal into trades, sell for the
most part but false wares; they would not be unwilling to stand a trial, if
their intentions were honest in their undertakings. Nay, although they speak
good things, yet they shall not profit the people (ut supra.) As there is no
protection promised to their persons, neither is there any blessing promised
upon their labors. But the next thing will further illustrate this; which is,

SECT, IV.


(If gifting be calling; it must be either ordinary or extraordinary. It is not
an ordinary Call, for the Scripture speaks of another way of setting men apart
ordinarily for this service (as will be proved afterward.)

Nor is it an extraordinary calling; although if it were, it would not at all
help our uncalled Preachers; for as it is not our business here to handle
extraordinary cales, so neither is it our wisdom now to expect extraordinary
callings. Extraordinary sending is either, when in the primitive times God did
by his immediate command send out whom he pleased to that service; Yet then
there was an act of sending different from the work of gifting of them (as will
appear presently:) Note.
this I believe our gifted brethren will not pretend to; if so, let them
discover their mission. Or when in the first erecting or re-building of
Churches, where an ordinary call cannot be had, men are called out by an
extraordinary power of God upon their spirits for this work. Paul (who is so
much talked of) if ye examine the Scripture, Act. 9. to the 20. ver. was not
only gifted, but sent also, ver. 6. he must go into the City, and there it
should be told him what he should do, ver. 15. He is a chosen vessel to bear
my Name among the Gentiles, which was to preach the Gospel, ver. 17. He was
filled with the holy Ghost, ver. 19. He was certain days with the Disciples at
Damascus: and all this before that straightway which is so much urged, v. 20.
It is more clear, if you compare it with Act. 22. 14, 15. what Ananias told
Paul be should do. And v. 21. you will see the Commission Christ gave him,
although filled with the holy Ghost.
Perkins says, Extraordinary only take place, where ordinary is not to be had:
yea, it must afterward, when the Church shall be settled, receive Ordination in
an ordinary way. This our opposers cannot plead, because among us an ordinary
call is to be had; (which if they suspect, I shall show them in the third
thing.) Or, when there are some extraordinary gifts conferred to enable men for
this employment. Extraordinary gifts, I mean not comparatively only, when some
have better gifts then others; or then ordinarily men of that place and
breeding have, some may have a better Genius, may be more industrious, may have
more advantages then others; but such which are given in an extraordinary
manner, as the extraordinary gift of Prophesying, the miraculous gift of
Tongues, when there has been no ordinary means used for the acquiring of them:
the immediate gift of working miracles, which were given in those days, Note.
not only to enable them for their work, but (besides other reasons) to
manifest and declare their calling. Which is conceived to be the reason of that
extraordinary gift which is called Prophesying, not preaching (as is now
pretended) that was given to the Seventy, Numb. 11. Numb. 11.
But of this more in its place. Nor do I think that those who talk of great
gifts, will acknowledge them thus extraordinarily bestowed.

Some of them indeed are Scholars, have (besides other learning) the gift of
Tongues, but it is by ordinary means acquired; although they may by false
pretenses delude common people, yet let any of the best gifted men make it
appear that they received that or any other gift extraordinarily: they may
speak good matter, and well managed, and so be cried up for excellently gifted
men, when they have gotten their abilities, but by the same way others have
gotten theirs; then where is the wonder? I wish that subtle Jesuits, learned
Priests, come not under a gray cloak, or a blue apron, and so pretend to an
extraordinary gift. For it is observable, that most of our grossest errors,
that have been so plentifully vented, have been first broached in such
meetings: which for the most parttend to Arminianism, or Libertinism, fit
leaven for Popery.

Others have no extraordinary gifts at all, have scarcely common gifts, they
are so far from having the gift of many Tongus, that they know not how to use
their mother Tongue properly; nay, those petty gift-lings they have, they have
acquired by some like endeavor of reading, hearing or conferences. I know no
more then ordinary gift they have, unless it be of impudence and confidence.

But yet more clearly to handle this thing; That gifting is not sending: I
shall do it in some few particulars.

1. The Scripture puts a difference between gifting, and sending men for the
work of the Ministry: Those who were qualified with abilities, were
Commissioned (besides) before they undertook that service. There is a
difference between (...), which is collatio donorum; and (...), which is
collatio potestatis, (as is distinguished:) the former makes a man able to
preach, the other gives him authority to preach; there may be abilities, where
there is no Commission, and there may be a Commission where many qualifications
may be wanting. There is a Text much urged by (almost) all that handle this
thing; but because something may be spoken against it, I shall lay no stresse
upon it: (viz.) Act. 13. 1, 2. yet me think it plainly intimates a difference
the Scripture owneth between gifting and sending: Barnabas and Saul were gifted
before, but they must be set apart for the work to which God had called them.
But other Scriptures are plain.

When God sent the Prophet Isaiah to preach to the people, he first gifted him,
he afterward gave him his Commission, Isa. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. He touched his
lips with a coal from the Altar; thereby he was qualified: but afterward he
received his authority to exercise his gifts, when he bid him Go and tell this
people: Nay Isaiah would not run till God sent him, ver. 8. Judicious Perkins
interprets this to be giving him his Authority to preach. Nor do I see what
other unforc't exposition can be given of it. But lest the Old Testament (being
almost out of fashion) should disrellish, we will see what evidence the New
will give us.

If Christ's own method in calling his Disciples may be sufficient testimony,
you will see, that gifting for, and sending them to execute the work were two
distinct acts, Mat. 20. 1, 5. Mat. 20. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8. Read the Text.
He gave them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, etc. ver. 1.
there he gifted them: but afterward he bids them, Go, preach, saying, the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; heal the sick, cleanse the leper, etc. ver. 7, 8.
there he gave them Authority to do what he gave them Power to do before, ver.
1. Yea, when their work was increased, their Commission was enlarged too, Math.
28 19. Mat. 28. 19.
Go teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. we read not that they preached
till they received Commission, nor that they went to any people, but who were
comprehended in it. Timothy had a gift conferred by God, and discovered by
Prophecy, yet he was set a part for the Office by the imposition of hands, 1 Timothy 4. 14. 1 Timothy 4. 14.
The gift was given by prophecy (i. e.) it was discovered in a prophetic
manner, that he should be a Minister; yet notwithstanding so eminent a
declaration of Gods mind, there was the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, which Diodate calls a sign of consecration and blessing. How many
places might I name, where the Apostle speaks of Ordaining Elders in the
Churches, which plainly evidenceth (besides gifting of them) a setting them
apart for the service as Tit. 1. 5. Act. 14. 2, 3. besides other places; but it
is better to speak enough then all.

Shall I go one step farther, and then show you, that Jesus Christ himself was
fitted for the service he came about, yet was sent by his Father: although he
was gifted, yet he would not go till he had his Fathers Commission, Heb. 10. 5.
Heb. 10. 5.
he had a body prepared him, he was fitted to offer Sacrifice, and so to
perform his Fathers will, but yet he would not take the honor to himself to be
made an High Priest, Heb. 5.5. Heb. 5 5. Mittam e a potestate, qua ego missus
sum a Patre,
Hence it is you find him speak so much of his being sent by his Father, in
many places of John's Gospel. Yea, he tells his Disciples, as my Father sent me
so send I you, Joh. 20. 21.

It is agreed by most, that to a faithful Preacher, there are two things
required; there must be gifts and abilities for the work, and there must be
Authority and power to exercise those gifts; the one is from man ordinarily,
the other from God. Id tantum possumus, quod jure possumus.
Paul seems to favor this distinction, where he opposes the call of God to
the call of man, Gal. 1. 1. Gal. 1. 1.
Paul an Apostle, not of men, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ. I know not what
gloss or interpretation can be put upon this, but what will prove that there
must be a calling, and this calling not only extraordinary from God, as it was
in him, but that there is a calling from man, which can be no other, but
Commissionating or setting apart. Thus Perkins glosseth it. Not of men, he was
not called by men as the only authors of his Call, not only by the authority
of men: in this he opposes himself to the false Apostles, who might have an
outward Call only from men, but had none from God at all. Nor by man, he was
not called of God, by the ministry of mere man; in this he opposes himself to
ordinary Ministers, who might have an inward Call from God, but it was by man's
ministry; they were set apart for it by man. To the same purpose Beza observes
a difference between the Praepositi(...) and (...), of men, and (...), by man;
the one intimates the Authority we receive from him in whose power it is to
make Ministers, (which Perkins before calls the Author of our Call;) the other a
Ministerial setting apart for the Office. (...) Non auctoribus hominibus ullis.
Beza. (...) authoritatis esse videtur; (...) vero Ministerij a superiori
quopiam demandati, Idem. Primum illud membrum non esse vocatum ab hominibus,
commune habeat eum omnibus veris Christi ministris; and paulo post, Vocatio non
potest esse legitima nisi a Deo. Tametfi autem rite vocatus interdum quispiam
crit Ecclesiae respectu, qui tamen prava cupiditate, non rect a conscientia ad
ministerium pervenerit. Secundum membrum, non esse vocatum per homines
peculiariter competebat Apostolis. Et infra, ^sta est ordinariae ratio eligendi
Pastores. Calvin in loc. Apostolatum ab aliis Ministeriis discerni oportebat.
Calvin in Act. 1. 26.
To this agrees the exposition of Calvin, Not of men; as wicked Ministers only
are, who have no other Call then what man can give them. For as no man must
take that Office to himself, fo neither must any else put whom they please into
the Office; the harvest is Gods, and such only must be laborers there which
are of his sending. Nor by man; which was to distinguish his Apostleship from
ordinary Ministers; he being an Apostle, was called by Christ immediately; and
after he says, that this calling by man is the usual way of choosing
Ministers. Very much further goes Calvin, if those who are curious will search
him. What need I tell you of Matthias his being sat apart for the Apostleship
in the place of Judas? Act. 1. 26. he was qualified by God, nor could the
falling of the lot drop any increase of gifts into him, but the lot must be
given, that he may be thereby designed, and set apart for the Office: It was
indeed an extraordinary way of setting him apart, but the reason of that was,
because it was to an Apostleship, to which the calling was different (as was
newly said) from the ordinary call of Pastors and Teachers. But my business
(in this) is not to show what way men are set apart (that belongs to the next
thing,) it is sufficient for me here to prove that there is (besides gifting)
some or other setting apart for this service; I shall do the other afterward.

Besides I find a frequent distinction made in Scripture, between the gifts of
private Christians, whereby they may be able to edify one the other; and of
others who have received the Ministry. The Romans were full of goodness,
filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another, Romans 15. 14. Romans
15. 14, 15.
yet they were not hereby authorized to preach presently, but Paul had the
grace given to him of God, to be the Minister of Christ to the Gentiles, verse.
15. The Thessalonians were commanded to edify one another, 1 These. 5. 11. 1.
These. 5. 11. 14.
yea, they must warn the unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak,
verse. 14. this could not be done without a treasury of gifts, yet they were not
to be exercised in a Ministerial preaching; for at the same time they must
know them that labor among them, and are over them in the Lord, and esteem
them highly etc. ver. 12, 13. they must not quench the Spirit, verse. 19. 12,
13, 19, 20.
which Zanchius expounds in one sense, of quenching the spirit of the Ministers
by discountenancing and discouraging them. Interpretatio 32 prospiritu
Prophetiae, extinguitur autem spiritus Prophetiae contemptu, dum eum
prophetantem asperusmur. Zanch. in loc.
Nor despise Prophesying, ver. 26. Yet further, I find there is much stresse
in Scripture laid upon men's outward call to an Office, by which they receive
their designation and Commission to execute it. When Christ taught in the
Temple, and none doubted his abilities, that they could not quarrel with him
for them, the chief Priests and Elders questioned his authority, that they
might find an occasion of contempt for want of that, Mat. 21. 23. Mat. 21. 23.
By what authority do thou these things, and who gave thee this authority? it
was spoken only of his outward call to it. Nay Christ himself commands people
to obey evil Ministers, who, although wicked men, yet having an outward call,
must be hearkened to, Mat. 23. 2, 3. Mat. 23. 2, 3. Legitima vocatio hic
notatur, quia ideo Scribas audiri jubet Christus, quod publici essent Ecclesiae
docteres, Call.
The Scribes and Pharisees fit in Moses chair, all therefore they bid you
observe, that observe and do: there is a strong emphasis in the illative
Therefore, because they sat in Moses chair, and (in Calvin's words) were
public preachers of the Law, they must be hearkened to in what they spoke from
the Law. Probably Christ could have divided the Land with more equity, and
less partiality, then an authorized Judge; yet having no call to it, although
in a lesser business then in the work of the Ministry, he would not meddle,
only ^o nomine, as not being Commissioned, Who made me a Judge? Luke 12. 14.

2. All who have gifts must not preach; the work of a Minister is only to be
performed by him who is called to the Office, it is unlawful in others.
Preaching of the word is one part of the Ministers Office, but all that have
gifts must not perform it, for it is forbidden to women to speak in the Church,
1 Cor. 13. 34. who (it may be) many of them have better gifts then some of
those that think themselves sufficiently gifted for it. Whatsoever the practice
of some women in some places is, the Scripture must be our rule, which will not
permit it.

Administering the Sacraments is another piece of a Ministers work, but this
only gifted men cannot perform, they are not Sacraments as administered by them,
The same Commission whereby Christ authorized his Disciples to preach, gave
them power to baptize too, Mat. 28, 19. Go, teach all Nations, baptizing them,
etc. this the Apostles practiced: the whole Ministry of John is named under
baptism: Matthew. 21. 25. The baptism of John whence is it? it is meant of the
Ministry of John. But those who through their gifts deem themselves sufficient
to preach, will not judge themselves fit to administer the Sacraments. Yet the
Apostle looks upon Preaching as the greater service, 1 Cor. 1. 17. I am not
sent to baptize, but to preach. It is spoken there comparatively, preaching the
Gospel was his chief and greatest business.

The performance of the outward act is not to administer a Sacrament, if he be
not called to the Office that executes it. It has been received among the
Churches of Christ, that if a person be baptized by one called to the Office,
although an evil man, or his Call not right in every circumstance, it shall
stand; if a Papist who has been formerly baptized, should be converted to the
true Religion, he should not be baptized again; whereas baptism administered by
a Midwife, or only some gifted person, is no baptism, the person must afterward
be baptized by an Officer. I will not insist on what at some extraordinary
times has been done; I handle what ought to be done ordinarily. It Is said,
factum valet, quod fieri non debet.
A gifted member may give you bread to eat, and wine to drink, but it is only a
Minister that can administer the Sacrament. A gifted person may sprinkle water
upon the face of a child, but it must be a Minister only that can baptize in
the name of God; And (if I may speak it) a gifted brother may speak good
things, but it is a Minister only that can preach the Gospel. It is another part
of a Ministers business to bind and to loose, Joh. 20. 23. it was spoken to
the Disciples, which is only declarative, not that they have power to for give
sins; but surely gifted men, who were not called to the Office, will not
undertake this employment, to bind and loose. This is the second Proposition.

3, Christ has set Officers in the Church, for the work of the Ministry,
which are distinct from the flock to whom he has committed the word of
reconciliation. Christ gave these as gifts to men when he ascended, he left
some Apostles, some Evangelists, some Prophets, some Pastors, some Teachers,
Ephe. 4. 8, 11.
Ephesians. 4. 8, 11. Diodate. Tantum abest ut haec dona debeamus usurpare ad unionis
Ecclesiae dissolutionem, ut potius ijs utendum sit ad illius umonem
conservandam, Zanch. in loc.
He touches the principal and public Offices of the Church, whereof the
three first were extraordinary for those Primitive times, and the two last
ordinary and perpetual. It is a good note of Zanchius, that these gifts should
be used to preserve, not to destroy the Churches union, (What Christ's end in
giving then was, is manifest, v. 12, 13 for the work of the Ministry, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of the body of Christ. How can
gifted brethren take to them any of these Titles, unless they be in the number
of those Officers? how can they dare perform any of this work, unless they are
called to some of these functions? For these Officers, are distinct from the
flock: edifying of the body of Christ, feeding of the flock, was the great end
of their being given; it is certain that all the body of Christ, yea every
member of the body has some gifts, if that will sufficiently authorize them to
be Teachers, (when the Scripture has proposed no measure,) what body would
there be left to edify? Besides, the holy Ghost is said to make them Overseers
over the flock, Act. 20. 28. Act. 20. 2^.
and to fied the Church of God; Who must be fed, or what of the flock must be
overseen, if every gifted member may be a Teacher, may become a Pastor? Nay, to
them is committed the word of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Surely every gifted
member will not pretend to this, that the word of reconciliation should be
committed to them. Nor can it be thought that those Officers were all of them
(as some) only temporary, that they were constituted for the Primitive times
only; for the promise of Christ to his disciples is to be with them to the end
of the world, Mat. 28. 20. which could not be restrained only to the persons of
the Disciples, who were so far from living till the end of the world, that
being sent forth as sheep among wolves, they might rather expect a sudden
dissolution.

4. I Will but add this. The names Christ gives to his Ministers, are such,
which belong only to them, who besides their abilities to perform the work,
must have some other Call to Authorize them to undertake and execute it. They
are called Watchmen, Ezekiel. 33. 7. Ezekiel. 33. 7.
I have set thee a Watchman to the house of Israel. It Is no hard matter to
perform the Office of a Watchman, but he must be appointed to it by some
superior Officer that executes it. It is lawful, it is a duty in him to stop,
to examine, to secure, when the same Acts in another may be suspicious,
felonious, and so punishable. They are called Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5. 19. 2.
Cor. 5. 19.
It is the Commission, not abilities, that makes a man an Ambassador: Another
man may have better Gifts, be of greater fitness for the employment; but he
only that has a Deputation for the service, is received, and has audience.
They are called Overseers, Act. 20. 28, Act. 20. 28.
It is not for every man that is able to oversee the Will or Estate of others;
they only can do it, who by some Deed or Commission are empowered to undertake
it, when others may have more skill, and no less fidelity. Chrysostom. says it
must be (...). Chrysostom. lib. 6. de Sacerdot. cap. 1.
Nay (tremendum quiddam) they must so oversee the Flock, that they may give an
account for their souls, Heb. 13. 17. Is there any such charge given to, or
under-taken by those unsent Teachers, who love to be seen in exercising their
gifts, not to be observed in taking care of souls; who delight to scatter their
bread (if I may call it so) where they have most followers, but have no Flock
to feed? I could show you that they are called Stewards, Elders, Rulers,
Ministers, but what is already said is sufficient. Which laid to the rest, I
hope will even extort an ingenuous acknowledgement from all un-prejudiced,
disengaged persons, That only gifting of men is not a sufficient calling of
them to the work of the Ministry, but besides that there must be a setting
them apart for that service: and then by consequence, that the preaching of
such men is no Ordinance of Gods making.

SECT. V.
OH that this might prevail with you! If this be true, how are they mistaken,
that so lowdly cry up gifted men for the only Preachers! Be their gifts what
they will, or (in these days) can be, were they far beyond the greatest
abilities of Ordained Ministers, yet if they are not otherwise set apart for
the service, if not (besides that) called to the Office, they are not lawful
Preachers. But what must we think of those who have but few or small gifts,
whose greatest gift is to talk of gifts? The gifts of Tongues, of Prophesying,
were extraordinary gifts conferred upon those who were extraordinarily called,
but these have scarce ordinary gifts: Vtsupra. Nay, which is the wonder, when
others whose gifts are far greater and better (who might be followed, and
admired for their parts if they were not Ministers) shall be neglected, these *
Donatilists shall be cried up and honored, Men of little gifts.
when that which should be the cause of their esteem, shall be the occasion of
their contempt; when what indeed is the badge of their honor (I mean that they
are Ministers) shall be the mark of their reproach.

When I consult the frame of some men's spirits, who after the acquisition of
some gifts, and their approbation too, yet suspect and doubt their sufficiency,
who after a lawful Call, yet tremble to think of the work, who could with
desire (did not conscience forbid, and Gods frequent assistance support) lay
down their Office, desert the service: Onus ipsis etiam Angelis tremendum.
Chrysostom. When Latimer to keep a good conscience laid down his Bishopric,
putting off his Rochet leaped for joy, feeling his shoulders so light, and
being discharged of so heavy a burden. Act. and Mon. fol. 1578.
when I think of Chrysostom's burden, and Latimer's joy in laying down his
Bishopric, and which is yet more, the warning that Paul has fastened upon the
door-posts, (...), who is sufficient? I am amazed to consider their confidence,
who think it a light thing to speak in Gods Name; who can without trial judge
themselves sufficient for such a service, and without fear (I had almost said
wit too) undergo such a Burden. More Arguments I might have given, drawn from
the Disorder, Heresy, the greater inconveniences that may follow upon such
evil; but such things might not take: Multitudes of Authors I might have
quoted to confirm it, Ancient and Modern; yea, (as they are called)
Presbyterian and Independent, but this (with some) might be of no weight; I was
resolved to build all my strength upon that foundation which might not be
denied. All then I shall say to such, is what the Scribes and Pharisees said to
Christ upon his preaching in the Temple; By what Authority do you these things,
and who gave you that Authority? Tuum est Caesa^i pulmentum praeparare, non
Evangelium exponere.
Or as Basil said to the Steward of Caesar's house, abusing the Scripture to
defend Arminianism; Look you to your Masters business, let the work of the
Gospel alone. It were well such men would walk in the Callings in which God
has set them, and use the gifts they have within the compass God has
prescribed them.

I would not be thought by this to condemn or deny the use of the best, or
meanest gifts of any Christian; as there is place for the meanest gifts to be
exercised, so there is room enough for the greatest gifts to be employed within
the compass of a man's Calling: I would have the smallest spark of fire blown
up, nor would I have the greatest flame to be quenched, if it may be useful,
but I would have them both burn within the Chimney; he is no enemy to the use
of fire that would not have it burn the house. A small spark out of its place
will quickly threaten, a violent flame will sooner produce destruction upon the
whole fabric. Water is useful and profitable, when within its bounds; but
dangerous and pernicious if it once break out beyond them. You see then by
this, that a man may use his gifts among his neighbors, that if his neighbor
comes while he is reading a Chapter, he needs not to shut his Bible, or if he
meet another upon the way he needs not to hold his tongu, A man may use his
gifts among his neighbors, yet not preach.


Men may have Families to instruct, Children and Servants to teach, who yet may
not have the oversight of the Flock committed to them: They may have
Neighbors to reprove, Friends to comfort, who yet ought not to go into the
Pulpit to preach. I could wish that Christians gifts were yet greater, yea, I
should be glad, that (as Moses said) in this sense, All the Lords people were
Prophets! Would they but thus manage their abilities, would they but edify one
the other, warn the unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak (which
are the common duties of Christians, 1 These. 11. 14.) they might find
sufficient use for their gifts within the bounds of their Calling. Men may
find work enough at home, without running out of their places to exercise
their parts, were they far greater then they are. I shall apply what the
Apostle speaks, and so fitly use for my purpose what others object against
what has been spoken, 1 Pet. 4. 10. As every one has received the gift, so
let him administer the same, and. But it is in respect to the gift men have,
and the calling they are in; private persons in their places, according to the
liberty God has given them; Public Officers in their function according to
the injunction God has laid upon them. For the place does not intimate that
every one that has any gift should preach presently, but (chiefly) that he who
is a Preacher should be faithful and painful in his Ministry; that in season
and out of season he should wait upon his Office.

There is a vast difference between the only charitative admonitions but of
private Christians, and the authoritative preaching of called Ministers: The
one requires and engages to obedience, not only virtute materiae, for the
matters sake which he preaches; but virtute officij, by reason of his Office,
If a private man require another to keep the peace, this he may do, because it
is a good things; but if a Constable require, it must be done because the
Officer commands.
speaking in the Name, and by the Authority of God; the other may engage the
hearers to observance virtute objects and materiae, in respect of the truth of
the matter that may be spoken; but not virtute officij; they have no power to
oblige by Office. Thus I have showed you (to avoid all offense and quarrel)
how private Christians may use their gifts, although they have no liberty to
preach.

But I am afraid I may complain, that many who talk most of, and crave most
liberty for the use of their gifts in public, make least use of them in
private; they will go many miles to get a Pulpit, who will scarce step a foot
to a neighbors house unless to persuade him from his stability; they who
glory in speaking to Congregations, and would every day be exercised in a
public throng, are negligent to instruct their house, can hardly any day spare
time to oversee their private charge. As if there were no virtue but in
extremity, nor excellency but in excess; as if no water were sweet, but what
were stolen: In this (although I am somewhat loath to use the comparison) too
like the swinish drunkard, who although he has good meat and drink at home,
delights not in the eating or drinking of any, but where he may use it to
intemperance. Or like some filthy Adulterers, who have handsome wives of their
own, and (were they not wives) could sufficiently delight in them, yet care not
for the enjoyment of any, but whom they have no Commission to touch or desire.
Indeed in this, as in all things else, man's Nature is strongly proclive to
run beyond its bounds, and to abuse what in its place might be very useful.

SECT. VI.
Ordaining them to that service, (viz.) When Church Officers, as such, upon
former examination and approbation of a persons fitness, shall separate him
for that work by fasting, prayer, and laying on of hands.

This has been so generally received in the Churches of Christ, that Reformed
Churches and their Divines have condemned the contrary, as the opinion and
practice of Anabaptists, Libertines, Arminians, and Socinians. But I Will not
urge them. Zanchius says, that no man should be admitted to this Office,
unless lawfully called, and legally Ordained. But I Will fall upon Scripture.
Nemo ad ordinariam Ecclesiae functionem admitti debet, nisi legitime vocatus
eoque legitime electus and ordinatus. Zanch. So then, it is not what is the
practice of one Church, or the custom of another people, but whether practice
is most agreeable to the example and rule of the word.


Only in this (as was said formerly) you must not extend my Proposition beyond
the bounds of ordinary cases; As in the primitive times, where extraordinary
callings were given, in the beginning and persecution of Churches where this
cannot be had. I showed you in general, there must be a Call, and that this
Calling was some setting a part, besides gifting of men: This was true of
Christ, and the Apostles, who were most extraordinarily separated: Christ by
the Father, the Apostles and Disciples by Christ: but now I am to show you what
way the Scripture lays out for the ordinary practice of after ages, when such
extraordinary Calls should neither be given nor expected. But somewhat more of
this afterward.

When Barnabas and Saul, were set a part for the work to which God had called
them, they were thus separated by Church Officers, with fasting, prayer, and
laying on of hands, Act, 13. 3, 4. Act. 13. 3, 4.
They are Prophets and Teachers, ver. 1. and when they had fasted and prayed,
and laid their hands on them, they sent them away, ver. 4. It was not by the
designation of any single person by his own power, nor was it the act of any
particular Congregation by their only election, but by the Ministers there
assembled. Timothy received his gift by prophecy, but he was set a part to the
work by laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4. 14. 1 Timothy 4. 14.
By the Presbytery there is meant, ordo Presbyterorum: which although Diodate
explains to be of the Pastors, and of the other guides of the Church; Beza
restrains it to those who labored in that Church (which is conceived to be
Lystra,) in the word and doctrine. Indeed it is said, 2 Timothy 1. 6. that he
received the gift by the putting on of Paul's hands, but it cannot be thought
to be meant of his alone, but of his with the conjunction of the other
Presbyters: for (as Junius) In a common thing to argue from the position of one
to the removing or denying of another, is inconsequent (as in this case)
Because Paul laid his hands on Timothy, therefore other Presbyters did not; it
will not hold.

Others say, that the Apostles by laying on of hands, did miraeulously confer
the holy Ghost, but (besides that it no where appears in Scripture, that the
laying on of hands in the setting a part of Ministers did work any such
Miracle) in that example of Timothy it seems otherwise; for the Apostle bids
him attend to reading, to meditation, that his profiting may appear, which are
the ordinary and usual means of getting abilities for the work of the
Ministry. If abilities were given by the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, what need of reading and meditation to acquire them? if the holy
Ghost were conferred by the imposition of Paul's hands, what need any other way
to make his profiting appear? Besides we find, that others who were not
Apostles used imposition of hands, in whose power it cannot be imagined to be,
to confer the holy Ghost by it. The Presbyters laid hands on Timothy, and
Timothy upon others, for it is given him in charge to lay hands suddenly on no
man, 1 Timothy 5. 22.

It is well observed, That imposition of hands was used under the Law for
diverse causes; in blessing those on whom they are laid, Genesis 48. 14, 20. in
consecrating or setting a part a sacrifice unto God, Numb. 8. 12. in ordaining
or appointing men to an Office, as Joshua was appointed to succeed Moses, Number.
27. 23. now in this use of it all these ends meet together; Blessing,
Consecration, and setting apart to the Office. Presbyteros and Pastores,
Diaconos and alios Ecclesiae gubernationi praefectos, Beza. Presbyteri hic
vocantur quibus injunctum fuit docendi munus.
Barnabas and Saul ordained Elders by fasting and prayer, Act. 14. 23. it is
manifest who did it, and the manner of doing is as clear. Nor is it to be
doubted, but that by Elders there were meant Ministers If you but view what
rites were used in the Ordination of Deacons, and who performed them, you will
find it not much different, Act. 6. 6. The Apostles prayed, and laid their
hands on them.

I could tell you of Titus, who was left to ordain Elders in Crete, and
Timothy, who was to lay hands suddenly on no man. But what need further
testimony? especially unless there were or could be some Scripture produced,
which would show some other prescript or practice in and for the ordinary
setting a part of Ministers to that Office.

It is said that Matthias was otherwise set a part, Act. 1. 26. It is true, and
so were all the Apostles of Christ, but that was extraordinary, which (ut
supra) was to discover his Apostleship to be different from ordinary Ministers,
which is not now to be expected till Apostles are called again.

But there is much ado made about that place, Act. 14. 23. where what is
rendered ordained, is in the original (...), which properly signifies to strech
forth the hand; whence it would be inferred, That the people by suffrage, or by
vote chose the Elders, and that election were sufficient ordination.

But suppose this true, that the word did signify only a giving of consent, or
electing by holding up of the hand, it was only spoken of the Apostles,
Barnabas and Saul; of those who preached the Gospel, ver. 21. who confirmed the
souls of the Disciples, ver. 32, who passed through Pisidia, v. 24. who
preached the word in Perga, ver. 25. for the sense is continued all along; so
that if nothing else were to be said, this were sufficient to show you, that
Ministers, Church Officers ordained them. Died^^e.
He that of any expositor I have consulted in it speaks most for it says but,
that they ordained Elders with the consent and approbation of the Churches.

But indeed the word is otherwise used: for that it at all signifies choice and
election is only metaphorieall, because among the Greeks, it was their custom
to give their votes in elections by the holding up of their hands: but by the
like metaphor it may be used for imposition of hands, and it is so frequently
used among Greek Authors: because the hands when they are imposed on others,
are stretched forth. Leigh (in his Critica Sacra) says it is taken among
Ecclesiastical Authors for imposition of hands, which no way belonged to the
people, but was always referred to the Apostles and their successors,
Stephanus (well skilled in the Greek) says, that when it has an Accusative
case after it, it signifies not to give suffrage, but to create and ordain, so
it is hete, (...), it is rendered by the Vulg. Lat. quum constituissent, etc.

Not that by this it should be denied to people or Congregations, any right God
has left them, or may be fit for them; Election, approbation is allowed them,
although Ordination be in the hands of others: In the setting a part one in the
Office of Judas, the 120. presented two, but God chose one of them, Act. 1. 23.
Act. 1. 23, 24.
It is but an injury to the Text to say that the people chose him, for if they
had chosen one, why should they have presented two? but it is manifest that the
choice was in him that had the determination of the lot, Show whether of those
two thou have chosen, ver. 24. When the Deacons were ordained, Act. 6. 5, 6.
the multitude appointed seven, and set them before the Apostles, ver. 5. but
the Apostles laid their hands on them, and sent them forth, ver. 6.

I desire in this to go as far as safely I may, but I dare not give this as
absolutely necessary, for the many inconveniences the Church may suffer by it;
wherefore it is the practice of the Reformed Churches, that the Presbytery be
consulted with in their Elections; Praecunte dirigente Presbyterio.
and that although a rational dissent be allowed to Congregations, yet the
assistance and direction of the Presbytery is required in it.

I have done with this: I hope it is evident to sober-minded people, That there
must be a Call, that this calling is not only gifting (but besides this)
setting apart men for that office; then what setting of men apart for the
Office of the Ministry the Scripture ordinarily mentions. If this be granted,
the great cry of disorderly men against Ordained Ministers will be much allayed.

I would commend one place to your consideration, 2 Timothy 4. 3. 2 Timothy 4. 3.
where Paul tells Timothy, that in the latter times men shall heap to themselves
teachers. I cannot but think that the great fault here prophesied, was heaping
up many teachers, and so submitting to them most, who best pleased their lusts.
The Codex Claromontanus renders it, Prout hoc vel illud illis arriferit.
(...), which Beza interprets, as this or that best pleased them. Yet I am apt
to conceive an emphasis in this word (themselves,) they did not accept nor
submit to those who were sent to them, but did take to themselves upon their
own judgment whom they pleased. Leigh in his Critica Sacra: quod fine judicio
and temer e sunt collecturi doctores sues.
Nor is this much differing from his opinion (who expounding the word (...)
used in this place) says, they shall rashly gather together Teachers of their
own without serious judgment.

Here I read two Ordinances of Parliament; the one of Lords and Commons, (viz.)
An Ordinance of Lords and Commons, April 26. 1645. Another of the Commons only,
(viz.) A Declaration of the Commons assembled in Parliament, against all such
persons as shall take upon them to preach or expound the Scriptures in any
Church or Chapel, or any other public place, except they be Ordained either
here or in some other Reformed Churches, Die Jovis, December. 31. 1646.

Which was nor (as it was reported) to prove the Call, that being better done
by Scripture, then Ordinances of Parliament could do it; but after I had ended
my Sermon, I read those to let the people see, that I preached nothing, but
what was agreeable to the Judgment and Orders of a
Reformation-professing-State.

SECT. VII.
I Have now only (in the fourth place) to answer some Arguments which are urged
for the lawfullness of their preaching, who are only gifted Christians, and
against their C^^ who are Ordained Ministers.

I did not mention that of Philip, because he is called an Evangelist Act. 21.
8. Nor of Apollos; for he was called a Minister, and ranked with Paul, 1 Co. 3.
5. nor of other preaching for approbation only, which is granted by all, they
being designed for the service, and it being one way of trial; these things
were not worth the answering.
So many are the Objections raised by many people, that (besides the trifling
away of the time) it would be unnecessary to name them all; I shall pick out
three or four which are most insisted on, and seem most proving: the clear
answering of them may end the quarrel.

But to avoid mistakes, and to contract the Arguments and Answers too into the
narrower compass, I would premise these two things.

1. I shall not stand much to answer any Arguments drawn from extraordinary
cases; it is sufficient answer that they are extraordinary, which, but in the
like cases, can be no pattern to us. For it is certain, that what has been
extraordinarily done, cannot be ordinarily practiced, (which because much
controverted, I will a little clear.) The Disciples of Christ desired him, that
they might command fire from heaven to consume those that received not their
Master; and the reason they urged was from the example of Elijah, he did so
upon the like occasion in his days, and therefore they would do the same thing
in theirs, Luke 9. 54. but Christ's answer is, v. 55. Ye know not what spirit ye
are of, it might be lawful for the Prophet to do what might not be fit for
them: I say, it might be lawful for the Apostles and Prophets in the Primitive
times, for others at other times, when extraordinary things are, must be acted;
which is not lawful at other times, when ordinary Calls may be expected and had.

2. I would not have you confounded in terms; there is a preaching the
Scripture mentions, which is not that Ministerial preaching we are handling,
and then an Argument drawn from that will nothing weaken the doctrine delivered
about this. There is a preaching which is nothing else but a declaration of the
power and goodness of God. Thus David is said to preach Gods righteousness,
Psa. 40. 9. (although if this should be further urged, we know that David was a
Prophet) the word signifies to declare a good thing. (...)
It is spoken of Animaaz his running to carry the King good tidings of Absaloms
death, 2 Samuel 18, 19. It is the same word used for the earth's declaring, or
showing forth the salvation of God, Psalm. 96. 2. which is not that preaching by
way of Office, which Paul speaks of, where he says, they cannot preach except
they be sent, Romans 10. (...)
Indeed Solomon is called a Preacher, Eccl. 1. 1. as it is translated: but the
word comes from that which signifies collected or gathered together, and is no
more then the Book of Solomon, in which are collected or gathered together many
wisdoms, and so it concerns not our business at all,

There is a Teaching also the Scripture speaks of, which is not that Teaching
that is part of the Office of a Minister: a Teaching which is nothing but a
general instruction, or brotherly admonition, either of superiors or
inferiors, or of one Christian to another, and may be performed either by word
or practice: Thus (amidst other things might be named,) Abraham taught his
family, (yet he was a Prophet, Genesis 20. 7.) If it should be further objected,
Thus Kings and Rulers, and Judges, may be said to teach, 2 Chronicles. 17. 7. which
was different from the teaching of the Levites, who had the Law of the Lord,
ver. 8. Thus in the New Testament, women might teach, for it is required that
aged women should teach the younger to be sober. Titus 2. 4. it was both by
their admonition and behavior, which yet is not that teaching, which Christ
gave in Commission to his Disciples, Matthew. 28. 19.

Be peculiari douo praedicendi futura non de docendi manner in Ecclesia
intelligendum. Beza.
Again, There is Prophesying in Scripture, which is sometime a foretelling
things to come, as Agabus prophesied, Act. 11. 27. and the four daughters of
Philip, Act. 21. 9. which is not a ministerial Preaching. It is Diodates
gloss upon that place, that they had the gift of foretelling future things by
divine inspiration. Sometimes an extraordinary Office in the Primitive times,
whereby they did not only foretell things to come, but explain the writings of
the Prophets, and other difficult places, by immediate revelation; as would be
easily proved, (and shall be spoken more of anon) from 1 Cor. 14. 30, and 1
Cor, 12. 28. which is not that ordinary Preaching, which is the work of called
Ministers; which is also called prophesying (as I conceive,) in the 1 These. 5.
10. although some do interpret that too of the extraordinary gift of
prophesying. Under the name of Prophet is every Minister and Teacher
comprehended, Luke 4. 24. By this will many things be answered, without naming
of them, which to have handled particularly, would have spent much time, made a
great noise, when they had had but little strength, and so scarcely worth our
labor.

But now to proceed to those Arguments that are most confidently urged, and by
which so certain a victory is promised against us.

SECT. VIII.
Argum. 1.
1. IT is objected from Numb. 11. 25. etc. That Eldad and Medad prophesied in
the Camp; that Moses wished all the Lords people were Prophets: and therefore
others, who are not otherwise Called may preach.

Resp.
For answer: Either the force of the Argument lies in Eldads and Medads
practice, or in Moses his wish; if in their practice, that they prophesied, the
answer is easy; if in his desire, that all Gods people were Prophets, it is
not hard; I Will give it you in some few particulars.

1. The Office unto which the 70. were here called, was not to serve at the
Altar, to perform the Priests work, but to assist Moses in his Government, to
bear part of his burden; v. 16. 17. they shall bear the burden of the people
with thee, that thou shall not bear it alone. So then, to argue from this a
liberty of every gifted man's preaching, is scarce rational. Suppose they had
undertaken this service without a Call, which you see they did not, for they
were set apart by God for it, yet thence to have argued a liberty of preaching
without a Call, would not be ad idem.

^Enrooles) Ass. par Moyse, au nombre des septante, don't Dieu lui avoit ordonne
de fair le chois. Diod. Written (viz.) by Moses to the number of the 70. of
which God had ordained him to make choice.
2, Eldad and Medad were of the number of the 70. were not of the common
people, and they were all Elders and Officers over the people before they were
thus set apart to this extraordinary employment. It is true they were in the
Camp, but it is clear they were of the number of them that were written, v. 26.
although they went not with the rest to the Tabernacle (they were written,) as
Diodate; they were written by Moses in the number of those Seventy which he
chose help bear his burden; and that they staid in the Camp, was upon some
lawful occasion (as is conceived) through some Ceremonial pollution. Calvin
is of the same mind, that they were of the 70. but gives another reason that
they came not to the Tabernacle, (viz.) that the miracle God wrought in setting
them apart for that work should be the more observed, for all the people came
not to the Tabernacle: so that whatsoever is here meant by prophesying (of
which I Will speak presently) it is enough for our purpose, that they were set
apart for the service, they had not only gifts, and called to Office before,
for they were those whom Moses knew to be Elders of the people, verse 16. but
they were extraordinarily separated to this employment; nay, to make their
calling the more eminent and visible, they had an extraordinary gift to
ascertain the people of it; Non creati fuerunt Prophetae, sed voluit Deus hac
exterua^ nota^ testari novos esse homines, Calvin. in los.
which is conceived to be the reason, why they had this extraordinary gift
bestowed upon them, that the people might see they were called by God to it, So
then this can prove nothing for the preaching of only gifted, uncalled
Preachers, for these were eminently called, and set apart for the service.

3. It is agreed by all that I meet withal, that this which is here called
Prophesying, was some extraordinary gift conferred by God only for some time;
not that they did prophecy as the Prophets, Prophetia autem bic tantundem meo
judicio vales ac eximia facultas magnifice dissercndi de rebus arcanis vel
mysteriis.
but whereby they did in a wonderful manner, even to admiration speak of some
difficult and abstruse things, which would not have been known or spoken of,
but by such a gift; Calvin says, that prophesying here is no more then some
excellent ability to reveal mysterious things; of the same judgment are many
others But because some may question this interpretation, I shall clear it from
the original: the word is (...) of (...) which is used in Niphal, when it is
spoken of a true Prophet, speaking the mind of God unto people for their
reproof and instruction; which alone must be the prophesying in question, and
for which this place is urged. When it is used in Hithpahel, (as it is here) it
is taken for a false Prophet, that runs of himself; or one, who being inspired
by God, speaks of some mysterious things, sings praises to God, but prophesies
not as a Prophet unto people, as is manifest, not only from its frequent use in
the Scripture, as they who can search may find, but from the consent of those
skilled in the Hebrew about it.

Pagnin of the word: Prophetae dicti, quafi oraculerum, and decretorum
divinorum internuncij, aus mysteriorum explicatores, scu elocutores: and paulo
post; Kimchi notat hoc verbum in Niphal, voce passiva^ efformari solitum, quod
signifiet recipere Prophetiara a Deo ad loquendum per eam illi ad quem
mittitur, uni, vel multis. Reperitur and in Hithpahel ac Elias notat fere in e^
conjugatione falsam prophetiam significare, cum quis sefe propria authoritate a
Deo non missus ingerit ut prophetet. Marinus in his Arca Noae, speaking of it
as used in Hithpahel; Se Prophet^^n fecit, vel vatem simulavit, fiuxit:
vaticinatus est, futura praedixit vel Theology occulta praedicavit. Saepius de
Prophetia falsa dicitur, quod est vatem singere. Prophetare da dovero, a
fintamente, parlare despirato, and parlare di cose alte, and divine. (i.) to
prophecy at large, and feignedly, to speak by the spirit, and to talk of
matters high and divine.

Leigh out of Schind. in Niphal, significat ac^^^tionem prophe^^^ Deo and
mandatum bequerdi ad alies. In Himpahel usurpatur fere de prophetia^ falla, seu
sictitia pro natura istius conjugationis. Again out of Danaeus, he says it is
wont to be formed out of the passive voice Niphal, when mention is made of the
true Prophets of God, which were inspired by his Spirit; and received from him
the prophecy which they delivered to men; but when they speak of false
Prophets, they use the self same word in Hithpahel, because such prophets are
not sent of God, but thrust forth themselves.

Vatablus in locem: Hic prophetare Hebraei exponunt cantica and lands dicere:
and (...) for the proof of it, 1 Samuel 10. 10. on which Chald. Paraph. and
prophetavit (i.) and landabat Deum una cum illis, and canebat cantica in
honorem Dei.


. Whereas it is said of the rest, that they prophesied, and did not cease, v.
25 It is (...) of (...) Vatablus renders it non addiderunt: the Sept. (...) Non
addiderunt, subandi prophetare, (i.) hoc die tantum prophetarum, Vatablus.
. it is to be meant only of that time, when God conferred that extraordinary
gift upon them, for the manifestation of their Call. So that had they
prophesied (in this sense) without a Call, which yet you see they did not, it
were no argument to prove preaching without a Call, because that is not at all
intended in prophesying here.

4. That Moses wished all the Lords people were Prophets, has nothing at all
of proof in it; for besides that by prophesying here is not meant preaching (as
was showed before,) and that the Scripture makes a difference between Prophets
and Teachers (as shall be showed presently) his wish is only that they were
Prophets; which implies no more, then that when they were Prophets they might
prophecy; that if they were thus gifted and set apart, they might in the like
manner exercise their gift. If we should hear of some great acts of mercy done
by rich men, and I should wish you were all rich; it were not to intend that
you should do the like acts, till you had the like riches. Or if we were filled
with the reports of some famous acts of Justice done by some faithful Judges
in avenging blood, in executing malefactors; and I should wish that all the
honest people in England were Judges; It were not that every honest man should
avenge blood without Commission, or execute malefactors till he were a Judge.
For my part, I wish that all Prophets may prophecy, and that there were more
able and faithful Ministers of the Gospel, that the Lord would yet thrust out
more laborers into his Vineyard; yet I do not see, that this place will prove,
that any should prophecy till they are Prophets, that any should preach till
they are set apart for the Office.

Argum. 2.
The second Argument is drawn from the order of the Corinthian Churches
mentioned, 1 Cor. 14. 31. where it is said, that they may all Prophecy one by
one, whence it is urged, that every one that is gifted may preach.

Resp.
For the answer of this, as of the other, I shall lay down some particulars
whereby you may see the mistake the more clearly.

1. Prophesying in that place was not Preaching, but was in the Church of
Corinth an extraordinary Office; now an extraordinary example is no foundation
to ground an ordinary practice upon; (as was spoken sufficiently before)
Prophesying is generally taken in Scripture for a gift differing from Preaching.

The Apostle reckons Prophets among extraordinary Offiuers; Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists are all together, 1 Cor. 12. 2. these Prophets could by immediate
revelation explain difficult and abstruse places; could foretell things to
come, as did Agabus. If we can in our days find any such Prophets, who
without any study, by immediate Revelation can thus explain Scripture, he shall
prophecy, and preach too by my consent. And that this was an extraordinary
gift spoken of here is manifest from the Context: it is joined with the gift of
tongues which was miraculously given: yea, they spoke by Revelation, Ver. 31.
If any thing be revealed etc. this is not meant of every sudden fancy, any
uncertain conceit of any ordinary Text: it is (...), which is spoken of
discovering and making plain things in themselves hard to be understood, and
that without our industry, by the immediate dartings of Supernatural Light.

2. Where it is said that they might All prophecy; it is not meant of all the
members of the Church, but only of the Prophets who had this extraordinary gift
bestowed on them. That it relates not to all, is manifest from what is spoken
presently after, where some were forbidden to speak in the Church; verse. 34. It
is not permitted to a woman to speak in the Church. Yea, the same Apostle
says, that all are not Apostles, all are not Prophets, etc. 1 Cor. 12. 29. if
all were not Prophets then all must not prophecy, and if all must not
prophecy, then the word All in that place must have some other reference. The
drift of the Apostle there was to prevent that disorder and confusion which was
too common, and too evil among them, verse. 26, 33. It is strange that men
should take occasion by it, to introduce and Foment disorder in the Church.
That term [All] then must be referred to the Prophets; all the Prophets may
prophecy; verse 29. Let the Prophets speak, and let the others judge; this can
be only meant of them who were called to the office, and were partakers of that
gift, which I told you was extraordinary; for they are called Prophets: Let the
others judge; let the Prophets judge, who have the Spirit of discerning, and
were able to try the truth, as Diodate: and so Beza nimirum Propheta: for says
he, it cannot at all be gathered, from those places, that it should be
permitted to any of the Church to speak: to this purpose it is observable that
the article ((...)) is joined with the adjective, it is (...) which speaks its
reference to the Prophets: ver. 30. If any thing be revealed to another; this
cannot be spoken of any of the private members, for it is only of him that had
immediate Revelation given him; if any thing be revealed to another, (viz) to
another Prophet, so Diodate: and Beza renders (...), alii, nempe Prophetae,
Then ver. 31. for ye may all prophecy, etc. of whom can this All be meant, but
of those Prophets who were to speak two or three, while others judged, who had
Revelations immediately given them? Diodate renders it, all that had the gift
and calling of Prophets: Nimirum Prophetae, non quivis ex caetu, imo non nifi
ad munus prophetanda legitime ordinati, Beza.
and Beza explains (...) All, all the Prophets, it concerns not the private
members of the Church, nay, the following ver. 32. explains it, and tells you
who must speak, the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; they
surely were to speak whose doctrine (for that is meant by the Spirits) was to
be tried by the Prophets; but the text says they are the Spirits of the
Prophets. Whereas it is said they must speak one by one, Diodate explains it by
turns, Non eodem sane die. sed singulis conventibus.
and in diverse or several Assemblies; and so Beza says, it must not be the
same day, but at several meetings; this is their gloss, although I shall not
insist on it.

How little strength there is in this Argument to prove the lawfulness of their
preaching who are only gifted, me thinks every one should see without any
direction, and then what room there is left for a reply, (unless it be that
wranglers can make room any where) I can scarcely see or imagine. Those that
might prophecy one by one, were not the private members of the Church, for
some are forbidden to speak; but the Prophets, whose Office was extraordinary
and who had an extraordinary gift, who had this liberty of speaking upon a
received Revelation. Add but to this (what you heard before) that Prophesying
and Teaching were in that Church two distinct Offices, and I hope it will be
sufficient.

Argum. 3.
The third Argument is built upon that prophecy, Joel 2. 18. where it is said,
that God will pour out his Spirit upon all flesh, and their sons and their
daughters shall prophecy, etc. This is looked on as a Gospel promise, and
therefore it is conceived that in Gospel days all that have gifts may preach.

Resp. 1.
For answer to this also; 1. Consider, that this promise of prophesying cannot
be meant of preaching; else must the promise in the days of Joel cross the
prohibition given by the same spirit in the time of Paul; here it is said their
daughters shall prophecy, In the Epistle to the Corinthians, it is forbidden
that women should speak in the Church.

2. If it be taken literally for prophesying, it must relate only to those
times when all parts of the same prophcey might equally be fullfilled: young
men may as well now pretend to visions, and old men expect now to have God
discover himself by dreams, as others claim a liberty to prophecy now by this
promise. Whatsoever prophecy is here meant (if you take it strictly) can then
only be practiced, when God gave such extraordinary gifts, and made such
discoveries of himself to people.

3. It is manifest that the Prophet in this Promise refers to the coming of
the Messiah, where there should be more Light, and greater knowledge given,
then was before under the Law. The extraordinary part of it was fullfilled when
the Spirit was most plentifully poured out. When Saint Luke urges this promise
as foretelling what was there acted, Act. 2. 16. 17. (this is that which was
spoken by the Prophet Joel, and verse 22. it is said that Christ was approved
by signs and wonders.

But fourthly, The true meaning of the place is, that when the Messiah should
come (as it is urged in Gospel days) God would pour out of his Spirit (i. e.)
he would give the gifts of his Spirit unto all sorts of people, as well ^o
young as old, to Female as well as male (viz.) illumination, sanctification
etc. he would do it extraordinarily in the Primitive times, for the
confirmation of the Gospel; which was fulfilled: he would do it ordinarily
afterward, under the continuance of the Gospel, which is performed in our
experience. The Antithesis in the former verses will help well to confirm this
exposition; he had before promised them meats, and drinks, and only outward
mercies, but he would then multiply spiritual blessings upon them. This is the
judgment of others upon the place. I will by the inward virtue of my spirit
enlighten the understanding of mine Elect, who by nature are but children in
knowledge, says Diododate; and so Calvin; The holy Ghost means that knowledge
and understanding wherein the Church under the Gospel shall excel that under
the Law. Propheta sub his loquendi formis designs intelligentiae lucem, qua
excelluit nova Ecclesia post Christum exhibitum. Argum. 4. Resp.


The fourth Argument is framed from the practice of the Church that was
scattered abroad after the death of Stephen, Act. 8. 1, 4. They were all
scattered abroad except the Apostles, veas. 1. and they that were scattered
abroad went every where preaching the Word.

To answer this briefly, I could tell you, that it is probable that they had
some extraordinary Call, from God, or Commission from the Apostles before they
went, for they had extraordinary gifts, and where God gives extraordinary gifts
by immediate inspiration, I should not oppose such men's Preaching.

But plainly and clearly, First, I cannot see any ground to imagine that the
word (they) in verse 4. should be referred to every particular member, for in
verse. 1. it is (...) all were scattered, but ver. 5. it is only (...), they
that were scattered, which may relate to some only. Besides, it is past doubt,
that among so many that were scattered, there were many women, and (as you
heard already) they might not preach.

2. Although the Apostles were left, it is known that there were many Officers
in the Church at Jerusalem besides; There were Prophets, Evangelists, and the
seventy Disciples: Philip was one of the scattered ones, who went down to
Samaria, and preached there; verse. 5. whom you will find called an Evangelist.
Act. 21. 8. so that if the word (they) must not be referred to all (as you see
it cannot be) then more then probably to those only who were called to Office;
they who were scattered, being called to the Office of Teaching; did preach the
word every where.

But thirdly, the answer is most easy: It was in a time when the Church was
through persecution scattered, there was a great persecution against the
Church, verse. 1. (which was one of the extraordinary cases I before mentioned)
when an ordinary Calling could not be had, nor expected; and among people who
before had not received the faith of Jesus Christ. Nor do I know any
sober-minded man that is or would be against the Preaching of well-gifted men
in such times and cases, without any ordinary setting apart to the Office, when
and where it is impossible to be had. But this (through the yet continued
goodness of a patient God) not being our case, the Argument is too weak to
prove the preaching of only gifted uncalled men in our days.

Argum. 5.
There is but one thing more, and I have done. It is loudly cried out, That
although gifted men may not preach, yet those who are ordained by Antichristian
Bishops, are not true Ministers, and then not the Preachers neither.

Resp.
For answer to this I shall tell you, 1. That all Bishops by whom Ministers in
England have been ordained, were not Antichristian; Many of them have more
strongly opposed, and done more against Antichrist, then yet we have. For
besides their serviceable endeavors, they have many of them in suffering
resisted unto blood; Me thinks we might yet remember the labors of Jewel,
Abbot, Davenant; Usher, etc. nor should we soon forget the blood of Hooper,
Ridley, Cranmer, Latimer, etc. which I speak not to plead for the Office of
Lord-bishop, nor to excuse the wickedness of those who were popish and
ungodly, but to recover the names, and to remember the virtues of those who
were and are godly and useful in their generations.

2. There have been evil men in Office in the Church at all times, Hophni and
Phineas among the Priests; Judas among the Apostles, Scribes and Pharisees in
Moses chair; Those who preached out of envy in Paul's time. Yet this could not
null nor evacuate their ministerial Acts. The Baptism of Judas (for he had
Commission as well as the rest to baptize) might be of as good Authority as of
the rest of the Apostles. If the water be pure at the fountain, although it run
through many impure channels, it may become pure again. The Condemnation or
Reprieve of a Judge, though wicked, is as Legal, as Authoritative, as of the
most godly. A wicked Colonel may give a Commission to a Captain, yet the
Comm^ssion's firm, it is not one tittle esteemed less effectual for the
unworthiness of him that gives it.

3. Bishops did never ordain Ministers as Bishops, but as Presbyters, not in
their own names, nor by the Imposition of their own hands only, but in the name
of others, and with the conjunction of other Presbyters.

But because that some say, That the Ministers are called by the Bishops, and
the Bishops by the Pope, etc.

I Will speak a word of it. This (were it true) would not null their Call. For
(not to insist on what is urged by some of the first Reformers of the
Protestant Churches casting off the Pope) Baptism administered in the Romish
Church is true Baptism; nor are any so baptized, if converted to the true
Religion, baptized again, ut supra. Many judicious Divines are of the same
judgment concerning Ordination. Money coined in Queen Mary's days was not the
less current after; the Impress of the Popish Princess had no power to
adulterate the silver. The Vessels of Gods house were carried to Babylon by the
hand of Nebuchadnezzar, which yet were not the less fit for the service of
God, when returned. The natural succession of Jesus Christ was propagated
through the loins of Rahab and Thamar, nay shall I say, he himself came through
the womb of a sinful woman, yet received no pollution by it.

We must learn to distinguish between the Persons and the Offices of men,
between their personal Acts, and their Acts of Office; a wicked man may be a
lawful, though not a good Officer; and then the Acts of his Office valid; this
is acknowledged by all in other Offices, and must it be only denied in the
Office of a Minister? Jehu was a wicked man, was therefore his pulling down the
Idols of Baal evil? Could his personal wickedness evacuate all the civil or
religious Acts (although good in themselves) he did by virtue of his Office?

If then it be proved that our setting apart or Ordination to the work of the
Ministry, be right for substance, having an inward Call from God, and an
outward Call according to the ordinary rule laid down in Scripture, the failing
in some circumstances cannot make it void, nor then the Ministry either a false
or no Ministry.

This was added since I preached it at Epping.
But the great cry is against the wicked Oaths (as they are called) that the
Bishops imposed, and the Ministers took at their Ordination. This makes a great
noise; but you will find it laden only with powder, it may cast some filth, make
some sound, it may defile the faces of some, and fill the ears of more, but
has nothing of strength to hurt them against whom it is discharged: For answer,

1. This nothing (or very little) concerns their Ordination who took no Oaths
at all, as it is now, and for some late years has heen in our Church; As it
has been longer in other Churches where there have been no Bishops to impose
them.

2. Many godly men denied some Oath that some Bishops would have imposed, and
were therefore refused: Not that they conceived their Ordination could have
been injured, or their Call made void by it, but that they scrupled the matter
of the Oath, and would not accept a Call upon such conditions.

3. Some had no offensive Oath at all offered; no other then what they in the
Universities, and most men of the Nation upon some occasions had taken before
(viz.) the Oath of Supremacy. I speak this on mine own experienbe, there was no
other imposed on, no other offered to me.

But because it is the Oath of Canonical Obedience, that (I think) is so much
shot against us. I Will tell you what it is, and then (although I will not handle
the matter of the Oath, but suppose, though not grant it, as bad as some
conceive it) show you, that the taking of this could not ^ull, nor at all hurt
the Call of Ministers. You shall obey your Ecclesiastical Officers, the
Archbishop and Bishop in their Diocese in things lawful and honest. This (if
I'know it) is the Oath.

Therefore fourthly, Neither this nor any other Oath is any part of the
Odination of Ministers. This was done by prayer and laying on of hands; the
Oaths were given at some other time (before Ordiantion) for some other ends. A
Constable before he is made such, had formerly the Oath of Supremacy given him,
but that did not make him Constable; it was only to try whether he was fit for
the office. Colonels and Captains were made such by the Parliament; but before
they had their Commission, were enjoined to take the Covenant: the taking or
giving of the Covenant did not make them Officers, but their Commission; the
other was only to try whether they were fit to be employed in the Service. When
men come to be Ordained Ministers, they had some Oath or Oaths imposed upon
them, but not as part of Ordination, only as (some thought) convenient trials
whether they were fit for the Calling: Every man that had valor, that had
skill, was not fit to make a Commander, but he must be faithful to, else might
he lead his men to the contrary party, or upon their own ruin: Every man that
had Gifts was not fit for a Minister, unless he were orthodox and peaceable
too; else might he injure the Church by his Calling. The Oath of Supremacy was
to try whether they were Papists (and I could wish that there were some other
way found now to stop the like gap) the Oath (as it was called) of Canonical
Obedience, was to discover (as the Bishops were pleased to fancy it) whether
they were conformable to Government or not. But it is clear, that whatsoever
the Oaths were, or whatsoever their intentions that imposed them, the taking of
an Oath was no part of Ordination, and so had no influence upon their Office
that took it.

I shall conclude all with these three Proposals very considerable at this
time, and to this purpose.

1. Whether every man ought not to continue in the Calling in which God has
set him? according to that of 1 Cor. 7. 20.

2. What can we conceive to be meant by Christ, where he says, He has left
some Pastors and Teachers. Ephesians, 4. 11. If all that have Gifts may do their
work? or what Paul intends, where he says, All the members have not the same
Office, and therefore he that has the Ministry must wait on his Ministry, or
he that teaches on teaching, Romans 12. 4. 7. if this be not a distinct Office
from the Membership of others?

3. Consider how much Papists and Socinians are by this gratified; and by our
weakening the hands of each other get strength against us: what a breach we
make for the open enemy to enter at.

The Papists would prove us no Ministers, because not made by them and their
Church, and so would argue us to be (what they commonly call us) all Heretics;
as having no Ministers, and then no Sacraments, and then no conversion: and how
sad is it, that seeming Friends should do the work of open enemies; that
Brethren (so called) should think to accomplish that on a sudden, which
adversaries have so long in vain attempted.

The Socinians would not have us right Ministers, because ordained at all: when
the only giving of Gifts, and the Election of the Church is (in their esteem)
sufficient Calling: yet they although formerly decried Heretics, go further
then many now adares cried-up brethren. They deny not but if the Church had
continued incorrupt, the custom of the primitive times might have been
continued: men might have been ordained, although they do not hold it
necessary. Oh how sad it is (...) that we who have gone to the house of God as
friends, and always joined against these professed adversaries, should now do
the work of open enemies against one the other. Smalcius against Franszius in
the name of others


SECT. VIII.
Here ended the Sermons.
AFter I had ended the Sermon (which was the last I had to preach on that
business) It was asked, who made me a Minister, or in what Church I was made
such? Which although then impertinently asked, has been now sufficiently
answered.

It was afterward enquired, Whether any men were ever made Ministers by men
since the Apostles days, or those sent by them? It has been abundantly
cleared, and by this enquiry in part acknowledged, that in the Apostles days,
and theirs sent by them, Ministers were by men set apart for the Office, and
you have seen what setting apart it was which was in their time practiced: I
think then it will be granted, That the Apostles examples are rules for our
practice, which is sufficiently urged by our opposers, when it may serve their
turns, What pretense else for this contention? Only they make use of the
Apostles practice, as Jewel Jewel Apol.
tells Harding he made use of the Fathers, if they favored him then they are
the Fathers, and must not their word be taken? If they were urged against him,
then they were but men, and humanum est errare; As Merchants use their
Counters, sometimes they stand for a penny, and sometimes for a pound. Besides
that, it has been so constantly practiced by all the Churches of Christ since,
that it were but vain to insist on it. I shall refer you for that to D. Seaman,
where it is so well done. Nay, if Ministers were not made by men since the
Apostles days, who made these men such? But if this were intended (as I fear)
to delude the people, that we could not prove by Scripture, that any were made
Ministers by men since the Apostles days (in which there is so little strength
in the eyes of wise men, it needs nothing to repel it, yet because more
ignorant people might not see it) I shall only say, There was no Scripture
written since the Apostles days, then if I should ask him, how he could prove
by Scripture, that there was any Minister, or any Church, or that any has
preached since the Apostles days, or those sent by them? either of these would
be as hardly proved.

Vex filet meus deficit, and nox mea tantum sed etiam Angelorum.
How strangely was Cyprian overcome, when he considered the Incarnation of
Jesus Christ, That his tongue was not able to express, nor his thoughts in any
measure able to reach it. If it were fit to apply it, I should think, what
astonishment has befallen even men and Angels, to behold the Incarnation of
evil spirits (which in these days) are risen up against, and would lay violent
hands upon the Ministry, Clemens Alexandrinus says, In all bodies there are
two ranks, Head and Members, Father and Child, etc. It is much, that only in
the Church there should be no distinction of Minister and People, of Flock and
Overseer. The seven Stars are in Christ's right hand, Revel. 1. 20. which was
spoken only of the Angels, Ibid. not of the Churches; of the Ministers, not of
any gifted Brother. Surely they must tug hard that remove them. May I not say
in this, as it was spoken in another case, My Father is stronger then I, and no
man takes them out of his hand.

What are the Ministers the only troublers of Israel, that they are so troubled
by all sorts of people? Is this the reward of their pains, the return of their
prayers, sighs, groans and labors for you? Whence has so many people been
freed from Popery, been converted unto God in England, that it has been the
most famous Church in the world (I would it had not lost its Crown) but by
their endeavors instrumentally? And can that be an unlawful Ministry, that
has brought in so many souls to God? Or is this a just recompense now to cry
them down? Would you violently thrust them out of the Church, who have
traveled in birth to bring you into it? Or can you think them Antichristian,
that have drawn you into Christ, if you are at all in him. Whence have these
enlightened People gotten all their Knowledge and Gifts, whereby they are
enabled to plead so stiffly against the Ministry, but from the Preachings and
Writings of these Ministers they thus decry? (for Gifts are now acquired by the
use of means.) Are they now so evil, who have been the Instruments of so much
good? Is this all their Reward, to be beaten with the Weapons they have put
into others hands? Is the child bred up only to scratch out the Fathers eyes?
Clemens who lived within an hundred and thirteen years after Christ, speaking
of Clem. in Epist. ad Corinth.
the Apostles being called by Christ, and Christ being sent by God, etc. says,
That those who for a long time have had a good report, cannot be put out of
their Office without injury; and condemns it as a shameful thing that they
should raise sedition against the Ministers. Contra Presbyteros seditionem
movere.
For which of their good deeds would ye kill them? If the Ministers of England
are no true Ministers, then where are the true Churches? And if no true
Churches, who has power to send them to preach, that question the Call of
others? Truly I would advise such to forbear preaching till Christ come again
to call new Apostles, and then possibly they might be sent among the rest. Is
the past example of the Apostles of no value? Is the constantly successive
practice of the Churches in all ages of no prevalency?

Oh that I could speak (in this) a seasonable word to the whole Nation: If it
has been proved (as I hope it is) that the Ministry (so set apart) is Gods
Ordinance, it is a great evil to oppose, a sin of a great magnitude to overturn
it. I could say as Gamaliel, Act. 5. 19. Ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily
ye be found to fight against God. A faithful Ministry has been always
esteemed the greatest blessing, and is it now become the greatest curse? Are we
weary of our mercies, or are we weary of God, or rather is not God weary of us?
I wish England trifle not so long with their meat, till it be lest before they
are aware. Should the Ministry now contemned be suddenly taken away, be
irrecoverably lost, how would it then be too late repented! Did you ever read
that the Ministry was lost to a people, and that God stayed long after? If the
Shepherd be destroyed, who shall watch the flock, who shall prevent the
worrying, the devouring of the sheep? If there be no interpreter; who shall
declare to man his Righteousness? Job 33. 23, 24. If Moses, and Noah, and
Daniel be taken away, who shall pray for, or keep off the plague from the
people! Did Jerusalem ever prosper, when the Prophets were slain? Is not God
himself engaged in their quarrel? And is it nothing to make him your Enemy? He
may at present permit their injury, but will severely avenge it afterward. Have
not the Ministers been the Horsemen and Chariots of Israel? Have not they stood
between you and Popery for these many years? Have not they stood in the gap
between you and Gods indignation many a time? Are you now so strengthened
against Popery, that you need their help no longer? Or rather have not the
Champions of Popery so insinuated, that they have persuaded you to cast off
your defense? Are you so secure from Gods Judgments, that you need their
intercession no longer? I pray God it be not rather, that your destruction
being decreed, the Lord will no longer permit the means of its prevention among
you, It was a sad sign, when the people would not hear Jeremiah, nor God suffer
him to pray for them. What would be your misery, should it be ever said of
England, as once of Jerusalem, Oh England, England! that stonest the Prophets,
and killest them that are sent to thee; How often would I have gathered thee,
as an hen gathers her chickens, and thou would not! Behold, your house is
left unto you desolate, Luke 13. 34. 35. Oh that before it be too late, We
might know the things that belong to our peace.

I have done, and can expect what I may suffer from unruly men, but I shall
rather account it mine honor, then my shame, to suffer for Christ, whose cause
(in this) I plead, although I am sorry I have no more strength to defend it.
It was a good encouragement Jerome gave to Austin; Signum est majoris gloriae,
omnes haereticite detestantur.
but I Will not apply it, lest it should savor of too much glorying in my self,
or bitterness to others. I can think some will find fault with all, some with
some part, others with other parts of it. I hope none will accuse me of either
malice or bitterness; If any shall discover to me my weakness (of which I am
sufficiently jealous) I shall humbly acknowledge it. If any shall convince me
of any falsehood (to which I am not yet conscious) I shall cheerfully retract
it. Only I shall expect the same meekness and candor I have brought with me:
Uneven Weapons make no fair combat: And shall desire, that if any answer it
their Name may be subscribed: I shall expect the finger of a Jesuit, because
their cause is so much concerned in it.

FINIS.
December 18. 1651.
Imprimatur

EDMUND CALAMY.

An Appendix.
SInce I had finished this task, there came to mine hands the confident news of
the Pulpit Guard Routed: which might have prevented my further march; But upon
better examination I found, in this, as in other things, men for the most part
speak as they would have it; for surely had not the Author himself reported it,
others would not have judged it a Rout, nor do I think they will yet believe it.
Indeed I should have imputed it to a strange Providenc, if through so much
weakness, he should have gotten so complete a victory. But I perceived that
this attempt was not designed only against that Guard, but equally against all
the Party, and the Cause; I thought good therefore to appear, although but in
the Rear, and with this small Party, while the other might have liberty to
charge him more thoroughly; at least, that my Brigade (I mean the Sermons I have
printed with this) might march with the more repute in the world.

I had not time to answer the Book largely, (for I was constrained to do this,
while the Press wrought off the other) nor should I have done much more in it,
had my time been longer, and my leisure greater; not only for that I find
little of Argument, although it is swelled into some bigness with railing, but
that the sum of what is there urged, is already spoken to by the Sermons
herewith printed. I shall only in this make some further discovery of its
weakness, and direct you to them for more full answer.

I confess (upon what sudden view I had of it) I find but little work to do,
but am much puzzled about the manner of doing it. It is in this, as with some
seabbed sheep, with some rancour'd wound, a man must cut off a great deal of
filth, pass by much corruption, before he come to apply the plaster, or
attempt the cure. He is so bitter in his expressions against the Gentleman, so
loud in his railings against the Coat (as he calls it, page 19.) that he
deserves no fair answer; But I forbear, least in this the Proverb should be
verified, Like to like, quoth the Devil to the Collier. Only, if I should take
equal pains to tell large stories, of the many filthy behaviors, the ranting
practices of men of his gang, malice might be suspected under it, no strength
of Argument would be discerned in it, yet I wish that those who might have
accounted it railing and bitterness in me, do not esteem it a virtue, an
excellency in him.

Master Hall.
I Will not meddle with his review of himself in the Looking-glass, I shall
leave that to him, who is more able and more concerned in it; where he has
sufficient opportunity to vindicate Truth, if he will adventure to fully his
finger with so black an object. Yet I cannot but observe how he justifies his
Antagonist, in what he complains of as most injured in: he is troubled that he
is reproached with the term of dangerous Sectary; Surely he that but looks on
him in that Looking-glass, will conclude that he is only standered with a
matter of truth.

Nor will I examine the trial and verdict he himself makes and gives of the
Ministers (under the name of false Prophets) For that, I shall refer him to be
judged by him, whom he is pleased to name as Judge (I mean Jesus Christ) in his
cause; who will doubtless one day show him, What sentence he will give upon
the evidence he has produced. Yet this is observable, that all the witnesses
he summons or brings in, are either of his forcing or making. What testimony of
Scripture does he bring, which he does not misapply? What evidence does he
produce from the Churches, deluded Souls, public Peace, but what is dug out of
his own pit, made of his own brain?

To take notice of his strength of Arguments, or depth of learning, is
impossible, there is no discovery of what is not. Althou^gh I must confess,
when I heard of, and saw some bold and confident assertions, I expected
something to support them. I shall acknowledge my self a false Prophet (in
this) if ever much learning made him mad. Yet I cannot but smile, that those,
who (because of their own ignorance) decry, and rail against learning in
others, are willing to make use of what they have themselves, yea, would
counterfeit more too sometimes. I find him at the charge of too whole words of
Latin in one place, Cum privilegio; if it be the language of the Beast,
methinks his mouth should not meddle of it: if it be any part of the tail of
the Beast, his tongue should not lick of it. In another place page 98. he
strains hard for two more, Episcopos, Presbyteros, But I confess he has
brought them forth in a woeful case (the accusative plural for the nominative
singular) but I see he speaks all in the accusative case. I would not wrong the
man; if he meant Greek, it may be he thought heathen Greek was not fit to be
used by Christians, and therefore writ them in the letters of his
mother tongue, If he intended Latin, he might conceive that true Latin only was
the Language of the Beast, or that the whores head had been sheltered under
Priscians Cap, and he might lawfully break it. But I would willingly know how
he got or came by this learning; surely it was only humane, and then acquired
only by industry; if it had been an immediate inspiration of the Spirit, that
would have taught him to have spoken it true. The Spirit is able to bring forth
its conceptions perfect. He that gives the use of Tongues, could not want power
to speak properly: they that spoke with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them
utterance, Acts 2. 4. were heard by the multitude speaking their own language,
verse 6. Besides, what ado he keeps with his terms of Logic, the major and the
minor Proposition; if Logic be so black an Art, I wonder he would touch it;
but I see he loves all of the Color, unless it be a black Gown.

I would give you a glimpse of his skill in interpretation of Scripture, that
since he fails in his humanity, you might see what Divinity he has; but I
shall speak only of so much of that, as will fall into my way, as I run over
those few things which relate to the Arguments I have urged or answered before.
In which I shall only give you some Animad^er ions upon what he speaks; the
book will not require, nor will my time afford any long business.

I find (in S. Walter Rawleigh's expression) much spoken but little said about
the Priests under the Law, and Ministers under the Gospel (page 17.) Because
there is some difference in their service, therefore must their Offices be
questioned? The Office of a Priest (says he) was appointed by God; and was not
the Office of Pastors and Teachers so too? Ephesians. 4. 11.

To excuse himself both from Corah's guilt and punishment, he says page 18.
Corah and his company were smitten for doing what was forbidden, but the Saints
are commanded, and commended for preaching, etc. he has not proved either of
them by the letter of Scripture, but let him prove the latter, either directly,
or by just deduction, and we will forgive him the former. You may see (in the
Sermons) what command they had, nor can I yet see, by what he says, any more
discovered.

But because it is questioned by him, to whom Corah and his company should be
rather compared, whether to the Ordained Ministers, or the only gifted
Preachers: observe these particulars.

Corah and his company out of a pretended fitness to perform the service to
which they were not called, would have intruded into the Office of Moses and
Aaron; It is easily judged who are most guilty in this.

Corah and his company did not monopelize the Office to themselves (as he
pretends, page ead.) but would have shared with Moses and Aaron, in what it was
conceived they monopolized. What think you now? who are most like Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, and then may most fear their punishment?

For his railing, That Ministers have no more Authority then the Devil and the
Pope could give them, and no more Calling, then Corah and the Devil himself;
The Lord rebuke him; only let him forbear such language hereafter. Where he
makes the carcass and form of a thing both one, I forgive him: he dislikes,
and therefore (I conceive) pretends not to Learning. Only I would not have
people deluded with such a soul-lesse carcass.

The Ministers have no Call according to the letter (ibid.) I had though (if by
the letter he means the letter of the Scripture) setting men apart by prayer,
fasting, and imposition of hands, had been according to the letter of
Scripture; I am sure what he objects against it is besides the letter.

Nor have they any Call from the Spirit, (ibid.) Are not their gifts manifest?
Can he without blushing accuse them of walking in the Devils darkness? will
not many of his own party contradict him in this? will not they acknowledge,
that many Ministers of England live holily, walk by the light of Gods Spirit?
What spirit has possessed the man? truth, meekness, charity, are the fruits
of the Spirit of God. He Will see what is spoken about gifts, supra, He says,
it is dangerous for men to preach without a Call, and dangerous for people to
hear such, etc. I am (in this) wholly of his mind; In the Sermons.
I hope by what has been spoken already, and what shall yet be touched on, it
will appear manifest, that only gifted brethren have no Call to preach.

Nay, take his own words, and (if I understand them) there is enough granted
for our purpose, (page 19.) although it is true, that none can preach according
to the intention of that Scripture, Romans 10. 15. (viz.) for the working of
faith, and converting of souls, yet it does not follow, that every gifted
brother may not preach: (these are his own words.) If he means that gifted
brethren cannot preach for the working of faith and converting of souls, we
have enough; nor can I see what else he should mean; for it is evident, that
the preaching of Sent Ministers is the means of converting souls, of the
begetting of faith. Besides, the Gentleman's Proposition, which he tries to
answer, is, If none may preach but those that are sent, then every gifted
brother may not preach. What he speaks of sending, (page ead. and prox,) I Will
speak somewhat to; and because upon that and two things more hangs all his
discourse, the full answer of which shakes the whole book, I Will stand a little
on them; yet not neither, because they have been so fully answered already, ut
supra.

1. Gifting is sending, it relates to the internal power of the Spirit in the
Saints, etc. (ibid.) Indeed there must be a sending from God, where men are
faithful Ministers; but there must be (besides) an outward designation to the
Office, where any be lawful Preachers. But besides what has been spoken
already (in the Sermons,) That only gifting is not the sending the Apostle
mentions; I Will show you in Scripture, that sending is only spoken of the
outward setting those apart for the service who are sent. (Not to name what is
so much, and so often spoken of Christ's being sent by his Father.) Where Isaiah
was to go about Gods service, the Lord asked, Whem shall I send? and Isaiah
said, Send me, Isa, 6. 8, 9. it was not spoken of gifting him, that was done
before, but of his outward mission: and thus it is explained by all I meet
withal, who had as much of the Spirit to interpret Scripture by, as this
pretender. The Disciples were sent, when after they were gifted, they were bid
to go, Mat. 10. 1, 5. yea, he seems himself to distinguish, where (p. 24.) it
is said, The gifting and sending of the gifted brethren, is, when the Lord in a
bleth them in a measure to it, and says to them, Go. Are not gifting and
saying go, two distinct acts? which is manifest in Paul, Act. 22. 14, 15, 10,
22, whom he instanceth in, although he would falsely infer the contrary from
another Scripture, yea, would delude people, by telling them, that he preached
before he was separated, Acts 13. 2. but I say he did not preach, before he was
by a special command sent by Christ. To this purpose were the Apostles said,
when by fasting, prayer, and imposition of hands they separated Paul and
Barnabas, to send them, Acts 13. 4.

2. He is very unhappy in confounding ordinary with extraordinary cases; which
is so much answered already, that I searce know what to say more. I there
showed, that those who were sent most extraordinarily, were (besides gifting of
them) set apart for the service; and what setting apart ordinarily was
afterward practiced Although the Ministers were not immediately sent by God,
which was extraordinary, yet they had prayer and laying on of hands, the
ordinary designation the Scripture mentions. This he pretends not to; if he
has an extraordinary mission let him discover it. Extraordinary gifts we find
none; if God has any time said to him, as to the Disciples, go; or as to Paul,
Acts 22. 22. I Will send thee to the Gentiles, whose examples chiefly he uses to
prove his Calling, let him manifest it. If he shall any more adventure upon
such a business as this, let him no more plead extraordinary Calls, but in
extraordinary cases: let him not urge Act. 8. Disciples practice, unless he can
parallel the cases to: It will else be to as little purpose as this.

3. He often distinguishes between the gift and the Office. A gifted member
may exercise his gift, although not execute the Office; I say their gifts may
be exercised, but it must be within the bounds of their calling, not in the
place of Officers. A file-leader (if he be able) may exercise his file, or two
files, etc. but he must not carry them, much less the whole company into the
field, nor engage them against the enemy till he has Commission. In the
exercise of a private Christians gift, there is but a charitative admonition,
which has no other obligation, but as the matter may be good he speaks; in the
execution of an Office, there is an Obligation to obedience, virtute offlcij
(ut supra.)

Yet notwithstanding his former distinction, he says, page 27, 28. That a
gifted brother may baptize and administer the Supper too. Strange! may they do
all the service of an Officer, yet not execute the Office? It is time for me to
cry down such Logic too. In the administering of Baptisin, there is but little
exercise of gifts; I should have though this had been part of a Ministers
Office.

When he so confidently asserted this, I expected proportionable proof; I
thought I should have heard of some extraordinary things at extraordinary times
and cases; which I should have answered, quod fieri non debet, factum valet;
but all the prof I find is of John's baptizing, (ib.) And was not John
commissioned for the service? And the disciples, who were then the ordinary
Christians, baptized, (p. e^d.) Did they baptize when they were but ordinary
Christians, before they were sent forth by Christ? But if when they baptized,
there were not other Christians, whom did they baptiz? And, Peter commanded
people to be baptized. Act 10. (ib.) and (he says) it is probable there were
gifted preaching brethren who aid the work. Away with such probabilities. I see
it is lawful (when it may serve some men's turns) to draw inferences from
Scripture: nor will Act. 8. (again urged) prove any thing.

But to delude the people, he says, Preaching disciples may baptize. What
then? They who had or have a Commission to preach, might or may baptize, the
same Commission including both; may those therefore either preach or baptize
who have no Commission at all? (p. 30.) he says, Preaching and baptism are not
so united together, as never to be separated. But (whatsoever he pretends) we
find them put into the same Commission, nor (for all the smoke he raises) do
I think he can produce one example in the whole Scripture, of any that ever
baptized, who was not Commissioned to preach.

The command makes things lawful or unlawful, says he, (ibid.) An excellent
position, one of the clearest truths in his whole Book; and I could wish that
as it holds, so it were believed and practiced in all things. I shall infer,
That till he proves there is some command (or what is equivalent) for the
preaching of only gifted men, he must give me leave to call it unlawful.

I shall speak nothing to his bitter inveighing against Presbytery (in great
part of his Book) only let you see his black mouth, and self-contradictions.
You have altered the name from Bishop, Priest, and Jesuit to Presbyter, page
22. And were not Presbyters long before Jesuit, Priest or Bishop either (in
his sense?) Page 22. he says, There was a Presbytery in the primitive times.
Yet Page 25. It was a strange name till lately. Will prople never be sensible
of such men's abuses? Had he but some few of these gifts that many of the godly
Ministers of Christ have, he would find Presbyters often enough in Scripture.

See how he foams Page 27. Presbyterian wolves, etc. if they could have
prevailed, they would have sucked the blood of the lambs of Christ. A
charitable censure: What they would have done, he knows not, I know who do
labor to suck the blood of the lambs of Christ. Let me tell him, time was,
that if others had exercised such cruelty against him and his party, as he
would have inflicted now upon the Ministers of Christ, his tongue must not have
run at this rate. It is pity so much tenderness should be repaid with so great
severity. But the Proverb is true:

Page 20. We have no true Church, no true Ministers. How then got he to be of a
Church, or when did the true Church begin? For Page 29. We are not speaking
(says he) out of, but in a constituted Church.

He is much put to it to answer that Argument, If gifted men may preach, then
gifted women too. This (says he) is your conclusion, we say, and the Scripture
says, that gifted Brethren may preach: you Will will conclude, that gifted
women may preach. But where does the Scripture mention gifted brethren more
then gifted women? I had thought gifting had been the qualification, the
sending; and then in one as well as another. Let people see what pains he takes
to shift off the truth, what ^oles he runs into so prevent a conviction.

Nay Page 60. he says, Women may prophecy too, though not in the Church, or
at Last by the permission of the Church. For which ^^^^geth, 1 Cor. 11 5. An
excellent interpretation. Paul says the women must not be permitted to speak
in the Church, and he would move they may, with his gloss upon another pi^^^
But, besides what is answered by the Gentleman t^^^ I shall (...) that Learned
Mead expounds it of singing, and for that exposition urges ^ Chron. 25. 2. 1 Samuel 10. 5. where prophesying is taken in the same sense, Every woman that
praisth or sings praise, etc.

He labors much to take off those answers given to what is urged, from 1 Cor.
14, But for all he says to that, I shall refer the Reader to what I have
spoken of that place, and of the argument drawn thence, in the former part of
this Book. He acknowledges prophesying to be extraordinary under the law, but
not in Gospel-daies, page 60. If it were ordinary in the Primitive times, why
was it given then by Revelation? Why were not all that had gifts Prophets? If
it be ordinary now, Why does it not continue? If Th. Collier can but discover
that there is such a gift of prophesying now as was then; when (ut supra) they
received immediate Revelation, when they could foretell things to come, when
they could by sudden instinct explain dark and difficult Prophecies, he will
speak something; but I do not see that is attempted; I would advise him never
to urge that Scripture more, until he can manifest such a gift. Yet I cannot
but observe his learned exposition upon the 32. verse of 1 Cor. 14. Let the
spirits of the Prophets be subject to the Prophets. P. 21. (i.) They are able
to contain themselves, and be silent, while another speaks: When it it is said,
ver, 29 that they must speak two or three, and the others judge. The text it
self tells you what subjection is meant there (i.) to the judgment of the
Prophets. Surely if he had such a measure of the Spirit that he pretends to, he
would have more skill in discerning of Scripture. Let none think that he has
the spirit of prophesying, spoken of, 1 Cor. 14. that can no better explain so
easy a Text.

Master Hall.
The Gentleman having said that the holy Ghost commends Learning: He replies
page 41. Holy Ghosts? Is there any such word in all the Scripture as Ghost? How
now? which way went the Spirit of God from him? What immediately inspired. yet
ignorant of this? has he forgotten Mat. 28, 20. Has Baptism been so long out
of fashion, that he has forgotten the words of it? Is Act. 2. 4. (besides
other places) quite out of his mind? Has his new and clear light dazzled his
eyes? or has he been digging so long in the bottomless pit, that the smoke
has wholly beclouded him?

He would know whether Paul's gift and ours were received different ways; (p.
45.) I shall grant they were, yet deny his false inference, we may have gifts
from the same spirit, yet in a diverse manner: As different gifts, so different
ways of conferring them were from the same spirit. Paul had his by immediate
Revelation, we receive ours more mediatly, by the use of means. One man takes
up water at the Fountain; is it not the same water, or must it be wickedly come
by, that another takes up in the channel? Why had he not as well questioned
what Timothy's gift had been, when it was different from Paul's too? What is
spoken concerning Numb. 11. 25. to the 30. is sufficiently cleared before: yet
without further reference, he grants me enough, that it was an extraordinary
spirit of prophecy: then whatsoever may be practiced in Gospel days; that
place will afford us no Argument in ordinary times, when extraordinary gifts
are not given. Jehoshaphat sent Princes to teach (page 62.) from 2 Chronicles. 19.
but you will see the Levites had the Law of the Lord, verse. 11. It is urged: May
not you do your self, what you may command your servant to do? No: A King might
command a Judge to hear and determine Causes, which he may not do himself: A
King inthose days might command a Priest to offer sacrifice, which to have
done himself had been sin. Our Iehoshaphats (says he, page 63.) have of late
rather encouraged the gifted brethren for to teach, then prohibited them. I
think the State is little beholding to him; If another should have said so
much, it might have been taken ill. I am sure they have not yet recalled those
Ordinances of Parliament, made against such Preachers.

He that sent Christ extraordinarily, sends lay Prophets ordinarily (page 67.)
that remains yet to be proved: this is per idem as he learnedly answers in
another place. Let us but see the examples of any in Scripture that ever
Preached, who were no otherwise sent, then our gifted brethren are now. You
have seen the Apostles, and Disciples were sent extraordinarily by the
immediate voice of God; but these, although they urge their examples, have no
such mission.

He would persuade us that Prophesying was not an Office, but a gift, (page 60.
and alibi.) yet it is numbered among the several Offices of the Church, Rom 12.
7. he confesses that the Office of Ministers is meant in the same place, why
then not prophesying; when they are equally called gifts? so they are called
too, Ephesians. 4. 11. yet there meant of Offices.

I shall say nothing of his vainglorious crying up himself and his Party as
the only gifted, the only godly men; his despitefull reproaching of the
Ministers of Jesus Christ, as wicked, ignorant, Antichristian Devils, what not?
Let the world judge who have the best gifts, and (by this) who have the most
pride: I could quickly show you a parallel between their Doctrines and lives
too, whether are most suitable to the revealed will of God; but I could not do
it without seeming bitterness to them, without a show of arrogance in our
selves. In this let God and all (but) moderate people judge between us.

Nor shall I speak (more then I have in the former part) to his railing
Arguments to prove Ministers Antichristian; there is but one that is at all
likely to get any credit, and that is answered there.

I shall only propose what he asked, p. 44. Who are the unquiet men, the gifted
brethren or the Ministers? If their practice will not sufficiently discover it,
in running from place to place to disturb Congregations, who practiced
quietness only while they had no power to be unquiet; let this railing book be
spread before you, and then see what boilings of spirit, what trouble some
humors these men are affected withal; who under a pretense of Christian
liberty disturb the peace of Christians; abuse the Names (and if it were in
their power) would even take away the lives of godly men.

I must end, yet I might have spoken somewhat more, if I had had more time, but
the Press will stay. I hope it is enough to discover the invalidity of his
proof, who has given in a great charge against the Ministers: and then to take
off the prejudice of Readers that might possess them against what I have
Printed in Justification of the Call of the Ministers of England. I am apt to
think (but shall submit to the judgment of more wise, and (now) less engaged
men) that there is nothing of value in his whole book, but either in the former
part, or this short Appendix, may receive a full and satisfying Answer. If
there be any need, I may be larger afterward: In the mean time I shall
earnestly desire the Reader to look upon both with a single eye, and
unprejudiced heart; look through the railing, and see what of Argument you can
find in that, then excuse my weakness, and see whether you may find an Answer
in this. Take not reproaches for Arguments (which content some) It is easier to
accuse then to prove: cast not off the truth for any infirmity in the managure
of its cause. It is easier finding then amending faults. If ever the like piece
should come to mine hand again, I should take little delight to read it, and
less pains to Answer it: It is a great sign of weakness of Argument, where
there is such strength of reproaches. Barking dogs are best appeased by
neglect: the greatest scoldes are soonest quieted by silence. If by this
unpleasant difference, truth may be at all manifested, and thereby the Saints
of God in any measure advantaged; I shall bless God in it, and esteem it a most
gracious Providence that I had any hand in it.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader.
THese new Books following are Printed and sold by W. Roybould at the Unicorn
in Paul's Churchyard, near the little North-Door.

THe Holy Arbor; containing a Body of Divinity, or the Sum and Substance of
Christian Religion, in Folio. By John Godolphin, J. C. D. 1651. The History of
the Bohemian Persecution, from the beginning of their Conversion to
Christianity, to these times, in 8*. The Ladies Vindication, or the Praise of
worthy women, in 12o, 1651. A further Discovery of the Mystery of the last
times, in 4o 1651. The Life and Reign of King Charles, in 8o, 1651. The
Antiquity of Commonwealths, instanced by that of Holland, in 8o, 1652.
Church-Cases cleared, with a Pacificatory Preface to reconcile the difference
between the Presbyterians, Independents, and Anabaptists: by Dr N. Homes, in
8o, 1652. A Sermon Preached the 8th of October. 1650. before the L. Mayor, etc.
By Dr Homes. The Mischief of mixed Communions, in 40, By Dr Homes. A Plea for
the Ministry in 4o, by M. W. Wickins. A Sermon Preached November. 5. 1651. By Mr
Jenkins, being the first he preached after his Releasement. The Churches and
Ministry of England, true Churches and true Ministry, cleared and proved, by
Francis Fullwood: before a numerous Congregation assembled to hear the
opposition then made by M. T. Collier and others of his party. Also a Preface
of the Manner, and a Narrative of the Dispute, attested under the hands of the
Ministers then present, in 4o 1652. The Ordering and Settling of Ireland, in
Folio, 1652. Christ alone exalted, in 17 Sermons, by Dr Crisp, in 8o. The
Assertion of Grace, by R. Town, in 8o. A Sermon Preached at Taunton, by Mr
Newton, May 12. 1652. Poems with Additions. Also, The Muses Looking-glass.
Amyntas. Jealous Lovers; and Aristippus the jovial Philosopher. By Tho.
Randolph, M. A. in 8o. 1652. The Life of Mr Marriot the great Eater in 4o. With
all his mercy Actions and Travels. A Cat may look upon a King. Or, A Character
of the Lives and Actions of all the Kings, from William the Conqueror to King
Charles, in 12o. 1652.

