THE CREED-FORGERS DETECTED, IN REPLY to a Pamphlet, Falsely Called, The
Quakers-Creed, Containing Twelve ARTICLES.

Published by some, who have not joined with Geo. Keith in his Pride and
Contradiction, but Testify against both him, and them that join with him
therein.

Let the lying Lips be put to silence, which speaks grievous things, proudly
and contemptuously against the Righteous,

Psalm. 31.18, For he that hides Hatred with lying Lips, and he that utters a
Slander, is a Fool,

Prove. 10.18. LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in
Gracious-street, and at the Bible in Leaden Hall street, 1700.

THE Creed-Forgers Detected, etc.
INTRODUCTION.
It Is no ways pleasant to us, that we have occasion on this wise to appear
against any; but especially against such, whom we love, and are sorry they
should draw back into those ways, where some of them (that have so done) could
find, in days past, no more true Peace and Satisfaction to their poor Souls,
than we could whilst we abode there, which was the only Reason we left them.

And this increases our Sorrow, and we believe will their Condemnation, That
they should publish such things of us, which we cannot but think they know, in
their own Consciences, to be false; viz.

That they imbibed many hurtful Antichristian Principles, which were instilled
into them by our Leaders and Teachers; and that they have been taught by them
and their Preachments, to slight and undervalue the holy Scriptures; and to
insinuate, as if the Doctrine of Christ crucified, and obedience to his holy
Institutions, were not minded by us; and that we are no Christians; and that
they used their utmost endeavors, not only to inform us of our vile and
abominable Errors in Fundamentals, but to Reclaim us; and that we wilfully take
to our selves Guilt, of all our Antichristian Errors.

And when they have thus most falsely and uncharitably Charged us, instead of
Proving, they query in their Introduction, What Consequence can there be
inferred, but that they wilfully take on them the Guilt of all their
Antichristian Errors? So that from false Premises they draw wrong Consequences,
and from thence make undue Inferrences, and then say, To what purpose so many
particular Persons giving forth Creeds, palpably Contradicting the former
Creeds. And yet must tell them, as we are not accountable for the sense of
this, they are not so fair and ingenuous, as to name one of these Contradictory
Creeds, nor the Persons that made them they call Creeds; but as boldly
undertake to forge one, as falsely to call it, The Quakers Creed, containing
Twelve Articles, to which we shall Reply.

But (say they) give us leave by the way to tell you, That whatsoever the high
Pretentions of any may be to Christianity, yet in their bold opposing the
Positive Commands of Christ, they plainly demonstrate themselves to be no
Christians; and from such every sincere Person ought to withdraw, and come out
from their Communion. But not too fast; for sure the contrary is true; and you
do here but beg the Question, and take that for granted, which you neither have
nor can prove, and so have made too much haste.

For you say, If any Quaker shall question the Truth, we offer to give them a
sight of the Originals, from whence they are quoted; but do not think meet to
subscribe their Names; nor we therefore, but proffer to give any of them a
sight of what we have quoted in Reply: And hope our Negation to what they have
Charged, together with what we have urged, may have that Credit with the
Impartial, as at least to prevail with them to suspend their Judgments, till we
are as truly Convicted, as we are falsely Charged. And we hope our Principles,
Doctrines and Conversations, will appear, upon a serious Examination and due
Enquiry, as Orthodox, Christian, and Agreeable to Holy Scriptures, as any of
theirs: And that we shall, by the Grace of God, as we have so continued, demean
our selves in all Respects, and to all Persons, so as to keep a Conscience void
of offense toward God, and all Men; although all manner of Evil may (as Christ
said it should) be spoken against us falsely, for his Name sake, and not for our
Evil-doing, that is our Comfort. So desiring those that Read this little Book to
follow this wise Advice, Before Judgment, Examine thy self, and in the Day of
Visitation thou shall find Mercy.

SECT. I. The Quakers deny the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity. P. 13.

The Proof, as quoted by these Persons, is as follows:

IF God, as the Scriptures testifies, had never been Declared or Believed, W.
P 's Sandy Foundation, p. 12, 13, 15.
but as the Holy One, then will it follow, That God is not a Holy Three, nor
does Subsist in Three distinct and separate Holy Ones: And since the Father is
God, the Son is God, and the Spirit is God; then unless the Father, Son, and
Spirit, are Three Distinct Nothings, they must be Three Distinct Gods.

That frequent, but impertinent Distinction, That God is one Substance, P. 12,
15.
but Three in Persons or Subsistances; a most absurd Blasphemy: They, the
Trinitarians, must necessarily conclude their kind of Trinity a Fiction.

Now these Persons giving this as a Reason for their leaving the Quakers, and
charging them with Error for thus Writing, and accounting it an Error against
the very Foundation of the Christian Religion, and an Antichristian Principle,
it may be taken for granted with them to be Truth to hold the contrary, viz.

That God, as the Scriptures has always declared, and we believe, is a Holy
Three, and does consist in Three distinct and separate Holy Ones; and since the
Father is God, the Son is God, and the Spirit is God, then they are not three
distinct Nothings, but three distinct Substances, and three distinct Gods.

And that the frequent Distinction, That God is one Substance, but Three in
Persons or Subsistances, is Pertinent, and no absurd Blasphemy; and the
Trinitarians do not necessarily conclude this kind of Trinity a Fiction.

Let these New Members of the Church, enquire of Dr. Sherleek, and Dr. South,
whether this be the Orthodox Opinion of the Church of England, and is according
to Scripture, or of their Leader that has caused them to Err. G. K. who said
as follows:

As concerning the Essence of the Christian Faith, Serious Appeal, p. 3. Writ
1692.
as to the matter of it, I declare sincerely, without all Equivocation, or
mental Reservation, in the true and general sense of the Words, That I know not
wherein I, or (the Quakers) my Brethren, of my Faith, are guilty of any
Fundamental Errors that are Repugnant to the Essence of the Christian Faith.

The only Exception we have, is against the Unscriptural Term or Phrase of
Three Persons, or a Trinity of Persons; but we own sincerely, that our Faith
ought to be, and is in God the Father, the Son and Holy Ghost, and that these
Names are Names of Relation, respecting the Relations, as well as the Relative
Offices, and Works of those Three; and this being granted by us, in the
sincerity of our Hearts, we are excused and cleared.

And that we always did hold, as above, although falsely charged with Error, is
well known to them that well know us; and notwithstanding these Persons pretend
this for one of their Reasons for leaving us, it is Base as well as Foolish, and
very Idle, for any to pretend to leave a People or Society for that which they
never held, and to allege for Proof, what was writ against those that did
falsely accuse us, many Years since, in those things.

And the Orthodox anciently did not agree about these School-Terms, which were
invented since the Apostles days, ibid. P. 4.
to guard against the Arrian, Sebellian, and other Heresies; and we are
altogether free of them, and detest them from our very Souls; no sober
Christian will therefore Judge uncharitably of us in that respect. For what W.
Penn argues, as concerning Three Persons, he only argues against the invented
Names [Persons] as G. K. affirms, Serious Appeal, p. 10. if he may be believed
by these New Creed-Makers; and also, that Persons in all proper Languages does
signify Substances, and not mere Properties, or Relative Attributes; which W.
P will not deny to be in God.

SECT. II. P. 9.
The Blood of Christ, outwardly Shed, undervalued by some Quakers.
p. 10.
Proof, as Quoted.

The Sheding of that Blood, Out of G. W's Ligot and Life, p. 64.
let out by the Spear, was an act of a wicked Man, and the Spear an Instrument
of Cruelty; which to lay the meritorious Cause, or Stress of Justification
upon, it is false Doctrine, says George Whitehead.

This is another pretended Antichristian Error against the very Foundation of
the Christian Religion, and one of the particular Reasons, as they call it, for
which these Persons leave the Quakers.

Now if this be so the contrary sure must be Christian and Orthodox with them;
let us therefore hear it, and it will be as follows.

The Sheding of that Blood, let out by the Spear, was not an act of a wicked
Man, and the Spear was not an Instrument of Cruelty; which act, to lay the
meritorious Cause, or Stress of Justification upon, is not false Doctrine: Will
these new Creed makers say so?

But we, who are so greatly Abused, Romans 8.24, 25. and 5.1, 9.
and foully Represented by our Adversaries, Believe in him that raised up
Jesus, our Lord, from the Dead; who was delivered for our Offenses, and raised
again for our Justification; and therefore being Justified by Faith, we have
Peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who dyed for us. Being now
Justified by his Blood, we shall be saved from Wrath, through him: For if when
we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the Death of his Son, much more
being reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life.

And if any would suggest, from this Retortion of G. W. upon his Antagonist's
words, That the Quakers slight or undervalue the Blood of Christ, that was Shed
without the Gates of Jerusalem about 1700 Years since; they grossly Abuse them,
and evilly Entreat them; for as before, we in Sincerity declare, and in
Humility, and with true Thankfulness Bless God, we have Peace with him, through
our Lord Jesus Christ, who, we firmly believe died for us; and being now
justified by his Blood, we shall be saved from Wrath.

And as G. K. says,

It is only the true Believer, who has Faith in Christ Jesus, whom God
Justifies; so it is only he that is truly Sanctified, Presb. and Ind. etc. p.
122.
and Regenerated, and Born again of the Spirit of God, whom God does Justify.
--

And it is a true Figure of false Christians, as G. K. says, p. 130. Ibid. who
would have Christ divided, and say, They believe in Christ without them, but do
not believe and Receive Christ within them, as God the Father does Reveal him.
Nor, says G. Keith, Serious Appeal, p. 50.
does Edward Buroughs and William Penn, if their words be duly construed,
contradict what I have affirmed. But that Men are justified by Christ's
Righteousness, as the requisite Condition and Terms, in order to that
Imputation; and that David, lying in his Sins of Adultery and Murder, remained
justified, we deny.

And let these New Creed-Makers prove that any owned by the Quakers, or in
Unity with them, undervalue the Blood of Christ outwardly Shed, for what they
Cite out of G. W. does not prove it.

SECT. III. That God and Christ is in Heaven, is denied by some Quakers.
And the Proof brought by them is, viz.

But that the Outward Person, which suffered, Serious Apology by W. Penn. p.
146.
was properly the Son of God, we utterly deny.

This they pretend is against the Foundation of Christian Religion, and as a
proof of the Quakers Errors and Antichristian Principles, which G. K. and
others have endeavored to render with as ugly a face as they can put on it.

Let us again try this backward, and assert the contrary, since it is urged by
them that are gone back, and examine them a little on it.

That the outward Person, that suffered, was properly the Son of God, we
sincerely own. Do you own this, and condemn W. P. and some Quakers, and leave
all the Quakers, for this and your other Reasons? And do you know and believe
that outward Person, or Body only that suffered Death on the Cross, which the
Soldier pierced with the Spear, was from all Eternity, or of an eternal
Generation; and that That outward Person or Body only was Glorified with the
Father, before the World was; as the Son of God, who was before that Body that
Suffered on the Cross? Consider these things.

And whether these things do not proceed from a Spirit of Prejudice and Envy,
Serious Appeal. p. 6. and 15
to render us no Christians, as G. K. said to C. Mather, so far is he (and we
may say are you) from that Candor of giving a favorable Construction upon W.
P's Words, that you show more Inclination to Clamor and Reproach, than Inform
or Convince. Come hear G. K. in this Case.

Because he (C. M.) cannot fix his false Charge upon me, of denying Christ; p.
25. Ibid.
he essayeth (but with as ill Success) to fix it upon my Brethren, as dear
Isaac Pennington, whom I well know to be a true Believer in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and a sincere Lover of him, even the Crucified Jesus, and whose Soul I
believe is in Rest with Christ, in Heavenly Glory. And as to his words, We can
never call the bodily Garment Christ, but that which appeared and dwelt in the
Body; it is easy to put a fair and charitable Construction on it, as well as
on Christ's words, when he said,
He that has seen me, has seen my Father; and yet many saw Christ's Body of
Flesh, that never saw the Father. But to clear the thing, J. P. speaks this
in Opposition to Socinians (and did not W. P. also?) And against the Godhead
Suffering, and others tinctured with Socinian Principles, as if the Manhood of
Christ, that was Born of the Virgin, excluding the Eternal Word, was the only
and whole Christ; whereas, Christ was before his Body of Flesh, and therefore
He is said to come in the Flesh, and to have taken Flesh.

And if we consider Christ, as he was before the World was, by whom all things
were Created, and in respect of his Godhead, the Body was not that, but the
Garment of it, when he Assumed it.

What say you now, was that Person or Body only, properly the Son of God,
according to Geo. Keith to Cotton Mather? If not, Where is the Error, and your
Reason for leaving the Quakers? And in that Book, out of which you took that
Citation (unless you took it on Trust) you may find a plain Confession of our
Faith in God, Christ, and the Holy Spirit, in p. 149. of W. P's Serious Apology.

We do believe in One holy God Almighty, W. P 's Serious Apology, p. 149.
who is an eternal Spirit, the Creator of all things.

And in One Lord Jesus Christ, his only Son, and express Image of his
Substance, who took upon him Flesh, and was in the World; and in Life,
Doctrine, Miracles, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and Mediation, perfectly
did, and does continue to do the Will of God; to whose holy Life, Power,
Meditation, and Blood, we only ascribe our Sanctification, Justification,
Redemption and perfect Salvation.

And we believe in One holy Spirit, that proceeds and breathes from the Father
and the Son, as the Life and Virtue of both the Father and the Son, a measure
of which is given to all to profit with; and he that has one, has all; for
those Three are One, who is the Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last, God
over all, blessed for ever, Amen.

SECT. IV. Justification by the Righteousness of Christ denied.
Before we Reply to this, we make this Remark, That here they do not say by the
Quakers, or by some Quakers, as if they were Conscious to themselves they ought
not so to Charge them, yet they have made this Note, viz.

Note, Reader, Here is Justification by the Active and Passive Obedience of
Christ, as the Meritorious and Fundamental Cause thereof, before God, plainly
denied, for that was and is wholly without us.

And now to their Proof.

Justification by Christ's Imputative Righteousness, W. P 's Serious Apology p.
148.
and wholly without us. And indeed this we deny, and boldly affirm it, in the
Name of the Lord, to be the Doctrine of Devils, and Arm of the Sea of
Corruption, which does now deluge the whole World.

Now these new Converts and Creed-Makers say, That here Justification by the
Active and Passive Obedience of Christ is denied; which shows they do not well
understand the Doctrines of those that they have joined with, nor of G. K.
neither, who has misled them, as by what is before quoted of him on this Head,
to which we refer; and desire them to consider what G. K. says, Serious
Appeal, p. 10. W. Penn's words are not so to be understood, concerning
Justification, as if he excluded Christ's Righteousness, which he fulfilled in
his own Person; but only he denies, that any can be Justified by that alone,
without Faith and Repentance, etc. And if this will not satisfy, we shall add
a Quotation of a Doctor of the Church of England, and quoted by G. K. the new
Sworn or Ordained Preacher, as it is in his Serious Appeal, p. 65.

Dr. Cave, concerning Justification in the Life of Paul, Sect. 9. N. 15.

Works of Evangelical Obedience are not opposed to Faith, Serious Appeal, p. 65.
in Justification in that Faith, as including the New Nature, and keeping God's
Commandments, is made the usual Condition of Justification; nor can it be
otherwise, when other Graces and Virtues of the Christian Life are made the
Terms of Pardon and Acceptanee with Heaven, and our Title to the Merits of
Christ's Death, and the great Promise of Eternal Life. Citing Acts 2.38. and
3.17. Mark 11.25, 26. 1 John 11.7. By which it appears, we must Walk in the
Light, as well as Believe.

And we shall conclude this Head, to show how falsely these Men charge us, and
foully they contradict G. K. now a Preacher of that Church they pretend to be
joined to, in some of his words, viz.

We deny not, but affirm, That our Justification is by the Righteousness or
Obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ imputed unto us; Serious Appeal, p. 50.
but we also say, It is Imputed to none, but such who have Faith, Repentance,
and sincere Obedience; and that is true inward Righteousness, wrought in them
by the Spirit of Christ -- Nor does Edward Borough and William Penn, if their
words be duly construed, contradict what I have Affirmed.

And it is false Doctrine, and contrary to the Doctrine of the holy Scripture,
to say, Fresh. and Ind. visib. Churches, p. 201, 202.
That Justification is only by Christ's Righteousness, without us, imputed unto
us, and received by Faith alone, and not by any Righteousness of God or Christ
imputed unto us, or wrought in us?

And G. K. writing this long since W. P. writ the other, it shows there was no
disagreement then, whatever now is pretended.

SECT. V. The Quakers account themselves Equal with God.
And for Proof, they quote Francis Howgill's Works, p. 232. and Geo. Fox's
Readiness Errand, p. 8. viz.

He that has the same Spirit that Raised up Jesus from the Dead, Serious
Appeal, p. 60.
is Equal with God.

Now concerning this, hear G. K. For it may be supposed, that you that have
left the Quakers to follow him, should have Regard to his words, what he says
to those that would six this on G. F. viz. It is not to be Regarded, and W.
Penn has sufficiently Vindicated G. F. and also G. F. has cleared it in his
Book, That he did witness both the Son and the Holy Spirit revealed in him, who
are equal to God the Father: -- And therefore, as G. K. said, may we say,
Indeed if Quakerism were such a thing, as you, and such as you, Represent it to
be, and would fain have People believe it to be, or that the ^oth part that you
say of it were true, it were most abominable, and such that hold it would be
most unworthy, and not fit to be esteemed Men, far less Christians.

But, blessed be God, our Religion is not that which ye would make it to be,
nor are we such as ye describe; and it is a great Question to us, if you do
heartily Believe these things that ye say of us to be true, either in General,
or in great part; and if you do not believe so, the greater is your Sin, as G.
K. said to C. M.

SECT. VI. The Death and Sufferings of Christ undervalued by the Quakers.
This is a false Charge: But hear their Proof, as quoted by them.

True it is, they own that which Died was his Body; i. e. Christ dwelt
Eminently in him.

But that Body, says W. Penn, is in no Man; Ergo, that cannot be the Christ, in
his sense, which is incapable to dwell in Men.

If this be an Error, and the contrary, Truth; then these Creed-Makers hold,
that which died was his Godhead, not his Body, i. e. in which Christ Eminently
Dwelt.

But surely they do not consider what their Tutor G. K. says, Serious Appeal,
p. 27. He says, Christ cannot (as to himself, properly and strictly, in a
literal sense) be killed or crucisied in Men: Mind that, then the Body that
Suffered and Died, by G. K's Account, was not properly the Son of God, nor
crucified in Men.

Neither do the Quakers hold, that Body that Suffered for all Men, is in all
Men: For the Body (as G. K. says in the same page) that Christ was to Suffer
in, as a Sacrifice for the Sins of the World, Note, Here is that Body of Christ
distinguished by G. K.
behoved to be a Clean and Holy Body, as it was a Lamb without Spot; and the
Death behoved to be a real Death: Which could not be of the Godhead; and it
would be Blasphemy to affirm, The Godhead died; and Ignorance to assert, That
Body that died, is in all Men; but it is sound Doctrine to assert and Preach,
That Christ, who is properly, and not Figuratively, called Light; as G. K.
affirms Augustine said, Is the true Light, which lights every Man that comes
into the World, John 1.9. and so is in all Men: And which Light, Word or Spirit
within, G. K. says, as quoted, in his Book of Retractations, p. 21, 22. It
has pleased the Lord to send his Son into the World, both in the Outward and
Inward, in a weak and low Appearance, that he might show forth the more
abundant Glory, in that which was so low and weak in Appearance, to prevail
over the greatest Power that stood in his way; for thus does the Seed of the
Woman bruise the Serpent's Head -- And this will bring People naturally to own
the Scriptures, and things therein declared; to own Moses and the Prophets, to
own the Dispensation of God to the Jews in that day, and to own Christ in the
Flesh, his miraculous Death, his Doctrine, Miracles, Suffering, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension, together with the wonderful End and Design of God
therein, etc. And this Method I well Approve of still, says G. K.

And so do the Quakers, and are firm in this Faith (although weak in Appearance,
and despised of Men) that He in whom they have believed, Christ the Light (that
many hate, because their Deeds are Evil) shall prevail over the greatest Power
that stands in the way; and that God will tread Satan down, and (make him like
Ashes under the Soles of their Feet, who love and live in Him; against whom,
and those that are built upon him, all the Powers of Hell, nor the Rage and
Enmity of Apostates, shall never be able to prevail against them: For he that
sits in the Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision; and
Christ, whom God has set upon his holy Hill, shall break them with a Rod of
Iron, and shall dash them to pieces, like a Potter's Vessel.

SECT. VII. The Resurrection of the Body denied, etc.
Urged for Proof, as follows:

I do utterly deny, W. Penn's Invalidity of J. Faldo's vindication, p. 369, 370.
that this Text, 1 Cor. 15.44. is concerned in the Resurrection of Man's Carnal
Body at all: But the Two States of Men, under the first and second Adam; Men
are sown into the World Natural, but they are raised Spiritually, through Him
who is the Resurrection and the Life; and so they are the Sons of the Second
Adam.

Will these Creed-Forgers say, They do own that this Text is altogether
concerned in the Resurrection of Man's Carnal Body, and not in the Two States
of Men under the First and Second Adam, and that they are not raised
Spiritually through Him, who is the Resurrection and the Life, and that they
are not so the Sons of the Second Adam? If they do, will this be good Doctrine?
Read what G. K. says on this Head: Because we own an Inward Quickening, Serious
Appeal, p. 52.
and being Raised with Christ, in our Souls and Inward Man; that therefore we
deny any future Resurrection of the Body after Death, which we deny not, but
affirm, against Ranters and vain Notionists -- And as for his Citing W. Penn's
Words arguing against that same Numerical Body, P. 9.
its Rising at the Resurrection, it is clear that he understands the same
exact Number of small Particles or Dusts, neither more nor less, than what is
commonly Buried; and what hurt is there in that?

And we affirm, as our Friends often have, that we believe there will be a
Resurrection both of the Just and Unjust; and if any Man now shall say, How are
the Dead raised, and with what Body do they come? We answer, as Paul did, ^
Cor. 15.39, 36, 37, 38.
Thou Fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it dye. And that
which thou sowest, thou sowest not that Body that shall be; but bear Grain, it
may chance of Wheat, or some other Grain. But God gives it a Body as it
pleases him, to every Seed its own Body. And it is false to say, as these Folks
do, in p. 13. and 14. That we mean other things; and maliciously to compare us
to the Papists. And its wrong to suggest, that if what we say is true, then
Christ did not dye; for we firmly believe Christ dyed, according to the
Scriptures; and that he died for our Sins; and yet we are not afraid to assert,
That the Life of the Word that was in the beginning with God, and was God,
which Life is the Light of Men, dyed not: And yet we sincerely believe Christ
bare our Sins in his own Body, on the Tree of the Cross, and Shed his Blood,
even the same Christ that was born of the Virgin Mary, and was Crucified, Dead,
and Buried, and Raised again, and is ascended into Heaven, and ever lives to
make Intercession for us; and therefore, in Contradiction to these Errers and
Strayers from the Lords Way, we affirm, That he we Own, profess and Believe in,
is the Christ of God, to whom one day they all must be accountable, and receive
a Reward according to their Works.

SECT. VIII. Jesus of Nazareth denied to be the Son of God.
For Proof they quote, viz.

The Light within sufficient to Salvation without any thing else, G.
Whitehead's Antidoe, p. 28
viz. Without the Man Christ Jesus, and Faith in him. If what G. Whitehead has
asserted be a Truth, then we may bid adieu to Jesus of Nazareth.

Answ. This is is a piece of Forgery; for what is pretended, as above, to be in
G. W's Antidote, is not there to be found, as quoted; but by search we find G.
W. there writes, viz. s seeing G. K. confesses, That the Light within, in a
true sense, is God and Christ, the Eternal and Essential Word, as in his
Antichrists and Sadduces, p. 23. Surely Christ within, and Christ without, are
not two Christ's; Christ without, is not another Christ than Christ within. --
Surely then God and Christ, the Eternal and Essential Word, is all-sufficient
and able to save from Sin, Wrath, and Damnation; nevertheless God has respect
to Christ Jesus, his Mediion, Suffering and Dying for us, in his so saving us.

And is this denying Jesus of Nazareth to be the Son of God? Oh for Shame, what
a proof is here! And then saying again, The Quakers say they own him to be the
Christ that was Born of the Virgin; so they do, and yet affirm, Christ is the
Light, the eternal and essential Word, as G. K. says; and if he has changed
his Principles, we have not; and he is become Heterodox, and yet would be
counted Orthodox, and is not; that is his fault, and not ours? And if he will
espouse those things for Truth, which he has called Errors, and exploded as
such, and say and unsay, and do any thing for Money: Let him consider there
will a day of Reckoning come, and he must Appear before him that will judge
Righteously, and Reward him and you according to your Works.

SECT. IX. The Holy Scriptures denied by Quakers.
This is a false Charge: But they Quote thus:

Christ left nothing in Writing, as the Rule, that we hear of; W. Penn 's
Christian Quaker, p. 142, 144.
and doubtless had he intended the Rule of his Followers to have been a written
Rule, he would have left it upon Record with all Particularity; this must be
believed, and that done, on Pain of Eternal Death: If the Scriptures were the
Rule of Faith and Life, etc.

Christ by his Disciples, and other Holy Prophets, left something behind them,
which we are persuaded were written for our Learning, that we through Patience
and Comfort of the Scriptures might have Hope.

And we do acknowledge the Holy Scriptures are a good Rule, but not the Only
and Chief; yet we should be glad all would walk according to them, and not
impose their Meanings and Interpretations upon others, and say as G. K. has
said, That Water in Matthew. 28.19. is meant; and Water is not meant, because not
expressed, nor by any just and true consequence is proved to be meant.

And yet he says, I still Adhere to my former Advice, that nothing be required
by one sort from another, Retract. p. 34.
as an Article of Faith or Doctrine, in common to be believed; but what is
Expressly delivered in the Scriptures, in plain express Scripture Terms.

Now if this Advice were kept unto by such that esteem it a Doctrine in common
to be Believed, viz. That the Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith and
Practice, they would be incapable to prove it is expressly declared in the
Scriptures, that they are the only Rule of Faith and Practice, as they would
also be unable so to prove, and in plain and express Scripture terms, many
other things which we hold, and they call Errors, to be such.
And we call them to make such a Proof, for we are not so Ignorant to
undervalue or deny the Holy Scriptures, they being our Evidence to prove our
Doctrines by, and of Divine Authority, and nothing that is contrary thereto do
we hold, notwithstanding all the Clamor and Noise against us, we do in all
sincerity declare, We esteem them the best Book that ever we Read, and have
great Comfort by them; and bless God that by his good Providence he has
preserved them to this day; and do Exhort People in the Fear of God to be
diligent in the Reading of them; and that also they would receive that Holy
Spirit, they testify of, and that the holy Men of God were moved by to write
them, that thereby, and waiting in it, they may come rightly to understand
them, and the things of God, therein testified of.

SECT. X. The Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper denied.
The Proof they Allege is as follows, as quoted by them.

I affirm, VV. Penn's Reason against Railing, p. 108, 109.
That Circumcision is as much of force as Water Baptism, and the Paschal Lamb
as the Bread and Wine; and we can testify from the same Spirit, by which Paul
renounced Circumcision, that they are to be Rejected, as not now Required.

Let them prove by express Scripture, and in plain and express Scripture words,
they are now Required, and ought to be Received, as Articles of Faith and
Practice, by all true Christians, in such express and particular manner, as
they are used by the Church they and G. K. have now joined themselves to. And
let them consider what G. K. has said on these Heads, that said in his first
Narrative, p. 15. I know not any Fundamental Principle, nor indeed one
Principle of the Christian Faith, that I have varied from to this day.

Now if these be Fundamentals, or any Principles of the Christian Faith, he
knows not that he has varied from them to this day: Who declared,

Acts 8.38. Serious Appeal, p. 15.
Does not prove that Christ's Baptism with Water, for as the Practice of
Circumcision, after Christ's Resurrection, does not prove it a Gospel Precept,
no more does the Practice of Water Baptism.

But both Christ and John did Teach, That Christ's Baptism was with Fire and
the Holy Ghost; but no where is it said, He Baptized with Water.

Nothing can be more Clear that Tertullian was not for, but against
Infant Baptism; they can give no Evidence in Church History, Serious Appeal, p.
33. P. 30.
for Infant Baptism -- Christ commanded not these words to be used in Baptism,
In the Name of the Father and of the Son, etc commonly called the words of
Iustitution -- As he can never prove any such Institution, so he has Zuinglius
against him, who says expressly, Lib. de Bap. p. 66. Tom. 2. Christus Jesus
Baptismi, formulam qua uteremur, his verbis non Instituit, quemadmodum Theologi
hactenus falso Tradiderunt, i. e. Christ Jesus did not Institute the Form of
Baptism in these words, to be used as the Theologues have heretofore falsely
delivered.

And as to the Supper, which you call a Sacrament, we advise you to Read and
Consider what he has said on that Account.

We deny not but he, (i. e.) Christ, took Bread, and brake it, Truth's Defense,
p. 138.
after Supper, and having given thanks, he gave it unto his Apostles, saying,
Take, Eat, this is my Body; and likewise the Cup, saying, Drink ye all of it,
etc. -- But where is it called a Gospel Ordinance, or a standing Command of
Christ unto the World's End.


Let Us have Express Scripture for this, and prove in plain and express
Scripture Terms, if it be an Article of Faith or Doctrine in common to be
believed.

And says G. K

As for 1. Cor. 11.23, 24. which J. A. brings to prove, that the outward
Eating is a Gospel Institution, Ibid. p. 143.
contains no Institution of it at all, but only an Historical Relation of what
Christ did and said that Night to his Disciples. Nor did Paul say, that he
received a Command from the Lord, or delivered a Command unto them concerning
Bread and Wine. --

And J. A. [like these angry Creed-Forgers] falls into his old Trade, P. 144.
of falsely accusing us, as being against External Ordinances. --


But does not J. A. and his Brethren know [and we may say, Do not these new
Converts know?] 'that his own [and their] Brethren Acknowledge there is no
absolute Necessity of using that called the Supper, so as none can be saved,
but such as partake of it -- But whatever outward thing God Commands-Brings
along with them a real Advantage to Men's Souls; but J. A. has not yet proved
that using Bread and Wine is any Gospel Command.


And G. K. now he is become one of J. A's Brethren, let him for the Satisfaction
of those that want it, give Answer in Express Scripture, and in Plain and
Express Scripture Terms, seeing, as G. K. said (to J. A.) He pretends so much
to Scripture Rule. Do you Creed-Forgers see if you can prevail with him to
answer them, That those that have but a little sound Judgment may easily find
he has not contradicted himself in any thing; as he asserts he has not,
Serious Appeal, p. 21. But for him to Say and Unsay, to Affirm and Deny, is too
common, to his Shame be it spoken; and yet in him, that which would be counted
Lying in others, is by some accounted Praiseworthy; such is their Blindness
now they are undervaluing the Light.

SECT. XI. They call all False (Ministers) that Preach Faith in a Christ
without.
We perceive under this Head, these Creed-Forgers brings several Quotations
that have often been by our Friends replied to, and so we the less heed them;
but now by them, they thereby to us appear such that once were as much for the
Inward as now they are for the Outward; and blamed the Quakers for being so
much Outward, as now they do for their not being enough for the Outward; so
they are In and Out, This and That, and neither This nor That: Unstable Souls!
drove away with the windy Doctrines of Men, and cunning Craftiness, whereby
they lie in wait to Deceive, and by fair Words, and fine Speeches, their Hearts
are Deceived, and Minds filled with Prejudice, and their Spirits with Enmity
against those they are strayed from. Now they are become, as they confess, like
Sheep going astray, and have joined with those (who some of them its like once
separated from, before they did from us) and now like the Dog to his Vomit,
they and G. K. are returned: We should be glad, if it were the Lord's Will,
they might see their Error and return again, and leave the Costly
Sermon-Makers, which they are now offended that we should Testify against, and
come to the Free Teacher, and Buy Wine and Milk without Money and without
Price; Isa. 55.
and not spend your Money for that which is not Bread, nor your Labor for that
which satisfies not; but hearken diligently to the free Teacher in your own
Hearts, and eat that which is good, and let your Soul delight it self in
Fatness: Oh! Incline your Ear, and come unto me: Hear, and your Souls shall
live, and I will make an Everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mercies
of David, said the holy Prophet.

And this was the Advice of that Prophet that exhorted to Sanctification, and
who bore a sharp Testimony against the Blind Watchmen, as they say some of us
have; Isaiah said, All ye Beasts of the Field, come to devour, yea all ye
Beasts in the Forest. His Watchmen are Blind, they are all Ignorant, they are
all Dumb-Dogs, they cannot Bark; Sleeping, Lying down, loving to Slumber. Yea,
they are greedy Dogs, which can never have enough, they are Shepherds which
cannot understand. They all look their own way, every one for his Gain from his
Quarter.

Now if any of the Faithful People of the Lord in those days, who did not hear
or follow those Blind Watchmen, Greedy Dogs, Idle Shepherds, or the Prophets
that Jeremiah Complains of, or the Priests that bear rule by their Means (which
he mentions Jer. 5.) should have complained to those that love to have it so;
Would they not rather have been Rebuked than Redressed? Or had they told them
they prophesied Lies in the Name of the Lord, Jer. 14.14. and 23.25, 26, 27.
see also Ez. 13.6.
and that he sent them not (might they not, considering the Priests was one of
the Chief Rulers) sought to have them suppressed, especially considering they
cried against their Gain, that would make them stir and say, They are
Enthusiasts: Poor Ignorant Illiterate Erroneous Persons, of dangerous
Principles, not fit to be tolerated, and have met with Smites, and the Stock^
and Dungeon also, like poor Jeremiah, and then they might say, as he did, Since
I spoke, I cried out, I cried Violence and Spoil, because the Word of the Lord
was made a Reproach to me, and a Derision Daily; and he heard the Defaming of
many, for Parshur had many of his side. Report, said they, and we'll Report it.
Oh! then it was that all the Prophet's Familiars watched for his Halting, when
the Priest that was his Adversary was Chief Governor; and indeed by the Chief
Priests the most Innocent came to Suffer, for the Chief Priests, rather than
fail of their Ends, they would gladly Covenant to give Money to a Judas, Mat.
26.
and seek for false Witnesses; and when they heard their Evidence, Oh! What a
feigned show of Detestation did they make? How seemingly Devout and Zealous did
they appear to stir up the People, by Renting their Garments, and crying,
Blasphemy, Blasphemy, then they Spit, Buffeted, Mat. 26.65.
and Smote with their Hands; and what care were they in that their Designs and
Contrivances against the Innocent might not be Discovered, least the last Error
should be worse than Lies told? And how did they Promise to secure them from
Trouble? And they that took the Money, did as they were taught; and those Lies
we read were commonly Reported afterward, and no doubt might be Credited by
many Ignorant Persons that took things upon Trust, and did not search into the
Truth of Matters.

And when true and faithful Witnesses declared the contrary, What did they say
of them that testified what they had seen and heard? Did not the High Priest
and his Kindred, seeing the Boldness of these Witnesses, and perceiving they
were Unlearned and Ignorant Men; although they had nothing to say against what
was done, and could not Contradict their Evidence (and were Conscious of their
Evil Deeds, in getting false Witnesses, yet not being able to deny; but
confessed indeed that a notable Miracle had been done by them, as was manifest
to all them that dwelt in Jerusalem; then they began again to prevent the
spreading of it any farther among the People, they then use Threats, and laid
their Commands upon them, which yet did not stop the Mouths of those that
Witnessed what they had seen and heard; then they farther threatened them, and
let them go, finding nothing how they might Punish them (no doubt that was
their great Grief) but it was great Joy and Comfort to them, the Sufferers, and
they lift up their Voice with one Accord, and said, Thou art God which has
made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and all that in them is! And the multitude
of them that believed were of one Heart, and there was no lack: And that did
not please the High Priest; nor their going about with this Testimony, which
struck at the Priests and their Hierarchy, and tended to bring the People from
them and their Synagogues; and to promote that Law, that of necessity would
cause a Change of the Chargeable and Changeable Priesthood that took Tithes,
and lived upon other Men's Labors, and did not profit the People at all. And
this Testimony of these Men that they termed Unlearned and Ignorant Men, tended
to bring People to a free Teacher, and to the Spirit of God that would make
them (however despised) Wiser than all their former Letter-learned Teachers
that they had heaped to themselves, whilst they had Itching Ears.

And when the Word of the Lord increased, and the Number of Disciples
multiplied in Jerurusalem greatly, and a great Company of the Priests were
Obedient to the Faith; and a faithful Witness, Stephen, full of Faith and
Power, did great Wonders among the People; there arose certain of the Synagogue
of the Libertines, and they being not able to resist the Wisdom and Spirit by
which he spoke; suborned Men, the old trade, which said, We have heard him
speak Blasphemous Words against Moses and against God; and they stirred up the
People, the Elders, and Scribes.

And great has been the cry of Blasphemy, Blasphemy, since that day, charging
an Innocent People with Blasphemy against God, against Christ, and against the
Scriptures; but who were stirred up of old, by the Designs of the Libertines,
Priests and Elders? Who were the Inconsiderable People that depended so much on
the Credit of the Priests? And, no doubt, but the Priests thought, that to
charge them with the Changing the Customs delivered by Moses, which the
Popularity as much dislike as Blasphemy, would get them on their sides.

And thus in Holy Writ we may find them that had the Name of God's Priests, and
that highly pretended to Religion, and yet sought themselves and their own
gain; and by their Lies and Lightness caused the People to Err: Often were the
Instruments of much Trouble, Exercise, Suffering and Affliction, both to the
true Witnesses and Prophets of God, and faithful Followers, and sincere
Believers in Jesus Christ, who were accounted Mad, and Movers of Sedition,
Turners of the World upside down, Pestilent Fellows, a Sect that was almost
every where spoken against, and the way that they worshipped God was called
Heresy; although they did, as we sincerely do, believe all things written in
the Law and in the Prophets; and have hope toward God; and believe there shall
be a Resurrection, both of the Just and Unjust; and have no other Gospel to
Preach but that, the Tenure of which is, Glory to God on High, Peace on Earth,
and good Will to all Men; with whom we desire to follow Peace and Holiness,
being full; persuaded, that without it no Man shall ever see God to his Comfort.

And our Friends call none false Ministers that are found in the Spirit and
Practice of the Ministers of Christ, that keep his Commandments, and follow his
Advice, as they have freely received, so freely give; and that preach Christ
without and within, as he ought to be preached; for he is not divided; such
Ministers we account true Ministers. But if any will pretend to be his
Ministers, and are not by their Fruits manifest to be in the Spirit and
Doctrine of Christ, but transgress, and abide not in it, and are found by their
Works and Fruits to be in the Spirit and Practice of the false Prophets,
Ministers and Teachers, that teach things they ought not for filthy Lucre sake,
not agreeable to Christ's Doctrine and the Holy Scriptures, and seek to draw
Disciples after them, and do as the false Prophets and Priests aforementioned
did; such we account False Ministers, but we Love and Honor the True.

SECT XII. Their Blasphemous Adoration given to Geo. Fox, and Vindicated by
other Quakers.
We shall conclude the Quakers Creed with this Section; (which shows they Began
and End with a Lie; for it is not the Quakers Creed, nor ever was by them made,
but disowned.)
And if they can, by good and sufficient Evidence, prove from any Letter writ
by any that we own, wherein Blasphemous Adoration was given to G. Fox, we will
disown it.

But without sufficient Proof, and clear Evidence, we hold not our selves
obliged to take notice of any Letter, pretended to be wit by J. C. or J. A.
that died so many Years since, and of whom we have better thoughts; esteeming
them Faithful Men, and that they are at Rest with the Lord.

And to Conclude, we hope hereby it will appear, the pretended Reasons and
Errors for which these few weak People say they leave the Quakers will appear
to be none; But that sound Reasons are wanting, Errors are not proved, their
Forgery is Manifest, and Envy Detected, and their Folly and Weakness laid open,
and they pitied, and their Work to do. And as empty Things make the greatest
Sound, so these Men, to make the Number seem great by their saying, Published
by some who have joined with Mr. Geo. Keith, in the City of London, and did
formerly meet with him at Turner's-Hall, and in diverse parts of the Country, as
Huntington, Reading, Bedford and Colchester. -- When all these, we are
persuaded (except Children) are scarce Six, besides those who for some time
before they joined with G. K. were not in Unity and Fellowship with us.

And did not he talk of Gathering a pure People out of all Professions? And
does he now lead them back to that Church which he called A LIMB OF
ANTICHRIST, and of whose whole Ministry, he said, WILL consist of Ungodly Men,
the wicked being still preferred by the wicked; and so he is now preferred
among them, to still up the Number; although we are persuaded that there are
Conscientious Men among them, and in half that time (if he lives so long) among
them as he was among us, we doubt not but he will sufficiently manifest himself
to be Conceited. Troublesome and Impatient (if he meets with Contradiction) as
any they have had amongst them for many Years; and them few who follow him, to
them we are perswaed will not prove their best Members, although they may be more
Hot, Angry and Malicious then them who are of a long standing among them, and
more Wise and Moderate. But to the Lord we leave him and them, and Pray God to
forgive them, if it be his Will, for all the hard Speeches, false Accusations,
and foul Representations of us and our Christian Principles and Doctrines.

FINIS

