A Health to the KING OR AN Astrological Prediction OF CHARLES II. HIS Coming to
the Crown of England, etc.

By TIMOTHY GADBVRY, Philomath.

Tempora mutantur and nos mutamur in illis.

woodcut of Charles II's head

London, Printed for W. Gilbertson at the Bible in Guilt-spur-street, without
Newgate. 1660.

Prince of Wales's bookplate C P

ICH DI EN



A Health TO THE KING
THe times we live in producing altogether varieties in men's fancies, that men
were seldom fixed to any one settled opinion in any thing, so that, Quot
homines, tot sententiae, might very well have been taken for a common Proverb
in our days: for men's minds changed oftener then the Moon; these changes were
not alone in private Persons, but among those that took upon them to steer the
Helm of Government here also; so that very few had that blessing among them
which the Prophet David mentions, of being of one mind in a house; so that our
Nation was in a condition like a man troubled with a Hectic fever and a
frency to boot, that most men were unsettled in the way they lived in; One man
cries out for a King, another no King; and seeing this confusion among us, I
took into serious consideration whether the King were likely to come among us
or not; for though people be never so mad in their ways, let them but consider
seriously, and they may see that a Prince may better live without a people,
then a people without a Prince; And though many have had opinion that he would
never come to his Crown here in England, nay, some Artists too, as well as
vulgar persons; I shall here make it plain from rules of art, that he will
come, though he should have a multitude of opposers; I pray God he may be
settled in peace without bloodshed, for if we suffer him not to come in peace,
and legal terms, Forrainers will assist him, and then our condition will be the
worse; I shall add a line or two of an ancient prophecy concerning the Kings
coming in this year 1660.

The Moon eclipsed till sixty year,
Shall then break out and shine most clear,
While England then for joy shall sing,
And bless the reigns of her good KING.
astrological diagram The Figure of his Nativity follows.
Prince Charles born 1630. May 29. 10th. 21. Ae.M.



In passing judgment of this Princely Nativity, I shall not obtrude my single
and private opinion upon the world for Authentic, without consent of
Authority, and that of the best and most credible Astrologers; viz. Haly,
Orignus, Guido, Banalus, etc.

I shall first show some reasons of our Kings unfortunacy of late years.

And secondly of his being established in his Fathers Throne.

And thirdly his time to continue, ad terminum vitae.

Sect. 1.
Whosoever has the Lord of the Ascendant combust of the Sun shall suffer many
afflictions in his life time; this is verified in this Princely geniture to the
knowledge of most people, the (which afflicts here) is Lord of the 12th House;
which signifies Enemies; but for as much as disposes of the, it notes the Native
to overcome at last; Another reason is, in the 4th House, which signifies much
labor and sorrow to the Native, a confusion and waste of his Patrimony, loss
in Lands, Buildings, and all kind of Edifices, trouble and anxiety in the life
of his Ancestors, loss of estimation, of credit; how this has been fulfilled
on this Princely Native, let the world judge: I might here show some reasons
why his afflictions should be in his younger years, but I pass that by, and
come to,

Sect. 2.
THat he shall be established in his Fathers Throne.
Maj. That person that has the Lord of his Ascendant strong in the mid-heaven,
and the Sun and there also (if it be any Princely geniture) shall obtain his
Fathers Kingdom.

Min. But this Princely Native has the Lord of the Ascendant strong in the
Mid-heaven, (or tenth House) and and there also.

Concl. Ergo, This Princely Native shall obtain his Fathers Kingdom.

The major here I shall support and strengthen by several testimonies; First,
Si quando Dominus Ascendentis fuerit, in signo M.C. and illud signum fuerit
domus vel exaltio aut terminus vel triplicitas ejus, Haly de jud. Ast. fol.
227. when the Lord of the Ascendant shall be in the tenth House, in his own
dignities, and in a masculine sign, the Native shall be a King or ruler over
many. Secondly, Si quando Sol fuerit in M.C. existente in suamet demo, aut in
signo masculino natus erit Rex, aut Deminus multae gentis, etc. Haly, page 5.
fol. 249. Sol in the tenth House gives great glory, authority, honor and
dignity from Emperors, Kings, Princes, and great Persons; he shall obtain the
love and friendship of some eminent person or persons, that shall exalt him
from his low, unto a very high degree, (i. e.) to his Kingdom. This will be
fully verified by other Nations assisting him to bring him in, if we suffer him
not to come in peace. Thirdly, If the be in the tenth House happily posited, it
denotes honor and preferment to the Native, be his condition what it will; all
these Aphorisms agreeing, who can say that Carolus the Second shall be hindered
from his Fathers Throne?

Sect. 3.
THat his Honor and Dominion once obtained shall remain and endure ad terminum
vitae, to the end of his Natural life.
Maj. Whosoever has the cuspe of honor and Dominion in his Nativity fixed, and
the significator fixed also in his own dignities, his honor and renown once
obtained, must continue to the end of his life.

Min. But it is thus in this Princely geniture:

Ergo, His honor, once obtained, shall and must continue to the end of his life.

I need not rake over many vetustious forms of obsolete Authors, for the proof
of this so conspicuous a truth; for every Astrologer (let him be of never so
short a time studious therein) must set his seal to the certainty thereof;
however, to confirm this truth, hear what Origanus says, fol. 703. in his
Discourse de duratione honorum, proving the truth of this proposition in these
words, Primo enim beneficus significatur, ac fortis ratione essentialium
dignitatum; statum honorum non, solum cum facilitate quadam per totam vitam
nati duraturum esse, etc. The same does the learned Leovitius say in his
Ephemerides; likewise the ingenious Argol Ptol. par. lib. 2. says, If the
significator of honor and dignity be in signs, the joy or delight in the honor
and dignity will continue. We admit (by reason of the position of Caput Algol
in decima domo) that this Heroic King may by a Phanatick brood, at sometimes
be disturbed; but this can never rise so high (he being once possessed) as to
detriment him in the least in point of his Soveraignity: Neither let any man
obje^^ to me the whimsical judgments, and Phanatisms (...) Purblinde Artists,
who out of disaffection to this Ro^ Person, and for a peniary reward, have
canted his dow^fall, and absolute impossibility of ever regaining or continuing
his Fathers dignity: For, it is as certain, as wh^^ is most certain, that this
Princely Person shall recover his Fathers Glory, and his own former Illustrious
Estate and Grandeur, Maugre the most malicious Enemie^ that Earth it self can
produce. The Stars proclaim his accessum ad Dominum, and from thence I predict
it, (...) to the Gentry and Comonalty of England, I dedic^^^ and send it, and
am not ashamed by name to own it, and therefore subscribe unto it,

From my house on Wappin wall, righ^t over against ^^e golden (...) Dated April
25. 1666. Timothy Gadbury

POSTSCRIPT.
I Know that many will object and say, why did not I (...) forth this sooner,
but stayed so long till most people were (...) expectation of his coming.

For Answer hereto, had I published this sooner I might have prejudiced the
King and my self too.

First, For had his Enemies known of his coming they mist have strengthened
their hand against him, that his access might have been the harder before he
could have settled here.

Secondly, The Powers of late we lived under were so ridged against him, that a
man durst not speak his mind, much les^ write in public; for one might with
more safety call a H^ heard-boy King or Prince, then to call him by either of
those Epithites pertaining to him; and this may suffice any ra^^^nal man in
answer to that Objection.

The Kings a coming, and we all shall see
Good days approaching, with much mirth and glee:
The Nation shall rejoice; and peace with Spain
Shall be concluded with them once again;
Our trade in the Nation, likewise shall increase,
And we enjoy prosperity and Peace:
Then our three Nations with much joy shall sing,
And paise the Lord for th'Raign of our good King.
FINIS

