The Failing and Perishing OF GOOD MEN A Matter of Great and sore Lamentation.

Held forth in A SERMON Preached the 26 of June 1662. Being the day before the
INTERMENT OF THAT Eminent and Faithful GOSPEL PREACHER, Mr. John Sympson.

Prove. 10.7. The memory of the just is blessed; but the name of the wicked
shall rot.

Psalm. 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints.

Accusator qui confortem defert, sese iutueatur. Printed in the Year, 1663.

To the Church of Christ, and every member thereof, over which Mr. John Sympson
was made (by the Holy-spirit) over-seer.
Grace and Peace be multiplied unto you, through the knowledge of God, and our
Lord Jesus Christ.
Beloved in the Lord!
IF I should spend much time in making an Apology for my self in reference to
the Dedication of this following Discourse to you of the Congregation, I might
well be judged to complement. It Is yours by right: If it come into other hands
(through God's blessing) it may do good, but as in the preaching of it I had,
so now in the Printing of it I have a special respect for you, and to you of
the Church it was first preached, and now printed for your sakes.

However I think meet in this place, to give some brief account of the reason
both of its Publication and Dedication. First, for its Publication, the reason
is manifold: 1. For that I did judge the subject in it self to be suitable to
the present state of the people of God, and might be of use to the stirring
them up to humiliation and reformation. 2. That I might manifest that dear
respect I had for, and that affection I did bear unto that choice servant of
Christ deceased, under whose Ministry I have been so often refreshed and raised
in my spirit. 3. Because I was desired by several of the friends of Mr. John
Sympson, either to print my discourse, or give them copies of it; wherefore I
chose to do the former, because I did judge it might give the greater
satisfaction. 4thly, That I might do something toward the vindication of the
name of that glorified saint, both from former, and later reproaches, and
slanders. Those that have a good conscience, have not always a good name. The
people of God in this life are called the troublers of Israel; they are
seditious, rebellious, what not? Christ himself was accounted a deceiver, and
imposter; and Paul was said to be aseditious person, and suffered (in the opin
on of some) as an evil doer, 2 Timothy 2.9. Wherein I suffer trouble as an evil
doer, even unto bonds. Job was represented unto the world as an hypocrite, and
that by his friends; which went very near him. The ministers of the Gospel
must expect above any other to meet with reproaches (2 Cor. 6, 8.) the Devil
hates them most, because they most oppose his Kingdom, and interest; and
therefore if he cannot debauch their consciences, he will spit his venom at them
through the mouths of wicked and ungodly men. But let wicked men know, that the
time is hastening on apace, wherein as God will make inquisition for blood, so
for names; as the death, so the name of a saint is precious in Gods account:
God will roll away the reproach of his people; * Josh. 5.9. Psalm. 37.6. Psalm.
112.6.
he will cause their innocence and righteousness to break forth as the sun at
noon, * and their names shall be had in everlasting remembrance. I had thought
something might have been done this way by a better pen before this time, but
it being several months since the death of Mr. Sympson, and nothing done, I
was willing to make public what I had preached; and I hope it is not out of
the pride and haughtiness my heart, (though a proud, and wicked heart I have,
and blessed be free grace that in any measure I know it so to be, but to do
Christ and his people service. The soul of our dear brother is in glory, above
any Encomiuas or Eulogie that can be made of him: What therefore is spoken in
the following discourse, extends not to him, but unto the living; it is not to
advantage him, but to prevent others from disadvantaging themselves by thinking
or speaking evilly of him. Lastly, That I might present the virtues of Mr.
Sympson to you for your imitation: Undoubtedly it is your duty to follow him so
far as he followed Christ. Now there were very many choice things in that
faithful man, worthy of emulation and imitation, wherein you will do well to
walk, as you had him for an example. Thus much for its publication.

The Reasons why I did dedicate it to you of the Congregation, are, First,
Because I did judge the Dispensation of God to which the following Discourse
refers, did more immediately concern you, than any other: it is true, there are
many not of the Congregation, that did undoubtedly receive good by Mr. Sympsons
Ministry, and will have cause to bless God for it unto all Eternity; and these
are much concerned in his death: But however, considering his relation unto
you, how he was under Christ your Bishop, Fastor, Feeder, Leader, etc. And how
faithful, constant and laborious he was in the discharge of his trust committed
to him, it must needs be granted, that that Providence of God did most nearly
concern you, and consequently this following Discourse. 2. Its to acknowledge
my thank, fullness to God and you, for all those presious days and hours which
I have enjoyed in your Assemblies. To my best remembrance I never saw nor
enjoyed more of the presence and glory of God in any Assembly (setting the
Min-stry of Mr. Bridge of Yarmouth aside) than I have done in your Assemblies.
The consideration of which, as it does in the first place oblige me to bless
the Lord (in whom all my Well-springs are, and who is the Fountain of
consolation to his people) so in the next place it does engage me to serve you
his people (with, and among whom I have enjoyed such great mercies) to the
utmost of my abilities. By this Dedication I do not profess to have paid my
Engagements unto you, I do only take an occasion hereby to acknowledge my self
your Debtor. Pay my Engagements I cannot better then by praying for you. My
hearty desire therefore to God for you is, That you all may know, love and
enjoy Christ in truth, that every member of your visible Body may (by the
Spirit) be baptized into that one Mystical Body, over which Christ is the Head,
that Hell may be never the fuller for any of you, but that you may all live
graciously, which is the way to dye blessedly. And further, that God would keep
you together, and hide you in the secret of his presence, cause his glory to
rest upon you, and cause a defense to be upon that his glory, that he would
give you Pastors after his own heart, and anoint them with a double measure of
his Spirit, a spirit fit both to rule and teach; to rule I say (not as Lords
over your consciences, but) according to the blessed direction of
Scripture-Canons; that so you may be able to bless God in the words of Ezra,
(cap. 9.8.) And now for a little space grace has been showed from the Lord our
God, to leave us a Remnant to escape, and to give us a Nail in his holy Place,
that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving in our bondage,

All I desire (which I am sure I shall have) is your acceptance of this my love
in the Lord. I cannot say that I do here present unto you the same Sermon
(verbatim) that you heard preached; For, besides those necessary distinctions
that must be put between the Tongue and the Pen, I have superadded some things
for the perfecting this Discourse, which I think you will not judge useless or
needless when you shall have read it.

When ought of Truth is presented unto you, take heed of looking too much upon
the hand that brings it, or upon the dress in which it comes; not upon the
hand, because then if the instrument that presents it, be accounted unworthy,
Truth will be despised: He that presents you with this following discourse, is
a very unworthy instrument, as unworthy as you can imagine him to be; though
blessed be God, how vile soever he be in other men's eyes, he desires to be more
vile in his own: But yet I hope you have learnt with the holy Prophet, to be
content to be fed, though it be by a Raven; it is no matter who brings truth, so
God sends it; though withal I would here give you this caution, Take heed of
going out of Gods way for feeding. I conclude that that man that resolves to go
to Rome to learn the Articles of the Christian Faith, has met with some bad
counsel. Keep in thy way, and have thy Touchstone always ready, and then (with
the Goldsmith) when ought is presented unto thee, first try it, and if it prove
right and sound, take it, and bless God for it, and mind not the person that
brings it; but take heed of going out of thy shop, for it may be whilst thou
art trading in other men's shops, thine own may be robbed.

Again, Mind not the dress in which Truth comes. Many have such critical
stomachs, that plain wholesome fare will not down with them, notwithstanding
times are hard, and bread dear, yet they must have food in such a dress, or
else they are not pleased; they will be ready to slight such food as the Country
people would be glad of with all their heart: I dare not invite one such person
to my little Feast, and that because I fear there is not one bit will please
him. I am plain, and cannot be otherwise: I dare say the following discourse is
wholesome; if therefore wholesome food will please thee, eat, and much good may
do thee. As to this particular I would only beg you, To look back and consider
those many exhortations you had from that blessed man Mr. Cradock, to keep
close to the plainness and simplicity of the Gospel.

To close: My dearly beloved, you are a people greatly blessed of God, with
respect to the means of Grace; your constant helps (for above these twenty
years) have been glorious helps; your Auxiliary helps (which you have had in
abundance) have been glorious helps. Considering one thing with another, I
think I may say and not sin, you have enjoyed the Cream of the world: Surely
Friends, God expects great things from you, expects you should be eminent
Christians; Eminent, 1. In thankfulness; the high praises of God should be in
your mouths, for that he has dealt so bountifully with you. 2. Eminent in
fruitfulness; Unfruitsulness under such means, soon fits the soul for cursing
and burning; Isa. 5. Mat. 3.10. Heb. 6, 7, 8. 3. Entinent in faithfulness; and
that, 1. in respect to sincerity, Phil. 1.10. You should not do things to be
seen of men, but as always under Gods eye. 2. In respact of constancy, Rev.
2.10. Be faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. The
Sermons thou have heard, and the Servants of Christ that have preached unto
thee, will all witness against thee, if thou shall turn Apost ate, Consider
these things and do accordingly, and it will be well with you now, better anon,
and best of all at last. Vale.

The perishing and failing of good men, a matter of great and sore lamentation.
Joh. 11.35. Jesus wept.
AS every thing is beautiful in its season, so words when spoken in due season,
are like apples of gold in pictures of silver. And therefore it is the great
work of a Preacher to consider the state of the people to whom he preaches, so
to prepare his work before hand, as that he may hit the mark, knock the nail on
the head: The Preacher sought out acceptable words; now generally those words
are most acceptable to, and best received by the hearers (especially
intelligent hearers) that are suited to their present condition. Good words may
be vain words in a preachers mouth, and they are evermore so, when they are
either inconsistant to the argument in hand, or else altogether unsuitable to
the capacity and state of the hearers. I considering therefore the secret hand
of God upon this Congregation, in taking away that eminent Servant of Christ,
Mr. John Sympson, thought it incumbent upon me to speak something at this time
that might be suitable to the present dispensation of God toward you, and in
my meditations this Scripture was cast in, Jesus wept. The occasion of this
text is known unto you; in the beginning of this Chapter you read that Lazarus
was sick, and the news thereof immediately sent to Jesus; who notwithstanding he
dearly loved him, yet (as the sequel of the story acquaints you) he does not
presently go up to Bethany to visit sick Lazarus, but makes a stay for several
days; the reason whereof is at hand, viz. That a sentence of death might pass
upon beloved Lazarus, and he be laid in the grave, and a stone rouled upon him;
and all this in order to the manifestation of the glory and power of Christ in
his resurrection. It is good here to note, that as Christ here dealt with
Lazarus, so he does often deal with his beloved Spouse, his Church on earth:
the Church she is sick, lies languishing, and nigh to death; report hereof is
made to Christ in heaven, and he is desired to come and visit his sick Spouse;
Christ, though he loves his Spouse with a dear immutable love, yet he seems
to turn a deaf ear upon this request, and carries it as if he did not mind
Zions concernments, as if he cared not how she was abused and trampled on by
this wicked persecuting world; but the reason (as above) lies here, that so a
sentence of death might pass upon the Church, and upon all her concerns and
glory; and all this in order to the manifestation of Christ's glorious power in
her resurrection, that he may appear to be the great God, that can raise
deliverance out of the dust, appear for his people when there is none shut up
or left.

After Lazarus had been in the grave four days, Christ he comes up to Bethany,
and the sisters of Lazarus, viz. Martha and Mary, they come out to meet Jesus;
first Martha she comes, ver. 20. and she says, Lord, if thou had been here,
my brother had not died, ver. 21. After this comes Mary, verse. 32. and she
falls down at Christ's feet, saying, Lord, if thou had been here, my brother,
had not died. When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping
which came with her, he groaned in the Spirit, and was troubled, and said,
Where have ye laid him? They say unto him, Lord, come and see. Jesus wept.

There is very much wrapped up in the bowels of this little Text: The text opened.
Here we may take notice of the humanity of Christ; it appears by Christ's
weeping that he is perfect man, as well as perfect God. That Christ wept, is to
be referred, not to his Divinity, but to his Humanity; and so we shall find
that Christ was subject as to this, so to all natural infirmities; as hunger,
thirst, weariness, etc. which may comfort the Saints that groan under natural,
as well as sinful infirmities; and that from the reason why Christ was made in
all things like unto his brethren; namely, That he might be a merciful
Highpriest, Hebr. 2.17, 18. And though Christ be now in glory, yet he is
touched with the feeling of the infirmities of his people here on earth, Hebr.
4.15. so touched, as that he cannot but have compassion on them under all their
pressures and grievances whatsoever.

Do thou then groan under natural weaknesses and infirmities? Go boldly to
the throne of grace, (which is the use the Apostle makes of this doctrine, Heb.
4.16.) and spread thy weaknesses and infirmities before the Lord, and thou
may in faith expect grace to help in this need, that Christ should enable
thee to bear up under these weaknesses, until mortality shall have put on
immortality.

But to come to the thing I intend, and that is the occasion of Christ's
weeping, which was the death of Lazarus, a good man: whence I shall observe and
prosecute this Doctrine;

That it is a Christ like frame of spirit, to be deeply affected with, and to
mourn over the death of such as are truly gracious.

Here Is Lazarus a good man in his grave, and Christ he weeps over him: you have
a weeping Christ over a dead Lazarus.

When old Jacob an eminent person was buried; it is said Genesis 50:10: ( That they
mourned with a great and sore lamentation, and that for 7 days together. And
so when Moses (that eminent servant of the Lord, that brought the children of
Israel out of Egypt very near to the good Land) died, and was buried by a
secret hand, it is said, the children of Israel mourned for him 30 days, Deuteronomy.
34.8.

M^^^eerly beloved, you have lost a Moses, one that was valiant for God in
former times, when the people of God in England were coming out of Egypt, and
he has been an eminent leader to the saints in their wilderness state, and God
did often take him to the top of Pisgah, and gave him their glorious visions,
and that not only of heavenly Canaan, but also of that glorious land of rest
and righteousness that the Saints shall enjoy in this world, when the mountain
of the house of the Lord shall be advanced upon the top of all mountains, and
the Kingdoms of this world become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his
Christ; of which things he has often spoke unto you in much life and power.
Now that such a Moses should be taken off in the Wilderness, while the people
of God are yet short of this good Land, is matter of great humiliation.

Likewise you find the same spirit in those Christians, Acts 20. that Paul (the
great Apostle of the Gentiles) did there take his farewell of, saying, ver. 25.
And now behold, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone preaching the
Kingdom of God, shall see my face no more. It Is said, 37, 38 verses, And they
all wept sore, and fell on Paul's neck, and kissed him: Sorrowing most of all
for the words which he spoke [that they should see his face no more]

David also is exceedingly affected in this kind, Psalm. 12.1. Help Lord, for
the godly man cease, for the faithful fail from among the children of men.
And so the Church, Micah 7. Woe is me, for I am as when they have gathered the
summer-fruits, as the grapegleanings of the Vintage; there is no cluster in me
-- The good man is perished out of the earth: and there is none upright, among
men, etc.

And the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 57. verse. 1. laments and bemoans the spiritual
security of the children of Israel, expressed by this, That they did not observe
and take notice, neither were they affected with the perishing and taking away
of the righteous, and the merciful man, and charge upon them this senceless
and stupid frame of heart, as their great and common sin.

Now by all this it appears, that it is both the duty and property of a
Christian (such an one as has been baptized into the spirit of Jesus) to be
deeply affected with the death of such as are truly gracious, especially when
they are eminent for use and service to Christ, and his people.



The living, the living will lay it to heart, says Solomon, Eccle. 7.2. The
stroke of death upon others, tells us that dye we must, and how soon the Lord
knows; and O happy! thrice happy is that person that can dye well: We are ready
to say, blessed is the rich man, and the honorable man, and the professing
man; the man that can speak well, and pray well, and live well; but above all
(say I) blessed is the person that dies well. Now such strokes as these puts a
serious soul in mind of dying. There Is none present knows who may dye next, may
go to the grave next. That Is the First; but then,

nature, and in grace: first in nature, when God takes away a husband, a
father, a child, etc. this cuts deep, and affects much. Abraham he mourns over
beloved Sarah. David over Absolon, though a rebellious son. To be stupid, and
not to mind the hand of God when he smites our near and dear relations, does
declare, that we do not only want grace, but natural affection; and to be
without natural affection, is a very black character, 2 Timothy 3.3.

And then in Grace there is also a great sympathy: If God smites one member of
the Church, the rest are affected with it: If a Paul, a Minister of Christ, a
Pastor, a spiritual Father, comes to take his farewell of his people, and tell
them that they shall never see his face more; oh what weeping, and mourning,
and lamenting is there at his departure!

etc. the soul of that Relation may be carried to Heaven, and there possessed
of glory, and yet nevertheless the death of that Relation may be in judgment
to the Family. And so in a spiritual Relation, God may take away a holy
Minister, a faithful Pastor, and this in judgment to the Flock, to those that
sat under his Ministry: And surely it is the great concernment of you of this
Congregation to hear the voice of this Rod, and of him that has appointed it,
and to endeavor to know the mind of God in this great stroke.

4thly, The perishing of good men is a matter of great humiliation, and that
because they are a great blessing to the nations, cities, families, etc. where
they are cast. It fares either the better, or the worse with such places for
their sake. When God destroyed the old world, the family of Neah was saved for
Noah's sake, Genesis 7. And God has promised to bless them that bless his people,
and curse them that curse his people. Genesis 12:3: and 27:29 Numb. 24.9. Woe then
to the ranting damning crew of this generation; who make it a matter of sport
to curse the saints of the most high; for as sure as God is in heaven (without
true repentance) those curses will return upon there one heads,

The story likewise of Abimelech is remarkable, Genesis 20. it is said, God fast
closed up all the wombs of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah Abraham's
wife, ver. 18th. and ver. 7, God himself says to Abimelech, restore the man
(meaning Abraham) his wife, for he is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee;
and thou shall live: and if thou restore her not, know you, that thou shall
surely dye, thou, and all that are thine.

Moreover you read that God blessed the house of Potipher, and all that he had
for Joseph's sake, Genesis 39.1. and 5 verses. And the house of Obed-Edom was blessed
for the ark sake, 2 Samuel 6.10, 11. And the City of Zoar was saved for Lets
sake, that he might have a refuge to fly unto, Genesis 19. and Proverbs
11.10.11. says thus, When it goes well with the righteous, the city rejoices:
and when the wicked perish, there is shouting. By the blessing of the upright
the city is exalted: but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked. Surely
then, if the city rejoices, and is exalted by the blessing, and prosperity of
the righteous, those rulers and great men of the earth, that have endeavored,
or shall endeavor to establish themselves in their greatness, power, and
glory, by the imprisoning, and banishing, of the saints, are exceedingly
blinded, and infatuated; for by this they discover themselves to be of the
spirit of Haman; who could not be contented with his name, and honor, so long
as Mordecai sat at the Kings gate: so they, they have not been content with
their greatness, so long as the people of God have had any breathing among
them, but still have designed the building of themselves, and their kingdoms,
upon the ruins of such, of whom this world is not worthy: It had been well for
such, if they had seriously considered the just judgment of God, upon this
proud Haman, he sought his own advancement, designed that, and he was advanced,
with a witness; for he was hanged upon a Gallows fifty cubits high.

Mind also these Scriptures, wherein this particular is further proved, Isa.
19.24 In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with Assyria, even a
blessing in the midst of the land. Ezekiel. 34.25.26. And I will make with them a
covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the land:
and they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods. And I
will make them, and the places round about my hill, a blessing; and I will
cause the shower to come down in his season: there shall be showers of
blessing. Micah 5.7. And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many
people, as a dew from the Lord, as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth
not for man, nor waits for the sons of men.

In which scripture the great increase the remnant of Jacob shall have in, and
the great blesing they shall be unto the nations of the world, is prophesied of.

The people of God must needs be a blessing to the places where they dwell; for.

Jehovah Shammah; Ezekiel. 48. ult. Psalm. 46.5.
for the Lord is there. God is in the midst of her, etc. But.

Jer. 5. ver. 1.

God there says, That if one man could be found in Jerusalem that did execute
judgment, and sought the truth, he would pardon it.

In these words two things are to be noted: First, that the people of God were
at this time reduced to a very small number, and those that were, Jer. 5.25. to
the end.
were hid, could not be seen; for Solomon says Prove. 28.12 -- but when the
wicked rise, a man is hidden.

The rulers and magistrates at this time were as bad as hell, Devils incarnate;
and when there are such magistrates, then righteous persons must lie hid, there
is no appearing for them at such a time.

Proverbs 28. ult. when the wicked rise, men (that is good men) hid themselves:
but when they perish, the righteous increase.

But. 2, and to the purpose, by (a man) in this text, we are to understand,
that a very few, a small number of righteous ones should serve to save the city.

And answerable to this, Genesis 18.
you have God condescending to the prayer of Abraham concerning Sodom so low,
that if there were but 10 righteous persons to be found in it, yet he would
save the city for the sake of those ten righteous. And although there was but
one righteous person to be found in Sodom, namely Lot, (and therefore called by
the Sodomites, This one fellow, Genesis 19.9:) yet Gods hands were so tied, and
bound up by this one righteous man, that he could not destroy Sodom, until Lot
was got safe to Zoar; for, says the Angel to Lot, verse 22. Have thee, escape
thither; (for I cannot do any thing) till thou be come thither, etc.

The people of God by their prayers and tears preserve the places wherein they
live from wrath and judgment, as appears by these scriptures, Genesis 19.20. Exo.
32.11.12.13.14, 31.32. and 33.12.13. and 34:8:9: Deuteronomy. 9:18. to the end Joshua
7:7:8:9:1: Sam. 23: Jer. 13.17. and 14:7:8, 9, 19: to the end; Lamen: 1.16. And
although it is possible the sin of a nation, or people may be so very great, 2
Chion. 36.16.
of such a Scarlet die, and clothed with such circumstances, as that God may
not hear the prayers of his righteous ones for that nation or people, ( as Jer.
15.1. Ezekiel. 14.14.) but pour out his wrath upon them without remedy; * yet
nevertheless such is the prevalency of the saints with God in prayer, as that
we find, when destruction and ruin has been threatened, and has seemed to be
entering in at the windows, and at the door, the prayers and intercessions of
righteous ones (they slinging themselves in the gap, and pleading with God upon
the account of his name, honor and mercy) has diverted judgment, and
procured national mercy and pardon many a time: And again, such is the
prevalency of saints in prayer, as that if God be resolved to destroy a nation,
he first restrains the spirit of prayer; he says to his holy ones, pray not
for this people for their good, (Jer. chap. 7.16. and 11.14. and 14.11.) and
let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume
them, (Exodus 32.10.) as much as to say, Give me my hands at liberty, and do not
tie me up from destroying this people. I cannot destroy while Moses does thus
pray, and therefore Moses hold thy peace; cease praying, that I may devour, and
destroy.

Yet once more, such is the prevalency of Prayer, that if there be a spirit of
Faith and Prayer in the Saints on the behalf of a Nation, or people, it is
almost an infallible sign that God will not destroy, but have mercy upon that
people. The prayers of the Saints (with holy reverence be it spoken) do
overcome the Almighty; so that God cannot withstand the faith and prayer of his
people, and the reason lies here; Because they wrestle with God in his own
strength, they engage the Almighty in almighty strength, and so must needs be
prevailers.

Well then might Elisha say of Elijah (that mighty man of prayer) when he was
taken up to heaven, [the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof] and also
King Joash say the same of Elisha, when he lay sick of his deadly sickness; For
that indeed the strength of a Nation lies not in chariots and horsemen, in
towers and castles, etc. but in the prayers of the [Faithful] of the land. It Is
not the Common Prayers of the common swearers and drunkards that will secure
and insafe a people, but the fervent prayers of righteous ones. Wicked
swearers, Drunkards, Adulterers, Idolaters and truce breakers are the plague
and curse of a Nation; but holy, believing and praying ones, they are the
blessing of a Nation. A Nation is more beholding to the meanest Kitchin-maid in
it, that has in her a spirit of prayer, then to a thousand of her profane
swaggering Gentry; such Gentry that are better at whoring, swearing and
drinking, then they are at praying. When they are drunk they will curse and ban
the people of God to the pit of hell; but alas, the people of God (in a holy
sense) does laugh them to scorn: they will put the prayers, and tears, and sighs
of one righteous person, against ten thousand of these poor self-destroyers;
and will be confident that the prayers and tea^s of that one person (be he a
Cobbler, or a Tinker, or be she a Kitchen maid, as abovesaid) shall do them more
good, then ten thousand of them shall do hurt by all their oaths and curses.

These profane wretches, are ready to wish the people of God all out of the
world, but alas! what would then these wretches do? they are beholding to the
saints for their very beings, and for the continuance of all their mercies.

When God has but once gathered in his elect, and done his work in Zion, he
will soon pull the world about these men's ears: If the righteous be taken away,
he is taken away from the evil to come, (Isa 57:1:) Woe to Sodom, if Lot
depart; and so I may say, Woe to England, if the righteous should be taken away;
Woe to London, whenever thou ceasest to be a refuge to the saints, whenever thy
gates shall be shut against the ministers and people of the Lord Jesus.

Ten thousand woes to that man, family, city, or nation, that engages against
the prayers of the Saints; that seeks to defend and maintain that interest
which the Saints do (by Scripturerule) pray against, and believe must go down.
If I know my heart, I would not be in the condition of such for the whole
world. Blind fools! do they think to stand against the faith and prayers of the
Saints, which (in a holy sense) overcomes God himself? If they do, they may
find themselves mistaken when it is too late.

The children of Israel, though they slighted and despised the Prophets, would
in time of destress come to them for prayer, 1 Samuel 7.8.9. and 12.19. Yea
Pharaoh, as proud, and as high as he was, yet when the plague was upon him,
Moses he must be sent for, and be entreated to pray for him, and his people.

The time may come, when the proudest persecutor on earth, may see cause to beg
the prayers of such whom he now persecutes.

And thus much for the reasons of the doctrine, showing why the people of God
must needs be affected with, and mourn over the death of praying and believing
ones.

We shall now proceed to application.

ignorant country people, but too often in this great city.

You may soon judge how fit such persons are to attend upon a funeral Sermon;
but indeed I am apt to think, funeral Sermons have generally been rather for
ostentation, and vain glory, then for profit.

Hereby is likewise condemned that heathenish practice of ringing of bells so
soon as ever funeral solemnites are performed:

How unsuitable is it, that so soon as ever the husband, or wife, or a godly
friend is laid in the earth, to set the bells a ringing, which imports matter
of joy rather then of sorrow?

I am preaching now to a people, who have by a profession separated themselves
from the world, and the traditions thereof; you will do well to keep your ground
in these evil days, and so to educate and bring up your children as that they
also may be delivered from these snares, But

2 If it be a Christ like frame of spirit to bewail the perishing of good men,
it informs us how unlike to Christ that spirit is, whereby men do censure, and
reproach good men when taken away by death.

And I do the rather mention this, because some have taken the boldness to
judge and censure this precious servant of Christ now in glory, and to speak
very unworthily concerning him, since his death:

Oh dreadful how unlike to Christ is this spirit? thou that should be
judging and condemning thy self for non improvement of so great a mercy,
artjudging this eminent servant of Christ now dead. The Liturgy of the Church
of England will teach theebetter; for let personsbe never so vile in their
lives, yet when they come to be laid in the grave, then they are dear brethren
and sisters. Consider you that are of this spirit, how sad it will be if this
servant of Christ shall appear as a witness against you at the great day of
account, if the sermons that he preached, and the profers of grace that God
made by him, shall witness against thee, and thou then be judged, condemned, and
sent to hell for not receiving, entertaining, and improving the precious
sermons of this glorified saint. It Is possible now you that judge and condemn
him, and speak more then you know, or more then is truth of him, and that
possibly to carnal and wicked persons, you may have your tale heard, and it
may be pleasing to wicked profane people, that he should be so judged by his
own followers, but at the great day of Christ there will be none to hear a tale
against him: at that day, God will clear his innocence before men and Angels,
and it shall appear to all the world, that he was a true and a faithful servant
of Christ, when it may be some of those that do now judge him, shall then be
condemned for notorious hypocrites, and it shall appear, that (notwithstanding
all their profession, and pretended Zeal for the name, and glory of God,) they
were workers of iniquity, and such who did live in the love of some accursed
sin or other.

O therefore away with this spirit, to hell with it, for from thence it came.
Let it suffice that this glorified saint suffered much in this kind while he
was living: I am apt to think the heats, and passions, and rash censures of
professors, has made him often go home with a sad heart, and cost him many a
tear in private: let this his suffering suffice, let not his name suffer now he
is dead: suffer him to be quiet in his grave: Leave his judgment to the Lord,
and let it be your work to improve those many precious sermons that he has in
the fear of his God preached unto you.

As to the matter of his taking the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy upon his
releasment out of Prison, About Mr. Sympson's taking the Oaths.
which has occasioned so much talk, I shall only say these two things.

Elizabeth's, and King James time, these Oaths were taken and pleaded for; and
that not only by the faith and troth Christians, but even by the
Non-conformists of those times, who were eminent for God in their day, and
whose names are yet precious among the Lords people, and who are known (by
their works) to be men greatly enlightened in the mysteries of the Gospel. Now
although I do not look upon their example to be binding to the saints in
afterages, or a sufficient rule for our practice, yet I judge the consideration
not only of the great holiness, but also of the clear light that many of those
(who did them take the Oaths with great satis faction) had in the word of God,
may a little take off the edge of that bitter spirit that is in many professors
against their brethren for these things; for that it cannot be judged
otherwise, but that many who did take these Oaths with great satisfaction, are
now in glory: But

Liberty of Conscience, and against impositions, yet thou shall impose thine
own persuasions upon thy brother after this rare: Such imposing spirits (let
their protessions be what they will) are not to be confided in; for it may well
be feared, that those that can so readily take away the good name of a godly
man, because he cannot conform to their Light, would take away his estate and
liberty also upon the very same account, were it in their power. Note.
Indeed those men are greatly to be lamented that shall sin against Light,
against avowed principles, against solemn covenants and engagements, shall do
that which is clean contrary to their own doctrines and assertions; I mean,
when those avowed principles, folemn covenants, doctrines and assertions have
been according to the Word of God. But thus did not this faithful man, he did
nothing in this matter but what was according to his Light; and that is
evident, for that several months before his imprisonment he did publicly
declare his judgment to be for, and not against the taking of these Oaths, and
did plead it while in prison with several friends; and when he came before the
Court, the matter lying so, that either he must take the Oaths, or else return
to prison, he did judge that he should have sinned against God, and against
those over whom the Holy Ghost had made him overseer, and against his family,
and against himself, if he should have returned to prison for refusing that
which he had light to do. The case being thus (as it is known to hundreds to
be) I should hardly trust my life, estate, or liberty in that man's hand, that
should trample upon the name of Mr. John Simpson for so doing.

both Ministers and others; so that we have cause to cry out with the Psalmist,
Ps. 12.1. Help Lord, for the godly man cease; for the faithful fail from
among the children of men. Now this dispensation of God calls for deep
humiliation, and it becomes us to bow before God, and to meet him in the way of
his judgments, least his wrath break out further against us, and there be no
remedy.

But 2d. and more particularly, I would beg you of this Congregation to
consider the present stroke of God upon you in taking away Mr. John Sympson:
And for the enforcing of this consideration, I shall propose these few
particulars:

First, This to me is a very speaking providence. I know all the providence of
God speaks something to us, but this speaks very much; as, first it speaks
forth an immediate hand of God: God has taken him from you, and not man. Now
for God to take away his Ministers at such a day as this is, must needs be a
speaking providence; even at such a day wherein men slay them civilly, slay
them in their testimony, and render them as naturally dead, for God then to
take them away by death, is as much as if God should say, Well, if my servants
trouble you, if their testimony be a torment unto you, I Will take them from you,
and provide for them in another world. You say they shall be as if they were
naturally dead; and because you say so, they shall be dead indeed: for God and
man to be both at this work; man to slay them civilly, and God to slay them
judicially, is surely matter of great lamentation.

As a very lovely song, Ezekiel. 33.32
of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument: you
have heard his words, but you would not do them. There has not been a suitable
conversation to such a Ministry: A Gospel, spiritual, heavenly Ministry, calls
for a Gospel, spiritual and heavenly Conversation; such was his Ministry, but
such (I fear) has not been the conversation of many of his hearers. And indeed
all of us that did enjoy more or less of his labors, have cause to mourn
before the Lord this day for our non-improvement, that we were so vain and
careless in our hearing; that we took no more care about the hearing,
receiving, and practicing what God was pleased to reveal unto us by his
servant. This faithful man might (according to the judgment of reason) have
lived many years, and done much service: Now for God to take away his faithful
laborers in the midst of their days, to cause their son to set at noon, is a
providence that has a dreadful aspect upon unfaithful, and unfruitful
hearers. And indeed such like strokes tells us all, that Eternity draws on
apace, that 'twil not be long ere the Kingdom of Christ's patience be over:
'twil be but as a day, and Christ shall cease to make proffers of grace, and
the spirit shall cease to strive with man, and all faithful Ministers and
Laborers shall cease to pray and preach for ever: and those unalterable words
shall be made good, Rev. 22.11. Let him that is unjust be unjust still, etc.
Oh! what would many a condemned wretch give at the great day to have Christ,
and mercy, and pardon proffered to it then, as they have been many a time
proffered in the Ministry of this glorified Saint? But know (O soul) that if
thou die despising and rejecting Christ and spiritual blessings, Christ will
despise thee at that day; and then 'twil not be all thy crying and roaring that
will save thee from the wrath of the Lamb, from everlasting plagues and
judgments.

In such kind of providence, God seems thus to speak, Is it not enough, [O
ye professors of England] is it not enough, that my faithful ministers, and
laborers should be reproached, and scorned, and trampled on by the profane
wicked people, but you [my professing people] must despise, and scorn them, and
delight to grieve their spirits. When it may be a faithful servant of mine has
with prayers, and tears [secretly] sought unto me for light in such a
scripture, or truth, and I have answered his prayer, and given him light
therein, and he has preached unto you in my spirit, and fear, then (with a
great deal of dis-respect to my servant) you have brought forth your objections
and cavils against the truth delivered, and this not to satisfy your selves in
the knowledge of truth: It has not been that you might know, love, and obey
truth, but to please your itching ears, and your critical fancies; and so have
sent home my servant with a troubled and a perplexed spirit for your sakes.
Well, says God, since it is so, that my servants testimony is a torment to the
profane, and their gifts, and persons despised by you, that profess my name,
I Will take them out of the world, out of all your way, take them into mine own
bosom, and kingdom, where neither a scornful malicious sinner, nor a proud
professor shall trouble, or grieve them more.

This kind of spirit was in the Church of Corinth: Paul (that glorious
preacher) was slighted by many of the gifted persons of that Church, 2 Cor.
10.10.
and it is not to be questioned, but that there were some in that Church that
thought themselves as wise as Paul, and as fit to preach as Paul, and to
advise, and give counsel as Paul, etc.

But I would have persons of this spirit, to weigh that text, Ezekiel. 33.30.
says God to Ezekiel, Also thou son of man, the children of thy people are
still a talking against thee by the walls, and in the doors of the houses, and
speak one to another, every one to his brother, saying, Come, I pray you, and
hear what is the word that comes from the Lord.

Here God takes notice of their secret whisperings against his Prophets, how
they spoke against Ezekiel behind the door, and the wall, and said (scoffingly)
come, let us go hear what this Ezekiel will tell us from the Lord, what story
of judgment and wrath he has to prate of to day. My dearly beloved, God
takes notice of all those unworthy speeches that are spoken secretly
concerning his ministers, he takes notice of that vain slight spirit that has
been among professors; who have said one to another, Come, lets go hear such a
man to day, hear what he will say, what news he will tell us, what he will speak
in the name of the Lord to us this day, etc. Beloved, is there ever a soul in
this congregation, that has secretly spoken against this faithful servant of
Christ, now in heaven? Oh! that God would break thy heart, and so sanctify this
present stroke, as that it may tend to humble thee under the sense of thy sin.
And thus much for the first argument to move to humiliation, viz. that the
death of this faithful servant of Christ, is a very speaking providence.

England; especially of such as are enlightened in, and zealous for Church-work;
such as have abilities for, and a heart to that great work of maintaining the
people of God in their separation from the world, and Antichristian defilements.

Zech. 13.7. Smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered, etc. If the
Lord prevent not, now the shepherd is smitten you will be scattered; for it will
be hard to find a person so ready to venture life and liberty to feed you, as
undoubtedly (had God spared him) he would have been. And besides, to many of
you he might be a spiritual Father, a Father in Christ, a means of your
Conviction and Conversion; and oh! what hard hearts have you, if you cannot
mourn over a dead Father, a dead shepherd, a faithful Pastor when taken from
you, etc? But





Secondly, He had great light in the doctrine of Free Grace, he had cast
anchorwithin the vail, and understood much of that great mystery of the mercy
seat. And indeed here lay the glory of his ministry, in holding forth the
riches of Gods grace by Jesus Christ. In the preaching of this Doctrine, he was
a mystery to this blind world, they could not understand him, and therefore
hardly knew by what name to call him; and not only so, but he was an offense
to many professors; for they (not being able to reach him) did judge that he
intended liberty to sin, notwithstanding he did often mention those cautions
laid down by the Apostle, Romans 6.1.2.15. Gal. 2.17. And as at many other times,
so (blessed be God) a little before his imprisonment, preaching from that text
Rev. 3.15.16. etc. he did so charge professors with their lukewarmness, and
hypocrisy, and neglect of closet duty, and family duty, and Church duty, that
he left a sussicient testimony behind him, for the stopping of such mouths for
ever. But in this the servant was not above his Lord; for the Pharisees did
thus charge Christ, they did charge him with being a friend to publicans and
sinners Mat. 11.19.
: Something of truth there was in this charge; for Christ he was the sinners
friend, but undoubtedly the intent of that charge was to accuse Christ with
being a friend to sin, and with indulging sin and wickedness in his followers;
which was abominable; for though Christ loves the sinner, yet he hates the sin
with a perfect hatred. Hebr. 1.9.
Now if the wicked heart of man could thus charge Christ, it is no wonder that
this his faithful servant should thus be judged.

And further, as he had great light in the Covenant of Grace, so he preached
that Doctrine with the greatest alacrity, and raisedness of spirit imaginable.
In the handling of other subjects he was more straightened and discomposed; but
when he came to speak of the unsearchable riches of the Grace of Christ, he was
as an Angel of God, lifted up above himself: he had a flood of words, and yet
seemed to want words to express what he did know, and what he did enjoy of
divine grace and favor. This being true (as those that did live under his
Ministry knows it to be) the loss must needs be great.

To lose a pure Gospel Preacher is a great loss: Eternity depends upon a right
understanding of the great Doctrine of Justification by Christ: Eternity
depends not upon being baptized once or twice, upon this or the other Form; we
may be guilty of mistakes about the circumstances of worship, and yet be happy;
but if we mistake about the greatmatter of our Justification by Christ, we are
lost for ever. And besides, this Doctrine gives in the best comfort in the
worst times; gives peace in trouble, and joy in sorrow, and life in death, etc.
When there are troubles without, and fears within, it is the consideration of
the Covenant of Grace alone that can establish and settle the heart of a true
believer.

It Is not so much the souls looking to the light within, or to its own
qualifications, as to that perfect satisfaction that Christ made to divine
justice for all its sins in his own person, that must beget in the soul a
well-grounded hope of eternal glory. All our inherent qualifications without an
interest in the righteousness and satisfaction of Christ, will leave us short
of heaven at the last. But

error when convinced, shows that he was an eminent faithful Christian,
faithful both to truth and the souls of his hearers. I am apt to think that
many Preachers have taught erroneous and damnable doctrines, and thereby have
seduced many; and that some of these Preachers have been convinced that they
have so done, but notwithstanding this conviction, the persons seduced by them
might go to hell in their mistakes, before they would endeavor to reduce them,
by making an open and public acknowledgment of those errors which they have
preached. Man is a proud creature, and stands much upon his name and honor; so
that it is rare to find a person that is willing (as Mr. Sympson often has
done) to trample upon his name, though thereby he might lift up Christ's name,
and save souls from dropping into hell.

his duty, he would presently up and be doing, and leave the success and
blessing to the Lord.





There are deversities of operations, but it is the same God which works all
in all. 1 Cor. 12.6.
For to one is given a ruling spirit, to another, a healing spirit: But all
these works that one and the self same spirit, dividing to every man
severally as he will. And the works and graces of God in his people, are to be
honored and admired according as they shine forth in their operations and
diversities. Domination, and rule is that most men seek after. It Is hard to
find a person that is gifted, willing to condescend (even in those things
wherein he may) to those Christians that are below him for peace sake. A
healing spirit is a glorious spirit, and a spirit much wanting among the people
of God in England. To lose therefore a Christian of a healing composing spirit,
is a great loss.



He walked close with God in his family; he was not a saint abroad, and a Devil
at home; but made it appear that he was really good, by this, that he was
relatively good; good in his relations; a good husband, a good father, etc,

He sat loose from this world; he made not gain his godliness; he did not
design to make merchandise of Christ and the Gospel.

He has often denied money for preaching, especially funeral Sermons; and if
any were forced upon him, or sent after him, he would soon dispose of it to the
poor.

His discourse was mostly heavenly, and spiritual: If other discourse was in
hand, he was but dull company, he had little to say: but if the conference were
heavenly, he was as upon the wing, as a fish in the water, and a bird in the
air, etc.

If it be here objected, that Mr. Sympson was in his younger years of a vain
and slight conversation; I answer,

First, Divine love rides in greatest triumph, when it has the greatest
sinners following it as it is captives.

Secondly, Some in the Church of Corinth that did heartily close with Christ,
were before their conversion very vile, and wicked; see 1. Cor. 6.9.10.11. Such
were some of you: but ye are washed, etc. but

Thirdly, This blessed saint would to his dying day acknowledge his former
vanity, and ungodlyness, to his own shame, and the lifting up of the riches of
free grace through the blood of Christ: and mind what the Apostle says, 1 John
1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive our sins, and
to cleans us from all unrighteousness.

Thus much for the 4th. motive to humiliation, which was drawn from the
qualifications of this servant of Christ.

instrumental for the conversion of many souls, he has l^ft behind him many
seals of his ministry. Every faithful laborious preacher is not attended with
such a blessing. Many a Godly minister has Isaiahs commision ( Chap. 6.10.) To
make the heart of his people fat, and their ears heavy; (dreadful work) and to
shut their eyes: lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed. It was the saying of a
godly Minister in England, after some years preaching to a people, That he had
preached his people dead: I say not, but that many might be the more fit for
hell by the means of Mr. Sympson's ministry; it might (through the wickedness
of the hearers) be the savor of death unto death to many: but this I say, that
God blessed him above scores, nay hundreds of Preachers in the great work of
Conversion, in turning souls from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, etc. Now to lose a Minister, whose ministry was attended with
so great a blessing (especially at such a time, when it is rare to hear of one
new Convert) must needs be a great loss. I shall here in the close of this
Exhortation speak a word or two by way of Caution; Caution.
and that



Job, Chap. 1.21 -- The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the
name of the Lord.

2. You have no cause to murmr, and that because you had sorfeited this mercy
long ago: that God continued the Ministry of this his servant so long among
you, was a fruit of his superabounding love.

Son] A dreadful speech it was; take heed (my friends) of this spirit. It Is
true, your loss is great, but God is able to supply it; and that either

1. By causing the spirit of Elijah to fall upon Elisha, by anointing and
raising up of some other to head and feed you in the room of this his servant.
Or 2ly, he can feed you himself without a Minister: God can fill up the room of
Ministry and Ordinances. Indeed let God be absent, and there is nothing can fill
up his room: It Is not husband, wife, children, estate, liberty, Pastors,
Ordinances, etc. can supply the want of God: but now let God be present, and
that is above, and more then all. And undoubtedly, if God deny you a public
Gospel Ministry, it is your duty to wait upon him for more secret and immediate
feedings. I am afraid, that as formerly professors were greatly guilty of
sleighting and despising the means and ministry of the Gospel, so now they will
be guilty of Idolizing the Ordinance of public Preaching at such a rate, as to
think themselves bound and obliged to hear men of any principles or practices,
rather then to neglect that Ordinance -- Arminians, Socinians, Jesuits, etc.
any thing, every thing, rather then be out of public worship. Take heed of
mourning in a spirit of unbelief, saying, Can God spread a table in the
wilderness? can God feed and teach without a Preacher. To live without the true
worship of God is bad, but to be found in a way of false worship is worse. It Is
my duty to omit that Ordinance of Christ, which I cannot enjoy without sin.

Thus much for that part of the Exhortation, which relates to Humiliation: I
shall give you two brief words further, and so close. First, Is it so that the
death of faithful instruments is a matter of great Humiliation;

Then let this stir you up to be earnest with the Lord, that he would continue
and preserve those faithful ministers that do yet remain, that he would double
his spirit upon them: hide them in the secret of his presence: increase their
number; Not forgetting the prayer of Moses for the tribe of Levi, ( Deuteronomy.
33.11.) in these words. Bless, Lord, his substance, and except the work of his
hands; smite through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them that
hate him, that they rise not again. These words shall undoubtedly be made good
with respect unto the ministry of the Gospel, Christ will in his time smite
through the loins of them that rise up against a Gospel ministry; hateing, and
despitefully using his faithful servants, and he will so pierce through their
loins, as that they shall fall, and never rise more.

In the mean time take heed you that profess the name of Christ, that you do
not endanger the rest of the faithful laborers that are left amongst you; and
that neither, 1. By slighting and despising the meanest of them, 2 Chronicles 36.16.
But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, misused his
prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was
no remedy. Nor Secondly, By idolizing those that are most eminent. How many
famous instruments (to speak according to man's judgment) has the professors
of this age sent to their graves before their time, by idolizing their persons
and gifts, ascribing that honor and glory to them, which was due to Christ
alone? This spirit and frame has even forced the Lord (in order to the
convincing and humbling of his people) either to take away the spirit of zeal
and courage from such instruments, and thereby render them unfit for further
service, or else to remove them by death from earth to heaven, out of the sight
of all his people that dwell in tabernacles of corrupt clay.

Lastly, Such strokes should teach us all to provide for death. God takes away
our leaders, and we must follow them: those that would not follow the counsel
and advise of Mr. Sympson while living, must follow him to the grave now dead;
to the grave we must all go, and the Lord knows how soon; Of what import
therefore is it, that we all manage matters so while we live, as that when we
com to die we may dye in peace, and in full assurance of our entrance into
glory? We should manage all our matters so in this world, as those that must
once dye, and come to judgment: performing every thing with this proviso, That
I may dye well. I am so to buy, sell, and converse with creatures, that I may
dye well. I am so to hear, pray, read, receive the supper, have communion with
the saints, as that I may dye well, dye in peace; all is to be done in order to
dying well. My beloved, this life is the trimming chamber unto eternity: by all
the means and mercies that thou do enjoy, thou art fitting either to bear the
eternal weight of glory, or the eternal weight of wrath: thou art fitting
either for heaven, or hell: thou will either be bound up in the bundle of life,
or else thou will be bound up for hell fire: Now the Lord give us all hearts to
provide for that everlasting state. Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 1. line last, for secret read severe; and what literal mistakes or
mis-pointings-hath escaped the Press, you are desired to amend as you find them.


