Good and true News from Bedford: Declaring the pollitick and profitable
exploit of Collonell Mountague coming with his Forces from Cambridge, and
obtaining entrance into that Town under the denomination of being Forces
commanded by Colonel Hurrey and Sir Lewis Dives for the King, by which means
he was well entertained, and under pretense seized many Horses, and took
diverse sums of money, which was before collected for the use of the King, but
now employed for the benefit of the Parliament and State; In a Letter sent from
Bedford to London* by a Gentleman there residing.

Together with another Letter from the LION, a Ship in service for the
Parliamen^ resident now at Hull, declaring the good service performed by the
Seamen on Land, against the Eearle of Newcastles Forces, driving them from
their siege took nine Pieces of Ordnance, whereof one was called the Queens
pocket Pistol, received from Denmark, Anno Dom. 1643.

This is licensed and entered into the Hall Book according to Order.

LONDON Printed for R. Astine. A. Coe. 1643.

SIR,
WE have had some pretty passages here which I thought good to make you
acquainted with. On Thursday and Friday last, being the 26. and 27. of this
instant Month, Colonel Mountague went forth into the Enemies quarters with
only 2. Companies of Dragoneers, and 1. troop of horse going to Bedford, for
we heard they had some small force there: but when we came there, they were all
gone from thence. But take notice by the way, that we went as a party of the
Kings horse, and were made very welcome in the Town; And having heard before
that the Commission of Array had given them charge to raise Money and Horse for
the Kings use, and they being as ready as may be to put it in practice: we
asked them where the honest men lived that was to gather the Money: being
directed, we came to the house and asked for the men, who said, We had very
small time as yet to do any thing; but what they had we should have it very
willingly, wishing they had more to do the King good, and so had we too, the
sum being but 7. li. and 4. good horse: We taking them thankfully, and
telling them we would visit them for more shortly: Do, and welcome, say they,
and so being prayed for by them, we left them and marched toward S. Needs,
where we had more of the same sport, taking more horse that was kept for the
same purpose also. And another pretty passage had almost forgotten, at a little
Town by the way we had 5. horse that was kept for the same purpose also, and
while they were searching the house I had command to stand at the back side of
an orchard to see that no body ran out at the back side, and whilst we stood
there, there came a man down the lane, and seeing some Force stand there, he
rode back again: I seeing, having the command of those that stood with me, I
took Soldier with me and rode after him, and when we had gained him we
told him that he was going to Cambridge to tell the Roundheads that we were
there: and telling him that he was an old usuring Roundhead, and one that had
lent the Parliament money, and being urged upon it, swore that he never lent
them any, nor paid the taxations, but what they strained and took by force;
telling us that for the King he would do any thing: He was high Constable of
the place 5. year, and gathered the Ship Money, and put some men in prison for
non-payment of the Money, and told us that he had persuaded as many as he could
not to take the Oath nor Protestation, and giving us notice of all the parts
and parties of the Country, and how every person of quality stood affected,
and by that means we got more horse, and are promised more for the King; but
when they are ready we shall turn Cavaliers again to fetch them: the man's name
is Edward Cosens, and he lives at a place called Rocxson; And the Captains
names are, Cap. Tailor, Cap. Lawrence, Cap. Langrige, and so marched to
Huntington, sending Captain Tailors Quartermaster to quarter 500. of the Kings
Forces, saying, Colonel Hurrey and his company was to quarter there that
night, and Sir Lues Dyves and others, who when they heard that the Kings forces
was coming there, they rang the Bells for joy, and so we did know our friends
from our foes, and still raised our force of horse, so that we had a
considerable number which did help us to make up our Dragoneers. And so in
haste I rest,

Yours.

SIR,
I Intend the next week (God willing) to give you a larger relation of the
proceedings near our Quarters, in the mean time be satisfied with these lines
ensuing: On Friday last being the 27. of this month, we marched from Hull,
having continued there in Garrison for the space of fourteen days; and on the
eleveth day of this month Captain Rainesborough, who is Captain of the good
Ship called the Lion, for the King and Parliament, coming to relieve the town
of Yarmonth with the number of two hundred of his shipped Soldiers, together
with three hundred soldiers under the command of Captain Wels, as also with
the Townsmen themselves issuing forth of the Town, set upon the Earl of
Newcastles forces and gave them battle, the Seamen went on with such a
courage and so hot, that they beat the Earls forces from their great Guns,
and took from them nine or ten great Pieces of Ordnance, one whereof was one
of the two great Guns that the Queen sent them, which she had from the King of
Denmark, calling them by the name of her pocket Pistols, but I hope she shall
never have them again to shoot fiery bullets into the Town, for they did
shoot into the Town out of them pocket Pistols Grenades and bals of thirty
and six pound weight, one of them shot into a house where a woman lay in
Childbed, and burnt the bed and the woman was in it, but such was Gods mercy
and goodness that the woman received no hurt at all, and although they shot
both day and night continually for the space of six or seven weeks together,
they killed only two, a man and a woman, all the time of their siege against
the Town, but on the eleventh day when we gave them the onset and overthrow,
we lost ten me^ and twelve hurt, and ten taken prisoners, one was that valia^^
and worthy Commander Captain Ramesborow, we took that day of the Kings
forces at least six or seven score prisoners, but how many of them were killed
is not certainly known, for as they were killed, they stripped them and threw
them into ditches, so that we cannot hear of above three or four score that
were killed, but I believe they lost more: They demand for the ransom of
Captain Ranisborow four of his best Guns in his ship, but it will not be
granted them; my Lord F^irefax does offer them two Knights, or any of their
Captains that we have taken of theirs for him, but as yet it will not be taken
for him: They are all quite run away to York, and have carried Captain
Rainsborow Prisoner with them, but I doubt not but that they will be glad to
release him again. Thus in have I rest,

Yarmouth, October 24. 1643. Yours T.V.

FINIS.

