Johannes Godartius OF INSECTS.

Done into English, and Methodized, with the Addition of Notes.

The Figures Etched upon Copper, by Mr. F. Pl.

YORK. Printed by John White, for M. L. 168^.

To the Reader.
I Am not satisfied, that ever Goedartius intended to publish these Papers: or
that He aimed at any thing more, then to please and gratify his Fancy, and the
excellent skill he had in Limning. And this appears from the almost total
neglect of descriptions, which he had sufficient oppertunity, to have well
performed; and the many references to the Colors in his De^igns, which
Calcography, or Printing could not represent; besides the tumultuous order, we
have them first published in, after his Death: above all, the little
advancement he seems to have made, in his Skill, in the nature of Insects,
after 40. Years (as he says himself) daily conversing with them: so that he
seems rather, to have diverted with them, then to have given himself the
trouble of well understanding them.

And yet after all this, you will find him every where very just, and true in
his Observations: but in many places very short, and hardly Intellig^^le.

Again, as he most industreously fed them, and observed their Changes; so he
committed little or nothing to Writing or Design, but what succeeded with him,
and (as he understood it) had its right Change: Which is more, than any man
ever did before him; So that we need not admire, that so long, and pertinatious
an Industry produced so few Historys: For he Designed not all, that came to
hand, but such only, as it was his good fortune to Feed, and bring up to Change.

And yet in these few Historys, you will have something of all the several
Genus's of Insects, that are in Nature.

He left his Papers in Dutch, which were at several times, and that by diverse
hands, put forth in Latin: His Latin Interpreters have added Comments, indeed;
but were Men wholly ignorant in Natural History; and their Comments are mere
Rapsodies, and altogether impertinent to the Explication of any one History of
Godartius: As he, who shall attentively consider them, will plainly find:
wherefore in this our Translation; I have omitted them, and have Printed the
Authors words only, and have here and there used the freedom of animadverting,
upon what is not agreeable to my own experience in these matters: besides I
have Methodised the Historys, according to the Several natures of the Insects
they treat about; and; (where I could understand him) I have explained many
things, that might be doubted of: And those who enjoy a suitable leisure may
hereby be put in a ready way, to pursue the History of these long neglected
Animals.

Also I have taken great care of the Designs, in transferring them upon Copper
Plates; which I dare promise are Exquisitly performed, by the best of our
English Artists: which was my expense; and which the Booksellers were not
willing to Reimburse me; so that this Impression consists but of a 150. Coppys,
which were intended only for the curious. And upon this occasion I must needs
say, that Natural History is much injured, through the little encouragement,
which is given to the Artist, whose Noble performances can never be enough
rewarded; being not only necessary, but the very beauty, and life of this kind
of learning.

If the Reader shall yet desire to be informed, why the Comments go no farther,
then the greater part of the work only; let him know, that the Translation lay
by me unfinished, and in the first draught for above Seven Years, and had so
done long enough, had not my very good Friend Mr. T. K. of Cowkreig, very
Obligingly undertaken to Transcribe and perfect it. So that the humor of
Commenting being past me, and the notions I once had of these things, being
less fresh in my memory, I had little leisure to instruct my self again, but
suffered it to go in that particular, as he found it.

M. L.

Section I.
Of Butterflyes, sitting with erect Wings: all whose Chrysoli's are Angular: of
which there are VIII. Species.

Number. 1.
Godar^. Part 1. Tab. 1.
THE Catterpillar, N. 1. is prickle Haired; it has its birth from an Egg,
which the Butterfly ( N. 1.) having eyes in its Wings, like those in Peacocks
^eathers, does lie upon Netles.

This Cattarpiller I took up the 14 day of May, 1635. And I fed it with the
Leaves of Netles, until the 11. of June, of the same Year. Then it composed it
self for change, with its head hanging downwards, as you may see in the Table.
It remaind in this form 19 days. When a most elegant Butterfly came forth.

At the first coming forth of the Butter^ly, its wings were like wet Paper; Off
of which fell certain watery dropps: But that, which did seem to me worthy
Observation, they became in half an hour dry, expanded, and fit for flight.

This Butterfly feeds on sweet things, as Sugar, and the Honey of flowers: Also
it is mainly delighted in rotten fruits, for which they fight among them selves.

In winter time they hide them selves within the Chimnies of poor Cottages,
from whence I have forced them with a good blazing fire.

Also they are found lying hid in hollow Trees.

It is well Observed by our Author that this Catterpillar, has its beginning
from the Egg of such a Butterfly; and so probably have all Catterpillars
whatsoever their beginning from the Eggs of their respective Butterflys. The
Butterfly is the Mother Insect in perfection, and the Catterpillar, its
Aurelia, or Chrysalis are but certain Disguises for a time, wherewith one and
the same Animal is by nature invested for diverse ends. viz, that of the
Catterpillar to eat such and such food; This of the Aurelia to perfect and
^arden its limbs.

Number. 2.
Goda^. Part 1. Tab. 12.
Although our Fingers suffer and are stung by Nettels, yet the Catterpillar
marked N. 2. delights to feed on them: Neither does it make ready for the
change, or obstaine from food, whilst this Plant flourishes.

It began to change the 23. of June, and the 9th. of July came forth the
Butterfly marked with beautiful colors, Figured in N. 2.

These Butterflyes are to be found all Winter in Stables, where Beasts stand.

These Catterpillars are exceeding Voratious.

Here is w^nting the Figure of the Chrysolis. We have noted in the foregoing
Number, the use of the disguises of Butterflyes: and I shall here Observe, that
catterpillers feed of course and ^arsh food, such as the substance of the
leaves of Plants; whereas the Butterflyes feed of the Honey of Flowers, and
liquid meats. This is contrary to what is natural in sangvincons and more
perfect Animals; who in the Embryo feed of a Prepared Chyle, but after birth
have a yet more courser food to nourish them: And yet more course as they grow
older, and to maturity.

Number. 3.
G. P. 1. Tab. 7^.
The nourishment of the Catterpillar N. 3. are the leaves of the Elm.

When the time of the change groes near, they betake themselves to Houses, and
fix their hinder parts to a wall, hanging down with their heads, that they may
more easily come forth of their shell or Chrysalis, when the time of change is
completed.

Before the Catterpillar changes its shape for that of a Chrysalis, and puts
off its old skin, it seems to be very much ^troubled, turns, shaking, and
tossing its body every way, and trembling as if it had an Ague. At length
rising, and falling often with his body it conducts its body into a circle,
upon which it swells so, that the skin cracks all the length, and so by little
and little it falls off, a new skin growing underneath. And at that time they
rest a while.

This is very notable in these Catterpillars, that where the back of the
Catterpillar was, there are the belly and feet of that Animal it is changed
into; and the contra^y, where the belly and feet of the Catterpillar were,
there now the back of that Animal is, which was produced by the change of the
Catterpillar. And this change is produced in a very short time; so that it may
distinctly be ^een and observed: For as soon as the old skin is laid aside,
this Transfiguration manifestly appears.

The Catterpillar of Number 3. Began to change the 21st. of June and the 30th.
day of the same Month it was changed into a very fair Butterfly, which I have
also exactly delineated Number, 2.

Immediately after the change, its wings were like mois^ Paper, but in half a
quarter of an hour they dried, were expended and made fit for Flight.

Afterward the Butterfly let fall from his Tail four dropps of blood; and
after half an hour one drop of clear liquor, like Fountain Water.

It lived a Butterfly 19 days without food.

Another Catterpiller of the same Species composed it self for Change the
13th. of July, and that change being come to perfection* there broke out of the
Back, (of the Catterpillar) 82 Flies, as in Number 3. So that out of one and
the same Species of Catterpillars, a Butterfly is produced, and 82 Flies.

Note, That I believe the Author was mistaken in his Observation of the Back of
the Catterpillar being the Belly of Butterfly, and the Chrisolis might well
enough I conceive turn its body within a dry, and loose skin, in the act of
throughing it off, and cause this mistake; especially, when it was so much
troubled and concerned in the cracking of it, as is noted by our Author.

2. Concerning the Catterpillars fixing his Body to a Wall, it is to be Noted,
that this is done by a single thread cross the middle, thus, (for I have more
then once actually seen it in doing) This is done, before it appears in the
disguise of an angular Chrysolis. The Catterpillar doubles its head backwards,
and touching the place, where it would suspend it self, it fixes a thread on
both sides its body, drawing it a cross, and then redu^^ing its head and
laying it self in a pendulous posture, it tosses it self and cracks the skin
of the Catterpillar, which flying off, it appears a Chrysolis, hanging as is
described.

3. I have my self often Observed that Red liquor fall from the Butterfly
Number, 2. And also an equivalent one, though not Red, from many flies hatching
from Chrysalises: and ^tis by the mean^s of this liquor, they swell their
Bodies and crack their Shells of their respective Chrysalises. A sprinkling
also of this liquor makes their wings so moist, when they first come forth. See
in the Life of Peireskius of the Reining of Blood, r^ferred hither.

4. the 82 Flies here mentioned were the brood of the I^hneumon Fly, conve^ed
into the body of the Catterpillar. I confess I am not yet acquainted with the
manner of the conveying them; but I am persuaded that it is done by the
Ichneumon parent. This I can affirm, that these bold Animals do frequently lay
their Young in the very Egg-cake of Spiders. Again I have se^n them perforating
the excrescencies of trees with a tongue from their mouth, as with a winble;
without doubt either to destroy and feed on the Maggot within the excrescence;
or else to impregnat them with their own kind^ More I have spoken to this
matter in one of the monthly Transactions of Mr. Oldenbourgh: However these
Flys most certainly are a By-birth only, It is farther remarkable in this
Number, that these 82 Flies did break forth of the Chrysalis, which also is
unusual.

Number 4.
G. P. 1. Tab. 2^.
Some times I have observed the Changes of Insects to be made into mo^e
beautiful Animals; then I expected; as in the Catterpillar N. 4.

I fed him with Elm leaves, in which he delighted. He has a very deformed and
ugly head, whereas in in most other Catterpillers the head shines like a
Looking Glass.

He purges himself and begins to change into the form N. 4. The 7th. of
June, and the 20th. of the same Month came ^orth a most beautiful Butterfly,
marked with most elegant colors.

These Butterflyes continue alive all Winter, unless other little Animals
devour them, or Spiders strangle them in their webs.

Our Author has diligently observed all alonge, that Catterpillars exactly
Purge themselves of all their excrements before they change, and are in the
disguise of Chrysalises. We have said that the use of the disguise of a
Catterpillar is, to eat a different ^ood, and that which the Butterfly cannot
eat: And therefore it is but reasonable, that the Catterpiller should quite and
clean empty it self of all the old food, when it is about to become a new
feeder. I am ^oreover conceited, that the change of a Catterpillar is not
superficial only, but goes deeper yet, and that the intestines are in some sort
changed also, as well as the Organes of the mouth. The inside of the Gutts
being indeed an outside too in all Animals.

Number. 5.
G. P. 2. Tab. 29.
I gave this Catterpillar N. 5. Many plants to eat but he refused them all: At
length it came into my mind, that he might be delighted with Netles, which
when I had brought to him, he to my great admiration rubd his Head against
them, and showed signs of gladness, and eat them greedily.

After he had been fed some time with Netles, he composed himself for change
October, 3. In the form expressed N. 3. Under a Glass, to which he fixed
himself with his Head downwards.

If you touched the Chrysalys, it moved it self so strongly as made the Glass
ring like a Bell.

Out of this change came the 1st. of December, a very fair Butterfly,
Peacock-like Eyed.

The Butterfly lived 40 Days without food, and dyed, for I knew not what to
feed him with.

This Catterpiller says 'our Author', refused to eat of many sorts of plants
offered him, and would feed of none but Netles: I add, and he would have
undoubtedly starved first: This is not an effect of the different make of the
Organ of their mouths, (as above said betwixt the feeding of a Catterpillar
and a Butterfly) but verily the delicatenss of the Palate and taste: which
perhaps might be improved to good ^^^pose in discovering the virtue of Plants.

I am persuaded there is no better way to know what kind of wood is best, for
Sheathing of Ships, than to essay certain po^^ished pieces thereof like Tallies
tied to a Bu^y In the waters and streams much infested by the worm. For that
sort of wood, which they shall refuse, is in all reason to be chosen for the
use desired. And the Indies are stored with greater variety of Timber, then
Europe, so that it would be very probable there may be some found, which that
kind of River worm will absolutely refuse to Eat.

Number. 6.
G. P. 3. Tab. 4.
The Catterpillar marked N. 6. Leads a peaceful Life: But is exceeding
fearful, it is moreover hairy, and very sensible,

It feeds on the leaves of Carduns Benidictus the softer part of which leaves
they greedily eat; but the more sticky and hard nerves they do not touch.

About evening they make themselves Webbes in which they de^end themselves
against the cold of the night. They are of a Black color, and have sharp
pricles mixed with yellow.

This Catterpillar began to change the 19th. of July 1665. The change was of a
pretty Figure, and as it were Guilt.

Out of the Chrysalis came the 7th. of August, a most elegant Butterfly and
marked with diverse couolrs. It lived with out Food, until the 11th. of the
same month.

The middle state or disguise of a Butterfly is called by the Greeks Chrysalis,
or a thing g^ilt, ^as the word imports: The Latin has left us no name, that
I know off: we have Translated it Aurelia. The Latins however call the
Catterpillar Eruca: which is a word (as I guess from a place in Vitruvius)
which signifies in the old Tuscan Language Viride aeris, and thence borrowed to
signify a Catterpillar; for some Catterpillers there are, which I have seen in
Languedoc feeding on a certain Common Tithymal, very notably painted with a sea
green color, or Blew. So that as the guilding of some few Chrysalises, gave a
denomination to all; in like manner the Blew Color of some one Catterpillar
gave the Name to all the rest. As for the Guilding it self, I take it to be
nothing else, but the S^um of an evaporated juice between the Skin of the
Catterpillar, and the shell of the Chrysalis, which last it covers.

Number. 7.
G. P. 1. Tab. 11.
Few Catterpillars love Cabbage, and yet the Catterpillars which are designed
in the 7th. Table: eat white Cabbage, but will not touch the Red Cabbage. Cold
and moist weather is a very great enemy to them and soon destroys them, and
they wither to nothing, but skin.

They have a double time of change; if that happen in Summer, it is at an end
soon, but if it begin in Autumn, it lasts until the following Summer; I have
experien^^d both changes.

One of the Catterpillars of the 7th. Table changed the First of July, and the
12^th. of August, the white Butterfly came forth, represented in this Table;
Another of the same species, changed the 17th. of December and remained a
Chrysalys, till the 15th. of May the Year following; when a Butterfly came
forth; the very same with the former.

But another Year it happened, that I observed in the same Catterpillars a
wonderful thing, I took a certain number of these Catterpillars, at the same
time: I fed them until they of their own accord left their meat, and betook
themselves to rest and for generation: after they had lain still 4 days, and
did not move, I saw break forth of the Skins of each Catterpillar, on both
sides the Animal 40. in some, 50. in some 52 little Worms, which Worms as
soon as borne, made themselves little Netts: (or Baggs) of yellow Silk,
beginning from the Tail to the Head, and shut themselves up in those N^tts in
those Baggs they defend themselves from the cold of Winter.

The Catterpillar (out of whose Skin I said those Worms came) k^it all their
little Netts together on a bunch that they might not be scattered, but that
they might be turned into Flies in Summer, in one place, and at once. The
Catterpillar notwithstanding all these wounds, out of which 40, or 50 Worms
did break forth, lived without Food in my Closset from the 24th. of September,
until the 28th. of the same Month the 19th. of October the above described
Worms turned into so many little Flies, and all of them dyed within 6 Days.

Another Catterpillar of the same Species after its Change, and that it had
lain in it 14 Days, 2 Worms broke out of the forehead of it, and those two
Worms, in my sight in the space of an hour and a half, were changed into Eggs
of an Amber color: and 13 Days after that, out of each Egg came a middle
sised Fly.

These things I have had the experience of, and have Observed them, not without
admiration, because it seems besides, if not against the usual course of
Nature, that from one and the same Species of Animals, an Offspring of
different Species should be gendred, and that one and the same Animal should
procreate after diverse manners, which thing yet is made manifest in these
Catterpillers, as I have in few Words declared.

^A double time of Chang^] The reason may be, for that those Catterpillars, as
is Observed by our Author, are very tender; so that they which Change not, till
the cold Weather come on, continue in the middle state or disguise, till the
Spring following: otherwise shoul'd they then change into Butterflyes and lay
their Eggs, the Brood would perish with the Cold: Others there are to my
knowledge, that are constantly hatched Catterpillars the l^tter end of Summer,
and not having time and Food to bring them up to a full growth, in order to
their change, do club for a web amongst themselves, and continue a very small
(...) all winter, and when the leaves begin to break forth, they again come
forth, feed a new, grow great ones, and Change: as the common Hedge
Catterpillar, etc.

2. The numerous Raze are Ichneumon's. the two others are a sort of Flesh-fly:
Both these I say are By-births, and not at all generated by the Catterpillar,
but by their respective Parents: the Catterpillar which bo^e them, serving only
as ^ood to them, not a Mother. It Is to be O^served that the Flesh-Flyes, did
feed upon the very substance of the Catterpillar, or Chrysalis, as they would
upon Car^ion. That the Ichnenmo^s did not destroy the Mother, and love not
corrupt meat, possibly the very food of the Catterpillar digested by her, was
their nourishment and not her bowels, who many days survived the strainge
eruption of that brood; I have opened many Catterpillers of that very Species,
in which I have found of these worms, but how and when they are conveyed into
their Bodies, I do not yet understand.

3. That is very curious and particular, if there be no mistake in the thing,
that our Author says: The Catterpillar her self knit all the little Netts
into one bunch, as though she acknowledged this Br^od to be her own: and yet
this is no proof they are so; For we see in Birds, the like instance, the
little Bird called the Hedge Sparrow will carefully and most affectionatly,
bring up, as well as Hatch, the young Cuckoo.

Number. 8.
^od^rt. Part 1. Tab. ^7.
When Savoy Cabbages and Colliflou'rs begin to knit, often are seen about them
certain Butterflyes which lay their Eggs upon those Plants, which Eggs by the
heat of the Sun, are Attracted and set in an upright Posture, and at length
Catterpillars break forth of those Eggs and devower the Plants.

These Catterpillers easily endure the heat of the Sun, but not at all lasting
Raines, which soon makes them ^abid and nothing but Skin.

The Catterpillar of this 8th. Table, purged itself and changed the 3d. of
August, and the 17th. of the same Month came forth the Butterfly here
represented; This Butterfly is but slow and not nimble, though it be sometimes
found to live over the winter and longer.



I have verily Observed the Butterfly in the very act of laying her Eggs upon a
cabbidg leaf; which is thus done, the Butterfly sitts upon the edge of the
lea^e, and bending her tail under the leafe-she fixes (by touching the leaf
with the point of her tail) one Egg, and then an other, and so a 3d. until
she has laid as many as she list ^ But all these Eggs are in that moment fixed
with the small end upwards, and not laid sidewayes, and afterward turned
upwards, by the heat of the Sun, as our Author seems to say.

Section II.
Of Butterflyes sitting with ^lat Wings, whose Catterpillers want the middle
Legs, and from there manner of going in Loops, are by some called Geometrae.

Number. 9.
G. P. 1. Tab. 31.
The Catterpillar of the 9th. Table comes of Seed or Eggs, hard to be found out
or met with, I at length with much diligence Observed them, laid upon certain
leaves, and covered with hair and down, Animal like, and so are preserved
safe from cold, opening those leaves I found a Green seed, or Eggs.

These Catterpillars feed on Goose^ury-l^aves, also of Red and White
Curran-berries.

They are wont to change about the end of June as the 22. The change is
elegant, whose Figure you have in this Table. It remained in the chang to the
13th. of July, on which day came forth a small white Butterfly with black spots.

If you take the Mo^th in your hands, or suffer it to fall, it seems dead a
while and moves not,

Here is a great mistake in this History, of Catterpillars laying of Eggs, and
therefore I have amended it in the very Text, beliving it an escape of the
Latin Translation.

This Catterpillar feeds not only upon the leaves, but on the very green Fruit
of the Apricock, as I have Observed.

It was from the change of one of these Catterpillars that I imagined I had a
small green Beetle, but more of this in another place.

Number. 10.
G. P. 2. Tab. 34.
The Catterpillar of the 10th. Table: was put into my hands by a couple of
friends, the 14th. day of October, with entreaty that I would observe its way
of liveing and change, I undertook to do what lay in my power, I knew not what
it fed on, and therefore I took much pains to find it out, to that end I put
before it leaves of diverse Herbs and other things, which I knew Catterpillars
to feed off, but it would not so much as taste of any of them. Then from its
color, which was not much unlike theleave^ of Elder, I began to suspect, that
those leaves might not be ungrateful to it, being by experience taught, that
some Catterpillars, are colored some what like the Herbs and leaves they are
nourished with: I gave it Elder leaves to eat, it devowred those willingly as I
thought, but yet once a day only.

At evening after Sunset, when it began to be dark, it eat hal^e an hour
together, when it once fell on, and being full it stretched it self right out,
and in that posture it looked like a stick out of a Faggot, for I could see no
legs at first look, and yet was not without them, wherefore I have drawn the
feet of the forepart of the Body, in that part also was a rising bunch; by the
half of which it so fastened it self, ^ucking continually like a Leech, that
it could ^^arce be plucked away, and would rather suffer it self to de plucked
in pieces, then be separated from what it stuck to.

Also the binder part of his body was very tenatious: it represents a
G^lpsmiths Forciples, with the which he is wont to take a Crucible out of the
fire, he shutting his hinder, feet as those forciples are to be shut, and in
that posture if you shake him, and tumble him never so much, he will rest and
not move, like a dead thing; sometimes a whole day together, but when he crept
forward, he took long strides, stretching out himself at full length right
forwards, drawing up the binder part of his body to his ^ore part, like a Loop,
or the Buckle of a Belt, and thus he walked.

The 25 of th. October, he put off a Skin, as many other Catterpillars use to
do, when they are about to change, and hung with his head downwards, from fix
a Clock in the morning, until eight at night, at which time he was always
wont to creep abroad, he eat at nights and slept in the day time.

Now when the Elder leaves were fallen, and being dry, had lost their former
taste and virt^e, he ref^sed to eat any more, the 19th a^ November. he fasted
all Winter, doing nothing else but shifting his place every Night; one Night
hanging with his head downwards, and another with it upwards, always his body
at its full stretch and length, and thus he passed the time away. All the time
I had him by me I could never perceive any sign^s of life in him ^'th day time,
except that Day when he was put into my Hands, and those small Signs that
were, I Observed by the benifit of a Light.

The 20th. of March, the Year following, I set before him the Buds of Elder, if
now perchance he had a mind to eat, after so long lasting, but he would not
taste them. The second of May, I gave him the full grown leaves of Elder and at
lenght I found him eating of them.

But so it was, that 3 Days before he fell to eating again, he had drawn a
Thread along the ^and, which I laid for him, out of the Saliva of his mouth,
and that thread was a long one, and much small Sand stuck to it, like so many
threded Beads, by the help of his For^eet he drew this thread to his mouth
again, and swallowed the sand, as I guessed to change his sick stomach, as
certain Eels swallow Prickley small Fish for their stomachs ^ake.

And that also was worth the noting in him, that he was grown a third part
biggar in thickness and length, since he eat, then he was, when I first had
him, that he also roled his body in the Sand, and tued him there, as often as he
eat.

The 16th. of May, he fastened the hinder parts of his body to the Glass,
which I kept him in, his head hanging downwards, and he clothed himself with
leaves, and a Web woven by him round about his body, in the form of a little
Bag or Net: into which Bag, (changing) he put off his Skinn, and let go his
hold from the Glass, to which, with his hinder part of his body he held fast,
^he let himself fall with his whole body, and in this posture he betook himself
to change.

The day after he had that form, which is expressed in that Table: the 24th.
of June, came ^orth an unusual and wonderful Butterfly, of a Yellow Color,
golden haired, which (very much shaking its Body) dyed the 5th. of July.

It was well our Author lighted upon the leaves that these Catterpillers would
feed on: though that was done by imagination, more then real resemblance.

It seems reasonable to me, that he who would effectually prevent the Worm
eating of Ships, should well understand the History of what Insect it is, that
infests them; and particularly the manner of its feeding. Worms, most
certainly have Peculiar palats, as well, as the more perfect Animalls, and will
rather die, than eat such and such an Herb, or Wood: so that the Wood that by
experience, they shall be found, to refuse to eat: that is the Wood* which is
the proper material to Sheath, or Plank Ships with. And this being so grand a
Desideratum, it would be worth trying all the numerous varietyes ^f Timber
Trees which Europe, or the Indies afford, which might be easily done by
Tallies of them fastened to a Buoy, in the most dangerous Rivers, or Bays, as I
have noted above.

Numb^r. 11.
God. P. 2. Tab. 43.
The Catterpill^r of the 11th. Tables eats Pare tree-leaves, but is most
delighted with Ro^e-tree leaves, they are not very greedy, and eating by
intervalls they lie quiet, and sometimes extend themselves, having fast hold of
the lea^e, with the hinder part of their body. Being full, they rest in the
form you see expressed in the Table: They care not much to change their place,
and go not from lea^e to lea^e, as is the way of many Catterpillars, they
willingly leave not the lea^e or twig, before they have devowred all: They are
elegantly colored, the upper part of their body being dark, the under
yellowish, but not so fair after meat, as before; because they are of a very
thin skin, and the Green food, they take, is seen through, and does obscure the
various colors, which addorne them.

Before they betake themselves to Change, the upper part of their body often
turns redish.

This Catterpillar ^ed by me some time, began its change the 19th. of June, in
that very Form, which you see him expressed in. The 27th. of November came
^orth a less beautiful Butterfly, marked with many black spots in the Back,
like a Marbled Book, as the Fashion now is; This lived a hungry life for 4
Days, I not knowing what to ^eed it with.

I had another of these Catterpillars; out of the hinder part of whose Body,
before he betook himself to change, 2 little worms crawled forth the 18th. of
May, of a duskey color; within 2 Hours they took the ^orme of Eggs, colored
like the Mother Catterpillar. The 9th. of June, the same Year, came ^orth of
these Eggs, two Flies, which within two Days, shaking and trembling, died and
about that time also dyed the Catterpillar it self. After that the Catterpillar
had spawned those worms she dwinled away, pined, and never eat more.

The^e a Worms, I say, were the disguises of certain Ichnenmones, and not
Flesh-Flyes, for the very reason, that the Catterpillar survived their
^ruption, Flies feeding on Carrion or P^trified bodies.

Number. 12.
G. P. I. Tab. 35.
The Catterpillar, of the 12th. Table feeds on the leaves of the
Black-curran-bush, it is of another shape then the ordinary Catterpillar, which
are wont to have feet in the middle of their Bodies ^ but this has them at the
extremities, and are very strong with them, when they change place, and creep
from bough to bough, they firmly lay hold of the bough with their feet, and
lift up their body like a Snake, and so try for another place to remove to,
they hold so fast by their feet, that you can scarce pluck them from the thing,
they adhear to.

This Catterpillar changed (having first exactly purged its Body) the first of
April, and the 24th. of July, came forth the Butterfly, expressed in the
1^^th. Table: tender, and a short lived Animal.

Numb^r. 13.
G. P. 3. Tab. ^^. ^^.
This green Catterpillar, of the 13the Table, eats the Leaves of the
Elder-Tree. When its full, it extends its Body ^orcibly the whole length, and
in that posture rests until the next day. As it creeps, it joy^es its hinder
parts to its ^ore-parts, like a Loop, and then extendsit ^el^e forwards, and
then gathers it self up again, and so on to its journeys end.

It changed the 6th. of October, 1663. And the first of May, the Year
following, 1664. It appeared in the shape of a most beautiful Butterfly
expressed in the 13th. Table, I chose the most Elegant of them to design that
by, because there is some difference in such, as are bread of this
Catterpillar. This Butterfly was very nimble, and of a swift flight.

Numb^r. 14.
G. P. 2. Tab. 21.
The Catterpillar of the 14th. Table, expressed to the life, are great Lovers of
green Garden Lettice, but will not (like many other Catterpillars) touch the
Plant withered.

This Catterpillar began its change the 8th. of June, in the Form expressed.

About the beginning of August, came forth a Butterfly, hoary color, having a
long Stinge in his forehead, or an extended Ray, which lived but one day
fasting, I knew not what to seed him with.

But I have Observed this kind of Butterfly to fly about Flowers, dipping that
long Sting, or Tongue into the flowers, and so to suck out the Honey, or sweet
juice, not settling or lighting upon the Flower, but doing of it as they fly;
for if they settled, their Legs were two short to suffer them to use their
Tongue; and this I take to be the cause, of their constant taking their
nourishment in flight, and not alighting, or settling upon the flower,

There is a sort of Gnatts, bread in Trees, which in like manner are armed with
long Stings, and can use them siting, because they have long Feet, especially
in the hindmost feet, so that he can fasten his Sting where, and how he
pleases; but the natural short feet of these Butterflyes, hinder their
feeding, save when they are upon the Wing.

This Butterfly is an exceeding swift flyer, he is very frequent in July, in
Gardens amongst Gilly-flowers and Pinks. I didonce take a small Speci^s, of
them exceeding beautiful; in Morgans Garden in London: I us't to call them the
Hawk-Flye, for their exceeding swiftness.

Our Author, in my opinion has well assigned the reason of their Feeding
Flying, to the disproportion betwixt their Legs and Tongue, or Pipe.

Numb^r. 15.
G. P. 3. Tab. P.
The Catterpillar of the 15th. Table, runs swiftly; for every stride is the
whole length of his body, going like a pair of Compasses. It is found for the
most part about the Thlaspi kind of Plants, which kind of Herbs it greedily
devowers: It feeds by Night only, and moves not by day; and although you do
disturb and molest it, yet it will keep it self quiet without any manifest
motion.

It changed the 11^th. of August, 1664. And the first of September it appeared
again, in the shape of the Buutterfly, expressed in the 7^th. Table, of a rapid
flight, which yet it would not be brought to, but by the light of a Candel, or
some such Artificall Light.

In Flying it used a strange motion of its Body, as though it was perpetually
circumvolved, with its Head downwards, and in a Circle.

It Feeds by Night only:] These Animalls, as well as others, have a natural in
stinct, to preserve themselves, and feed only, when they are most secure, and
the Insectivorous Birds at Ro^st.

Number. 16.
G. P. 2 Tab. 16.
The Catterpillar of the 16th. Table, eats Hyssop, and is ^ound chiefly about
that Plant, when in flower, but if you touch the Plant, it falls to the ground,
and thus hides it self.

After I had a long time ^ed this Catterpillar, with Hy^sop, it changed the
7th. of August, and when it had been some days in that condition, Three Worms
broke out through the skin of it; which in a very short moment were changed
into Three Eggs. And out of every one of these Eggs, the 8th. day of September,
came forth a Fly, as I have expressed them exactly in the 16^th. Table, the Fly
lived not above three days.

These were Flesh-flyes, and consequently the Chrysalis was Rotten, and this
History not finished; because we have not the Butterflyes, which in reason ^e
ought to expect, the disguise declaring as much to us. I am at a loss how it
comes to pass, that in our Northen parts of Europe, where such Plants as
Hyffop, etc. Do not naturally grow, there should be found Insects to feed on
them; we must either say, that they came into our parts by degrees, that is the
Plant being cultivated at first, not far off the place, where its Native Soil
is, the Butterfly strayed, and found it out there, and so on; or, (which is
most probable) this Catterpillar will feed of other Plants, as well as Hyssop,
and so the Catterpillar is no Stranger to the Soil, though the Plant be; This
I say is more probable, then that the Butterfly and Plant should both be
Strangers, for I cannot think, that this or any Animal else is Spontaneously
produced by the Plant, or any cause else whatsoever, but the Animal Parant.

Number. 17.
G. P. 1. Tab. 71.
The Catterpillar of the 17th. Table, is all green, like the Curran-tree leaves
it feeds on: it Eats those leaves, beginning in the middle, where it greedily
feeds, but touches not the outsides of the leaves, when full, they lift
themselves up, and then extending themselves they rest; continuing in this
posture three Hours, until the meat be digested, then they excerne, what has
been put over, and fall too again; they never drink as many other
Catterpillars do, that I could observe, therefore must you feed them with fresh
leaves constantly, if you would know what they will come to. It purges its
self from all its excrements (as is the custom of Catterpillars) and began its
change, gathering some leaves I had given it, Glewing them together by a Slimy
humor, (from its mouth) about its body.

This ( Catterpillar) expressed in the Table, remained without motion, from the
4.th of June* till the 5th of May, the Year following, that is a 11 Months and
a Day: at which time came forth a Fly, with a Black body, all but the upper
part of the Tail Yellow. This as soon as it came to Light, rested a while,
until the air had dried and hardened it, and then it pruned its Wings and
slicked its Body over, and prepared its self for Flight,

Our Country People call these kinds of Catterpillars, Surveyours (Geometrae)
because of their Gate, which is like a Pole turned over and over, as when one
measurs Land.

This Fly, is one single prett^ large Ichneumon, or Slender Waspe, and
therefore this History, as well as the precedent, are imperfect; because these
are but By Bir^hs and not the Butterflyes, which ought to be expected, and of
which these Catterpillars, and their Chrysalis are but the disguises.

Section. III.
Of Butter^lyes sitting with Hanging Wings, and clapped to their Bodies, like the
Wings of Birds.

This 3d. Section of Butterflyes is very large and contains the History of a
numerous Tribe: I should have had great satisf^ction, if I could have taken the
Subordinate Genuses, from any differences remarkable in the Butterflyes
themselves, and not have been forced to order them by cer^aine common Notes
Observable in the Disguises of the Catterpillars: But the want of Particular
discriptions, which our Author has wholly omitted, has necessiated me to this
method; from the bare Figures, little of certainty can be gathered. We indeed
Observe the A^tenn^^, of some Butterflyes to be small like Wiers, others
Plumous: Again some to be very full of Feathers upon their Shoulders, others
upon their Heads etc. But these differances are neither certain nor common
enougn: These of the Catterpill^r on the contrary, are more not able, such as
their be Ho^ned, Hary, Naked, Great, Little, etc. At present we m^st be content
with these, which is most pardonable, then the pu^ting the Ca^terpiller in one
Chapte^ (as Muset has done) and the Butterflyes in another, as though they had
little relation to one another.

Number. 18.
God. P. ^. Tab. 1.
The Catterpillar of the 18th. Table, is to be found in Elder Groves, so long
as the leaves are tender, and full of juice, but when they begin to be hard and
Withered by the heat of the Sun, it leaves them and frequents other places, it
seems to be peaceable and Tame, for it resists not, but flies if it be injured.

It began to Change the 6th. of October, and the 25th. of April, the Year
following 1664. It appeared in the shape of a Blew Catterpillar, mixed with a
Redish b^own, in the Hinder-parts, of his Body.

It lived from the 25th. of April, until the 2d. of May, without moving its
Body from the place, and so it died.

But before it died, it laid certain Eggs, of a notable Green color, which our
Peope call Spanish-Green.

The Eggs of Butterflyes, are to be found in their bodies whilst they are in
the Disguise of a Chrysalis, and therefore are undoubtedly essential parts o^
the Female, as much as her Legs and Wings, and in no wise generated by the
Male. As soon as they have thrown off all manner of Disguise, they are ready
for Copulation with the Male; but if they chance to be Unmasked alone; and not
in the company of a Male, they lay instantly their Eggs without Copulation;
though probably such Eggs are not Feconde and will not come to hatch.

Number. 19.
G. P. 3. Tab. L.
The Catterpillar of the 19th. Table eats the Succulent and fresh gathered
leaves of Oziers, these leaves that are white and long. It is a slow goer.

He changed the 10th. of October, 1663. And the first of May, of the Year
following 1694. A very great Butterfly came forth. This Butterfly, touched with
a Pin, fell down Precivitately, like one dead, and wi^ho^^ motion, so that I
thought him dead, of which that I might be certain, I stuck him through with a
Pin, and yet he showed no fignes of life, b^t by and by he Expanded his Wings
and endeavored to Fly away, but he had not strength, he ^ivid until the 11th.
of May, 1664.

Number. 20.
G. P. 1. Tab. 65.
The Catterpillar of the 20th. Table, feeds slowly of the leaves of the Willow,
and is slow of gate, it abstained from Meat the 24th. of August, and began to
Weave certain Threads, but desisted, and often changed its place, until the
14th. of October, at which time it changed its Green Color, into a brown one
and dyed. I think that this Catterpillar abides in hollow Willow Trees, and is
turned into a Butterfly in Spring: but guesses are uncertain, and as yet I
could make noe experiment.

Again of the same. N. 20. B.
G. P. 3. Tab. C.
The Catterpillar expressed in Number 20th. Eats Night and Day of the Whitest
leaves of the Willow, and supper over; he withdraws, and hides his Head like a
Tortoise within his body, least the night Air or Rain should hurt him, after
that I had observed him to abstain from his ordinary food, I put him into a
Glass half filled with Earth, throwing in some Fragments of Willow leaves,
these leaves he forthwith crumbled to dust, and so kneaded them with the Slimy
juice of his Body, that he made him a very convenient place for the Change, the
House was like Willow-wood, but harder far, so that it could scarce be pierced
with a knife, and one would hardly guess a Catterpillar was within it.

Before the change, in the space of two hours, he lost the beauty of his
Color, and was then of a Liver Color brownish: As though he was to dye.

He remained in this Change from the 20th. of August, 1663. until the 11th. of
April 1664. And then came forth of that most hard Shell, a Butterfly of an
Ash Color diluted, whilst he lived, he scarce moved, and yet run thorough with
e Needle, he lived until the 24th. of May.

Again of the same N. 20. c. G. P. 2. Tab. 37.

This is a Rare and unusual Catterpillar, he is for the most part to be found
on the Sand Hills, which lie along the Coasts of Holland and Zealand, and feeds
on the leaves of a kind of Palm (called by our People Duin-Palme,) (perhaps
Myrtus Brabanticae,) this Herb was very grateful to him, but I that dwelt fa^r
off the Sands, could ha^d^y get it, wherefore I taught him to feed of certain
O^ie^s or Willows, which seemed to be soma thing like the Plant, in Color;
^and dryness.

This Catterpillar had two Tails and when he was Vex^d, out of each* Tail he
pu^ forth a Red Sting, which he bent and brandished, trembling as though
angury* and again drew them in, and also he could conningly draw up his Head,
and hide it like Tortoises.

He changed the 4th. of September, under certain Willow leaves, which he had
knit close together by certain Threads of his own Spinning* in the former of
five little Cells, as you see in it expressed in the Table, which when It u^^ed
with a Knife, it felt as hard, as a Stone. In this manner he lay and moved
not, or showed any signs of Life in Nine Months, and Fifteen Days, for the
20th. of June, the Year following, out of the five Cells came forth five Flies:
which Cells when I had opned I found nothing at all in them, not so much as a
Skin, or the Tail or Feet, I wondered all was consumed, I kept these Flies for
some time alive, and when I expressed one of them in the Table, I gave them
their liberty, not thinking it necessary to Paint the rest.

These three Tables of our Authors, I have made one, and put the Histories
together: because in my judgment they are about one Species of Butterfly.

(2) We must commend the industry of our Author in this place, because not
having succeeded, when he first kept the Catterpillar, he (the next time he
lighted upon it) supplied it with Earth and fragments of Leaves, in order to
its more convenient change, and it must be observed, that many Catterpillers
require a Forrian matter to make a Foliculus of; for the security of the
Chrysalis, as Leaves, Earth, etc. Though indeed, others Spinn themselves one,
out of their own Bowels; or use their Hair for that purpose.

(3) The History is complete in the second History* where are the two
Disguises of the Butterfly it self.

The 3d. History presents us with a By-birth, but indeed a very Rare and
curious one: here we note that these five Cells were the Workman-stip of the
five Ichnumon Worms, and very probably they made use ^f the Catterpillar for
stuff to make them Foliculi out off: Just as he says in the 2d. History, the
Catterpillar crumbled the Fragments of Leaves and Earth, and Kneaded them into
a Foliculus, of a strange hardness. He has not Figured that Foliculus in the
2d. Table, but took the Chrysalis o^t of it, and Painted that alone.

We now come to treat of, or order all the not Harie and Tuberous
Catterpillars, of our Author, and such as have Hooks, and Horns, or Bunches
any where about them.

Number. 21.
G. P. 3. Tab. E.
The Catterpillar which you see expressed in the 21th. Table, feeds on Alder
leaves; Upon its back stands up two yellow; Hooks, the rest also of his body is
eged of a pale Yellow; but before the changed, he put on an abscure Green
color, and the two Hooks fell within his body, so that now he was every where
plain and smooth.

He began to change the 6th. of October, 1663. And appeared in the form of a
Butterfly the 27th. of April, the year following, which for the great
diversity of colors, I could scarce describe, it was most lively, and flew the
nights through almost without ceasing, it lived until the 5th. of May, when it
died with extended wings.

These sorts of Catterpillars, with Hooks on the middle of their bodies, I do
not know that I have yet met with, and cannot therefore guess at the use of
them, if it be not for defense only, as the Author expresses it in the next
Histo. ry.

Number. 22.
G. P. 2. Tab. 38.
This Catterpillar of the 22 d. Table, was found in Flanders at de Groeds, a
Village over against Flushing, upon a Willow bough, in that very posture it is
expressed in the Table, it feeds of Willow leaves, but eats very sloly, and
after eating composeth it self again, in the posture you see it Figured, in
the hinder part of its Body represents the Head and Beard of a, Goat, and it
doubls or draws back its foreparts, of or to the hinder parts; when you touch
it, it strikes at you with Head and Tail, as though it was angry: In the Back
it has two Hooks, with which it stoutly defends it self, so that it scares all
Creatures, that sees it: when it eats, you would say its head was bound to its
body, by a slender thread, not unlike the body of a Spider.

The Is It. Of September, it rested and began to change, in the form expressed
in the Table, and after 22 Days, came forth a Butterfly, distinguished with
variety of colors, Elegantly.

This Butterfly, before its death, laid its Eggs of a Green color, in diverse
figures and fashons expressed in the Table, otherwise then the rest of
Catterpillars do.

It lived with me from the 21 st. of September, until the 3 d. of October.

This Butterfly, laid its Eggs in certain broken Linkes, or Chains, as is
expressed in the Table; But I suppose she would have laid them in another
manner, if the Male had first made them Proliffick, however I affirm nothing:
having observed certain Butterflyes Eggs, wrapped and wound in Spirall Lines,
about a Twig; and moreover the Eggs of Froggs, and of some Fish, are Spawned in
Chains.

Number. 23.
G. P. 1. Tab. 33.
The Catter^illar of this 23 d. Table, feeds upon the leaves of the Sallow, it
is rare to be met with, and I nevercou'd find any, but that one only: it daily
required fresh food.

After that I had fed it a whole Month, the knit certain leaves together like a
Net, in which he hid himself.

And then he changed, as I have expressed it in the Table.

After he had had his fill of leaves, (as I said) he changed the 19 th. of
July, and the 3 d. of August came forth a Butterfly painted also in the Table:
which lived six Days without food.

Number. 24.
G. P. 3. Tab. O.
The Green Catterpillar, of the 24th. Table, feeds on Sallow Leaves, until the
end of S^mmer. It begins to Eat at break of Day, and eats with great greediness
5. or 6. Hours without ceasing, or other employment: It never voids its
excrements, unless when new food drives out the old. It cleaves so fast to the
Sallow leaves, that it can scarce be plucked from them; but will suffer it
self first to be plucked in pieces. In the hindmost part of its Body it has a
sharp Pinn or Sting, and Venomous, which it uses (as soon as it is troubled) to
defend it self with, with a swift agitation, and every where; that it may
Wound them that hurts it, with the motion of the Sting.

The Male Catterpillars are Green (as we said) and want those round sports
which look like Eves; the Females are not so Beautiful, but of a more Grayish
color.

Before that these Catterpillars change, they move long and much, and exactly
clean themselves of all Excrements: they make themselves no covering (as all
other Catterpillars are diligently wont to do) but putting off their Hackle,
they are changed into Chrysalis's as is expressed in the Table.

This change happned the 19th. of September, 1663. and the 5th. of May, the
Year following 1664. came forth a lusty Butterfly, which lived till the 14th.
of May fasting.

I could never Observe from these kind of Catterpillars a perfect and complete
Butterfly, but with contracted, and as it were scorched Wings, not to be
expanded, or fit for flight. They are wont to lay their Eggs before they dye.

(1.) I note particularly the observation of our Author of New food driving out
the O^d, which must be either that the intestines are not so very long, and
many as in Sanguineous Animalls; or this is done upon the account of a New
fermentation.

(2:) Its a curious Note, the distin^ion of the Male, and Fe^^le Catterpillars:
this would be certainly known in order to the completing their Historys, for
as Malpigius observes, the Eggs are of one color, when laid after Copplation
and of another without it.

(3ly.) A probable reason why our Author, never could have a complete
Butterfly, of this Kind, was, because he did not furnish the Catterpillar, with
convenient matter for a Foliculus, and so in some measure starved it.

Number. 25.
G. P. 1. Tab. 14.
The Catterpillar of the 25th. Table, feeds of Sallow leaves, it is armed both
before and behind, in the forehead it has a kind of hard Shield, but no Eyes,
that I could Observe, and in the hindermost part of the body, it has a Prick or
sting, hard and stiff, it is of a Green color mixed with Blew, I take it to
be Venomous: if it be touched, it moves that part of the body, which has the
Sting, and does as though it did defend it self with it.

It cleansed it self, and began to change the First of April, in the form
expressed in the Table, in which condition it remained for 55 Days, not
obscur^ly, representing the Face of a Man with a Beard, and in the other parts
a Child in Swaddling Clothes.

The 25th. of May, broke forth a Butterfly, figured in the Table.

This Catterpillar, feeds also of Ligustrum or Primp leaves, and is to be found
about Primp hedges, with us in England: It is a most beautiful Creature.

Number. 26.
G. P. 3. Tab. Y.
I v'st to call the Catterpillar of the 26th. Table the Elaphant because of its
Snout, it feeds of Vine leaves, when it has done feeding it draws up its Head
within its Body, and hides it self like a T^rtoise, its very fearful, for
being touched never so lightly, it trembles and is astonished, enough to cause
the same affections in the beholders. It can turn its Snout very dexterously
every way, and what its lays hold of with it, its hardly to be got from it,
for it has great strength: Its very quick of hearing, for at the least noise
it fears and contracts it self, as I have often tried.

The time of its change approaching, it abstaines from meat, and seeks a fit
place to rest in, and to that purpose I put it some bits of Wood and Vine
leaves, of which and the juice of its Body mixed, it made it self a House, and
changed in it, the 4th. of September, 1665. And lived in it until the 16th. of
April and longer, which thing I observed by mine Eye and Touch, being
uncertain what would become of it.

When I touched it, and put it in the hollow of my Hand, I observed it as cold
as Ice, and yet moved most strongly.

This is most certain (this Animal) did live without food from the 4th. of
September, 1665. until the 16th. of April, 1668. To which its coldness and
continual rest, did seem to conduce very much, from which and the
Tenaciousness of its juice, it would be long in wasting, which thing is also
frequently experienced in other Creatures, which rest in winter, and eat not
till the Spring or summer.

This History is imperfect, there being only the Disguises and not the
Butterfly: I am apt to believe the Chrysalis dyed, by being taken out of its
Foliculus, and therefore in vain the Author expected to see it hatched, or a
Butterfly breakforth.

As to its coldness; I can witness that in the depth of Winter, and in the
very deep Snow, I have found both Catterpillars and Hexapode Worms, lying upon
the Snow, and therefore have crawled out upon it. I say these Catterpillars
were so hard Frozen that thrown against a Glass, they made a sound like
stones; but put under the Glass and set before the Fire, did quickly crawl
about, and bestir themselves nimbly to get away.

Number. 27.
G. P. 3. Tab. V.
This kind of Catterpillar expressed in the 27th Table: Is amongst Corn, and
there feeds, of a certain Bind-weed, ( Haedera minor, called in Dutch, We
wind) and is at least two Hours at one meal: Its excrements are of a
determinate figure, expressed in the Table, it is of diverse colors, with two
black Lines on its back, betwixt which two, is there one of Green, the rest of
its Body is Greenish, in the hinder part of its Body is there a Red and crooked
sharp Horn, and in some places is there a mixture of White and Blew, it is of
a quick Ear and touch, for upon the least noise, it will not move of a long
time. The Author prevented by Death left no more.

This History is confessedly imperfect, there being nothing but the Disguises
of a Butterfly expressed. I could have wished the Author had taken all along
the pains he has here showed, in more carefully describing in words the
Painting of the Catterpillar, but he relied upon his excellent pencill too
much, for he had e'se leisure and opportuuity enough to have done it. This
Catterpillar is Cornigerouse, and therefore we put him amongst his like.

2. As for the determinate Figure of the Excrements of this Catterpillar; if
the Author had well observed it, he might have found that particular common to
many Species of Catterpillars. I take the cause of it to be* the Figure of some
parts of the Colon, or Gut wherein these excrements are baked and molded.

Number. 28.
G. P. 3. Tab. Z.
The Butterfly, of the 28th. Table: was sent from Paris to the Author, for its
beauty and vastness, in which it far exceeds all others, to the end upon
occasion, he might find out his Origin. It was taken in the Kings Garden, and
given to Dr. Borellius, the States Ambassador: Who carefully transmitted it to
him.

In my Judgment this Butterfly will be found to have a Disguise, like some of
the next precedent: And to have been changed from one of the Cornigerous
Catterpillars: but it is improper to talk here of Origin, because it is
perfect of it self, and is the Mother of the Catterpillar, which it is changed
from.

We Proceed in the Histories, of the smooth and not Hairy Catterpillars.

Number. 29.
G. P. 3. Tab. F.
The Catterpillar of the 29th. Table, feeds of Colly-Flowers. One in a corner
hid under a Paper was found dead, out of whose Body the 10th. of September,
1663. 12. Worms came forth, which in the space of about four Hours were turned
into so many Eggs, the 2d. of July, the Year following 1664^ out these 12 Eggs,
came 12 Gray Flies [one of them expressed in the Table.]

Another died the 12th of September, whose relics were changed into a Worm
the 17th. of the same Month, which Worm broke forth of the skin of the said
Catterpillar, with great strength and force.

A 3d. Catterpillar of the same Species, changed the 25th. of September* 1663.
and the 8th. of May, the Year following, it appeared in the form of a
Butterfly, of a slow gate, and no pleasant color, it lived fasting Nine Days.

Note the First Catterpillar, our Author plainly say^, Died, and the Carcass
undoubtedly was Fly-blown, so that the 12 Worms were Maggots, of some small
Fleshflyes and accordingly they proved, one of them being Figured in the Table.

Again we believe the same of the Worm, which broke out of the dead Body of
the other, but the Author being silent, what became of it, we shall not
concern our selves to guess of what Race it was.

Number. 30.
G. P. 1. Tab. 67.
The Catterpillar of the 30th. Table, feeds o^ diverse Herbs, amongst the rest,
it chiefly delighted in Ground Ivy, but it is delicate and choice in its meat,
f^r it will eat none but fresh gathered: it changed its Skin of times, for it
seemed so hard, that the Body being notably increased in bulk, it was necessary
that the skin should be broken; and another grew under it.

Its skin being cast, it did not move for one whole day. nor could it feed,
because of the tenderness of the new skin which was hardened by the Air.

It changed the 5th. of August, as is expressed in the Table, and the 26 of the
same Month came forth a Butterflys figured in the Table.

These Butterflye, are wont to fly about chiefly in the night, but are careful
to avoid the flame of Fire and Candle which thing happens otherwise to the rest
of Butterflyes.

This Butterfly, Lived 6 Days without food.

Note here our Author gives a good reason of the casting of the skins of
Catterpillers, saying that it grew hard and was not ^urther to be extended, so
that of necessity the growth of the Animal cracks it: The like I have observed
in Spiders: This also holds good in the Horns of Animalls, which cast them,
as Staggs: Which when they are at their full growth are deprived of all further
nourishment, become hard, and are suceeded by others which pullulate; the like
is observed in the Hair of Animalls, and the leaves of Plants.

It is no less certain that all the Skins are one under the other, each
successively Pullulating, as in the leaves of Plants.

Number. 31.
G. P. 3. Tab. 25.
I have often observed the seed of H^liotropium sh^^ upon the ground, to be,
preserved all Winter, thoug^ never so Cold and to Germinate in the Spring: The
Catterpillar, of the 31st. Table, eats this Herb, it lies under ground ith
Day, and comes not out until the Evening to seek food, I kept this
Catterpillar under a Glass, but I experienced that it never moved, or eat any
thing ^ave ith evening.

After that it had duly cleansed it self, it began its change the 17th. of
August, and remained in that condition, until the 9th. of June, in the Year
following, so that it was like a dead thing without food almost 10 Months.

Afterward came forth a Butterfly, marked on each Winge, with the Letter O.
And Figured in the Table.

Here we must note, how necessary it is, in order to the completing of
Natural History, that our Naturallist should be well skilled in Plants: Viz.
The Food of most Insects. Heliotropium, is a Name given to many Plants, as to
one Species of Tithemall, also to the great Indian Marigolde; again to other
Plants, Famous for Dying a Blew Color, etc. So that the Author has left us in
the Dark for the Food of this Insect; for want of a more particular Title of
this Plant.

Number. 32.
G. P. I. Tab. 42.
As soon as Mulbury-leaves are spread, the Catterpillar (called Bombyx) of the
32 Table, is Hatched, and feeds on them, although in their Infancy they will
Eat Wild ^^chory and Lettice, for the Mulbury is late in putting forth its
leaves.

Before that these Catterpillars makes Silk, they cleanse themselves from all
Excrements.

One Hundred and Threescore Catterpillars (160.) are wont to make one Ounce and
80. Grains of Silk.

The Catterpillar, Figured in the Table, changed the 14th. of September, and
the 24th. of the same Month, that is in the space of 10 Days, it broke forth a
white Butterfly.

Before these Butterflys Couple, both Male and Female are exactly purged, and
then they are exactly Coupled by the Tails end; after that the Female lays a
160. Eggs which are all Infaecund, and wither to nothing unless the Female
couple with the Male.

Sometimes they do again Couple after Laying, but they Lay no Eggs, for the
Butterflys are wont to Dye within Fourteen Days.

See MALPIGIVS DE BOMBYCE.

Number. 33.
G. P. 2. Tab. 20.
The Catterpillar of the 33d. Table, Eats Plumiree leaves it^s a little eater,
and sleeps much, you will often find Two of them together at rest with their
Heads inward bent to the middle of their Bodies.

Both of them two companions began to change the 25th. of May, as is expressed
in the Table, and from each of them came forth a Butterfly, after 31 Days,
that is the 26th. of June, of a Yelloish color, and which would not fly in the
Day time.

These kind of Butterflyes, seem to be weak fighted; they care not for flying,
but runn swiftly, and they runn into some dark corner, not caring for the
light.

They live of Honey gathered out of Flowers, and therefore have a long Tongue
to fetch it out of the Bottoms of flowers.

This Tongue they carefully, when they runn, roll up, to preserve it from
injuries, they lie in dark places in Winter time.

Number. 34.
G. P. 2. Tab. 24.
The Catterpillar of the 34th. Table, Eats of the leaves of that Wormwood
chiefly, which grows upon the Sea banks, I found it sitting upon that Plant, in
an Island of Flanders, near Axella, and Nevza, they are their whole Body
throughout, exactly of the color of Sea Worm- wood, they are fierce, and
Subtle and strike at whatever touches them, they hold not very fast, they runn
swiftly where they feed they scatter much Worm wood leaves, and when they are
neverso lightly touched (of which they are exceeding impatient, tremble and
fear) they cast themselves down also, and hide themselves there, where you can
scarce discern them; because they are most exactly colored like the Plant they
feed on: they save their Head by covering of it with the hinder part of their
Body: in the Face they are tender (as I have experienced) and soon killed with
a small hurt in that part, and therefore are very careful of it.

Again I do wonder at their so well enduring of cold and wet that you can^
carce kill them, and although they seem to be quite stormed, yet they will
revive, for I cast some of these Catterpillars into cold water, and kept them
12 Hours in it, then I took them forth stiff with cold and extended, so that
I could not discern the least signs of Life or motion in them; but exposing
them to the Sun, within half an hour they came to themselves and could not be
discerned from their fellows that had not beeu steeped. If you in like manner
Drown Fly^s, in Bear or Water, and let them lie in it all Night, and having
taken them out, sprinkle them well over with the Powder of Chalk, they will by
and by creep away, which seemed Dead, the heat of the Chalk which I look upon
as a kind of unquenched Lime, put Life into the Flies, as the heat of the Sun
into the Catterpillars, the Sun causing the Vital juice to return into, and
pass the benumbed Members.

Further it is to be observed, that this steeping in cold Water, gain these
Catterpillars a good stomach, and made them eat more greedily then their
fellows which were not served so, as men seem to have better stomachs in
Winter, then in the heat of Summer.

These Catterpillars, make themselves commodious nests to change in, of
Wormwood scattered upon the ground, and shutting up themselves, they change
therein.

This Catterpillar changed the 4th. of September, and lay in that condition
(figured in the Table) 10 Months, 18 Days.

And the 19th. of July, came forth a Butterfly, of a wonderful shape, and
accouterment: it lived not above four Days, for I knew not what to feed it
with, that it would Eat.

Number. 35.
G. P. 2. Tab. 27.
The Catterpillar, of 35th. Table, delights to feed of Brambles, and of the
Vine, he is slow of motion and gate, and yet will seem displeased if you
injure him, and defend himself against violence; I fed this the space of four
Months, which time being over, he made himself a little House of fair Paper,
the leaves of Balm and Spittle of his own, to change more safly in.

He changed the 12th. of September: and remained in that condition Figured in
this Table, Eight Months complete no more nor less: for the 12th. of May, the
Year following came forth a Butterfly, not unbeautifull, but impatient of
Hunger, for I knew not what to Feed it with, and Dyed within one Day.

Number. 36.
G. P. 2. Tab. 28.
The Catterpillar of the 36th. Table, is not given to any peculiar food, as
most other Catterpillars are, but Eats of every Herb you give it, it greedily
Eats Rose leaves, Mints, wild Awrache, and many other Herbs; he never stired
ith Day time, but as often as I observed him at night, I found him Eating, and he
seldom left any thing of that I gave him: He retired when, he had done Eating^
under a Dry leaf, rather then a Green one.

This Catterpillar when he had spent a whole Day in Creepeing about, he rested
under certain leaves; and there changed the 23d. of September, and remained in
that condition, Figured in the Table, 9 Months and 4 Days; for the last of
June, the year following, came forth a most beautiful Butterfly, painted with
diverse colors wonderfully.

There are some of these Catterpillars, twice as big and as long as others, I
took a lesser Catterpillar of this sort, and I fed it long, but as the season
of the Year de-clined, and leaves grew hard, he could not Eat them, he not
withstanding had endeavored to change, but nothing came of him, and I left my
experiment.

But standing at my Doors, set about with Elmes, I saw a great company of
Catterpillars upon an Elm bough upon which without doubt their Mothers had
laid them.

These little Catterpillers let themselves down, by certain single Threads out
of their mouths, they were all exceeding Green, and Pelluced, I took them and
fed them with Elm leaves under a Glass, they all Housed themselves with houses
of Sand and Spittle, against the cold and of winter. In Spring I let them seek
their own food.

I have not all the satisfaction I could wish, in Translating this History, I
find it so imperfect and disordered: undoubtedly the Latin Translator is much
to blame, I have mended the Text, where it speaks of the great Catterpillars
being the Mother of the little ones; then which nothing can be more absurd:
again we have here an Aurelia, put for a Butterfly etc. If it were matter of
Fact and possitively asserted by our Author, as his observation, I should not
have alter it, but its expressed, as a conceit only.

Number. 37.
G. P. 2. Tab. 31
The Catterpillars of the 37th. Table Are rare: I found this in a Sand-hill,
the 23d. of June, sitting upon Grass, which grows there (called in Dutch Duin
grass) and I took it home with me to try what could become of it.

The Day after a Little Animal like a Beetle, crept forth of the hinder parts
of its body, Figured in Table, 37.

The Catterpillar after this refused all food, and contracting and winding its
body, it changed at length.

The little Animal lived, but stirred not much, only shaked it self, it
changed snake like, and the skin being cast, it was of a Golden color on the
fore part of its Body, and russet the hinder, it had six Feet, and two little
Horns, it eat Rose leaves, and the flowers of Elder.

The Catteryillar, the Mother of this Beetle, changed the First of July, and
remained in that condition until the 21st. of the same Month, then^ a
bea^tifull Butterfly came forth which lived 9 Days fasting.

The birth of this Beetle, is an odd Phenomenon, I am of the Opinion that here
is a great mistake, because the like once happened tome: That I thought to have
observed a Beetle borne of a Catterpillar; but I question my own observation.
The Catterpillar came to good; and here is the Butterfly perfect. I guess this
Beetle might well be by accident, and unobserved brought in, and laid in the
same place, where the Catterpillar was kept; and so I formerly thought of my
own observation: But I affirm nothing.

Number. 38.
G. P. 2. Tab. 32.
The Catterpillar of the 38th. Table fed of Marigold leaves, or flowers it puts
off its skin four times, and in the scarcity of Food they Eat one another; I
have indeed Observed other Catterpillars, to Eat one the other, but those do it
greedily.

After I had Fed this 14 Days, and that he had cleansed himself of excrements,
he changed the 9th. of August, as is Figured in the Table, and after 18 Days,
the 27th. of August, came forth a Butterfly, having six Golden spots upon his
Four Wings: The Four lesser Spots were upon each wing one, the 2 bigger Spots
on the upper pair of wings only: This Butterfly lived a Hungry Life until the
6th. of September, I not knowing what to give it to eat.

We observe in this History that Butterflyes, when Catterpillars, are unlike
themselves, not only in the disguise, but manners two; they then Eat one the
other, but are ^eery peaceful, when in a Perfect state, and unmaskt, Spiders
will Eat Spiders, etc.

I say again I could have wished the Author had taken the care of discribing to
us the Paintings and Color of the Insects, which he delineated with his
Pencill.

Number. 39.
G. P. 2. Tab. 33.
The Catterpillar, of the 39th. Table: Has his Origin from rotten Willow, and
is found lying in the Bodies of those Trees.

In this Tree is found a certain fat juice, not unlike Turpentine, for of the
Saw-dust of Willow a Vernis is wont to be made by boiling.

This Catterpillar lives of this fat juice, and is to be found in the marrow of
that Tree, both Summer and Winter, for our Dutch-Boors, when they cleave them
in Winter, often light upon them: But to have their change they must either
keep them in a warmer place, or not take them out of the Wood.

These Catterpillars are of a redish color, like boiled Cray-fish, and they
smell rank.

In the Months of June and July, I have met with them creeping in the
Highways, then seekeing out a convenient place for to change in; which choice
is an old decayed Willow, for its softness, and for its food.

Concerning the manner of the Propogation of these Catterpillars, it is
obscure, and not fully known to me, and cannot easily be found out, for on the
outside of the Tree are no chinks or cracks, no (not small) holes, and yet
Catterpillars are to be found within.

This is most certain, that I have found these often in the Pith of Willows,
and it is likely they are there generated of corrupt Wood by heat, as other
Animalls, which are spontaneousely begot.

Also having very often tried to keep them to know what would become of them,
they all Dyed, and when I did stop up their Dead Bodies in Juggs, I had a
multitude of little Flies, which I say without doubt were Generated of heat and
corrupted matter.

When these great Catterpillars are at their full growth and bigness, they seek
out where to rest, in order to their change, it changed in an Old and dried
Willow Tree the beginning of June, as is Figured in the Table, and the 23d. of
July, came forth a great Butterfly, which moved not out of its place, it was
Hatched in; and Dyed there after Eight Days, shutting its Wings.

This very Catterpillar, I have also found in the Body of an Oak Tree, new
Feld and Sawn a sunder, wherein it makes holes, you may turn your Finger in:
The Romans had a way to feed these Fat, and did eat them as a delitious Food,
they called them Cossi. It has a very rank and strong smell, is a little hairy,
and of a Reddish, but pale color.

2d. The remarke of Willow Sawdust affording a refine, is curiouse and the
first time, that I met with it in any Author, Pliny (lib. 16. c. 18.) says the
Gauls had a way of extracting a Bitumen from Birtch, which is as improbable,
however to this purpose some of the Old Trees we dig up out of our Mountanous
Mosses in the West-rideing of Yorkshire, are certainly no other then Birtch,
and when dry do Bvrne with as lasting a Flame, like Firr-Tree splinters, which
gives the occasion of calling them Firr-wood.

3d. As to the Spontaneous Generation of this Catterpillar, and other Insects,
I have declared my opinion in the Negative. This is most certain, that these
Cossi are hatched of Eggs laid by their Animal Parents, and that these very
little Worms are capable of piercing the Tree, by little and little, that is as
they Eat, that probably these little Holes grow up again, after they are once
fully entered, at least so as not to be visible, but to a very dilligent
enquiry. Again probably they change not, but are in the Disgvise of a
Catterpillar, for many Years, which is agreeable to my own observations, all
which things render the Observation very tedious, but I little doubt, the truth
of it, and that this Catterpillar is propagated by its Animal parents, the
Butterflys: as all other Catterpillars are.

Number. 40.
G. P. 2 Tab. 3
The Catterpillar. of the 40th. Table.: I took the 13th. of December, and fed
it with Sallow leaves (its usual Food) as long as I could find any of them;
but when I could get no more of those leaves it fasted all Winter; but it
Daiely shefted its place, its life and motion were so weak, as scarcely
perceiveable.

The 24th. of March, I offered it the tender Buds of Sallow, but it Eat not:
the 2d. of April, I put again before it Sallow leaves, and then it Eat them,
for then they were bigger, and more Nourishing; the same thing I observed in
other Catterpillars, not one only; that they abstained from tender young Herbs;
but eat them greedily, when a little more grown up.

The 6th. of April, holding fast by the feet upon the edge of a piece of
Paper, it crept out of its skin; that I seemed to have a Catterpillar upon the
Paper, for it was just like (as to color) the skin it crept out off.

When it cast this skin it parted with an Egg of the same bigness, that Ants
Eggs are usually of. The 14th. of May, is cast another skin, and again parted
with another Egg: Both the Eggs came to nothing.

The Catterpillar changed the 13th. of June, as is Figured, and after 10 Days
came forth a Butterfly, which fasted Seven Days, and Dyed.

Note, that is no unusual thing with these kind of Animalls; I mean
Catterpillars, to go on, or suspend their Eating, and consequently their
groth, as was observed.

2d. Here indeed is a per^ect change, and a By-birth besides, I guess the
By-birth to be the Chrysalis of Ichneumons, because the Catterpillar lived: And
perhaps from this Observation we may guess something of the place of Ichneumons
Worms ^eeding; which is probably not within the Body of the Catterpillar, but
betwixt the skin or the Exuviae only.

For here every time the Catterpillar casts a skin, it parted with an
Ichneumon, and the reason (why these Ichneumon Chrysalis are Figured as
Foliculi, and so first appeared: whereas others most usually Pierce the
Catterpillar in the form of Worms, and change afterward) may I say well, be
the Catterpillars fasting all Winter: so that the Catterpillar not haeving cast
all the skins to the last, these Worms could not break forth: Or were not fit
and ripe so to do, but spun themselves Foliculi within the Catterpillar, before
their time, and so came to nothing.

Thus far the smooth and not Hairy Catterpillars whose Histories are more
per^ect, that is having both the Disguises Figured and the Butterfly two. Here
follow the less per^ect Histories (those in which the Figurs of the Aurelia's
are only omitted) of the large sort of smooth Catterpillars.

Number. 41.
G. P. 1. Tab. 14.
The Catterpillar of the 41st. Table, feeds on the Leaves of Bursa Pastoris and
Senecio: Although most Catterpillars feed on the leaves of Herbs, and are
therefore to be found upon them, yet this Catterpillar of the 41st. Table, lies
hid underground oath day time, and comes not out until the Evening; and Eats as
much ith night, as is sufficient for all the day, like Batts.

This Catterpillar changed the 28 of April, and remained so until the 9th. of
June, when a Butterfly came forth which appears not in the Day, but seeks his
food in Gardens amongst the Flowers.

History. 42.
G. P. 1. Tab. 30.
The Catterpillar, of the 42th. Table. eats the Leaves of Violets. If it happen
(when two or more are fed together) that one of them change early before the
rest, and there be a want of meat, the Catterpillar not yet changed will
deuower the ( Aurelias) which it may well do, these being not in a condition
to resist and move.

This Catterpillar changed the 13th. of October, and continued in that
condition until the 6th. of June the year following, at which time came forth
a Butterfly of a Bluish color Figured in the Table.

Number. 43.
G. P. I. Tab. 37.
Although flowers are not much infested with Catterpillars, yet are they not
free from them, the Catterpillars of the 3d. Table. chiefly Eats Gilliflowers,
I know by experiance that the Catterpillar lies under ground all Day, and comes
not out before Sun sets.

He changed the 30th. of July, and continued so until the 23d. of September,
and then a Butterfly came forth of a Redish color,: Figured in the Table.

Naked Catterpillars, are a more acceptable Food to Birds, then such as are
Hairy, as I have ^ound by experience in feeding Red-breasts: I guess the
reason to be, that the Hair is noxious to their stomachs. And indeed, it is my
opinion, that the Vesicateing faculty of Insects is much more in the Hair;
then in any other part: I having Blown into my Boxes, where sometimes I kept a
sort of Hairy Cimices, had in a few Minutes after all my Face Blistered. These
Naked and therefore more inocent Catterpillars, by the instinct of Nature seek
to preserve themselves, by getting under Ground in the Day time, when the Birds
are stirring.

Number. 44.
G. P. 1. Tab. 56.
The Catterpillar of the 44th. Table, feeds of Dogsmercury, as soon as i^
perceives any thing it is not u'st to, it casts it self upon the ground, and
lye^s round in Ball, as though it was Dead. -- It changed the 30th. of July,
and the 26th. of August, came forth a Butterfly, fig in the Table, of a rare
shape and color; the fore part of its Body was Hooded as it were, it lived
long without Food, and was very fearful.

What the Plant Mercurialis may be I cannot guess, many there are that bear
that name, as Bonus Henricus, Dogs mercury, etc.

Number. 45.
G. P. 1. Tab. 56.
The Catterpillar, of the 45th. Table, Eats the leaves of Lovage, only ith
Night, never o'th Daytime, I found it lying in the cracks of a Chery-tree, it
changed the site of its Body often in the Day time, it us't to lift up its
body, as though it looked about it watchf^lly.

Before it changed, it cast its skin, with great difficulty, Sweating all over
small watery drops: having a new skin it rested for a time, and changed the
first of June, and the first of July came forth a dark colored Butterfly.

Malpigius, has well compared the casting of skins in Catterpillars, to the
breeding of Teeth in Children; because both are often accompanied with
dreadful Symptoms.

Number. 46.
G. P. 1. Tab. 60.
The Catterpillar of the 46th. Table, I Fed the space of two Months, with
Ground Ivy in Dutch Onderhave. Before it began to change, It purges it self,
and changed the 28th. Day of April, and a very Beautiful Butterfly came forth
the 26th. of May, Figured in the Table, it had so elegant a luster, that it
could not be Painted without Guilding, it bears two equally long Plumes upon
the Head, it is wonderfully adorned about the Eyes, and Armed, under the Eyes
appear two Teeth, it Lived Three Days without food.

I understand not what our Author, means by the two Teeth under the Eyes of the
Butterfly; This is a mistake I guess: Butterflyes, indeed have a Tongue, Trunk,
and hollow Pipe by which they Feed on Flowers: But I am yet ignorant of their
having Teeth.

Number. 47.
G. P. 1. Tab. 61.
The Catterpillar, of the 47th. Table: Is very curious and delicate in its
Food, which are the leaves of the CherryTree.

It changed the 6th. of June, and the 14th. of the same Month came forth a
Butterfly Figured in the Table, of an unpleasant color, and Beggar-like dress,
it lived not long, sad and moving little.

This is a very quick change, the Butterfly throwing of the disguise of an
Aurelia in Eight Days, this was in the heat of Summer, Malpigius observes, the
Butterfly of the Silkworm, not to do it in the hottest season in less time
then 10 Days, I would have it tried whether or no it would succeed, that if a
Chrysalis, change late ith Year, was put in a warm place, immediately after its
change, it would soon throw off that disguise, and become a Butterfly, the
place might be insted of an Elaboratory, or Glassehouse: All the parts of the
Butterfly are budded in the Chrysalis; But are not sprouted, Explicate, and
hardened.

We come in the next place to such Historys, of the large smooth Catterpillars,
where we find either the change imperfect, that is some by birth, Figured in
stead of the Butterfly, or the Catterpillar, only, and no Aurelia, by Birth or
Butterfly at all.

Number. 48.
G. P. 1. Tab. 18.
The Catterpillar of the 48th. Table: Eats Violetleaves, it can hardly endure
the Sun beams, and therefore gets under Ground, it can hardly be found because
it is green, like the leaves it feeds on, it creeps fast enough; save that when
it perceives any thing, it is not us't to; it moves not, but lies as though it
were Dead.

After that it had exactly cleansed it self of all excrements, it changed, the
4th. of September, and abode in that condition without Meat or motion, to the
9th. of May, the Year following, at which time came forth a Fly, Figured in the
Table.

This is an ordinary Flesh-fly, and therefore the Aurelia was Carrion and
putrid, when the Fly fed upon it. To know when a Chrysalis is alive, is by
touching the Ta^le of it, for although it have no local and progressive
motion, while in that state, yet it can wag that part very briskley: As to
Aurelia's fasting so long; as such they must fast having no Organs to eat, and
being in disguise; but whether thy are not Fed, by a nourishment equivalent to
that of Infants in the Womb, Is to be inquired after.

Number. 49.
G. P. 1. Tab. 19.
The Catterpillar of the 49th. Table: I fed 13 Days with the Leaves of Willow
trees, when it began to Abstain from Meat, it turned and tossed every way with
great anxiety, and labor, and then it gently reposed and changed the 17th. Day
of July, and the 20th. Day of August, came forth a Yellow Fly, not unlike a
Be: Figured in the Table.

We have said that Ichneumons arc of the Wasp kind, it is therefore no wonder
that some sort of Wasps or Be, near alike in shape to that which we vulgarly
own and call Wasps, should be nurished after the same manner, that is, should
make the bodies of Catterpillars, the place of their nourishment, if not the
matter too, as in this By-Birth: This is yet a great mystery to us after what
manner, and on what these Wasp-Wormes feed within the Bodies of Catterpillars;
the Anxiety of the Catterpillar in its change argued the troublesome Guest, it
had in its Body.

Numb^r. 50.
G. P. 1 Tab. 58.
The Catterpillar of the 50th. Table: I for some time fed it with Elm leaves,
when it creeps, it is twice as long, as when it rests.

It changed the 9th. of September, and did continue in that condition until
the 24th. of May, the Year following, at which time came ^orth an odd shaped
Fly.

This Fly is a very ^ierce enemy to Spiders, and by a singular antipathy
persues and kills them; whereas other Flies are taken in Spiders webs and eaten
by them: I have experienced that these kind of Flies, whilst Spiders are in the
middle of their Nets, and there expect the coming of Flies, they seize upon the
Spiders and wound them mortally; the Spider himself thus wounded, cast
himself upon the Ground by a thread; this Fly follows, and breaks every leg of
the Spider, one after the other, then he glories in a full Victory, and often
goes above the Spiders body as it were rejoicing, I have Observed this thing
thrice in doing, and then I saw the Fly carry away the Spider on its Wing.

This By-birth is an Ichneumon: That is, a Wasp with a slender body: its
killing the spider is very remarkable, and I have elsewhere (in the
Philosophical Transactions) Registered an observation of these kind of Waspes,
laying their Eggs within the cakes of Spiders Eggs, and that when Hatched, the
Wasp-worms do feed upon the substance of the Spiders Eggs, and do inprocesse of
time, in the same Spiders webbs change into Aurelia's, and are thencc changed
into Ichneumons of their own Species, from whence we learn the confidence of
these kind of Insects: Which are secure from Spiders, and therefore may well
put other Insects, such as Catterpillars, less able to defend themselves, to
what service, and use they please, making their Bodies Nurseries of their Young.

Number. 51.
G. P. 2. Tab. 25.
The Catterpillar of the 51st. Table: Feeds of wild Aurach, and is of the (
Green) color of the Plant; its very slow in eating and creeping, and every way
a sluggish Animal: It casts its skin like Serpents, or the Silkworme four
times, and had four several shapes, upon its casting its skin, which happened
thus, viz. When it had don eating, out of the body of the Catterpillar came a
not-very-little worm, somewhat flat, and shaped like a Flesh ^aggot: the worm
crept forth the 12th. of February, about ^oure in the after noon, this Worn
incessantly crept up, and down without eating or drinking for Fourteen Hours;
but in the mean time by little and little lost its color, and its skin grew
harder, for defense perhaps against the coolness of the air and enemies; and
now creeping no longer, it rold its bent body, and put on an obscure color,
and then languishing, it seemed to fall of eating, but not greedily: the next
day it seemed to Die, there being no signs of life, or motion in it; but it
continually rested till the later end of September: At which time came forth a
Fly, rarely to be met with; with long^^h legs, and flat feet: I believe this an
Amphibious creature, and to live in the Water as well as in the Air: this Fly
had a great Head, of an unusual shape, it laid mosty on its back, and
therefore I have so Figured him; he eat nothing that I offered him, and died
the 3d. of October.

It will be a hard matter, for any man to make sense of this History, and
undoubtedly the diligent Author, had much wrong done him, by the ignorance of
the Lattin Interpreter, for to omit other things, what shall we make of the
XXII. Calends. October. The truth is the Animal is very odly described, and
Figured, it should be a Waspe by all circumstances, and especially in that it
has 4 Wings.

Again it could be no Flesh-Maggot; because the Catterpillar was not carrion;
but alive, at that time of the eruption of this Worm. The Author hints, a
solution by thinking it an Anomalous, or Amphibious Creature. I affirm
nothing, but that it was a By-birth; so the casting of Four Skins is false.

Number. 52.
G. P. 1. Tab. 62.
I could find nothing that this Catterpillar of the 52d. Table would eat,
perhaps because he had left off feeding, and was ready to change.

He began very Anxiously to toss and roll, turning and winding his body every
way: by and by, there was an eruption of certain drops of water or sweat out of
his, body all which drops, I saw change in the space of 12. Hours, into living
Catterpillars (Erucas) but they all perished with their Mother, for my want of
knowledge of their food in one days time.

Its very frequent with our Author, to think that Dead which sensibly moves
not: I am of the opinion that this Bybirth were the worms of an Ichneumon: And
that these Worms after eruption changed into Aurelia's: Which was perhaps the
way they perished; compare this History, with the Cabbage Catterpillars above,
History the 7th. of our method.

Number. 53.
G. P. 3. Tab. T.
I fed the Catterpillar of the 53d. Table: with Alder and Paretree leaves from
the 28th. of May: when it had Eaten enough, it fastened it self to the sides of
a leaf, lifting up his head, at Sun set it drew in its head and slept all
night; but some of these Catterpillars, will sleep 17. or 18. hours together,
on the contrary others will creep up and down two Days and two Nights without
food or resting; the hinder or lower parts of this Catterpillar Body are
pellucid, they fight desperately together some times; [ The Author left no
^urther.

We have now done with all the greater sorts of Smooth Catterpillars, as well
which the Author left us perfect, as the more imperfect Historys also. Here
follow in the nex place, the lesser Species of smooth Catterpillars, and we
shall observe the same order in them, which we have done in greater, that is,
first to range the more perfect and complete Historys, where we find the
Butterfly, and both the Disguises Figured.

Number. 54.
G. P. 1. Tab. 9.
The Catterpillar, of the 54th. Table Feeds of the leaves of Ragwort: It is a
Black and Yellow color and smooth, in the month of July, it cleaves to Bents
or straws, and hides it self in a skin, for matter, like Yellow Silk.

After that I had fed him with the said herbs 8 Days, he changed the 24th. of
July, and lay as dead in that condition, until the 8th. of May, the year
following, and then came forth a Butterfly partly Black, and partly Read, not
unelegant, Figured in the Table: the Butterfly, retained the color of the
Catterpillar, save that the Yellow in the Catterpillar was changed into Red in
the Butterfly, it lived without meat 23 Days, and dyed after having ejaculated
its Seed.

This Catterpillar is common and well known, I have had some of them out of
whose bodies broke forth certain small Ichneumon Worms, spining very ^ white
Foliculi.

Number. 55.
G. P. 1. Tab. 68.
The small Catterpillar of the 55th. Table: Feeds on Elder leaves, and roles up
those leaves like a Funnell, making it self a House in them against Rain,
Sun, and Birds, and for this reason also feeds only in the night time.

It changed the 22 of November, 1657. And continued as is Figured in the Table,
until the 21st. of July, 1658. Then came forth a Butterfly, Figured also in
the Table, very pretty and elegantly marked.

Number. 56.
G. P. 2. Tab. 1
The Catterpillar of the 56th. Table: Feeds upon the leaves of Winter Roses,
but will not touch any flowers or leaves else, this is a nimble Catterpillar,
and very sensible and crafty, I speak nothing but what I have seen and tried.
This Catterpillar, (as I have often tried) would not be moved at all, if the
Wind blew the leaves it fate upon; but if I moved the air with my hand it
would immediately cast it self down upon the ground, by a thread of its mouth,
for to save its self from the fall.

A^mongst the leaves, it ^eeds of, it is wont to make it self a House,
elegantly knit of its own Weaving and in this it changes, which it did the
20th. of May, as is Figured in the Table, and so continued until the 12th. of
June; then there came forth a Butterfly, which lived fasting to the first of
July.

Number. 57.
G. P. 2. Tab. 4.
The Catterpillar of the 57th. Table, is wont to feed of Elm leaves, it makes
it self a pretty kind of Nest, fastening a thread to the one side of the leaf,
and then to the other, and so brings both sides together, Knitting them close
leaving an open passage at both ends; it creeps both backwards and forwards
alike: If you touch it, it casts it self upon the ground swiftly by a thread,
and does Dart its Body swifter then an Eale, perhaps to strike terror into
those Enemies that follow him.

I have two Catterpillars of the Species, one of them changed the 2d. of June,
as is Figured in the Table, there came forth a Butterfly Figured in the Table,
the 9th. of July, which lived fasting 10, Days, I guess this to be a Male the
other bigger bodied Catterpillar lived until the 3d. of June, it was full of
little Worms, which without doubt were the death of it.

As Worms are the Death of Children, according to the opinion of both Ancient
and Modern Physicians; So ^2. Little Worms, broke forth of the dead Body of
it: The 5th. of June, each of which Worms as soon as out of the Body of the
Catterpillar, fell to work and made themselves a Net, under which each made it
self an Egg of its own Weaving. The 19th. of July, out of these Eggs came
forth 32 little Flies, which I kept alive a long time with Suggar: But at
length I gave them their liberty suspecting that I should else kill them, if
these Eyes had been a little biggar, I had Figured them in the Table, but they
were scarce visible.

These Flies were a By-birth, and undoubtedly Ichneumons, because they Spun, as
soon, as they came to light.

Number. 58*
G. P. 2. Tab. 7.
The Catterpillar of the 58th. ^ Table, are very noxious, and feed of tender
Rose buds, they eat out the substance of the Bud, and do knit the leaves
together very artificially, for shelter against the Sun: This Worm is from a
fat juice Hatched by the Sun and Dew: After long observation, and many
unsucsesfull trials (for this Catterpillar is not easily brought to change by
our feeding) I found that it changed as is Figured in the Table: The 1st. of
June, and was covered as with a white sheet, the 21st-of June came forth a
Butterfly, which as soon as borne stood with erect wings, then it set a running
swiftly with wings aloft, then it leaps up like a Grass-hopper, and at last
rested quietly, it dyed within five Days for want of Food.

It is ill guessed of our Author, to think any thing can be begot of a fat
juice, etc. There is but one way, that of Animal Parents.

Number. 59.
G. P. 2. Tab. 9.
The Catterpillar of the 59th. Table, feeds of Bramble leaves, they come of
Eggs, Hatched the beginning of May,, and lived upon thedry leaves of Bramble,
by the Butterfly their Mother: For an Egg so laid, produced the Catterpillar
Figured in the Table, which I fed as soon as Hetched with Bramble leaves, from
the 6th. of May, until the 3d. of June, when it began to change, making it
self a place to secure it lelfe in, of laeves knitted (...) and then changed,
the next Day, as is Figured in (...) Table: The 20th. of June came forth a
Butterfly, which new Hatched, lay like a dead creature, but by and by flew like
an Arrow out of a Bow.

These Butterflyes, are hard to be taken abroad, being of a swist and cunning
flight: they sit under the leaves when weary: They abide col^e well; for I have
also found them in the middle of Winter under Bramble leaves, this Butterfly
lived 18 Days fasting with me.

Number. 60.
G. P. 2. Tab. 12.
The small Catterpill^r of the 60th. Table, are ever found alm^st within the
Flowers, or Blossoms of the Cherry, Apl^ or Pare^^ee, and destroy much, and
cannot easi^y be driven thence, but by showers, they can endure both hear, and
cold, and well know how to defend themselves from the harm of either; they
Knit and close up the Blossoms they eat, and feed most in the cool of the
Evening or Morning, and that for 14 Days at least.

They are bread by a moist wind, and as soon as borne do destroy, and eat the
said Blossoms like a Gangreen; the watter out of which they are bread, is a
moist cloud like Honey dew, which by the scorching of the Sun, and the native
heat of the Trees, is turned into live Worms, which our Dutch Boors call
Woolves.

The 18th. of May, this Catterpillar changed, and the 10th. of Iu^e came forth
a Butterfly, quiet for two hours after it was borne: which as soon at its wings
were dry, let fall one drop of water and flew away.

In the Morning you will find of these Butterflys, sitting on Paretree
flowers, and sucking Dew thence, but in Winter they hide themselves in Stables,
and Grainaries for warmth, they are very fearful, and scarce fly away unless
much urged: This Catterpillar was of old called by the Dutch Boors* De Woolfe.

Our Author here also follows the vulgar opinion, as well as name, concerning
the breed of these Worms; but his own Observation of the suruiving of these
Butterflys all Winter, were enough to evince the contrary, that they breed the
Worms: Compendious expedients to rid a Fruit Tree of them, were well worth the
invention; in the mean time, it is as well worth our pains, the picking these
out of Blossoms betimes, as the weeding of Corn is. And my reason is, because
they are bred but once in a season or about a time; and therefore if you rid
the Fruit once of them, the Fruit is secure of them ever after. But of these I
purpose to say more in an other place.

Number. 6^.
^^ P. 3. ^^b. 13.
The Catterpillar of the 61st. Table, feeds only on the Herb Calamin^ha, it is
always wet, and leaves a shineing slimy tract after it, where it has, crept
like a Snaile: its a fearful and timorous Animal, and hides it self under
the leaves of Mint, and often changes its station, it feeds ith night, but
never ith Day time, and with its body in an erect posture, as one that is very
circumspect and wattchfull to avoid danger: when it goes, it makes have.

The Titmise, or little Birds (Pari) devower these Insects, and therefore they
seldom appear, and are not to be driven from the places they hide themselves
in, but by violence.

The Catterpillar Figured in the Table, abstained from meat the 15th. of
October, and made it self a little house of sand and slime, and loosing its
color it changed the 26th. of March, as is Figured in the Table, and the 13th.
of June, came forth a Butterfly very notably marked with spots, which after 8
Days fasting dyed.

I conceive there is but little difference betwixt the Saliva of Insects, and
that of Spiders, Snailes, and Catterpillars, being very much akin. The reason
why the Spiders and Catterpillars, for me the Thread of their Saliva, and the
Snail not, is very probably, the Organs or Pipes, through which this juice
passes, which are not given to the Snaile.

Number. 62.
G. P. 1. Tab. 72.
The Catterpillar of the 62. Table, fed of the putrified Stone of a Mountain
Duck, and was bread thence, and lived in that stone as long as any thing
remained to feed on.

It change the 29th. of May, 1659. As is Figured in the Table, they undergo the
like change in the Feathers of Duck, wrapped up and hid therein, that nothing but
a little hole was left for the Butterfly to go out of.

The 7th. Day of June, 1659. came forth a Butterfly, or Moth Figured in the
Table, this Moth is beautiful and delights in flying, wherein it uses strange
motions and windings. These Moths live long unless they be taken in Spiders
webs.

They shun the light and hide themselves in obscure places, and sometimes in
Gardens, under the leaves of Plants: They feed on the Sweet Dews on Flowers, as
other Flies; they hide themselves in winter in Houses, etc.

From this History, some have doubted whether the Catterpillar was ever
perfectly formed before its change, but was rather borne after the change,
because that until the change it remained in the place of its birth, and took
its nourishment there as Children do in the Womb, and Chickens in their Eggs.

The Butterfly living abroad in summer, and returning into Houses in Winter, is
enough to satisfy the manner of this Catterpillars birth, which is from the
Animal Parent* and not of putrified flesh, also it was in disguise in the
rotten flesh, not as in the Womb, but as in a place where store of food was to
be had; suitable to its nature, and for this the Mother Butterfly was Caterer;
so that however the parts of the Butterfly are altered, from what they were,
when in the disguise of a Catterpillar, yet does the But^^^^ly retain a sense
of that meat, which she once fed off her self and does not c^reless^y drop her
Eggs; but there only where she finds suitable food for them to eat, as soon as
they shall be hatched.

Here follows the less perfect Histories, of the lesser Species of smooth
Catterpillars; That is to say; where either one or the other of the Disguises
are not Figured in the Table, or a By-birth only instead of the Butterfly.

History. 63.
G. P. 1. Tab. 15.
The Catterpillar of the 63d. Table feeds on Thorn tree leave^ as long as
there are any to be had, it goes backwards and fore wards, as it pleases and
that swiftly, when these Catterpil^ars, change, they get together into oue
place, and every one hangs by his own proper thread.

This Catterpillar, chauged by little and little, ^he 5th. of June, and the
27th. of the same Month, came forth a Moth Figured in the Table, which Moth
haunts Thorns, and lays it Seed upon them which ( Spawn) hangs thereon until
the beginning of the Year following, for Catterpillars appear not till there be
food for them.

I have seen the change of this Catterpillar, (see my Notes.)

Number. 64.
G. P. 1. Tab. 16.
The Catterpillar of the 64th. Table, feeds of Sallow leaves, they shelter
themselves from the Sun, in boughs and leaves knit together, they creep
swiftly, and as soon as they perceive anything that is not usual, and not
familiar to them, they suddenly cast themselves down by a thread for their
security.

This Catterpillar changed the 53th. of June, and a nimble Butterfly Figured in
the Table broke forth the 21 st. of the same month.

Number. 65.
G. P. 1. Tab. 40.
The Catterpillar of the 65 th Table, feeds of the leaves of the Ashtree (which
are Infested by this and many other Animalls) it very cunningly rowles up the
leaves, and shelters it self against the Sun.

This Catterpillar purged it self and changed the 24 th. of June, and the 26
of September, came forth a Moth Figured in the Table.

Number. 66.
G. P. 1. Tab. 46.
The Catterpillar of the 66 th. Table, was bread in a Sugar Pear, and feeds
thereof, it changed the 3 d. of August, and the Second of July, the Year
following, that is, after a 11 Months (in which space it lay without motion or
food, and as I thing dead) came forth a Butterfly, Figured in the Table.

We must think that Fruits, as well as leaves, are not the Equivocall Parents
of any Insects: But the Butterfly only of Catterpillars, etc.

Not withstanding the opinion of Aristotle (de Plantis) and lately of Signior
Read, concerning Plantigenous Animals.

In the next place we shall range the Historys of the lesse^ Smooth
Catterpillars, which are imperfect, that is where there is a By-birth only, and
no Butter^ly Figured.

Number. 67.
G. P. 3. Tab. B.
The Catterpillar, of the 67 th. Table, greedily Eats the the leaves of
Sallows, there are great numbers of them: Also these Catterpillars drink much
and long, especially any sweet things: If you touch them, they defend
themselves moving very swiftly the hinder part of their body. this Catterpillar
changed the 1^ th. of September, 1663. and continued so until the 22 of
August, 1664. And then came forth a Fly, which lived fasting until the 30 th.
of the same month.

In the very middle of the change, is seen a black Egg, to which this Fly owns
its birth.

This is the By-birth of some Flesh-fly, and our Author is very diligent in
that he has here, once for all, observed to us, that he found, in the very
middle of the Chrysalis of the Eruca, the Chrysalis of the Fly; which he calls
a black Egg: The Catterpillars Chrysalis was undonbtedly Carrion, and then
Fly-blown.

Number. 68.
G. P. 1. Tab. 28.
The Catterpillar of the 68 th. Table, Eats the leaves of Roses, and I feed
him also with the leaves of Province Roses, as often as I neglected to feed
him, ^he prepared for change, but because that I had often observed that from
an untimely change, ugly, miserable, and imperfect Butterflys came, therefore I
gave this meat as long as he would eat, and that he willingly changed: He
cleansed himself from all excrements, and changed the 14 th. of August, and the
17 th. of June, the Year following came forth a Yellow Fly, which is Figured in
the Table, this Fly was slow and weak: This Catterpillar lay in the change,
more then 10 Months, like a dead thing without motion and feeding.

Number. 69.
G. P. 1. Tab. 29.
The Catterpillar of the 69 th. Table, delights to feed of the leaves of the
Red C^rran-tree: That only when the Day breaks, after having quickly cleansed
its body, it began to change the 12 of July, and continued in that condition
until the 14 of August, at which time came forth a Fly, Figured in the Table:
A very swift Flyer but Dyed within Four Days.

These two last are By-births, and of the Waspking* being something more gross
and thick bodycd, then we usually find Ichneumons to be: however they are of
kin, and I little question, but our Author might have found in these
Chrysalis's the Ichneumons Chrysalis's; or the Nimph's of Wasps e^closed, if he
had had the hap to have sought for them.

By the Figure of the Catterpillars they seem to be of one and the same
Species, and our Author not distinguishing betwixt By-births and such as are
Genuine, he seems in some few places, to have multiplied Species unnecessarily.

Number. 70. ^.
G. P. 1. Tab. 39.
The Catterpillar, of the 70 A. Table, feeds on the leaves of the Elm, and is
to be found on the very top of these trees: it leaps from place to place, like
a Grasshoper: cold destroys it.

Having cleansed its body, it changed ^he 28 th. of August, within a net which
it had made before its changed, and which was as bright as Silver, it continued
in the change till the first of June the Year following, about 9 Months, at
that time came forth a Fly Figured in the Table.

This By-birth, is a Waspe, as appears by the Figure.

Number. 70. B.
G. P. 2. Tab. 8.
This Catterpillars ^^^ds of Elm leaves, their sleep extending 10 hours, and
then cleanse and eat again, when they are about to change, they let themselves
down from the Tree by a Thread for safet^, as soon as they come to the ground
they seek a dry Elm leaf and having found one they creep into it, and
Artificially Knitting it together else on all sides, covering their bodies
besides with a silver colored and bright Net: In this manner changed the
Catterpillars, the 26 of May, as is Figured in the Table, and Four Days after
came forth a Fly, Figured also to the life in the Table: It lived with me also
fasting Six Days.

This is an other History, of the same Catterpillar, and this is a By-birth
also; but a Flesh-fly, and Viviparous, if I mistake not.

Number. 71.
G. P. 1. Tab. 48.
The Catterpillar of the 71 st. Table. feeds of the leaves of the Cherry-tree,
they are for the most part to be found under the leaves, shaded from the Sun.

This Catterpillar cleansed it self, and changed the 22 d. of July, and the 4
th. of August came forth a Fly.

This By-birth (by the Figure) is a Waspe; having a short, thick body, and
Four Wings.

Number. 72.
G. P. 1. Tab. 49.
The Catterpillar of the 72 d. Table. eats the tender leaves of the Ash,
leaving nothing but the skins; it is of a shining color, as black as Pitch; it
grows no bigger, then it is Figured: I called this the black Crab, because its
hinder parts are like a Crab.

It changed the 28 th. of July, and there came forth a Fly, Figured also in the
Table.

This By-birth is a Flesh-fly, as appears by the Figure; and therefore we
suppose the Chrysolys was Carrion.

Number. 73.
G. P. 2. Tab. 2.
The little Catterpillar, of the 73 th. Table. eats the green leaves of
Wormwood; and its bred of a certain humor, as a seed, which some Mother Fly
laid upon that Plant, Whence comes this Catterpillar: When it is newly hatched,
it is of a white color: When it begins to creep upon the ground, it forthwith
makes it self a shelter, against the scorching heat of the S^n: After that it
has once attained to its full growth, it is incomparable swift, and not easily
to be taken, at the least noise it runs out of its shelter or lurking place to
escape the Birds, it is then something like the color of the Earth, it falls on.

When it begins to change, it gnaws in two a sprig of Wormwood, that it may the
more conveniently knit it self therein a House, to change in.

This Catterpillar, changed the 4 th. of June, as is Figured in the Table; the
9 th.-of the same Month came forth a Worm, which the 13 th. of the same Month
appeared in the shape of an Egg; out of which Egg came a Fly (Figured in the
Table) The 26 th. of the same Month; which in less then a quarter of an hour,
became as big again, as when first hatched: I nourished this Fly along time
with Suggar and Water; it made a wonderful loud noise in flying, though but
little of body.

This By^birth, is a Flesh-fly, which are well known to fill a Room with noise,
when they fly about it: Here are some unintelligible mistakes in the Latin
Copy.

Number. 74.
G. P. 2. Tab. 3.
The Catterpillar, of the 74 th. Table, eats the Leaves of the Rose-tree; for
the most part it feeds in the night only, for fear of Birds perhaps: It creeps
slowly, and if touched, it slowly rowles it self it up: When it is full, it
stretches it self out as though it slept: It made it self a House to change
in, like a little Net, very pretty.

It changed therein (as is Figured in the Table) the 16 th. of September: And
the 14 th. of May, the Year following came forth a Black Fly, which lived 7
Days fasting.

The By-birth here is an Ichneumon, as appears by the Figure.

Number. 75.
G. P. 2. Tab. 5.
The Catterpillar of the 75 th. Table, would eat nothing but a cer^ain Rush or
Grass, growing on the Banks of D^^ches: It ^ed but slowly, and crept as slowly
after it had done fee^ing, and when it was full, it was a third part less, then
in the time of its feeding.

The 2 d. of June, came forth of this Catterpillar, a Worm, ou^ of which Worm,
the 9 th. of the same Month come a Fly, which was so very small, that I could
not Figure it in the Table.

This Catterpillar changed in the form of a Tobacco-Roll, as is Figured in the
Table.

The 1 st. of August, came forth thence a Fly, whose wings were so clear and
Transparent, and clapped so close to its body, that it seemed to be without
wings: This Fly was like a great Pismire, and ran swiftly, and not with
Expanded wings, but with them clapped close to its body, it lived with me fasting
14 Days.

It Is rare that one Catterpillar should nourish two By-births; but this History,
seems to be an instance, that it i^ so, and that both of them are Ichneumons.

Number. 76.
G. P. 2. Tab. 6.
The small Catterpillar of the 76 th. Table eats Columbine leaves, and cleaves
so fast to the edges of those leaves, that you may sooner pull them in pieces,
then take them off: they eat like a spreading Cancer, what ever Plant, be it
Roses, etc. they light on; for the most part you find them great and small
together; they are just of the color of Columbine leaves: they fear no
weather: touch them and they vibrate their tail wonderfully.

This Catterpillar, changed the 8 th. of June, as Figured in the Table: And the
21 st. of June, came forth a Black Fly, Figured also in the Table; these kind
of Flies I have often seen sitting upon Bryonie, ( Vuae vrfinae) lived two Days
without meat.

This By-birth is a kind of Flesh-fly; and the Chrysalis is the change of a
Flesh-fly; and therefore here is some escape in the observation.

Number. 77. a.
G. P. 1. Tab. 64.
The Catterpillar of the 77 th. Table, Marked a. eats but once a Day, and that
sparingly, the leaves of Sallow, and when it has done eating, it rowles up its
body in a round, like a ( Snake) dog, and then about noon the next day a little
more food, and then to rest in the said posture: this I observed it to do (and
it is a most wonderful History) until the last day of September, 1653. and it
rested without changing the posture of its Body, or moving until the 24 th. of
October, 1655. I touched its body daily with a little Feather, that I might
certainly know whether it was a live or no, and I observed it alive, and at
every light touch to move and contract its body, two whole Years and 24 Days,
and that without any food, or so much as local motion, I saw no change in it,
but that its body through long fasting was manifestly lessened.

Number. 77. b.
G. P. 2. Tab. 17.
The Catterpillar in this 77 th. Table, fed for most part on Columbine, and
some times on Rose leaves; when full, it roled it self up like a Hedg-hog, as
is Figured: I kept some of these Catterpillars, some whole Years, formerly by
me, and fed them, but they constantly dyed without changing: without doubt,
because som^thing was wanting necessary to their change; which thing when I had
thought on, I shut one of them up in a Glass Violl, filled with Earth and fed
it therein, after a while, I found that it crept within the Earth, and that he
made himself a large House in the bottom of the Glass, by the slime of of his
mouth, Arched over head, and covered himself with Earth, that he seemed a lump
of Clay, and thus he did, as I guess, for safety: Also within this Earth, he
knit himself a Net for yet greater safety.

The 27 th. of July, this Catterpillar rested in order to its change, as is
Figured in the Table, and remained therein 7 Days without stirring, the 5 th.
of August, came forth a Fly, and the day after another Fly, both which after
they had rested a little while, did couple in order to the propagation of their
Species.

I have often seen these Flys lay their seed upon the leaves of Columbines,
which is a Green and fat juice, and so small, that one must have good Eyes who
discernes it.

These Flys I fed for some time with Water and Honey, at length depriving them
on purpose, of their Water, they Dyed.

This is the 3d. time our Author has made two Historys of one Animal.

Here are indeed many things worth nothing, and dfficultly explainable: In the
first History, the ^ong suspending its Change, even for above two Years, is
very remarkable. In the Second History, the diligence of our Author, in
supplying it with Earth is very commendable.

Again the two By-births are Ichneumons, as appears by the Figure: Their
coupling is extraordinary; the Author, never yet having observed it; though
some Scores have been born together.

He also tells us of the Seed or Eggs of these Ichneumons, which he says (from
frequent observation) is extremely small, not to be seen, but by very good
Eyes, but that I suspect an error in this observation, (this fat and Green
juice, may rather be an excrement then Eggs) I should think that possible the
Ichneumons Flys Eggs, may be licked up, and swallowed down by Catterpillars in
feeding, and escape digestion, and hatch within the Catterpillars body: but I
affirm nothing not having yet seen the Seed, or Eggs of any one Ichneumon laid.

Hitherto of the smooth Catterpillars, both Small and Great: In the next place
we shall Range the Historys of the Hairy Catterpillars.

Number. 78. a.
G. P. 2. Tab. 29.
The Catterpillar of the 78 th. Table, marked a. feeds on Alder leaves, I
nourished two of them, to see what would come of them; the one was a little
brighter colored, then other.

One of the two changed as is Figured in the Table, the 15 th. of June, and the
15 th. of July, came forth a Butterfly Figured in the Table, very brisk and
sportive, I kept him alive 1^ Days.

I had a Third of these kind of Catterpillars, which seemed to be sick, it had
no stomach to its meat, and its Hair trembled, as though it shook with an Ague.

It not withstanding changed (just as the first is Figured to have changed) the
20 th. of June, and out of that change came forth a Fly the last Day of June;
Figured also in the Table: This Fly was very nimble in running, and very
sportive with its Wings and Horns, it eat Honey exceedingly, and immoderatly,
I let it go, now well knowing to what it ows its Birth, and what comes of its
Seed laid upon Alder leaves, and Hatched by the heat of the Sun.

Number 78. b.
G. P 2. Tab. 30.
The Catterpillar, Companion to the first, (and of which we said came of
Butterflys Figured in the Table,) changed the 19. th. a June. just as Figured
of the change of the first.

The 2 d. of July, came forth a wonderful Animal, without Wings, having the
hinder part of its body very thick, and full of Eggs, and covered with a thin
skin, so that the Eggs were almost vi^ible through it, the Day after its Birth,
it laid all its Eggs, and having that thin skin of its Tail, full of^Down
or^Wool, like the leaves of Moth-Mullein, it p^ll'd of that Down, and covered
its Eggs with it for security, and then when it had emptied it self, there was
(...) left, it but the forepart of its Body and Legs, and it appeared then
much like a Spider: it lived fasting 18 Days. The very day that it Dyed the
Eggs were hatched and the little Catterpillars crept about, I suffered them to
provide food for themselves, not being willing to be troubled with the feeding
of them, especially knowing what they would come to.

Note that all that is related in the 1st. History, is agreeable to our
observations, there being an Ichneumon from the Chrysalis, of an Eruca: also
besides the By-birth, there is the Butterfly, viz. The Genuin and Legitimate
off spring.

In the 2d. History, there are two things very singular* The First is the birth
of a Monster, or a Butterfly, without Wings, this I say is no By-birth,, but a
Monster in Nature, such as the birth of a Bird would he without Wings. The
Second is yet more wonderful; that this she Monster should lay her Eggs (which
thing is common to all the Butterfly kind as soon as horn) without the
Copulation of a Male, and that (which is most remarkable) these Eggs should be
Hatched, that is Proliffick, without the Male, ( Vid. Ma^pigium de Bombyce)
where one of the best observations in that piece is the change of color in the
Eggs, of such Females as have admitted the Male; and that such Eggs as are laid
without the admittance of the Male, do not change into that color, and are
not Proliffi^ck; This I can affirm that I had a Butterfly which laid her Eggs
in a Box, and that these Hatched therein after a certain time, but whether the
Butterfly had admitted the Male before I took her, I cannot say.

Number. 79.
G. P. 1. Tab. 59.
The Catterpillar of the 79 th. Table, feeds upon Plumtree leaves, it is a
wonderful Figure, on the back it has Four Yellowish Brushes, or Tufts of hair,
out of the Forehead grow two other Tufts, like Snail horns, on each side are
two other Tufts like Oars, the one Black, the other Yellow, on the hinder part
of the Body they look like Feathers; but all is Hairy; it changes its skin with
great anxiety, wiping its sweaty Body with the Fetherlike tufts: all the Day,
after the shifting of its skin, it rests without food; and all its body is very
tender and soft.

After it had cleansed it self well, it change the 20 th. of June, and abode in
it until the 30 th. of the same Month, and then came forth a wretched
creature, neither Butterfly, nor Catterpillar: the reason of the defect was,
that it abstained from meat before its time, its Body not being arrived to that
perfection, requisite to its change.

The Authors words must be favorably interpreted, for it is plain in the
Table, that the Animal was a Butterfly; but as he w^ll notes a starved thing;
many of which I have had, whose Wings were yet imperfect, or at least not in a
condition to be expanded.

Number. 80.
G. P. 1. Tab. 36.
The Catterpillar of the 80 th. Table, is found about the Sand hills, along the
Sea shore, where it feeds of various Herbs bu^ I could not find one Herb that
it would eat off: upon the back of it grows Five Bunches of hair, two upon the
head like Horns, and one upon the Tail; and out of these Bunches grows some
Hairs longer then the rest, as ornaments: I forthwith designed this
Catterpillar, because it hastened to changed, making a web for it self of its
own Hair.

It changed the 10 th. of July, and the 8 th. of August came forth a Butterfly,
which as soon as borne hid (as it were) its eyes with its fore feet, as not
being yet able, to endure the light.

Number. 81.
G. P. 3. Tab. S.
The Catterpillar, of the 81 st. Table, was taken in an Apricock tree: And sent
to me from Bergenopsone, etc. After I received it, it would not feed, but
changed the 7 th. of October, 1664. And the 2 d. of May the year following came
forth a gray Butterfly, which so covered with its Fore-feet the whole Head,
that it was not to be seen. It seemed to be a Female from the heaviness and
thicnesse of its body: It lived fasting 10 Days, and before it dyed, it laid
many Eggs; but which for want of the Seed of the Male were not Faecund.

How much this opinion, of Infaecond Eggs agrees with the Observation of the
78th. History, Let others Judge.

Number. 82.
G. P. 1. Tab. 50.
The Catterpillar, of the 28 th. Table, feeds only of a certain Grass; it
sleeps in the Day time, but ith night is in perpetual motion, its very
thirsty, when it drinks, it dipps its Head in the water, and lifting up the
forepart of its body, it drinks like a Hen, often sipping.

When it had cleansed it self, it changed the 7 th. of June, and abode so
until the 3 d. of July, and then came forth a Butterfly; a pretty big one, of
a yellowish color, marked with a red Line cross each Wing, as Figured in the
Table.

Number. 83.
The Catterpillar of the 83 th. Table, G. P. 3. Tab. G.
would eat nothing that I gave it; it is a slow goer, not unlike that slow
paced Animal, well known to the West Indians, by the Name Haut: It was wont to
wipe and cleanse its whole body, with a dark colored Feather on its tail, and
likewise defend it self with the same, if touched: It is very quiet, before its
change; it changed the 2 d. of October, 1663.

It composed it self for change thus: It first made a Net, round about its
body, of its own juice; and within that Net another, yet less and of a finer
thread; which touched not the outward Net, but hung like a Bell in it, and was
so thick and compact that no body could see through it; and within this it
changed.

The second of May, 1664. Came forth a lusty White Butterfly, I st^uck him
throw with a pinn, that he might not Dissipate its excellent Witness, and so
he lived 4 Days.

Number. 84.
G. P. 2. Tab. 50.
The Ruf^ Catterpillars, of the 84 th. Table. Eats greedily the green leaves of
the Artichoke plants; and when its belly is full, it creeps into the Earth.

This Catterpillar put off its skin the 30 th. of August: and fasted, until
the Hair was grown again, and that it co^'d ea^; that is for four or five
Days, sooner or latter.

The 9 th. of September, it changed, as is Figured in the Table.

The 1 st. of May the Year following, came forth a White Butterfly, (...) never
moved for two Days; but then grew wild and furious; and at length dyed for want
of Food.

Number. 85.
G. P. 3. Tab. H.
The Catterpillar, of the 85 th. Table, eats Alder leaves; all its body is
Rough and Hairy; if you touch these Hairs, it Vehemently strikes its Head with
its Tail; in one Night it lost all its greenesse, and became wholly Black: I
could well see a change of color with my Eyes; it shook the Hairs and moved
them with a notable force, and clearly without changing at all its skin.

It changed the 6 th. of October, 1663. As is Figured in the Table.

The 30 th. of June, the Year following, came forth a duskish colored
Butterfly, marked with white spots, as is Figured in the Table: It lived until
the 10 th. of July.

Number. 86.
G. P. 3. Tab. D.
This Catterpillar, of the 86 th. Table. creeps swiftly from place to place,
and eats almost any kind of Herbs, Tresoile, wild-time, Elm, and Willow
leaves, and many others; and yet most other Catterpillars will starve before
they will feed of any thing, but their ordinary food: For color it was of a
shining jett Black: if touched, it rould it self up round like a Ball.

It changed the 13 th. of September, 1963. And the 25 th. of May, the Year
following, came forth a very beautiful White Butterfly, having its body
distinguished, with three rows of Black Spots; it lay without motion.

It is worth Noting, that from a Cole black Catterpillar that had no White, but
about its mouth, there should be born a White Butterfly.

From another of the same Species of Catterpillar, the 13 th. of June, 1664. A
Long Legged Fly came forth, which lived not above one Day.

Number. 87.
G. P. 1. Tab. 3.
The Catterpillar of the 78 th. Table, feeds on Poplar, and Willow leaves,
which two are of a like nature: These Catterpillars come of a Seed, as most do,
which did stick to the Poplar leaves, they are seen a far off, abiding in the
tops of those Trees, because of their notable whiteness, Figured in the Table.

It changed the 6 th. of June, and continued so 14 days, and then came forth a
White Butterflys Figured in the Table.

The Butterfly, laid its Seed after some Days time, and lived, without food,
24 Days.

Number. 88.
G. P. 1. Tab. 7.
The Catterpillar of the 88 th. Table, Feeds upon the leaves of Brambles and
Oziers.

It changed the 13 th. of June, and so remained until the 14 th. of July, and
then came forth a dark colored Butterfly, Figured in the Table: It is of a
brownish color, upon each wing it has a round white spot; I found it dead
after two Days, though it seemed to be of a strong nature.

Number. 89.
G. P. 1. T. 10.
The Catterpillar of the 89 th. Table, feeds of Sallow leaves; which are dry
and astringent, and therefore it drinks much; which are singular to it; for
almost all others eat green leaves, and drink not.

Its birth is from a Ring of little Eggs, cleaving so Tenatiously to the tender
twiggs of trees, that it can scarce be g^tten off, but with a Knife; these Eggs
abide the sharpest Winters, and are h^tched by the heat of the Sun in the
Spring, when the leaves put forth, that their meat may be ready for them, as
soon as born.

This Catterpillar changed the 2 d. of June, and continued so until the first
of July; and then came forth a Butterfly Figured in the Table.

It dyed after it had laid its Eggs; but the Eggs dried, for want of having
been besprinkled with the Seed of the Male.

Observe the Elegant Posture of the laying of the Eggs, of this Butterfly; in
the fashion of a Ring, Circling a Twig; as for their being in faecu^d, for want
of the Male, it agrees not with other, this Authors Observations, as is above
noted.

Number. 90.
G. P. 1. Tab. 13.
The Catterpillar, of the 90 th. Table, feeds on Haw-thorn leaves, and
Pear Tree leaves: As soon as Autumn comes, they gather together, and Club for
a Web; for that purpose they knit together the tops of the yet tender boughs
with their leaves; and therein preserve themselves, as soon as the weather is
favorable to them, that is about the beginning of April, they begin to eat
again; they leave a Hole open, out of which they may go and come in again;
in cold weather they exactly shut that Hole: Rain never stands upon the web,
but slides off, as though it was greasy: Titt-birds, eats them greedily.

This Catterpillar, changed the 2 d. of June, and the 30 th. of the same Month
came forth a White Butterfly marked with a Red spot on each wing.

Number. 91. b.
G. P. 1. Tab. 13.
The Catterpillar, of the 91 st. Table, eats Haw-tree, and Cherry-tree leaves,
etc. It is wont to ly under the shade of the leaves; as hardly enduring the
heat of the Sun.

Before it changed, it cast its skin thrice, each time, resting on e^ay until
its Head hardened, for immediately after its skin casting, the Head, and all the
Body is soft, and weak; and by little and little grows stronger and hardens.

It changed the 12 th. of June, enclosed in a Bagg, as is Figured in the
Table,: And the 4 th. of July, came forth an elegant White Butterfly, Figured
in the Table.

Number. 92.
G. P. 1. Tab. 22.
The Catterpillar of the 92 d. Table, feeds on the leaves of Cherry, Pear,
Plums, and Almond trees: I could never find the feed it came off: It is
admirably beautiful in the variety of colors; when it is first Hatched, it is
like a little Snail, moist, Glutinous and shining; then it waxes by little and
little, until it casts it skin, and then appears its color, and after that it
again and again casts its skin.

It changed the 22 d. of September, in leaves Knit together; and the 12 th. of
July, the Year following, came forth a Butterfly Figured in the Table,; it
lived, but two Days, though it had laid 9 Months, and 20 Days in the change.

Number. 93.
G. P. 1. Tab. 23.
The Catterpillar of the 83 d. Table, eats the leaves of Labrusca, (perhaps
Bryonie) although with the smoke of that Herb Mice are said to be killed: They
eat not, as I have experienced of the Herb, before its Berryes come, and then
they feed on the leaves until the Berries grow Red and fall off; and then the
leaves seem no longer fit to nourish them,

This Catterpillar, changed the 24 th. of September; it continued in its change
until the 13 th. of June, the Year following, because Winter came on; and
Flowers out of which Butterflys take their food, began to fail: the 13 th. of
June, I say came forth a Butterfly, a of Yellowish color, Figured in the Table.

Here the reason of the Noneruption of the Butterfly all winter is, well
assigned, to be the want of Food, and the aproaching cold.

Number. 94.
G. P. 1. Tab. 32.
The Catterpillar, of the 94 th. Table, We fed with Tobacco leaves only; and it
loves those leaves, which are largest and dry; and the smaller moist, and
tender leaves, in the Wings of the greater, he cares not for.

He having cleansed his body, changed the 3 d. of August and the 17 th. of the
same Month came forth a beautiful Butterfly, which is wont to haunt Garden
flowers; puts a long sting into them, and is swift of flight.

This Butterfly is frequent in July, to be Observed when July Flowers are in
their prime; but is dificult to be taken by reason of its sudden and swift
flight.

Number. 95.
G. P. 1. Tab. 34.
The Catterpillar of the 95 th. Table, in great numbers ^at Ozier leaves, it is
of an elagent color, viz. Yellow distinguished with Black lines, as is Figured
in the Table.

It changed, the 8 th. of August; and the Year following came forth a
Butterfly, Figured in the Table. Of a Robust Body, and yet it lived but two
days.

Of this also see my Notes.

Number. 96.
G. P. 1. Tab. 38.
The Catterpillar, of the 95 th. Table, delights in Ozier leaves, as many
others do; to me the reason seems to be the dry temper of them; which corrects
the moisture of Catterpillars If touched, it coyles up its body, like a Ball;
but you may put him out of that fearful fit.

After it had well eaten, and well purged its body; it changed the 10 th. of
September; and the 10 th. of June, the Year following, came forth a White
Butterfly, marked with Black Spots upon the wings.

Number. 97.
G. P. 1. Tab. 63.
The Catterpillar, of the 97 th. Table, eats Rose leaves, and Clary: It changed
the 20 th. of July, as is Figured in the Table; the 2 d. of August, came forth
a various colored Butterfly, which I kept alive a while with Honey.

Number. 98.
F. P. 1. Tab. 8.
The Catterpillar of the 98 th. Table, eats diverse Plants, and are found upon
the Sand-hills; it changed the 12 th. of July, and the 5 th. of September, came
forth a Butterfly Figured in the Table: This Butterfly was tender and weak;
which I took to proceed from the Catterpillars, being deprived too early of its
food.

We found this Catterpillar, on the Sandy Downs above Calice: See my Notes.

Number 99.
G. P. 1. Tab. 17.
The Catterpillar, of the 99 th. Table: Willingly feeds on Lettice and Clary
leaves; it is very Hary, as soon as it perceives any thing unusual to it, it
rowles i^ self up, like a Ball, and moves not: It sets up its Bristles, like a
Hedghog; and if you take hold of its Hair, it easily suffers them to be plucked
off.

Sparrows, and other Birds eat not these Catterpillars; but seem to abhor them,
whence some guess they are poisonous.

It changed the 30 th. of June; and the 22 d. of July, a large and beautiful
Butterfly came forth marked with diverse colors.

These Butterflys lay their Eggs before winter; and because ^^he Catterpill^rs
are hatched late, about October, they therefore hide themselves in the Ground,
chinks of Walls, and in other places, and live without food, until the
beginning of Summer, as I have had experience.

Number. 100.
G. P. 2. Tab. 23.
The Catterpillar, of the 100. Table, eats the leaves of Earth Nuts; with which
I kept him long: After his belly was fallen (perhaps for digestion sake) he
ever crept long about the Glass, I kept him under.

It changed the 3 d of August, as is Figured in the Table, the 2 d. of June,
the Year following, came forth a ^Butterfly, to which I never saw the like; Its
wings were as White as Snow, its Body Yellow, and bright; it flew swiftly;
first clen^ing its body of a certain humor; it dyed after 5 Days keeping under
a Glass, where it seemed to have been stifled, for want of a free Air.

Number. 101.
G. P. 2. Tab. 26.
The Hairy Catterpillar, ofthe 101 st. Table, eats willingly the leaves of
Heliotropium, as its usual food: They fight amongst themselves desperately, and
make the Hair Fly: They are very fearful, and roll themselves up when
touched, sleeping Doggs-sleep.

It changed as is Figured in the Table: The 10 th. of September* in a bag of
leaves knit together; the 10 th. of June the year following, came forth a
Butterfly; which seemed to sleep ith Day, but was very swift and nimble ith
night, Bat like: I let it go, not knowing, how to keep it.

Numb^r. 102.
G. P. 3. Tab. N.
The Catterpillar of the 102 d. Table, having had its fill of Ozier leaves,
betook it self to a corner for change, as I thought: But in stead of that I
Observed a Green Worm, to break forth of each side its body; this was done with
great anxiety, and contortion of its Body: The first Worm, as soon as borne,
fastened upon the wound, it came out off, and sucked up all the juice, and
substance of the Mother Catterpillar; so that nothing but skin was left: The
other Worm through the firsts greediness, being destitute of all food, dyed in
the wound, out of which it was coming: Whose body also, the Mother being
evacuated, was consumed and drawn dry by the first Worm. This first Worm being
now satisfied, with the Bodies of Mother and Brother, rested moveless, and
without any other food, until the 15 th. of October, 1664. And then changed
into a Black Egg: The 18 th. Day of May, the Year following, 1665. Came forth
two Flys, One of of which is Figured: in the Table, in which History it is
worth nothing: That of one Egg came two Flies; that by this means, the loss
of two Worms, might be restored: Which as I said, did make up the body of one.

Thus we have done with all the Historys of Butterflys, I find in all the
industrious Labors of Joha^^is Goedartius: I should not question the truth of
this last History, nor of the Faithfullness of the Translator. Mey being every
where as modest, as the other is ^old and impertinent: I am willing to confess
that this is the only puzzel which I have yet met with in all the experiments
of the Author; yet it may be, that two Ichneumon Worms, might club for a
common Foliculus; which he calls a Black Egg, as well as five, as in the 20th.
History, above to be Noted. and yet that is, but a bare conjecture of mine, and
which this History (to say the truth) dos not countenanc; for it says, that
one Worm only, was remaining alive, which changed, into this black Egg.

Thus also you see the Butterfly kind, takes up near two thirds of the Book;
but yet this was not the Authors choice, but his chance: which will appear, to
him who shall consider that this kind of Insect, is for the most part laid,
Hatched, and fed openly, and obvio^sly upon Herbs, and Trees: whereas the
nesting, education, and food of most other kinds of Insects, whilst in Embrio,
and in their several disguises, is in dark and secret corners of the Rocks,
or within Trees, and Plants, or under ground, or at the bottom of Lakes and
Rivers: So that, unless diligently searched for, they are not easily to be
found.

Section. 4.
Of Butterflys with Transparent wings, known by the name of Draggon Flies, in
English.

There is another kind of Insect, which the Ancients have left nameless: the
more modern Authors, have called them Libellae, Perlae, etc. These Insects I
reckon among the Butterflys, at least for some affinity betwizt them, I put
them nex after them: they all have Four Wings, stif^e, brittle, and
Transparent; they are of a fierce nature, and pray upon Flys, which they take
in s^ight, as Hawks do the little Birds: Some perhaps may think better to put
them after or next the Beetles; because the Worms of both are Hexapod: our
Order will e agree well enough with both; and it is sufficient that we do not
confound them; as being a peculiar Tried of Insects of their own kind.

Number. 103.
G. P. 3. Tab. R.
The Hexapode Worms, of the 103 d. Table, when first Hatched are very small,
like Gnats; but in time grow great: They are found in Ditches, and have no
other food, then that the greater feed upon the lesser; in a very short time I
saw one of the three Large ones Figured in the Table, devower six Lesser ones
of the same Species: Hence it is, that these creatures are wonderful timorous,
for if a Lesser meet a Greater they fly a way with all the speed possible, but
in vain.

I find no more amo^ngst the Authors Papers, but that of one of the Hexapode
worms Figured in the Table, a Sky color Winged Insects; Figured also in the
Table, was Produced; but I find not any one circumstance of the mattrr of the
Change.

Number. 104.
G. P. 2. Tab. 14.
The Hexapode worm of the 104 th. Table would not eat neither Bread nor Meal,
nor Sugar, nor diverse Herbs which I set before it: Nor would drink water: I
then bethought my self of giving it to eat dead Pismierss Bee^les, and other
dead Insects; I therefore put it up with a dead Beetle, into an Ivory Box,
having learnt by experience, that these kind of Insects will perforate Wooden
boxes; this Beetle it fedd on eating out all its bowels, and creeping into the
shell of the Beetle; wherein it would conveniently turn it self about every
way: This Worm is slow footed: its an angry creature, and bold; keeping its
station, unless you vex it overmuch: It has a painted Tail, which is
shining, with which it defends it self, that it cannot give back, and then it
contracts its body, and with its toothed Forcipes, it strongly defends it self,
against any violence done to it.

This Worm lay in the body of the Beetle, it had fed on, from the 18 th. of
August, until the 8 th. of June, the Year following; then out came a winged
Insect, beautiful, and elegant. The wings were very remarkable, but so tender,
that I could scarce draw them with a Pencill, and shining bright as Mother of
Pearl. Its two eyes glisterd like Gold; its body was of a Seagreen color.

He flew with his head erected, and the rest of his body hanging downwards,
with his wings spread, but not agitated; which perhaps he could scarce do, as I
guess from the bigness of them, but was carried by the Wings through the Air,
he lived but two Days fasting, for I knew not what to feed it with.

Section. 5. of Bees
In the 5th. SECTION, we put the Bee-kind, which have (as all the former
Insects) Four Naked Wing.

Number. 105.
G. P. 2. Tab. 46.
You have one of the great sort of Bees, (called Bombili^, by the Greek)
Figured in the 106 th. Table.

This Be chooses mostly a deep and dry soil; to house in; not a stiff Clay,
which would not easily be wrought into; nor one two light, and Sandy, which
would be apt to fall in: also a deep soil they love, that the water may not
soak thorough, and trouble them.

In such an earth they dig holes, to breed in; sometimes three, and sometimes
three foot and a half deep, and a foot square within: into these holes they
carry fine, and dry Grass, and cover that over with Wax,, no otherwise then
Swallows coat their Nests with Clay; but these Bees make their Nests
Transparent, and sull of holes; and do coat them over, very neatly, with
coverings made of Wax; that they may be safe from Rain; which might otherwise
soake through the Earth and get into them.

In this Nest they make a Theca, or small Cell, like the half of an Egg, and
the bigness of a Pea, divided in 2. parts.

Every Be lay 9. little Worms in this Theca, or Cell, of the bigness of a
Mustard seed, but as white as milk, and Pell^^^d. Then they shut up this
Theca, that it may be like a complete Egg: This Cell now to the Sense is
moderatly hot, as an Egg sat on by a Hen.

I Observed the lesser Bees often to creep over, and about this Theca, or Cell;
as though they had a mind to keep it warm, and so hatch it; and again I saw
them scratch it, as though they would make a crack or opening in it; but they
made it softer by scratching it.

The Worms included in this Egg-like Cell, daily grew biger and biger; in the
mean time the lesser Bees did not cease their endeavors to hatch it, nor did
they leave it off, until it was broke asunder; also the Worms within by the
continual agitation and motion of themselves, did help forwards, this work of
breaking it open; and they growing; the heat also increased, which made the Wax
yet more soft.

The Worms hatched from this Egg or Theca lay quiet a whole Day, and then the
great or Old Be coming, devowered all the Wax, of which the Theca was made,
and in which these Worms were included; that this Wax being again liquified in
her body, might serve, as the material, of another Theca.

Now when these Worms (thus hatched out of the first Theca) have layn a whole
Day, quiet without moving at all, and l^ke dead things, they weave each for
himself an Egg, of the bigness of a Bay-berry, of a certain spittle, destilling
from their mouth, and body.

And being now made, they are indeed, moist and soft; but in time they dry and
become hard.

These Eggs are all glued together in a Bunch by these Worms; and out of each
Egg comes a Be, as is Figured in the Table; where the Eggs or Foliculi is
opened at one end, that the Be may be seen, which comes of the Worm, Figured
also in the Table;

This done the Great Be comes again, and makes a new Egg; and puts therein 5
Worms of her own laying, and then a another Be does the like, and 3 d Be, and
so the rest follow, doing in like manner; until all the work be fini^hed and
made like a bunch of Grapes, in form and Figure.

And yet whether one and the same Be perfect this work, and lay Worms in all
the Theca's, or Cells of the Bunch; or whether they are diverse, and many Bees,
at this work, making, and filling the Theca's, with Worms, we are not certain;
but we judge it likely, that one and the same Be requires the making of the
whole bunch of Theca's; and fills them with her Worms only, for with these Eyes
we have seen one Be, which alone laid 33. Worms, and put them into the
Theca's. This is also Observabe, every Be in the making of every Egg, is
bu^ied, before that be finished, for 28 hours in a continued labonr almost, yet
some get their work done sooner, others later a little, as it is with Work men,
which are more handy some then others.

The Worm Figured in the Table, changed, the 11 th. of July, and so continued,
until the 17 th. of August, when it appeared in form of the Be, Figured in
the Table. when these Young Bees have, by biteing, opened the Wax cases, and
are come forth of them, they are wont to rub their Eyes, with their foremost
feet, and by this means of rubing, they seem to open their Eyes, or at least to
rouse themselves from sleep; in the fore part of their body, they are W^ite,
Yellowish also, and Black, their wings ly upon their backs, and are not yet
expanded, and they are moist; but are soon dry, by the Air; that in a quarter
of an hour, they can expand, and extend them.

These little Bees, new hatched, are not yet fit for work; but yet they cove^
to get up into the open air; but are a hinderance to the greater Bees, which
are busily employed, who therefore drive them down, as often as they come up;
also they run too and fro, as though they were drunk, after three Days that
they have been hatched, then they are able to carry Earth, to the nests, which
the old Bees Arch over, with Earth heaped together, which Hollow Arch, they
draw over with a coat of Wax, as Brick layers Servants carry Mortar, and Bricks
with which they build Walls: In like manner, these Young Bees serve the Old
ones; but they do not carry Earth forwards; but like Hens scratch it backwards,
and those Young Bees which were first hatched and are elder then the rest, are
employed about the more master-like works; for they make Wax, dig holes, and
Arch them; the Younger geting Earth; The elder eat Wax and soften it in their
stomachs, and throw it up again, by little and little Liqui^ied; and of this
Liquid Wax and Earth mixed together, they make Nests; not unlike Swallows, and
finish their work with theirfore Feet complicated, and the Younger help them in
bringing and ramming the Earth.

This commonality also has its Kings or Captain as the Noble Bees, by whom
they are governed, and this Bombylius or Master Be is very old, and in body
Greater, then the rest, like as the King of the little Bees does excel the
rest in magnitude, and show: But this is destitute of Wings and Hair, where the
rest abound, with White, Yellow, and Black Hair, and are rough; this is
altogether Bald, like naked Birds, or as is painted on the back part of the
Head; moreover he is Black and shining, as Polisht Ebony; sometimes he coms to
look upon the Works in which the Commonality is busied, and to explore whether
they are made of a just measure, as well Latitude, as Altitude, conveniently
creeping into the Nest, and creeping out; Ascending, and Descending, he does
seem, to measure as Architects are wont to take an exact account of the work,
which the Workmen make: the less Bees when they meet this Old Be, do not
exhibit a little honor to him, as to the King; they do run about him every
way; they stroke him once and again; in the mean time playing with their wings
expanded, embraceing him with the Anteriour ^eet, as with arms, even as we
gratulate him we meet, therefore the Bees are an example to us, of giving
honor to old men.

When this Captain Bombylius has explored whether the work answers the Rule;
he does descend into the Latibulum, and every one of the younger does anew set
upon each his work.

In the Morning these come late to the work, and unless these little creatures,
which daily in the morning creep upon them and about them, did not excite them,
they would come later.

They have also amongst them another Bombilius, who like the Drummer, does beat
to the Soldiers, to come to the Gardes, or to move the Camp, or to March, or
to Fight with the sound of the Drum, so also does he excite them to work.

This about 7 a Clock ith morning, does ascend to the top of the work, to be
built, and with the half of his body, looking out of the hole, does vibrate
and agitate his wings, and by the benefit of them, does excite a streperous
noise in the hollow Latibulum, not unlike the noise of a Drum, which mostly is
heard a whole quarter of an hour.

I, an expert person, and an Ear witness, do commemorate these things; Yea and
an Eye witness, and together with Me, many others have heart it more then
once, the Vibrating and Streperous wings of that Drummer of the Bombilii: I
say, Persons, which for the hearing of this curiosity have visited me.

Be^ides, and to these, there is one that does Watch, for when sometimes I did
beat the nest, this Forth with did ascend out of the Latibulum, as one struck
and astonished, and did Discurre every where, as one that did explore what
matter was without: but suboderating noe danger, again he soon descended. More
then once I have with admiration seen that. Sometimes also, I have put upon the
stick, a Domestic Be; but having spyed this, forthwith out he came, and
snatched the Be as one in wroth, and left it not, till it was killed.

Furthermore I have found these Bombilii, to coat with Wax the Cells, out of
which their fellow Bees had gone, to fill t^en with honey; to seal them up with
Wax, lest the Thieves entering into them, should wast the Honey. For amongst
these are to be found idle Drone^, Thieves and s^ow Bombilii: Yet we have seen
those, with the rest going abroad to collect Honey, did make a show to fly out
with them, but they did not go out of the Chamber, in which I did keep them;
but did only fly a few rounds, and that being done they did return into one of
the Glass bottles: (For I hadplaced two in the Chamber) in the which they had
built their Combs: And each one returned into the Bottle out of which they came
^orth; when the rest flew out into the Fields, and Meddows, and afterward did
return home, some laden with Honey, others with Wax, and some with Water,
these Droans did return empty into the Hives: and moreover did devour the
Combs made by others, and the Honey gathered for winter.

These are the idle Cattle which do not employ themselves in the gathering of
Honey; but do consume the aliments gotten together, by their fellows,
concerning which the Ancients have said much, etc.

Perhaps you will ask what was the end of this Old Bombylius, which I did
think to be the King or Captain: Him I saw near dying early ith morning before
the Drummer did Vibrate, as he was wont, his wings, and did excite a noise to
them, creeping out of the House: But wholly horrid and Trembling in body; hither
come, as it were tired, he lay down and without Convultion of the feet, sweetly
did expire; neither did that seem a wonder to me, for his feet were long since
numbed with Old age.

The King being dead, the number of the other Bomb^lii, did daily decrease, at
last I did see a Bombylius creeping out of the Cmbs, whose Head was plucked from
the shoulders: A body without a name.

I beheld this Trunk palpitating, and lying alive two Days, and then expiring,
hence it was easy to guess, all things within to be troubled and done
inordinatly and ill, and the Bombylii to do as they list, and to fight
^iercely the King being dead; for from that time the Drummer beat not any more,
as he was wont, the King being alive.

It is also worth admiration, about the birth of these Bombylii from one Old
Be of this kind, when he does compose himself to propagate his Specis,
Sometimes to come a Hundred and Twenty Worms, yet sometimes fewer, and
sometimes more; but one only sometimes, to have bred at once, there are many
Eye witnesses besideds my self, who have wondered, one of these little Bees to
be so fruitful, as to be able to constitute a Be Kingdom, and an entire
swarm.

Section. 6. of Beetles.
Number. 106.
G. P. 2. Tab. 5^*
Betwixt the bark and the body of an Oak, growing in the Island Wallacria in
our Zeland, I found this Worm boaring it; though soft, knew how by the benefit
of a peculiar organ, as with a wimble to perforate a very hard wood; and this
kind of Worms use their mouth, out of which a sharp and hard Instrument does
stick for a Wimble. Also they are not a little strong, in protracting the
hinder part of the body to the head wards: Moreover they do affix the Podex in
the excrements, and so they are placed betwixt the Wood and excrements, as it
were squeesed in a Press; so that they may force with their mouth and boar, and
in this posture they do pre^orate the Oak, and do live of the marrow and
fattish matter, which they boar out. Being fed to satiety, they do extend
themselves straight, when he Ventricle has done its office, they do exonorate
the belly, and at the same time they do, by little and little, more and more
contract the body, and draw it up, as much as may be; so that always the voided
excrement is found very close to the body: And so pressed they force into the
wood.

This did give it self to Transmutation, the 28 th. of October, placed upon the
bark of the Oak, on which I had found it sitting, together with many other
little ones; yet I judging it alive (for I saw them wag frequently) the* Year
following the 13 th. of January, it did produce an odd Animal, of a Hoairy
color, variegated with black spots; but yet stout and fierce; in the Forehead,
it was Armed with Horns, which it did draw back, when it was angry or did move
forwards; but did join them, when pleased; did not suffer it self to be in it
closed in a wooden box, for it did thoroughly bite into the wood, and that
quickly, and so broke out, and ^o did she^ from what kind it sprang; for I
could not explore of what aliment it did live, and therefore could not keep it
alive, but I suffered it to starve.

Number. 107. b.
G. P. 1. Tab. 66.
The Worms of Table. 107. b. are most bitter enemies of Catterpillars: The fore
part of the body has two open claws; whichshut and open like Pincers; by these
claws they pinch the bellies of Catterpillars, and hang upon them; the
Catterpillars feeli^g the pain of the wound, do move and agitate the body every
way, that they may free themselves: In the mean time the Worm, like one dead,
the body being extended, does quiesce without motion, and by how much more the
Catterpillar does move, and toss; by so much more is it hurt, and the belly is
burst; after that the Worm has let go, the wound does forthwith swell, which
seems to indicate a venom.

This Worm, well armed by nature, is Yellow; and of a splendid color: it
cannot easily be hurt of the Catterpillars; it cannot live above gro^nd above
two Days.

I put upon the ground one of the Worms described almost dead; which forth with
recovering spirit, penetrated by boaring the ground.

In winter time diging, I found one of these Worms, the Ground being Frozen,
above two foot deep, (they easily abide cold,) together with a certain Be,
which I placed near the Worm, that I might observe how they agreed.

The Worm, forthwith set upon the Be, and took hold of his head with his
Pincers, and so long agitated, until the Be very much tired, did endeavor to
get away; but his wings being frozen, could not.

A little battle I saw at the same time betwixt a Be and a Catterpillar; which
I had then also dug out of the Ground.

Number. 107. a.
G. P. 2. Tab. 19*
The two Worms expressed in the Table, are plainly of the same nature, and cast
upon the fire, do conslagrate like Oil.

Now I shall relate the Metamorphosis of them.

One of the Worms, when he lay still for Transformation, it was the 2 d. of
June, and he continued in that posture till the 24 th. of September, in which
posture he is expressed in the Table.

But that same day he brouhgt forth an Animal, like to a Chrysalis: as that
Worm had a pair of Pincers, so this Animal was in like manner armed with
Pincers, very pernicious, for with them he pierces and breaks the Eggs of
Ants, and Gryllotalpae; wherever he finds them: He is equally as malicious, as
the Worm, from which he is changed: Also he fiercely fights with his like; and
especially after three Days hunger; for then he fights most stoutly with his
Princes, etc.

When you do cast him Ants or Gryllotalpae's Egg; forthwith he does Exuge them
boared through with his beak.

As this Animal is an enemy, to all Insects, and does endeavor to devour
them; So also it has its enemies and indeed very Infest; to wit, the
Gryllotalpae, for these every where near their nest, make covered Burrows in
which they do wait in Ambush, and observe which they may devour. As these are
wont to kill Catterpillars, so to them is returned, what they have given to
others: Yea as these have treated the Gryllotalpae, not yet excluded and hidden
in the Eggs; so also the adult Gryllotalpae, do treat these, and prevail over
them.

These Worms are two years old, when they change; neither do they change the
Hackle: But when they change form, then Snake like they put off the Skin, and
grow Whitish; and also on each side the beginning of the wings is then beheld
to come forth, but the Head and Feet obtected with a certain thin membrane, or
skin, which by little and little does excresce with the Feet, and at length
does fall off.

And this membrane does seem only given to them for the conservation of their
members, when they are in the state of Transformation; and now when these Worms
are plainly Transmuted as dead, yea void of all motion, they ly upon the ground
fixed, and there appears no ^igne of life in them.

Number. 108.
G. P. 1. Tab. 6.
The Worm represented in Table 108. Was bred from the sweet Root called
Skirrets.

In the same Root in which it was bred, it composed it self for change the 9
th. of August, and the 25 th. of the same month came forth a Black creature
depicted in the Table: it is of a slow gate, as the Worm from which it was
bred, when this little beast was first seen, it was covered with a Yel^owish
color very pale; the Forepart was Reddish, but afterward it became exactly
Yellow, and then of an Amber color; and at length elegantly Black.

I kept him alive some Days with sweet juices.

Number. 109.
G. P. 3. Tab. M.
This Species of Tcredo is wont to be found while yet it is little, betwixt the
Bark, and the Okewood, or also in the very Bark; and there it is procreated of
Seed; but now having got more strength, it does boar into entire Trees; by its
most sharp mouth, and does infer great damage to them: it does seem a wonder,
or at least worth the Observation, a worm so soft, little, and tender, to
penetrate so great and most hard trees, and boaring the trees does follow after
the fat, and oleaginous juice with which it is Nourished.

It is necessary that the Anteriour parts of the Mouth, to be not only hard,
but also subtle, and sharp; by which they may penetrate to the intimate parts
of the Trees, and to comminute their substance, although wood, and most hard,
into a most fine Powder; which in every Species of Teredo may be observed.

It composed it self to change the 10 th. of November, 1663. And the 6 th. of
April, the Year following 1664. the Red creature presented it self to our Eyes
designed in this Table.

I kept it alive with Sugar until the 5 th. of May.

Number. 110.
G. P. 1. Tab. 79.
The Worm, of the 110 th. Table, was brought in a certain Ship from New
Zeland, in the West Indies, into this Country.

I found it in the bark of wood, of which Chests are wont to be made, in which
is wont to be brought Sugar, out of the Indies; from that bark it has its
Original, and does seek nourishment; it began to undergo the change the, 7
th. of September, and remained in it to the 19 th. of October, and at that time
changed the skin; and with the skin the shape; by little and little, the
color, members and all the rest.

The manner of the change (as I Observed it) I have set forth in the Table, and
at length, the Transformation being completed, an Insect, (perhaps never seen
in these Regions) came forth, of a wonderful structure and shape, much unlike
to the first which it had; which I have also delineated exactly.

Number. 111.
G. P. 1. Tab. 78.
The Worm, of the 111 th. Table, is in Dutch called the Corn Worm; because it
consumes the roots of Corn; it is ^ound also in Gardens and Orchards.

I took this Worm the 22 d. of August, 1659. And I kept it a whole Year in a
Glass bottle, with Earth put in the bottom: To which I injected the seed of
Henbite, with a White flower. (for there is another Herb of that name with
Purple flowers) and I observed in the evening the Worm to be wont to come
forth, up from the bottom of the Bottle, that it might feed upon the Herb, and
Flower, before described; this being done, again it hid it self within the
Earth; for never or very seldom, it does appear, in the Day time, above ground.

After the Worms of this kind have eaten enough, and have come to the just
Magnitude of body, they seek high places; that they may safely quiesce, and
that they may pleasingly compose themselves to Transformation, which they
expect.

This Worm seems to come from the seed of those Beetles, which eat the leaves
of trees, and which is very frequent in Holland upon the tops of Trees in May,
for then their nourishment every where abounds.

This kind is wont to stay above ground two whole Months, or a little more, the
rest of the Months of the Year, it lies hid under ground and uses no
nourishment; like to a dead thing, and it does always, unmoved, plainly
quiesce; but touched with a hot hand, or otherwise, it forthwith stirrs; as I
have often tried. And this also of this kind of Beetle, never to be found two
or more joined under ground; but always Solitary.

Before the Worms hither to described, were transformed into Beetles, they had
lived over the forth Year.

The Worm of this Table, did begin to change it is form on the 3 d of
September, 1658. and I have described the manner of it' s Transmutation; and in
May, 1659. from that came a Beetle deplcted also.

It lives long, provided it be not starved; for want of food; or through the
vehemence of the cold.

Number. 112.
G. P. 2. Tab. 18.
This Kind of Worm, I found creeping upon Greencorne; and in vain have sought
it other where: They are pernicious creatures, for they eat the green Ears or
Sheathings of Wheat: They swiftly ascend, and descend, as soon as they perceive
the Corn to be touched with a Stick or the Hand, (The like is above noted of an
Eruca) forthwith they cast themselves upon the ground, be they little or
greater; the less swiftlier, then the greater; for that these are not so
Tenacious of the Corn as those, which are Armed in the hinder parts with
Clikers, by the help of which, they hold hard upon the Corn; being fallen upon
the ground they creep into it, and ly hid under it.

One of these, affixed to a stalk of wheat, being about to change into a new
form, the 22 d. of July, as is depicted. On the 8 th. of August, came forth an
Animal very thirsty, for as soon, as it came forth, it drunk much, and often.

I learnt by experience, (and all that I have writ I have proved so) this
Animal may very long be kept alive with water, and Sugar; but destitute of
water; it lives not above four or five Days.

Number. 113.
G. P. 2. Tab. 15.
These Animalls for the Elegancy of them, are called Lady-clocks; they owe
their Original to the Seed which their Parents shed and put upon the
Curran-bush leaves; and which the heat of the Sun hatches.

These Eggs like seeds laid close in a round, as loaves in an Oven, the 20 of
May, first did look black: But the 29 th. of May, did grow greenish at the
bottom; and the Second of June, every one of these Eggs, had a black spot, or
point in the middle; and the 5 th. of the same month, Animalls were hatched out
of these Eggs; partly yellowish, and partly black; in which no touch of life
did appear, unless breathed on, then they moved, or rolled, to and fro.

But the 6 th. of June, when now their feet are grown, and hardened with the
benefit of the air, they creep about; then run about; but about evening, and
when the air was cooler, they run together, and kept close; either for
company, or for heating one another; and in this situation, and posture, they
remained till 16 ith Morning of the day following; then every one set out to
seek food, and that, the dew which uses to fall upon the leaves from the sky,
and endued with a peculiar force of Aliment, well known to those, and other
Insects, for food; for they feed on it, etc. About the 13 th. of June, these
Insects did put off their skins, Serpent like; which being done, they are
Yellowish and Blackish.

The Day after, viz. The 14 th. or about it, they change form another time,
and color, so as to grow Yellow and Reddish.

They begin the 3 d. change, two Days after the Second change, in that very
posture, and with a Black and Red color.

The 4 th. Transmutation they are wont to undergo, ^he 3 d. Day after the 3 d.
Metamorphosis.

And this is the last change which they suffer, and by it they get their last
skin, partly Black and Red, and where it is Red, variegated with Black spots,
or points, as is depicted.

It Is worth the noting, as often at they cast their skin, they fix their feet
fast to the Leaf or Paper, they chance to be on, and when they have fixed them,
they creep out of the skin, and leave it standing so, that seeing of it, you
woul'd say it was verily one of those Animalls standing, etc.

I sustained these Creatures for some time with dew, collected before Sunrise
from the Curran-bush leaves, until I saw them to have attained to their full
Magnitude, and perfection, nor to make any further change, and then I set them
at liberty to provide for themselves.

Number. 114.
G. P. 2. Tab. 41
With this sort of Worm, Skins and all things made of skins, are much infestd.

This I found upon the Feathers of the dried body of a Duck, eating the fat and
skin thereof, and perhaps they are bred of it, because they feed of it, as many
Insects exist from that, with which they are nourished, as the Philosophers
Write. They creep very swiftly, as soon as they perceive any thing, which may
trouble them; they hide themselves forthwith under the Feathers, so that they
may not easily be found.

This deserves Admiration, these Worms to cast 10 Skins, before they change;
and as often to cleanse, as they cast their skins.

Their Excrement is like a slender Thread twisted, yet firmly compacted, a Span
long, and which may be extended, for it is Viscons, and hard to break, and
under dirt, they are wont to ly hid.

I tried this Worm to have fed, from the 10 th. of June, to the first of
September, when it did desist from eating, it began its Transmutation, as is
depicted Number 114. and the 20 th. of October, to have bred first a Hair
colored Animal; which then put on a Red, and lastly a Black color. which was
Yellowish, in the middle of the body.

You may keep these Anmalls, as long as you please if you give them Walnuts to
feed on; but take their ^ood from them, and they live not above four days.

No Insects are so fearfnll as these are, for let them have the least
perceivance of any thing, that may hurt them, and they presently counterseit
themselves dead for fear of being killed; and indeed, it is so with all kind of
Animalls, who naturally fly things hurtful.

Another Worm of this kind I fed, not unlike in color to the other, Figured
in the same Table.

Which the 3 d. of September, composed it self for change, in the Figure
depicted, it remained in that state to the 20 th. of November, on which day it
boar Twins a Male ou^ of the right, and a Fe-male out of the left side.

But you will ask, how knew you to distinguish Male and Fe-male? I answer, both
these within a quarter of an hour after their birth copulated, and showed me
which was Ma^e, and which Fe-male.

The Male was longer, and slenderer, then the Fe male; which was shorter and
rounder, the one delighted in the others company exceedingly; but I let them go
together at liberty into the Fields.

I was an eye witness of this secret of Nature, from one and the same Species,
two specifically different Animalls to have been bred, from the one, One; and
from the other two a Male and a Fe-male; I saw this Transmutation with my own
Eyes, and coul'd not find the reason of it.

Number. 115.
G. P. 2. Tab. 10.
I find by Accurate search, that about the middle of June, a Greasy and Fat
substance does drop out of, both the upper, and the under side of the leaves of
Mothmullen. Sometimes sooner, sometimes later; but the 15 th. of June, I found
out this thing.

This fat juice did become a living Animal, the 20 th. of June, to wit, a
little Worm; which was in the middle of the Body pellucid, like water; was of
a Sapphire color, Greenish, which slowly and gently was agitated by the Suns
heat; but the 24 th. of June, it became of a Yellowish color, and the 27 th.
of the same Month, I did distinctly see on the hinder part of the Body, which
was Yellowish, 32 Black spots, and forwards on the body 8 more.

These Animalls feed of the down only growing on the leaves of Mullen; and
this wool, or down mixed with Venice Turpentine, and used by way of
suffumigation in smoke, cures the Piles; which I have tried.

This little Animal did give it self to change, the 30 th. of June, the same
Year; but because nothing particularly came from it, I have not depicted the
form of the Sheath, or Chrysalis; for only after it had given it self to rest,
it grew in its roundnesse, as though it would change, and the 8 th. of August,
it did creep out of its skin, as out of its Shell, Yellowish distinguished with
Black spots, and round in Figure.

It is worth observing, that these Creatures, when they first grow Yellow, ever
before they have feet, are beseiged by their enemies; and they are certain
little Spiders; which are of the same color with them, and bigness; and
without doubt, deceive them, upon the likeness of them.

These Spiders are bred of the same Leaf with them.

Moreover there is another Creature of a Black color with Pincers in his
Forehead, which he opens and shuts, as he lists; with which he kills these
Worms, and Spiders: This also I guess is bred from the same Leaf, etc.

All of them feed of the Down growing upon Mullen.

This Down is pellucid like Crystal.

Number. 116.
G. P. 1. Tab. 43.
This little Annimall feeds on a Thistle.

He began to be Transformed the 9 th. of July: The manner of the change is
depicted, for its singular elegancy; The upper part represent the Figure of an
Imperial Crown, under which the Image of a humane Face offers it self: In the
middle you have the Image of some ensign.

The state of that Transformation continued in this manner 12. Days; after that
appeared a great Animal, having six Feet; which also I painted.

Number. 117.
G. P. 1. Tab. 44.
This Worm is not much unlike the former; Melissa Yields it aliment; whose
juice drunk with Wine, is believed, to mitigate the pain of the Stone.

In creeping appears, near thee xtream parts of the Body, a thin skin; which
does seem to refrigerate it by conti^ualy fanning it.

It began to change the 7 th. of June, and after 10 Days it received the form
of the Insect, depicted.

Number. 118.
G. P. 1. Tab. 45.
The Worms depicted in the 118 Table, I found upon the leaves of the Willow, in
a certain order; as it were, disposed in Battle Array, and with the bodies
erected.

And when they had come to their just Magnitude, their bodies being inclined,
they began to eat, and to abrade the tender particles of the leaves, so that
nothing was remaining, besides a certain dried skin.

They appear Yellow in the beginning, afterward they become black.

They composed themselves for change, the 7 th. of June, and the 18 th. day of
the same month appeared the Animalls depicted.

These Animals have a certain glue, near the Tail; by which they do adhere to
all things so Tenaciously, that they can scarce be shaked of.

Number. 119.
G. P. ^1. Tab. ^6.
For Gryllotalpae or Field Crickets, I know them by many experiments to be very
rebust, and of a firm life.

I cut off the head of one of them; which after 2 days was wholly eaten by
another Field Cricket: only 2 little Nerves being left, yet the head lived 12
hours after.

I hanged another Field Cricket by a string in the heat of the Sun, so that it
became wholly Black: yet it died not, before the 7 th. day.

They are very ingenious in building their nest: for that end, they do elect a
certain Glebe of earth firm and Tenacious: and therein they make themselves a
hole to go in and out at; within they make a great cavitie, in the which they
depose more then 100. Sometime 150. eggs.

This being done: ^he hole of the ingresse they accurately shut up, and they
strengthen the Glebe as much, as may be; for that being broken, all the eggs
perish, and are consumed of certain Black Flies; which ly hid under ground;
therefore they are very anxious and solicitous of conserving, and making firm
this Glebe; therefore they perpare for themselves a certain subteraneous
Ductu^, round about the Glebe, that they may go round about this Glebe, and
preserve it: besides, about this Glebe they have other holes, and hiding
places; whither in time of necessity they may Fly.

Again, they know how to raise up their nests, by a wonderful industry, in a
hot and dry season, that they may almost touch the superficies of the earth:
that by so much the better and sooner, the eggs may be cherished with the heat
of the Sun, and hatch; on the contrary, the air enclining to cold and
humiditie, they do sink lower into ground their nests.

I have observed also the Field Crickets to have wings, but not to fly: but for
ornament; that with them they may cover, and preserve the very tender hinder
part of the body.

In the Island Wallachia of Zeland, there are many Field Crickets, and they do
much hurt to the young and tender corn, which they sa^ in two with their mouth
and cut the roots.

The Gardiners, that they may remove them, put into the ground little pots,
that the upper lips may be equal with the superficies of the ground, the Field
Crickets falling into these cannot get out.

Or their nests are to be broken, and the eggs spoiled

Number. 120. a.
G. P. 2. Tab. 42.
The Animal depicted in the 120 th. Table, a. is ugly. Beetle-like, and mostly
lies hid underground; it has no wings, it feeds of the leaves of Anemone, or
the garden Ranunoulus.

This I put into a Big Glass, the 5 th. of May, filled with new earth; the 11
th. of the same month it thrust it self, wi^h the hinder part of the body into
the earth; at first I did not observe that hole was by it, but taking it out,
I made all plain again.

The next time I looked at it, I observed, that it had thrust its body again
into the earth, and I took it out again; but the 3 d. time seeing it again in
the hole, I let it a^o^e, and did observe not-a-few Eggs; which it had laid in
the hole, Yellowish Eggs, like grains of Sand, thick compacted, as in the
Table, they are depicted. When this Animal had laid its seed, it was as
little again, as it had been, just before; for it could scarce draw its laden
and big body, and now it became more Agill, and eat more meat, and greedilier,
then before: also in a night, the hinder part of the body was extremely shrunk
up, and shortened by the half; it slept at the least 1^ hours daily, as often as
it awaked, it devoured its usual food, which I gave it, greedily.

And the 2 d. of June, I found it again crept with the hinder part of the body
into the earth, continually beating the earth therewith, that it might more
easily lay its seed etc.

After this manner it placed its seed upon the earth the 2 d. time, in the same
form as the first; but that being done, it lived not long after; for when the
leaves of Anemony did wither, it died with hunger, without doubt.

From the seed of this Animal, which was first laid, many very little Worms
were hatched, not thicker, then horse-hairs: But the 21 th. of June, the crept
swiftly, and were as big as Mustard Seed, had six feet and 2 ho^^s.

The greatest part of these Worms being numbered, I found them above Two
Thousand: but I believe there were 3 Thousand.

The seed which it laid the Second time, the 29 of June produced also many
Worms, just like the former; but not so many in number, to satisfy my
curiosity, I took them up on my Pencill point, a little wetted, one by one, and
put them into a glass, and thus I counted 906. but many I lost in the telling.

I took great pains to find out a grateful food for these Worms; but to little
purpose, I gave them honey, dead earth Worms, Ants Eggs, Sugar, Bread, diverse
green herbs; but I could not bring them up to a just bigness with all these.

But by means of a Microscope, I Painted to the life one of them, in the form
you see it in the Table.

This and others I kept alive, and found that yearly they changed color* the 2
d. year brownish, the 3 d. year black.

And thus much for the female Beetle I shall observe something of the Male of
this kind.

Number. 120. b.
G. P. 1. Tab. 74.
I found the Worm expressed in this Table, b. under an Iron Pot: it is fierce,
and devours all other Worms, even those that are wont to eat Catterpillars: I
put him (for the experiment sake,) with 4 other Worms, such as are wont to
devour Catterpilears, into a China-Cup, he forthwith snatched one of them up
with his Pincers, and sucked out all his Juice, and although the Yellow Worm,
did much Strive to get away; yet this kept fast hold, till he had killed them
all.

Number. 120. ^.
G. P. 1. Tab. 17.
Also again I noted about the Female of this Species in the Table. c. that it
was of a slow motion, and crept, and rested by turns. It is wont to live in the
dark underground, and also above ground in obscure places.

It is nourish^d with Worms only that it finds, and devoures, it tears open the
belly of the Worm it kills, and sucks the guts, and eats them, lifting up its
head, and now and then settling its feet upon the body of the Worm: I have
observed the guts of the Yellow Worms, which it had plucked out, to have the
thicknes of the hair of a man's head, now when it is full, it sleeps 5 hours,
without any motion; and drawing its head almost under its body, it lies upon a
side.

And because this Beetle is of a very slow motion, and lives not, but of other
Worms, it has wings; these wings are as long as its body, and yet do not
appear, or can be seen, unless it produce them; so accuratly are they rolled up
and folded, and thus hid, are not dirtied, and marred by creeping underground.

Section. 7. OF GRASSHOPPERS.
Number. 121.
G. P 2. Tab. 40.
Many years I desired to konw, whence Grasshoppers were bred, and did use
muchdiligence in the matter.

I have had 40. years experience, and do attest the Grasshopper depicted, in
the 121 Table, yearly to be found, the months of November, and Dec^meber. in
our Island of Zeland, about old Lime-trees, and to live for some time of a
certain humor they suck from these trees.

For winter coming on, they all dye which come from this Lime-tree, and it
seems proable, they must desert those Trees; because they afford them no longer
nourishment.

Whilst they are Worms, they live of and in the wood of the Lime-tree; but when
they become Grasshoppers, they have need of other nourishment then the leaves
and humor of these trees.

The Worm depicted lying in the state of Transmutation, is not easily found,
unless when by the force of winds, the Trees are torn up by the roots, or when
the wood is felled.

About that time this Worm light into my hands, having entered into the state
of Transmutation and resting in it, so that I cannot exactly tell the very time
of its entry into the Transmutation, for it had placed it self in the very
interior pith of the Tree, and I found it in the dissected wood the first
January.

As soon as I had got it, I placed it in its own earth, in a warm place near
the fire. And the 31 th. of the same month it brought forth a Grasshopper, which
cast its shin first, and then changed its color. For 14 days I gave it Sugar,
Apples and Pairs; but these not being its meat, it dyed.

Section. 8. OF FLIES.
Number. 122.
G. P. 1. Tab. 53.
The Worm of the 122 Table, was bred of the Putrid flesh of a certain Bird;
which I kept under a glass, until it did begin to be transformed, the 30 of
May, and the 14 th. of June it had the shape of a big Fly depicted.

When it first came forth of its worm, or egg, no wings did appear: but in the
space of half an hour, it seemed bigger by half, and the wings were spread
and smooth.

Number. 123.
G. P. 1. Tab. 54.
The Worm of the 123 d. Table, was bred of a Flanders Pica, dead, and corrupted.

Having sought a Place to hide it self in, after the manner of Insects, which
change; it began its change the 12 of June; and, the 27 of the same month, it
put on the form of a Fly, depicted.

Number. 124.
G. P. 1. Tab. 55.
The Worm of the 124. Table. had its original from the corrupted brain of the
Water-Hen.

When the time of Transformation comes, it boars a hole in some wood, and hides
it self in it.

It boared open all the wooden boxes in which I endeavored to keep it; so that
I was forced to keep it in a glass.

It began to change the 12 th. of August: and it had the form of a Fly, the 26
th. of the same month, depicted.

Number. 125.
G. P. 1. Tab. 69.
The Worm of the 125 th. Table, had its original from Wheat-bran putrefied;
which I kept mixed with water, till it grew sower, and began to putrefie.

From this Putrefaction came many Little Worms; which begun to take a new
form, altogether the 22 d. day of June: and the ^ d. of July in the same year,
they all changed into Flies; which lived without any food, till the 16 th of
the same month.

The following Flys make a distinct Genus, remarkable for their Quick and
Steddie flight.

Number. 126.
G. P. 1. Tab. 2
The worm of the 126 th. Table: is bred in Iakes, Privies, of sincks; its Long
Tail serves, that it rolls not in creeping, for that it has a round body
without Legs; as it rolls it balances it self with its tail.

It composed it self for change the 26 th. of August, for which end, these
Worms seek hiding places in the chinks, and clefts of old walls.

It remained in its change 17 th. days, depicted in the Table, then came forth
a Be.

When this Be was first hatched, I thought it wanted wings; for in the place
of them, I could Animadvert nothing; but 2 white points like Pin-heads; but the
Be forthwith began to spread those white spots, with its hinder feet; and
within 2 hours fitted them so, that they were fit fo fly with.

The nourishment of this Be, is a certain sweet juice; which it draws from the
flowers of Carduus Benedictus it also feeds on Sugar, and may be kept long
alive with it.

It uses little Aliment, for it lived 21 days without any food.

By the Be, is to be understood a Fly; that is, a Two winged Insect; the Be
kind having ever Four wings.

Number. 127.
G. P. 1. Tab. 4.
The Worm, of the 127th. Table, is found in Privies; and is bred of Men's
Excrements; it is a very slow creature.

It composed it self for change the 28 th of September: and remained therein to
the 22 d. of October.

And at that time was born a Fly, depicted in the Table.

These Flies are wont to abide about the places where they are bred, and I
could not keep it alive with Sugar.

Number. 128.
G. P. 1. Tab. 4.
The Worm depicted in the 128 th. Table, was bred of rotten dried Fish called
Scate.

Nature cannot be idle; the corruption of one is the generation of another; and
from rottenness, especially in a hot and moist matter (which seems to be most
apt for generation,) diverse Animalls are produced.

I experienced this Worm the 26 th. of May; to be changed into an egg; and a
Great Fly to be bred of that egg the 21 st. of June, depicted in the Table.

Number. 129.
G. P. 1. Tab. 50.
The Worm represented in the 129 th. Table, is bred in the fruit of that Shrub,
which in Dutch is called the Speen appell; and the virtues which are ascribed
to the fruit; are also of the white worm bred within it, to wit, for the Piles,
and burning Fevours, and for these ends, the fruit is gathered about the 16 th.
of October, for the little White worm remains therein, to the middle of June of
the year following; and at that time is turned into a Fly, making a hole to get
out at.

Number. 130.
G. P. 1. Tab. 51.
I had a mind to try, what would become, of the putrid and corrupted Urine of a
man; I made a Funnell of paper, and so folded it, that no Fly or other Animal
could get into it: having infused into it often times humane Urine; I ^ound some
Worms to be bred in the folds, where the feces stayed.

I reserved one of them, for the experiment sake, which composed it self for
change, the first of March: and the 14 th. of the same month, it had the form
of a Fly, depicted in the Table: its head was R^d, the body Black, and the
hinder-parts Yellowish.

Number. 131.
G. P. 1. Tab. 52.
This Worm was bred of Bar^ey flower; which yet it did corrode into smaller
particles: this flower being moist, putrefied, and this Worm was bred form the
putrefaction; for the corruption of one, is wont to be the generation of
another.

I could not observe this Worm to live; but yet it began to be changed the 8
th. of August, and 23 d. of the same month it received the form of an Oblong
fly.

Number. 132.
G. P. 1. Tab. 73.
The little Worm of the 132 th. Table, was bred of Rotten Cheese, mixed with
Cummin; with which also it is nourished, and kept alive.

These Worms do not creep so much, as (the body being gathered up) they
suddenly Spring, and Leap Locust-wise.

Before they do compose themselves for change, they do quiesce 3 days.

This Worm began to change the 28 th. of November, 1658. and the 10 th. of May
the year following, a little Fly appeared, whcih lived 8 days without food.

The Worm the Chrysalis, and the Fly, are all depicted in the Table.

Number. 133.
G. P. 1. Tab. 41.
The Worm of the 133 d. Table, is wont to be found upon the leaves of the
Curran-bush, which are blasted: under those leaves I have descried to lie hid,
a great Number of little Animalls like Pediculi, the Worms of this Table eat
them.

For whilst these Worms do quiesce, without any manifest motion, and that the
Animalls do creep about and upon them, they sting them with their beak, and eat
them.

It began to change the 19 th. of June, and the 30 th. of the same Month it
appeared under the form of a Fly; and so in the space of a 11 Days a Fly is
bred of a Worm.

Those Pediculi are very probably Cimices^

Number. 134.
G. P. 1. Tab. 47.
The Worm of the 134 th. Table, feeds of little creatures, which they call
Green Lice; and do lick the fat of Roses; so that it is very manifest, not the
least Animalls are safe from enemies; but the Less are food for the greater.

This Worm does stick to things, and keeps it self immovable by the bigger and
obtuse parts of the Body; but the acute and slender part, which is like a
Proboscis, it tosses every way, and moves it, that it may take some of the
Foresaid little Creaturs, and having caught them, it lifts them up, lest they
should stick or adhere to any thing, and sucks them so lifted up, until
nothing remain but a every thin Skin Wings and Feet. Also these Worms seem to
love Ants; for they are often with them, but hurt them not.

It began to Change the 14 th. of July, under the Figure of an Egg: and the 21
st, of the same Month, it received the form of a very long Fly.

This was a By-birth, and an Ichneumon-Wasp; the true birth should have been a
Fly, like the last aescribed.

Number. 135.
G. P. 2. Tab. 11.
There are many of these Worms to be found upon the leaves of the Elder; for
they are bred of the Seed which the Fly their Mother lays upon them in the
Month of June, and Hatched by the heat of the Sun.

They well know by instinct (which is admirable) that there will be food ready,
as soon as their Young ones are Hatched, this instinct is Analagous to reason,
and comes near it: So that there they lay their Eggs, where they know the
little Brood, as soon as Hatched, will find meat; for the Ants do depose a
sertain fat and faecund humor, upon the extreme boughs of the Elder, Apple,
Cherry P^re-tree; and upon the leaves of the Curran-bush, from which little
Creaturs of a Green, and sometimes of a Black color, are bred; from the hinder
part of whose Body, an humor is wont to distill, which these Creatures
vehemently covert; as Fishes Water, and greedily sup up.

And when these Flies know, that these little creatures are bred, a future meat
for their Young ones; they do inject their Seed upon the leaves.

These little Creaturs have six Feet, and long Wings, yet I never found them
to fly; bnt are a food to these Worms.

These Worms know how to Counterfeit dead, and to lie amongst them; for that
the innocent little Creatures creep over the Bodies of the Worms; which when
the Worms feel, they take them with their sharp bills, and snck them; lifting
up their Proboscis like Hens, when they drink.

These Worms feed of these little Creatures, and the Birds feed of the Flies,
they are changed into, and we of the Birds.

As soon as these little Creatures perceive the Worms, forthwith they fly them,
and run away.

When this Worm has fed to its fulness for twenty four hours it is wont to
rest and sleep; from Eightith Morning till Nine the next Day, and when he again
feels these little Creatures to run about him, he Eats as much of them as he
has a mind, and now full again, it rests, and seems as Dead.

And the 12 th. of June, this Worm affixed to a leaf did compose it self for
change, as is Depicted.

But the 15 th. of July, a Fly was Borne; which as soon as come forth, in half
a quarter of an hour became as big again, and lived four Days without Food.

These Little Creatures are a numerous Brood of Cimices.

Number. 136.
G. P. 2. Tab. 47.
The 30 th. of August, I took up a Ripe Mushrome; and putting it under a Glass,
I exposed it upon the Pavement to the Sun. The Day following, that Little
Mushrome was full of little Black Worms; but the 11 th. of September, the
greatest part of it was turned into Blark water, like Ink; except that part,
which was called the Stool, or Foot, being the Root.

In this impure Water I numbered 63 worms; which the Day following did betake
themselves to change; but 7 Days after the 10 th. of September, they were all
turned to Living Flies, very swift and nimble, with Red Heads, and Black
Bodies; some of these were of an Elegant color; and had on each side a little
hammer, with which they did beat and excite themselves.

Some of these had Black heads; but one was of a different color from the
rest, and of a bigger body. etc.

You may keep these (if you please) long alive with a Sweet Liquor; I speak
this by experience, as all things else; for I fed many of them from the 10 th.
of September, to the 24 th. of December the year following; and I could have
easily kept them longer, if it had been to any purpose.

Number. 137.
G. P. 2. Tab. 22.
We may very often see, upon the leaves of Oziers, and other Trees, certain
Little green creatures, and so tender-skined, that they are crushed with the
lea^^ touch, and the humor squeezed out of them is green.

These are bred from a certain humor, which the Ants lay upon the said leaves,
and with the sun, hatches into little creatures: they spoil the boughs they
a^re bred on; for they corrupt the wood, knitting upon it a net: under which
lying-hid they grow up; and in the mean time do suck up all the moisture; so
that the boughs being deprived of that humor which is owing to them, do become
lean, tender, and black barked; not like the rest of the wood.

When they are new hatched, the Ants are seen to creep amongst them, and as it
were to cleanse them.

The Worm depicted Table 137 th. eats these little creatures, as soon, as they
are grown up: yea it fills it self with these, that it can hardly stir; and
being so filled, it rests quiet in the same place it laid it self down in, to
the next morning; and then, when the yester-dayes meat is digested, it begins
to devour the remaining creatures, or seeks a new bough, better furnished, and
on which more of these small creatures sit, and of them it fills its hungry
belly, as before.

This Worm gave it self to change the 10 th of June, in that form and Posture
as is depicted, and it remained in that state 20 days, so that the 29 th. of
June, a Fly came forth, which (wonderful!) most suddenly came to its perfect
bigness; for within a quarter of an hour, it bacame as big again, as it was,
when it was ha^ched, and as big again as the egg from which it broke out.

I knew not what to give it, that it would taste, and so it dyed, the 5 th. of
August.

Number. 138.
G. P. 2. Tab. 45.
The Worm of the 138 th Table, is mostly upon the leaves of Elder; for the most
part it is on elegant whitish color, and yellowish; which afterward becomes
blackish.

It feeds of the little creatures, which are often to be found on the extreme
twigs of the Elder: these are the offspring of Ants; bred of a humid seed,
laid by the Ants npon the extreme boughs of the Elder, and, by the heat of the
Sun, cherished and brought to maturitie; that these little creatures might be
bred of it. Also the Ants are continually at hand, to defend them against this
Worm. etc:

It you would know whence this Worm is bred, I answer that it is bred of such a
Fly, as is depicted in the Table, which is wont to lay its seed upon the leaves
of the Elder, well knowing these little creatures to be there, which may serve
it for food, and from the seed of this Fly, this Worm cherished by the heat of
the Sun, does come.

When I had fed this for 13 days with its due food, it left eating, as though
it would have begun its change, but Two days after it put on the glorious
color before named; which done, it again devoured the little creatures; and
last of all, the 26 th June it did compose it self for change, and did remain
in that state, to the 13 of July, on which day came forth a Fly, very like that
of the 130 th Table above, but a little bigger, and Yellow on the forepart, it
lived fasting till the 17 of July.

Number. 139.
G. P. 2. Tab. 44.
The Worm depicted in the 139 th Table, is seldom found, for that it lies in
stony, and moist grounds; and sometimes it is in Gardens, for the gardiners
complain that this Worm does hurt their herbs not a little; nor is it easily
to be taken, for it knows how to hide it self under ground, as soon, as it
feels any thing to stir.

It feeds on all sorts of herbs, and eats their roots, it is very voracious, so
that filled it is twice as big, as when it is hungry.

It peeps out of the ground only with the head; which it forthwith draws in
again, as soon, as it does perceive any noise; you must take it with a Spade.

Having taken it, I put it in a glass, filled with earth, and did expose it to
the open air; in a place moderately hot of the Sun; and I provided it with
meat and drink; In this glass it composed it self for change, in that posture
in which it is Painted; the 29 th of May: and the 25 th of June following, it
bred a creature furnished with 2 wings, and 6 long Feet called by us when
boys, the Tailor.

These Tailor Flies are very ^eacherous; there are double Number of males, for
one female; for this you will experience with me, if you mind as I have done
often, when the male Couples with the female mostly 5 or 6 males Fly about
them, each of which stay their course of coupling, and endeavor to hinder the
former; To whom it is given first to couple, he remains affixt to her 2 days
together; and the male, loose, not very long after dies; but the female lives.

And when the Seed of the Female is ripe for laying, in infixes its Tail in
the ground, and lays its seed in it; from which this mischeivous Worm is bred,
which is not fit to breed Tayler-slyes till it be Three Year old: if it were
not for this Three Years unfitness to breed, and that there are more Males
then Females; this Worm would do great mischief, in which, God's providence
is much to be admired.

These Flies are those with very Long Legs, and which by our People are called
Drummers. It is remarkable, that they lay Violet-coloured Eggs; all the Species
as them, which I have yet seen, and have I seen at least Five sorts with us in
England.

Of the Original of GNATS.

This is also a new Genus of Flies

Number. 140.
G. P. 3. Tab. 10
I have sought with great diligence, what was the generation of Gnats, and from
what principle etc.

I Observed Gnats to retire to Cisterns in great Numbers; and especially about
the beginning of December; thither they carry their Seed, and after the same
manner, as I have often learnt by my own proper Experience; for they are wont
to sit upon the surface of the Raine-watter, contained in Cisterns, the hinder
part of the their Bodies being inclined downwards; and to excerne their Seed,
and that Seed so dejected, does forthwith sinck to the bottom and after a
little time, is converted in^ Red, and (as it were) Bloody little Insects.

These Little Bloody Worms are nourished of certain little Creatures swimming
in the Water, which I have been wont to call Water Lice, because they have
almost the same form with the paper Lice, and they stay there 11 Months, and
they do make themselves little Cells of their own juice, mixed with the
particles of Lime, within which they hide themselves, against the extreme cold.

But the time of the Natural change being at hand, they do convene in great
numbers, and the heads of all being joined, the hinder parts of their Bodies,
are long much tossed, too and fro, and do excite a great motion of Water, with
which motion, I have Observed a great plenty of a certain Tenacious juice, in
which they compose themselves for undergoing a change.

The 30 th of June, and 13 th of July, I Observed many Gnats to fly out of the
foresaid Juice: The Males have light Feathers on the Head, but not the Females;
but do swel with Eggs, nor yet can so vehemently prick our skins as the males.

As Gnats do arise from bloody little Worms, so they do vehemently desire
Humane blood; for that end they enter into our Honses about Night, even by the
Chimneys, and other hidden places, if they find not the Doors and Windows open,
then they thrust their Trunks, or Darts into the parts of the skin: Where they
may find an open passage to the Blood; which ^ they suck and are mightily
delighted in: They Draw it with very subtle and sharp Darts, made of as it were
three small Hairs, contexcontexed; but hollow within like Pipes, and adapted to
draw blood upwards.

I have sometimes Observed, that a Gnat well filled with blood, not to recede
from our Skin, until a drop of Water, had been rejected out of her Body:
Which I guess to be the Serum; and in so short a time to be separated from the
Blood, and rejected as an excrement.

When the Gnats, new bred, do ascend from the bottom of Cisterns, they are
White, and do seem to want Feet, and Wings; but these do appear in the space of
a quarter of an hour, and they are wont so long to adhere to the sids and
walls of the Cisterns; until the wings are now enough expanded, are hard, and
are fit for flight.

But some will Object, how I could so accuratly Observe, what Gnats do in the
bottom of Cisterns; to whom I Answer, I Observed all things in a Glass Vessel
made for that end, into which I put all those things, which are wont to be
found in Cisterns, to wit Lime, little Stones, Earth and Rain Water, to which I
put the above described Red worms. Also I was forced to place that Vessel in a
cold place; also often to renew the Water, and to admit the fresh air.

For experience taught me, those little Worms, for defect of Coolness and
fresh and well tempered Air, all soon to Die: Therefore by means of the
pellucid Glass, I Daily and diligently observed, what was Daily done in it,
and what changes happened therein.

Section. 9.
OF MILLEPEDS.
Number. 141.
GP. 2. Tab. 36.
All this History of the Authors is Founded upon a mistake; as thinking these
July, or Millipeds (of all which He has given Us the Figured, Table 141.) were
bred of the Thigh bone of a Man; when indeed, they were only lodged therein, in
the depth of Winter; the whole thing is impertinent and not worth the recital.

Number. 142.
G. P. 2. Tab. 48.
Besides what I said of Mushrooms Number 136. I saw also when the aforesaid
Worms were changed into Flies, and when I had placed the water, from whence
they came, before the Sun; it was filled with exceeding little Animalls, which
moved themselves, and were therefore alive; which after I had taken out of the
water, by the help of a Pin, and had viewed them in a Microscope; I found them
to be very little Serpents, or Snakes; and indeed, Multitudes of them did move
so swiftly, and did mix themselves so together, that they could not be counted.

I kept many of these two Years, and I found them marked in their Bodies; some
with Black, some with Green, and others with Brown spots; but the greatest of
them which I kept, was of the Size and shape, and variegated with Brown spots,
as is delineated in this 142 Table: It was very swift and nimble, for as soon
as I laid it down on the Ground, it crept into it, and I had lost it, if I had
not presently dug it up, by the help of a little Spade, I had in my hand.

I kept this little snake long in a Glass, filled with Earth and water; but at
length through the great heat, and want of Water, he died, which I was very
sorry for having kept him so long.

Section. 10.
OF SPIDERS.
Number. 143.
G. P. 2. Tab. 49.
In the before mentioned Matter, from whence the Flies and Snakes come, I saw
also and found a certain kind of Chrystalls; like in form to small Sands, but
but there grew out Feet to them, and by degrees they grew greater; till in
three Years space, they were full grown, and attained the form of the Spider
Depicted in the 143 Table.

Of the Mushrooms, growing out of the Roots of the Poplar Tree, is wont to
breed another kind of spider; of an oblong form, a Yellow color, and stinking.

From Rotten Mushrooms, another Race of Spiders does proceed, and they are
Reddish, there is another kind of Mushroom, which rises from the Earth, which
first of all appears shut, but in a days time is open, and then it represents
the form of a Mushroom, with a round dish, or little house, like the cup out
of which the Oak Acorns are taken; in this Cup is found Five round grains of
of seed, of the size of Raddish-seed, but pellucid, as Crystal; after these
grains fall out of the cup on to the superfi ^ies, or into the chinks of the
earth; they are cherished by the heat of the sun, till they begin to live,
after wards they get feet; and in three years time they attain to their full
growth, all these things I tried twice Two years together.

These Spiders de^ight (...) be about the herb B^lm; and in Summer time (...)
shadow themselves under it; but in winter they ^y hid in the Chinks of walls,
or wooden fences.

The forem^ntioned Spider, which has its original of Mushrooms, (which many
esteem a delicate) has long feet, which I have exhibited (...) you, in its
birth, progression, increase, and perfection, in this 143 d. Table. where
Figure 1 represents it, at it is first appeareance, Figure 2 at the space of
half a year: Figure, 3 at two years: Figure 4 Three years growth; when it has
attained its full size; which it keeps till it dye, by a natural or a violent
death.

These Spiders are rarely found on the superficies of of a smooth wall, but
commonly in the fissures thereof; but so as they have their feet exerted out of
the Wall, and in my opinion to this purpose; that if any humor come from the
Wall, they may take it with their feet, for with this all their feet are
embrewed, and they first move their fore-feet to their Mouths, and then the
rest; which they successively brush through their Mouths, by the help of their
Forcipes, and so lick off the Nitrous humor, sticking thereto, by which they
live.

On the Day time these Spiders are wont to rest, unless you drive them away;
but in the Night time they play together; for then they are often seen to take
hold of one another feet, and so to fall upon the ground, and when they play
thus together, they do not hurt themselves; for when they fall on the ground
their long feet being streched our, they fall on them like Cats: As soon as
they fall they presently rise again, and stradling with their Thighs, they
as^end the Wall with a Stilt-like motion: They often also Fight so, that they
kill one another; for they are very tender, and are easily killed; and this is
well seen in them from an instinct of nature; therefore with their legs
contracted and affixed to both sides they sit, and defend themselves; for then
their bodies being defended on every side with their Feet, as Ten^^ with Pales,
they sit safe, prevailing against the Spiders, that assault them, with their
own strength; in this posture one of them cannot kill another at one assault;
what do they then will you say? The more strong entang^e the Feet of the more
weak with a wonderful dexterity, and hold them so bound, like the small
tendrells you see on vines, which wreath about and encircle the branches, and
embrace them; and then they hold their Feet so ensnared with theirs, and break
them one after another; nor do they cease, till they have pulled off four or
five of them, this being done, they leap upon them, and bite them, and suck
the wound, and leave nothing, but an Exanguious skin, sucked dry, and the rest
of the Feet.

One of this kind of Spiders I kept long, with Water of Saltpeeter and Lime
mixed; he was very fierce, he always overcame all the Spiders I offered him,
although he found some amongst them, which took him up much time, and gave him
some danger of recovering his health, which he could not overcome, but with
much difficulty; at length he remained Victor of all, viz. Thirty in number,
which I gave him one after another.

I placed before him two Pots; in the one I gave him Meat, in the other Drink;
but he put his Feet into one, and the dry Carcasses of the Spiders he had
killed.

Having eaten these Spiders, he grew great, and put on a Black Color; at
length he dyed, no doubt of the abundance of the juice, which he sukt from the
Spiders, (...)

Number. 144.
G. P. 1. Tab. 70.
The Worm of the 144 th Table, is most worthy of admiration; which I took the
Third Day of April 1658. I never could observe (though I was very diligent)
whether it eat or drunk; neither could I animadvert whether or not it had any
Eyes, or any aperture in its body; by which it might either receive nutriment,
or eject excrement: it wants Feet; it always rests, immovable, and rather
rejoices in cold then heat; for I placed it in the Sun beams, and presently it
sought for a skadow and shelter, and afterward moved not.

sometimes it turned its body, so that it lay on its back, but presently
contracting its body into a round, it kept its former habit, as is Figured in
this Table.

I had this Worm alive with me at home, from the third of April 1658, to the
28 th of August 1659, without any food, and on that Day it dyed, afterward
(which is worthy to be observed,) there lived always near this Worm three White
Animalls, less then common ^ and; which always stuck on the belly, or back of
the Worm, and after this manner they lived Nine Months without any food that I
observed, at length, two of these Animalls on the Head, and the third on the
Back of the Worm, dyed.



FINIS.

