THE LITVRGICAL CONSIDERATOR CONSIDERED: Or a brief view of Dr. GAVDEN'S
Considerations touching the LITVRGY of the Church of ENGLAND.

Wherein the Reasons by him produced for imposing the said Liturgy upon all,
are found to be so weak; his defense of things offensive in it so slight; the
Arguments against the Liturgy by himself afforded, are so strong, that some,
who upon His Majesty's Declaration did incline to the Liturgy, are now further
from it, by reading his wordy Discourse about it.

ALSO Some Reasons humbly rendered, why ma^y Ministers as yet cannot conform to
that Liturgy; but not out of Disloyalty, Pride, Ingratitude, Peevishness, nor
Schismatical Petulancy, as the Sarcastical Pen of this uncharitable Doctor has
published.

The second Edition.

By G. F. as Firm and Loyal a Subject to His Majesty, as this CONSIDERATOR is.

Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities; for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought, etc. Romans 8.26.

(...). Just. Mart. Sine monitor^, quia de pectore oramus. Tertul.

You must give God His due by regulating aright His Church according to his
Scripture. King Charles the first, in His dying Speech.

The Vices in Rhetoric are Sordidness, ^ediousness, Obscurity, Flatness of
Conceit, Argu^eness, and Minutiae, Gawdiness, Wordiness, and empty Ostentation.
Dr. Reynolds Treatise of Passions. Cap. 39.

LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Cornhil, near the Royal
Exchange. 1661.

An Epistle to the Reader by way of Apology for Ministers not receiving the
Common Prayer Book.
Christian and Courteous Reader.
THE Judicious and Reverend Author of this ensuing Tract (no less approved for
his learning, modesty, piety and zeal to the unity of the Church, and his
Witness his separation examined, and published, Anno 1652. and his answer to
Dr. Owen's Schism.
Antiseparation in the day of its prevalency and prosperity; then for his
loyalty and fidelity to the Kings Majesty in the day of His distress) having
entered the Lists with my Antagonist (Dr. John Gauden) by way of Answer to his
confused Considerations of the Liturgy of the Church of England; Prelatical
censures (beyond the bounds of charity or sobriety) of many His Majesty's best
and most loyal Subjects, who in prudence or conscience forbear the use thereof;
and his Sarcastical Comment on His Majesty's Gracious Declaration concerning
Ecclesiastical Affairs, and the liberty thereby indulged and used (as we
presume on due and fit encouragement) was pleased to vouchsafe me a view
thereof: which I having seriously perused, do find to contain an Answer so full
and sober, by Arguments so weighty and solid, that I cannot but commend it to
the reading, and regard of all serious Christians who desire to have their
Faith settled by right and religions Reason, against the unsettledness of fancy,
to which the florid expressions of Rhetoric can only avail.

If thou have read Dr. Gaudens Considerations, thou find the Liturgy set out
in such excellency, and extemporary conceived prayer, so much debased by
elegant expressions, and florid Hyperbolies, that thou can not but be
ravished in thine imagination; but if with patience thou read and ponderest
this Tract, and the Arguments therein produced, with the extent and reflections
of the same, thou will find the Dr. has indeed Hype bolized and verified what
has been observed of him (viz) that his Rhetoric is better than his Reason;
that being exceedingly extravagant through the want of this, for his speech
sounds better than it informs, and pleases as it passes, not as it is
po^dered; I have often heard of Queen Elizabeth's Character of a Sermon, first
preached, and then printed, viz. That it was the best in hearing, but worst in
reading: And that the Preachers Apology was, that Her Majesty in reading, had
his Fiddle, not his Fiddlestick. My serious advice must be to this Reverend man
if it be not below him to take it) never hereafter to sunder these two, for his
Oratory loses its luster and efficacy with its sound.

This, and works of this nature are commended to thee, noc to the end it should
maintain or promote the Controversies conce ning the Common Peayer Book (which
have been so high in nature, Witness the troubles at Francksord An. 1554. in
the times of Queen Mary.
and long in continuance, ever since before the reign of Queen Elizabeth, that
would men with serious and composed spirits, consult the Churches peace, (to
which they so fairly pretend,) it would be found a sufficient Reason to abolish
this Book, and make void this Form of public Worship, which none dare affirm
necessary; and therefore must confess to be alterable, when found inconvenient)
but to convince the World, the Ministers who do yet demurr to the use thereof,
are not without conscientious grounds for their so doing, which they could with
much ease and equity digest into an Apology: what serious Christian can observe
the malici us vexations of Ministers, by the spite of many Churchwarders and
particular persons prosecuting their faithful and able Ministers, unto the loss
of their Estates, imprisonment of their persons, (and at least,) present
interruptions of their Ministry, though the want of a Standard whereby to try
the Common Prayer Book which has had its change by every of our Kings, sirce
the Reformation of Religion must needs render their conviction impossible to
every understanding, and conscientious Juror: Or, the Bishops wilful and
pertinacious refusing to ordain, institute, or induct any Ministers, unless
they will subscribe the use of the Common Prayer Book to be lawful, and that
they will use it in all public prayer, and none other, according to the Canon,
(whose establishment by Law is donbted and denied) notwithstanding His
Majesty's Gracious Indulgence in his Royal Declaration every way proportionable
to that Authority by which these Canons were at first established; or those
heavy Censures, and harsh Invectives proudly belched out by our Antagonist,
against all such as do not presently conform to the use thereof, as guilty of
peevishness, ingrat^tude, schismatical petulancy, or pride, not so much as
considering what has been by one well suggested, That the prudence of some,
expecting the alteration promised in his Majesty's Declaration, does supersede
the Act which their desire of the peace, Considerat. of Liturgy. p. ^. Tho.
Bold. in his Rhetoric restrained. page 3.
unity and uniformity of the Church does incline them unto. Can I say these
things be observed, and men not see plainly, that some pretending to the
healing of our wounds, do propose and pursue ways and methods which must needs
bespeak them Physicians of no value; nay, of more cruelty than skill,
frustrating the very influence of His Majesty's plaster, applied by His
Gracious Declaration; constraining men (who otherwise might with all humble
thankfulness enjoy in silence the liberty indulged) by open and public
Apologies to stave off the violent and unjust censures of proud and envious men.

Christian and Courteous Reader, I have in Loyalty to His Majesty, with such
fervency and fidelity asserted His just Interest, that it may rationally be
concluded, I would not in the least decline His just Desires, or deviate from
his Royal Command, did not Conscience toward God countermand the Compliance
with them. And I am so much affected to the peace of the Church, that I have of
late preached, what God assisting. I resolve to practice, (viz.) That many and
great corruptions in Gods Worship are to be grieved for, and patiently groaned
under, before Schism be consented un o, or separation consulted.] Provided
nevertheless I be passive, not active in them, I can keep communion under that
Form of Worship, whereby I cannot administer, and heartily say, Amen to the
matter of those Petitions which are put upon an order so confused,
preposterous, and indigested, that it seems to me to be so much below the
gravity of the Church, whose mouth I must be; the seriousness of the Office
whereby I minister; the sanctity of the Duty I am to perform; and the s^ored
nature of the Object to whom they are presented, that I dare not stand between
God and his people with the same; Calvin's Epistle to Mr. Knox, Mr. Wittingham
and the brethren at Franck ford.
and therefore cannot but in my place and capacity contend against it, and with
Calvin (in this very case) allow their constancy, who strive for a just cause,
being forced against their will unto contention; and worthily condemn the
frowardness which does (...) and stay the holy carefulness of ref rming the
Church.

Let not men mistake us (I profess it for my self, and presume I may do it for
many of my Brethren) we are not against Set-forms of prayer, or their use in
public; we believe them lawful and convenient, but not necessary, and
therefore not to be exclusively imposed; they may be helps to weakness, and
happy expressions of special emergent occasions of prayer, or praises in the
Church.

I do believe the Church of the Jews had certain Set-forms of prayer and
praises; but I believe also they were occasional and transient; indicted by the
Holy Ghost, and composed by Holy men for that present and peculiar occasion; of
this nature was the Song of Moses, Deborah and Barak, and David's Psalm in 2 Samuel 22. and that at placing the Ark in the Tabernacle, 1 Chronicles. 16. which
bears this Note upon it, Then on that day David delivered this Psalm to thank
the Lord, into the hand of Asaph and his Brethren; and many other Psalms and
Set-forms which are referred to their special occasions; for which having
served, they were added to the Canon of Scripture, as witnesses of Gods
dealings and directions of his peoples duty in all future Ages; but were never
compacted into a set Liturgy prescribed, and imposed as the only standing Form
of Worship; the Jewish Rabbines tell us from Moses to Ezra, more than one
thousand years the Jews had no stinted Forms of prayer in their Church; and
yet they had two considerable Reasons to have enforced it, which we Christians
have not, their infant weak estate wanted Crutches, and the time of the pouring
out the spirit of supplication was not yet come. 2. The Forms were indicted by
holy men in this very act inspired by the Holy Gkost.

I am easily persuaded the several parts of the Service Book were composed by
single persons; and who so will read Isidior Durandus, His Parallel of the
Liturgy and Mass Book
and the Rationalists, will find the time when, the occasions on which, and the
reasons for which they were appointed in the Church. Mr. Baylie has assigned
many parts thereof to the particular Popes, Ecclesiastical policy, Book 5. Page
265.
and seasons prescribing the same; and our own Hooker reports so much of the
Letany or Rogations, that chief part of our Service; but that these things
perished, not with their Authors and occasions, I see no good Reasons for it;
admit we that they were the good expressions, of good men, on good occasions;
yet they were only expressions of men; not inspired by the Holy Ghost, and
unwarrantably resolved into a Liturgy, and made unjustly exclusive to the
expressions of good men, succeeding, as in time, so in capacity to express
their own desires, as their occurrent occasion; should direct in no less sacred
expressions; the alterable condition of the Church does necessitate their
expression to be alterable. I pray what part of our contended-for Liturgy, as
exactly perfect, shall solemnize the saul-humbling memorial of the malicious,
mischievous Murder of His late Majesty, to be held on the 30th. of January; or
the God-praising memorial of the Happy and Honorable Return of his Sacred
Majesty that now is, to be observed Annually on the 29th. of May. I hope men
shall not be indicted for making mention thereof by conceived prayer or
praises; none being in the Book prepared or prescribed which can do it: for it
is most unreasonable that we should be imposed upon by the personal composures
of private fancies who without warrant compose set forms, and therein vent
their own superstitious notions as has been attempted by the books published
as forms of prayer, for the 29th. of May and 30th. of January, the last of
which was sent in the name of the Bishop of London to our Churches, if by his
Authority I conceive not more to the offense of many Godly men, then Breach of
the Laws, and Usurpation on his Majesty's Authority, and abuse of his Royal
Power, punishable with a Praemunire: In reference to this variation, the Church
might, and must keep a standing Council to vary the Liturgy if we be not bound
to dependence on the Spirit; which the Apostle directs, when we know not what
to ask, Romans 8.26. as the only help to our infirmities, and so excludes all
prescribed prayers which must render the dictating power of the spirit
useless, unless the prayer be in an unknown Tongue, or ambiguous phrase, much
at one with latine-service, where the spirit is needed as an interpreter, not
dictator, or most perfectly comprehensive words, that the mind may expatiate
upon, and that is peculiar to the Lords prayer; and so that must be our only
Liturgy.

That St. John the Baptist taught his Disciples to pray, I yield; and that our
Savior teaching his, propounded to them a most perfect prayer, compendious for
the manner; but most comprehensive for the matter of the expression, to be
their pattern, no serious sober Christian can or will deny; but that they were
confined to the only or constant use there of, none do, or dare affirm; or that
it should be to them the Dictator of a standing Liturgy, cannot be rationally
inferred; because the prescription of it affords no premifes to enforce such a
conclusion, the Disciples, who learned that they might teach the Church, never
improved it to such an end; themselves prayed often and openly in the Church,
yet only in their own expressions (for ought appears to us by holy writ) and
the nature and order of prayer, being a serious expression of the hearts
sensible conception, does interfer with such an inference.

That Liturgies are of ancient use in the Church, I agree; but Liturgy as
Episcopacy primitive, was in nature clearly different from what they are now
pleaded to be. Ancient Liturgies were not set and prescribed Forms of public
worship: Smectymnus has asserted, Answer to the Remonstrance. Vindication of
the Answer, p. 14, 15, 16, 17 18, 19, 20, 21.
and well cleared it against the Remonstrant, and that out of Justin Martyr,
Tertullian, Austin the Carthaginian, and Milevitan Councils, That un ill the
time of the Arrian and Pelagian Errors, there were no Set Forms of prayer in
the Church; and then the liberty was only restrained, which has been since
destroyed; men being only bound to confer the prayers of their own composing,
cum fratribus instructioribus; and Forms digested by the latter of these
Councils, were imposed no further than by a placuit ut preces quae probatae
fuerint in concilio ab omnibus celebre^t^r; and only enjoined that the prayers
of particular Ministers should be approved by more prudent men; the original
Liturgies of both Jew and Christian, were plain Rubricks; English Directories
for the method and order of preaching, reading, prayer, administrations of
Sacraments, and public worship: It is an easy matter to make a bravado and
noise of the Liturgies of S. James, Basil, Cyril, Chrysostom, whilst none are
produced and proved legitimate, if there be any not apparently fictitious,
bring them forth to a Test or Standard, we will joynislue, and try the despised
Directory, and extolled Service-bock, and freely consent to retain that which
best agrees, and to reject the other; until then bears us not down, like
Children with big words without cause; methinks it were hugely worth the
enquiry, what Liturgy King Lucius received, when Faganus and Damianus converted
his Subjects; the Church by them constable tuted had settled public worship. It is
apparent that Eleu^herius the then Bishop of Rome referred him to the Canon of
Scripture for to frame all his constitutions by, it would much fortify our
pretenders to Antiquity, to find out the Liturgy used in England before Austin
the Monk; brought over his Roman Missal: Antiquity is a poor, whilst no part
of the Service Book as to its frame and order, does pretend higher than the
time of Pope Damasus, 376. after Christ, and the whole Fabric is apparently of
a much later date: I would desire men may no longer be cheated with words; they
who talk or write for Episcopacy of Liturgy, let them declare the meaning and
acceptance of their term themselves have made ambiguous; for although I could
willingly consent unto a Set-form of public worship, as convenient Crutches
for Ministers of weak abilities, who need no less Set-forms of Preaching, even
composed Sermons, (for whom, finding Homilies, the constant Concomitant of
Liturgies (in this sense) I am apt to think they were at first prepared) yet I
conceive this will better advise the Churches care to have more able Ministers,
who may not need them, than warrant the imposing either of them on more able
men, unto the depriving of the Church of the edifying gift of prayer or
preaching; nor do all the Arguments yet produced, conclude for any such
prescription, nor can they give the least of satisfaction to a serious spirit,
owning the antecedent, but denying the consequence, as unjustly inferred to
make a mere clamor in the world; against which, whether there be not Reason
with a full answer to all the supposed advantages of such an imposition
suggested by-our Antagonist, I refer thee to the consideration of this ensuing
Tract. Some Cynthius seems here to pluck me by the ear, and say, Sir, you run
too fast, and tell us nothing that is urged for Set-forms of prayer, is
sufficient to conclude the imposing of the prefer bed English Service Book;
whereas you are to consider it is established by Law, and calls for your
obedience; which if you yield not, you are bound to produce your Exceptions by
way of Apology, to anticipate the sufferings which impend over your head. To
this I briefly answer,

I know not what to understand by established by Law; we have since the
Reformation had as many different Service-books, as Sovereigns. The Book of
Queen Elizabeth, two of King Edwards, one of Queen Elizabeth's, one of King
James, and one of King Charles the First, (though not commanded, yet) used in
England, pretended to be only autherized by Act of Parliament; and that this
was (under color of Explanation) altered by Royal Authority, all that call to
mind the Conference at Hampton Court in 1603. and consider King James his
Proclamation, for conformity to, and practice of his Book, as the only public
form of serving God, established and allowed in this Realm; and that the Book
received among us is greatly different from what it was established, is
suggested by the late Reasons for Reformation in Worship; and cannot be
detected for want of a Sta^dard to which it should be compared; I would thank
that judicious Lawyer who in this case would resolve me these two Queries.

1. Ought not a Form, Method, or Order, enjoined by a Law (^^b poena) to be
used, and that exclusive, with a n^ne other to be enrolled; as the Standard to
which on all suspicion of variation, men must have recourse in order to their
convictions; and for want of such Standard, the Law be not voided by an
impossibility of conviction?

2. In case one Form, O der, or Method be established by Act of Parliament;
another by the Kings Commission and Proclamation, as the only Form establish d
and ^llowed, which of them must be embraced and practiced, and in default, for
which of them must we be convicted and punished, if by the last we conceive our
selves at present discharged by a power (His Majesty's De^laration) no way
short of what is pleaded for its establishment; if by the first we conceive our
selves discapacitated by that public charge made by Royal Authority, which for
want of the Standard we cannot discover.

Until these be resolved, we can easily see what is offered to us, and
exercised by others; but know not what is es^ablished by Law, against which we
are not to offend: Nevertheless to stay the censures of peevishness and
stubbornness cast on us by passionate men, we humbly profess our consciences
do interdict our use of the Common Prayer on three (as we judge them) weighty
and important Grounds or Reasons.

1. The Common Prayer Book is capable, and so qualisied, that it ought to be
abolished.

2. The Form and Order of the Service Book (used among us) is Superstitious,
and unsuitable to Solemn Public Worship.

3. The Common Prayer Book has been expelled our Church by a lawful and just
Authority, and stands excluded by Sacred Oaths, and a most public National
Solemn League and Covenant.

First, We cannot return unto, and receive again what is capable, and so
qualified, that it ought to be abolished; for that we as Ministers of the
Gospel, charged with the Method and Order of Divine Worship, are in our places
and capacities bound to abolish all things abominable for their
unprofitableness and inexpediency; but in our places we can only enforce such
abolition, by declaring against, and not receiving, assenting to, or admitting
as the standing order of public Administrations; that which in our consciences
we are convinced is so inconvenient, or otherwise qualified, that it ought to
be abolished; as the Jewish did, so the Romish Rites must lose their dignity by
non-submission to them.

That our Service Book may be abolished without sin, none can or will deny,
whilst the exceptions against it, corrections of it, Apologies for its faults
and defects, with the confessions of such who contest for it, do proclaim it an
humane Constitution, subject to corruption and inconveniency; and thereupon
alterable at humane pleasure.

Three things necessitating the Church to abolish what is humane (though in it
self good) are written on our Liturgy in most legible Characters.

First, The similitude and symmetry of it unto the Popish S^rvice and Religion;
wherein it is both mov^ns, minding us of those superstitious dreams and
fancies, which dictated the order, and at first occasioned the use of the
several parts thereof, (as the Sacrament of Penance, Doctrine of Venial sin,
and P^iestly Absolution, the ground of the Confession, Misreatur, and
Absolvtion; the miraculous efficacy of the words directing the Kyrie Eleyson,
with the threefold sin, Original, Venial, and Mortal, which directed it to
Father, Son, and holy Ghost; the sanctifying influence of the words of the
Pater Noster, making it necessary to begin and end; nay, essential to every act
of Devotion and duty of Religion; the miraculous power of particular Rogations,
the Reason of the Letany, the hearing of the heavenly Quire, which is suggested
as the occasion of the Angelick Hymn, and so of other parts, which I cannot
stand to mention;) but also movens, inclining, and apting us to receive, and
again profess that form of worship, with little variation or difficulty.

This similitude and symmetry is apparent by these things.

1. The original Extraction of it (was, and it cannot be denied) from the
Romish Breviary, Ritual, Missal, and Pontifical, Fox Acts and Mon. p. 1272.
1273, 1274, 1275.
into which it may be with ease again resolved.

2. By the order and several parts thereof, which must run unto Romish fancy
for a rational soundation, the Word of God, and nature of the duty not
dictating any.

3. By the groundless Insurrection of the Rebels of Devon and Cornwall, on the
introducing of it into the English Church witnessed in the Expostulatory
message of King Edward the sixth, in these words:

As for the Service Book in English, it has manifest Reasons for it, page 1189.
and yet p^rchance seeme^h to you a new Service, and indeed is none other but
the old, the self-same words in English which were in Latin, if the service of
the Church were good in Latin, it remains good in English; for nothing is
altered but to speak with knowledge what was spoken in ignorance.

4. The attractive influ^nce it had on the Papists, who for eleven years in
Queen Elizabeth's time came to Church without any conversion to true Religion,
Abbot Bishop of Canterbury in his Explicatio illustrium quaestionum. c. 4. p.
112. Morton's Appeal, p. 46.
but on the conformity of the English to the Romish service: on which ground
Pope Plus the 4th. and Gregory the 13th. offered to confirm it, and the Fathers
of Trent assured our Catholic Nobles, that the Pope might do it without any
damage to the Catholic Cause. And the Messengers from Rome entertained here
by Secretary Walsingham, at their return, wondered their Lord the Pope was so
ill advised, or at least informed, as to Interdict a Prince, whose service was
so like his own, and caused the Bull against the Queen to be recalled.

5. Bristow's Motive 34.
The assurance Harding, Bristow, and Carrier, those seducing Jesuits, gave
themselves, that they might yet convert England to the Catholic Church, whose
Service and Ceremonies she yet retained; Confid. p. 45. sect. 8, 9.
the l^st of whom says expressly, The English Common Prayer and Catechism
containe^h no point of Doctrine contrary to the antiquity of the Romish Service.

6. The Service was (and yet is) the Engine of Accommodation between Rome and
England on the designed Spanish Match, unto which none was more potent than the
similitude and symmetry of the English to the Romish Service; Cabala. Lord
Keepers Letter to the Duke, p. 79.
of which, that the Court and Clergy of Spain might be convinced, the Bishop of
Lincoln then Lord Keeper, caused the English Liturgy to be translated into
Spanish by a Franciscan (seeming Protestant) and sent it to the Duke of
Buckingham (there resident) to obviate the Exception, Ecclesiastic policy,
lib. 5. sect. 28.
and facillitate the Enterprise.

This to some seems an Exception of no value: and I concede to the learned
Hooker, that it is too hard to say, in nothing we may follow Rome; for, in what
they do as men, Nature will necessitate; what as prudent men, Discretion will
advise; what as Christian men, Religion will constrain us to conform: But our
stumble is, at what they do as Romish Babylon; for as such, disordered and
superstitious service is derived from them: and the difference is vast between
Scriptures, Sacraments, and Ministry, which must not, nor can be changed,
because they passed through a Romish Chanel; and human Constitutions of Method
and Order, which ought so to differ from, as to speak detestation of, what is
Idolatrous, and determine an incapacity (if possible) of being thereinto again
resolved. The removal of the High Places did not more advance the Reformation,
than the not-demolishing them did occasion and facillitate: Israel's
backsliding in Religion.

Sure I am, the Primitive Fathers, and our Protestant Writers, apprehended
God's mind to be, that His People avoid the Symbols, as well as abhor the
Substance of False-worship, and infer it from Exodus 23.13.20. Zech. 13.2. Deuteronomy.
7.15. Isa. 30.22. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Jud. 23. and interdicted in their Counsels
conformity to the Jews or Heathens in their Festivals, Eusebius devita
constant. lib. 3. cap. 17.
observation of Easter, Fasting on Sundays, Monuments of Martyrs, adorning
their houses with Bay Leaves and green Boughs, and bringing Wine and Cakes to
the Church, and the like; Council. Cartha. Can. 5.14, 15. Bract. Can. 32.73.
Con. Phi. Can. 27. De Corona militum lib. de Idolatria. August. Confess. lib.
6. cap. 2 Confutation of the man of Chester, fol. 54.
against all which * Tertullian urged with much earnestness our Arguments, as
does also Ambrose to * Monica the mother of Austin, who are seconded by Calvin,
Musculus, Beza, Zanche, Peter Martyr, our own Fulk, Jewel, Andrews, Sutliffe,
and who not against the Papists in many things Rejected, and the Rejection
thereof defended by this very Plea. And Bishop Pilkington in our very case of
the Common Prayer book confesses, That in Marriage (which is least offensive)
and many other things, we are too like unto the Papists, and that it is our
fault generally that we differ no more from them in all our Ministry. I wish we
find men convinced of the Nature, and resolved for the Duty of Separation from
Babylon and Antichrist; of which, if they doubt, they may well plead for this
grand prop of their uniting Fabric, so suitable to what is catled Catholic
Religion: but for us, we judge Separation not sufficient unless it proclaim
Detestation, and resolve union to be the result of Papists murning Protestants,
and cannot but endeavor to abolish what is like and suitable to their service.
But Secondly,

The Scandal given by this Service Book does constrain the abolishing of it.
That it has been a stone of stumbling, and Rock of offense, unto the sin of
some, and sufferings of others no observing Protestant can possibly deny; and
it has been made most plainly legible by the troubles of Frankford; constant
complaints of men fearing God in the times of Queen Elizabeth and King James at
the Conference at Hampton Court, Anno 1603.
the Corrections promised (though not performed) the Apologies and Challenges
of the silenced suspended Ministers of Lincoln, Devon, and Cornwall, the High
Commission and Visitation Censures, the earnest Petitions, and importunate
Remonstrances from London and all parts of England, the Commotions of Scotland,
sinful separations from the Church of many weak men hereat scandalized;
obduracy aad ostentation of the Papists, complaints of the Reformed Churches,
and finally by the concurrent judgment of the lare Preface to the Directory.
Assembly of Divines, and Determination of Lords and Commons in Parliament
Assembled on this ground, and consideration, among others laying it aside by
their Ordinance for taking away the Common Prayer book Jan. 3. 1644.
Authority, unto the unspeakable joy and content of many pious and prudent men.

That offenses and stones of stumbling, occasions of sin or ruin, ought to be
taken out of the way and abolished, none that know the word of Christ, Mat.
18.6, 7, 8, 9. the wariness and warnings of the Apostle, who would rather never
eat fiesh, than offend the weak, 1 Cor. 8.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Romans 14. or the
worth of immortal souls, can or will deny.

Thirdly, The scandal and symmetry of the Service Book does not so much
satisfy us, and stir us up unto the desire of abolishing the same, as to see
it so shamefully Idolized, by not only the Vulgar, but such as affect to be
accounted the Fathers of the Church: in which respect it calls as loudly for a
zealous Hezekiah to make it a Nehushtan, and break it in pieces, as ever he did
the Brazen Serpent.

This Idolizing of the Service Book is grown most obvious and common, having
been super-superlatively expressed by the applause of it, acclamations for it,
as the unum necessarium of salvation, only way of Gods worship, and all of
piety; unto the thrusting out Preaching, and planting in the Church a Reading
Ministry, appropriating to it the effect, and attributing to it the honor of
all Gods Ordinances, palliating all profaneness and neglect of piety by the
bare use of the Service Book, and zealously persecuting unto bonds (and death
if possible) all that decline to use it, thinking they do God good service: I
have been often astonished at the high devotion to it, D. John Gauden.
and commendation of it by meaner persons; but the considerations of our
Antagonist has scrued it to that height, that if it presage and provoke not
its utter extirpation, I cannot but conceive men want sense or zeal.

In his florid expressions he thus extolls, magnifieth our Service book unto
that height, that I tremble to transcribe his terms.

This Liturgy is the most excellent means to preserve the truth of Christian
and Reformed Religion, Considerations of the Liturgy. page 10, 11, 12, 42, 43.
it is necessary for the holy harmony and sweet communiou of all Christians,
mightily conduces to the salvation and edification of the meaner sort of
people; the Christian Religion cannot easily be planted, nor thrive among the
Country or common people without a settled constant Liturgy imposed and used;
nor can the Reformed part of Religion be preserved in England to any
flourishing degree, without the Liturgy be maintained, as the firm and most
impregnable Bulwark against Romish Superstition; upon the Liturgy depends the
peace and unity of this Church, as much as the House did on its Pillars which
Sampson pulled down: The Liturgy is the only bond of Loyalty, Love, and Duty to
Sovereign Majesty, the only Basis of Glory, Charity, Unity, Safety,
Reformation, and true Religion; that in the variation of the Liturgy, England
must shake hands with all these. And much more to this purpose; in which, if he
say true, we must cast off Confessions of Faith, cease from Catechizing,
silence Preaching, suspend Statutes, slight Sacraments, receive and read the
Servicebook the Ark of Gods presence, assurance of Salvation, all in all of
Piety and Morality; Almighty instrument to convince of sin, convert to God,
conjoyn to the Church, confirm against Error, and conduct to Glory. It is,
sure, time and reason this holy Book be placed on the Altar, handled and opened
by the Priest, only, with no less reverence than the Jews Thorah, or Papists
Mass Book; or rather cast out of the Church with indignation.

But our Second Exception against the Service Book on which we pray we may not
be pressed to the use of it, is this (...)

The form and onder of this Liturgy is Superstitious, Second Exception against
the Liturgy.
or unsuitable to Public Solemn Worship.

I shall not now meddle with the matter of this Book, which by its ambiguous
phrase is obnoxious to the Exceptions taken to it: Be that good; yet, forma dat
essentiam, the form and order must constitute it solemn public worship: And in
that I conceive something will be found Superstitious, an evident (...),
Will Worship, humane invention, without, beyond divine prescription: His
Spi^itual House page 144.
I must tell Mr. Masterson, who affects that term, it seems to be a plain
(...), an over-earnest, importunate, unwarrantable approach to God, which can
expect no other Answer, than, Who has required these things at your hand? not
directed by the Word, or dictated by the nature of a duty, but founded in the
superstitious fancies of men: Of which nature I judge these particulars.

1. The whole extraordinary Service, Epistles, Gospels, Collects and Lessons,
appointed for Wednesdays, Fridays, Lent, and other Holy Days, whichmaketh a
difference in days, and gives them some dignity above others, and sets them in
a parity with the Lords day (sanctified by God our Savior) and that in honor
of the Saints, or memory of the parts of our Redemption, which abstractedly
considered are mysteries, not mercies) and this without any appointment of God,
See my Fastening St. Peter's Fetters. Sect. 3. page 55.
who only can make Time holy, or Authority given (by any legible Commission) to
the Church, and contrary to the Word of God, Gal. 4.10. Col. 2.16. and must
therefore be a Superstition.

2. In the frequent impertinent use of the Lords prayer: which is a Prayer when
time prevents, or abruptly contracts our own expressions, or to which as a
puttern our Prays must conform: but will not therefore be necessary to be used
in the beginning, middle, and end of Prayers, Eccl spo^. lib. 5. Sect. 34. p.
255, 256.
(as the Reverend Hooker does suggest) nor is essential to every Act of
Devotion, to which a fancy of a sanctifying power of the words, not Christ's
prescription does direct it, rendering it a vain, senseless repetition, and
self-devised Worship.

3. The Doxology, a good compendious Confession of the Deity and Eternity of
the three persons; yet ungroundedly added to the end of every Psalm, unless on
sense of some Sacred Nature and efficacy of the words; without which I cannot
acquit it from addition to the Scriptures.

4. The dignifying of the Gospel, by the specialty of Minister, Place, Gesture,
and popular Acclamations, above the Epistles, though containing the same
matter, and having the same Author. One Scripture may be more useful, but none
more honorable than others of the same Nature and Authority; and I can have no
confidence of their courage in fighting for the Gospel, who are too cold to
burn for the Epistles.

5. The Ceremonies hereto affixed, The English Popish Ceremonies, part. 3. cap.
3. page 124.
(which have been argued to be superstitious beyond my ability to answer) being
purely Religious (not Natural or Civil) Rites, used to edify by their
significancy (the peculiar work of a Sacrament) and so opening a door for
others no less significant but wanting Christ his Institution' (which the
Church is not commissioned to stamp on any) than are the Cross in Baptism,
kneeling at Sacrament, and the Surpli^e: of which last, I should have granted
to Du Moulin, that if the King commanded me to preach in a fools coat, I would
do so rather than not preach; yet cannot admit the Surplice: for I think it is
one thing to wear a garment the token of Royal displeasure and derision,
(wherein Ministers must be wonders and fools to gain Souls,) and it is another
thing to wear a Garment piously, prescribed as a piece of Religion, part of
Worship, a peculiar holiness in access to God, as were the Priests Garments
under the Law, and as are the Popish Vestments, of which number ours makes one.

As in these things the Liturgy seems superstitious, in other things it is
unsuitable to solemn public worship, and that in all the parts of it.

In the reading of the Scriptures it leaps and skips much, thrusts out some,
and brings in Apocrypha; cuts, and parcels, and keeps no serious Soul-edifying
order, which is indeed pretended unto in the preface to it.

The Creed and Ten Commandments, (profitable compendiums of faith and
obedience,) the profession of which is a convenient and necessary piece of
order, unto the discrimination of such as Turks and Infidels who conversed
among, but ought not to communicate in Christian Churches.
unduly intrude into the Assemblies of Christians; and direction of some
administrations, as Baptism, and Confirmation; but are made a positive constant
part of public solemn Worship, on what good ground I confess I am not
convinced.

In the Sacrament of Baptism, the foederal holiness, and Parents interest in
the Covenant, (the only ground of applying that Ordinance to Infants) is
obliterated and opposed by the Personal stipulation used by adult persons, and
here by appointed to be done by Deputies (God fathers and Godmothers) no way
constituted by the Child, commissioned by the Lord, or called for by the form
of the Covenant sealed in Ba^tism; unto the great advantage of the
Antipoedobaptists. And (notwithstanding the Canonical Comment upon it) the
making the sign of the Cross is made the formal act of incorporation into the
Church, made at the saying of those words, Canon. 1603. Can. 30.
We receive this Child into the Congregation of Christ^ flock, and do sign it,
etc. as if this were not done by the very application of the Sacrament, and
Baptismal act.

Confirmation (the primitive course of admitting adult persons to the Lords
Table) is unduly applied to children in an Infant state, and that as an act of
solemn worship, rather than Church order, and as an Exorcism or Spell,
therefore declared to be applied unto children at such age as they begin to be
in danger of falling into sin, though not capable of making any moral
improvement and reflection thereof. I might pass through every part of this
Service, and show its dissonancy to Solemn worship, but I must not thus much
enlarge; I shall therefore only take a view of its sutablenesse to solemn
public Prayer, (which it mainly intends) by comparing it with this general
description of solemn public Prayer, whereby it differs from personal and
ejaculatory Prayer.

Solemn public Prayer is a serious, composed, and at once making known to God,
the desires of the Church, by expressions suitable to their present occasion
openly uttered by the Minister, enforced and concluded by the peoples Amen.

Let this description be admitted (as I think it cannot reasonably he denied as
the Square and Test of a wel-ordered set-form of Prayers, and it resolved into
these Rules will decide our Question.

1. The occasions of the Church must dictate their desires: These be variable,
and conclude for variation of expression, and against imposed set-forms, which
(however they may do as to the general and common ^^sires of a Christian, yet)
cannot possibly fit all particular occurrences; and therefore leave such as
adhere to them in very frequent straits, and constrain new composures; as in
the case of the 5th. of November, and now the 30th, of January, and 29th. of
May: In this case we know the Common Prayer books defect is rendered ridiculous,
by the famed than giving for deliverance from Bull-goring.

2. The expressions of the Churches desires must suit the occasions which
dictate them: Be it Confession of sin, Supplication, Imprecation de-Precation,
or Thanksgiving; General for the Church, and common state of a Christian; or
Special, in reference to a particular Duty, Ordinance, or Condition, for Divine
assistance in, efficacy or acceptance of any Dispensation or Ministration: How
fitly the Confession and Absolution; (wherein though a General (yet kind of
Venial) unworthiness is acknowledged, and acbeptance by an Authoritative
Supplication, and Ministerial Absolution, is prayed, more sutably to the Popish
penitential order, than a preparitive supplication, (in which unfitness ought
to be bewailed, subsequent duties expressed, and assistance in them desired,)
will square with this Rule, let wise men judge, and likewise compare the
subsequent order of Prayer.

3. The desires of the Church must be expressed seriously and composedly; The
whold man sequestered from all other acts and business, set and intent with all
seriousness, to mention them before God in a fixed possture of body and mind,
without unnecessary variation of place, or gesture, from Desk to Table, now
kneeling, anon standing, and therefore transient salutations, affectionate
friendly Christian wishes, quickening versicles, desultory short options, by
leaps and starts, which may beseem Ejaculatory, cannot square with the more
serious and composed frame of solemn Prayer.

4. These expressions must be openly uttered by the Minister, the People
attending the same in sil^nce, that on due apprehension they may give their
assent, and enforce it with their Amen: for the Minister is their mouth to God,
and Amen is the part and only part that good order, and Gods word, does
appoint the people in their Assembly, and then their popular Responds,
concurrent Acclamations, the peoples Rogations, supplicative or deprecative
Options on the Ministers rehearsal of Mercy, Misery, or Duties, do square
better with the confused vulgar clamors condemned in the Heathen, than chains
solemn public Prayer.

5. These expressions must be uttered at once, in a set and continued
discourse, without interruptions by intermingled duties, unnecessary stops,
abruptions, salutations, versicles, responds, abbreviations, pauses, and
postings on again, with a Let us pray, when nothing but prayer is in hand; all
which do better suit the sacred frenzy of the fanatic Heathen Priests, in
their Idol and fantastique service and devotion, than that solemn Worship of
God, which ought to be the result of the spirit of a sound mind. On
consideration of this unsutableness to solemn public prayer, I should have
told the learned Hooker, That though God, as a great God, knows our wants,
and is more gracious than to make His Answer depend on the artificial order and
method or frame of our prayers; yet when in the sight of men wespeak with God
after the manner of men, Ecclesiastic polity, lib. 5. sect. 34. page 253.
it is our duty to speak in that g^^ve, serious, and composed order, that may
bespeak us men of sound minds, and so sensible of the nature of the Duty, and
Majesty of God worshipped in it, that our Rudeness may not engender
Irreverence, and expose our God and His Service to the scorn of men.

Nor is it an argument of any force that our first Reformers rejoiced in this
Service, and the Non-conformists themselves used it. For we must not be acted
by Example, but Rule, and conceive our case different from the one and the
other.

To the first, the Infancy of Reformation might rejoice in, and grow up, under
that order of Divine Service, which the adult estate thereof must cast off;
because some of the Martyrs rejoiced in some broken pieces and rude
Translations of the Scripture, must we therefore be therewith contented, and
not correct them? We our selves at the first coming out of Popery, should have
thought a Bohemian Cup at Sacrament, or a Mass in English, to be a very high
attainment, not knowing things more excellent; but when enlightened, must not
therein acquiesce. Calvin wrote to the Church at Franckford, that if godly
Religion had flourished till that day, there ought to have been an order of
Service better corrected, and many things clean taken away. And shall we who
have enjoyed true Religion more than 80 years since that time, yet continue and
contend for that Service Book, as if ashamed to give place to better things?

We must indeed confess, the Non-conformists used some parts of this Service,
but we humbly conceive our case is different from theirs; they had been
educated under, and insensibly yoaked with it, and drawn to subscribe a promise
to use it, and None other; by reason whereof they (groaning under it as their
burden) were to consider, how to obtain a Regular Release from the corruptions,
which, by reason of the peace of the Church, credit of their Ministry, and
sidelity (as far as might be) to their Promise, prudence did forbid to cast off
with violence; wherein yet there wanted not some witnesses against it: But our
case is to take on us (not cast off) the Service Book, on just grounds, and by
lawful Authority laid aside; to which we generally were not engaged, wherein we
may well be warned by the burden of our Progenitors, and have reason to look
before we leap; the rather, because we are under a sacred Oath, which will
duly, if not directly, bind against it. And this leads me to our third Reason,
for not receiving and using the Book of Common Prayer, which is this:

The Common Prayer book has been expelled by a lawful Authority, and stands
excluded by a most public, National, Third Exception to the Liturgy.
solemn League and Covenant.

That the solemn League and Covenant is just and lawful in its Matter, and
public and National for its Quality, I have demonstrated in my Fastring St.
Peter's Fetters. Its positive exclusion of this Service Book will be evident on
these Considerations.

1. Every of us stand obliged in Sincerity, Reality, and Constancy, to
endeavor Reformation of Religion in England in Worship, according to Gods
Word, and the Example of the best Reformed Churches: But the Word of God allows
not, nay, it condemns an order of Service which is symbolical to Idol-worship,
superstitious, and unsuitable to solemn public Worship; and no Reformed Church
has received and used our Service Book. Not using Corruption is the least act
of our Endeavor for Reformation that we can perform.

2. We are obliged to endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Worship: And that must
be, by bringing Scotland to receive our Liturgy, which must be done by
convincing them of its consonancy to Gods Word, and conformity to the best
Reformed Churches, and that before their form of worship we have sworn to
preserve (if in this point any be better than themselves) for bellum Episcopale
has already proved too feeble an Argument: or by considering their Directory,
and getting it established in the two Kingdoms, unless the Word of God, and
Reformed Churches, can point us to a Medium of some purer way of Worship.

3. Preface to (...) Directory.
Though the Directory was not directly and explicitly Covenanted, yet the
Assembly of Divines advised, the Parliament ordained, and Ministers of most
Counties of England received and attested it in pursuance of their Covenant; as
most agreeable to the Word of God, and example of the best Reformed Churches;
and the Kings Majesty has graciously sworn to use it in His Royal Family, and
^n the same principle give his Royal assent to the injunctions for it, passed,
or to be passed, and endeavor to establish it in all his Dominions. Now, Lex
currit cum praxi, and Oaths are well interpreted by concomitant and subsequent
actions: I think it worth the serious enquiry of such who pretend and pursue a
correction of the Service Book, whether the Directory be not according to the
Word of God, and example of the best Reformed Churches? and how far the
Covenant b nds unto it? lest by a correction our King and Kingdom be plunged
under a God-provoking, Land-destroying perjury. For sure I am, the Directory
and Service Book (though amended in most things) cannot consist; and therefore
we must be resolved in this before we receive that (when something refined) we
may suffer, we must not sin.

But here Captain George Masterson (that Morpheus of our City, A Captain in the
Churchregiment for the Commonwealth Ruin^, who gave in their Ensign, The Law
and the Testimony for their Motto.
wanting nothing but an inculca me tanquam salem insipidum, to make him the
E^ebolius of our age, having turned his Belt into a Girdle, and Buff into a
Canonical Coat, relinquished the Law and the Testimony to run to the
Common Prayer Book, unto whose plea, borrowed from the Learned Hooker, these
Exceptions are framed bids a Stand to my March; and tells us in Answer to
our Covenant, Herod and the Jews lying in wait for Paul swear: That is true,
and if he will make good his Inference of the Covenant, I will promise him to
save the Hangman the labor and burn it, and what I have written for it with my
own hands; in which if he fail, See his S^i^itual House. p. 130.
he must needs be found wicked and fallacious, but that is not strange to him:
therefore,

He tells us, Lawful Authority is essential to make an Oath obliging; but by
his leave, though it be to make an Oath lawful, I deny it to be essential to
make it obliging. I believe he d^eams every unlawful Oath void, but Bishop
Sanderson will teach him better Divinity: But that his Bow may not break,
(which could never hold to shoot one forcible Shaft) he adds another Paradox,
To de^y the Covenant wanted lawful Authority is treason: He lives indeed near
the Inn^ of Court, and has conversed much in High Courts of Justice, and may
bless God for a gracious Prince that he is not as sensible of Treason as his
brother Peter's: Yet I shall make bold to tell him, I have denied it, and do
deny it, and yet fear not to be indicted for Treason, whilst I have the
Authority of his late and present Majesty owning them, who enjoined the
Covenant, a Parliament, til his Patron Bradshaw became President. I must be
better informed in England's Consti^utions, if Lords and Commons sitting in
Parliament are not a lawful and just (though not a full and complete)
Authority, to the Orders and Ordinances of which the people owe subjection, in
which my observation of daily obedience, the non-contradiction of the Learned
in the Law, and the Act for their Continuance (making sober and judicious men
to doubt of their yet existence, though the present Aspect of the Nation cannot
bear it does very much confirm me; and yet I would have him know, I think I
have, and shall approve my self, a much more loyal Subject to his Majesty than
himself, who not only rejoiced in the death of our late murdered Sovereign,
but blasphemoufly triumphed over his most Sacred Majesty in the day of His
distress at Worcester, in these and the like terms: The enemy did and might
rationally expect, See his considence in man, preached the last day of the
sixth Month 1651. dedicated to John Bradshaw. p. 16, 17.
that if he could set his foot, his wearied foot, on English ground, his
strength would take root downward, and bring forth fruit upward, it could not
but be expected on all hands, that the further he rolled, the greater strength
he would gather: Yet behold, admi^e God, though at his entrance he leave our
Army fourscore miles in his Rear, their flesh wearied, and spirit almost
languishing through the continued difficulties they met with in a strange Land;
though he appear in a Country very fond of him, though he march with an Idol
in the head of his Army, the name of a King, to which the generality of this
Nation are very superstitious, too ready to ^ow down and submit their necks to
a Tyrants foot; yet behold his strength is at a stand, much about a scantling
as it was when he fled out of Scotland. Let us remember Newbery, and Marston,
and Naseby; remember Dunbar, and Fife, and Sterling. Is not this a most
faithful Subject and judicious man, to charge Treason on all such, as esteem
the Two Houses of Parliament a lawful Authority! Yet,

This Authority was that which expelled the Liturgy, and received to their
Ordinance for that purpose so much of assent from his late and present Majesty,
that makes me sure it amounts in equity and conscience (if not by the
punctilioes of the Law) to a full and complete Authority, especially
considering it to be enforced by the Emphasis of an Oath.

Courteous Reader, I will hold thee no longer, but beg thy excuse for this too
wide a Portal for the Authors more compendious Fabric, which has been framed
to fence off the force and fury of passionate and censorious men, who think
nothing but peevishness withholds from using the Common-service book: That the
one and the other may inform, convince, and confirm, is the hearty prayer of

Thine and the Churches Servant, striving for the purity, plainness, and
simplicity of Gospel Worship, ZACH. CROFTON.
From my Study at Gravellane in Houndsditch London, Jan. 26. 1660.
Dr. Gauden's LITVRGICAL CONSIDERATIONS CONSIDERED.
The PREFACE.
tells us, That in the cure of a sick person, as the Physician must do his
part, so the sick person must do his part, and the (...), which Liebantius, in
his Scholia interprets Apothecarires and Chirurgions, etc.
Assistants to the physician must do their part, else the cure may be hindered.
How long this poor Church has lain sick and languishing, is too well known to
the Christian World; diverse have tried their skill to heal us, but have proved
Physicians of no value. How many thoughts this has caused our Royal Sovereign
(the King of our Prayers) since God has in so wonderful a manner brought Him
to His Throne, he knows best? I doubt not but He made His Prognostic so soon
as He saw the Patient, that the disease was most difficult of cure; yea, to
bring this Church to such a healing and healthy complexion, that God might
delight to look on it, was a thing impossible for any Physician, but such a one
who is infallible in the knowledge of the disease, and of the medicines which
must heal, and could irresistibly cause the Patient to take the Physic, and
Omnipotently concur to the blessing of it.

One thing that makes some diseases (as the Hypochondriaca Affectio, into
which, the perplexed thoughts and cares about our state, may be enough to bring
His Majesty) so difficult of cure, is found in our disease; viz. the (...)
viscerum, wherein the medicines which are good for one, hurt another. Some men
pretending Antiquity for fifteen hundred years, cannot be healed unless the
Physician prescribe a Bill of six hundred, yea, a thousand Churches to one
Bishop [as Cyprian and Austin had, if modesty will affirm it:] Lordly Title,
Great Revenues, Pompous Ceremonies, Oath of Canons; which things of late, had
almost destroyed our Nation: this is mala intemperies indeed. Others there are,
who being under the Bonds of a Sacred Oath and Covenant, imposed by both Houses
of Parliament, and as Solemnly taken as ever Covenant was, they cannot be
healed, unless the Physician prescribe the Bill of Renowned King Charles the
first in His dying Speech [ When wise men die, they speak to the life] who
wrote His Bill thus, Printed by W. Shears. 1654. p. 118.
Now Sirs, for to put you in the way, believe it you win never do right, nor
will God ever prosper you, until you give God his due, and the KING His due;
that is, in their course of time my Successors, and until you give the People
their due. You must give God his due, by regulating his Church aright,
according to his Scripture. [A Speech becoming a Christian Prince, and Subject
to the King of Kings; I can hardly transcribe it with dry eyes:] The Holy
Scripture, and the Covenant will agree; and this is to fetch medicines from
God. How is that Covenant which before we so much pressed, I desire to see a
rational Answer to Mr. Crofton when come forth Dr. Gauden's Reply.
come now to be so much slighted, I know not? Mr. Pryn as I heard published,
and Mr. Crofton has since affirmed, That by virtue of that Covenant, the whole
Nation was bound to rise up; and bring in our King, although they did not all
formally take it; and that they warranted from the Covenant, though made by
Joshuah and the Elders, with the Gibeonites; but afterward broken in Readiness
time. Sure I am, it made deep impression upon the spirits of some of us, though
we had not taken it as others; whence, though we did not rise up in Arms, yet
we did in fervent Prayers, and God gave the Answer, tantum-non, miraculously.
Have we been true to our King in that part which concerned Him, and must we not
be true to the King of Kings in that which concerns him, having the same
Obligation? I am sure we ought to be; else, as we charged some men with perjury
in respect of our King; others, yea, God will charge us with perjury in
reference to that which concerns Himself.

I had thought the Reduction of Episcopacy, etc. published by that Reverend,
Learned, Humble, Holy and Peaceable Bishop, Dr. Usher would have given content
to the Bishops, if they were as Gracious, and loved the peace of the Church
[though not so learned] as he: Not only Dr. Holesworth; but I heard also Dr.
Brownerig, and two more Episcopal Doctors consenting to it; had it pleased the
Bishops [as I doubt not but it does Dr. Reynolds; whom, though I scarce ever
saw, I must ever Reverence for his Pious, Gospel-like, and Learned Labors:] I
doubt not but it would have pleased our King, it being that Form which moderate
men would not have opposed: And had the Liturgy been thoroughly purged from what
is offensive in it, with other prayers added in Scripture Phrase (and not so
imposed to take away the use of our gifts in any Ordinance) a strict Law made
and prosecuted for ejection of scandalous and insufficient Ministers; Men
placed in Government, Orthodox, and acquainted with the Power of Godliness
indeed (which His Majesty declares He will promote) An Act established for
sanctifying the Sabbath, and other things; for which His Majesty has
excellently declared, the Church had been in a recovering way, blessing the
Lord for our Physician, as we have blessed Him, and do bless Him for His
Gracious Moderation; His easing us of the Burden of Humane Ceremonies, and what
He has declared concerning tender Consciences.

But here comes in Dr. Gauden, one that pretends to be an Assistant to the King
in the Cure, a Surgeon, or what I know not; but instead of carrying on the
Cure, sets it back very much: It is not a little paper and ink this man has
spent in our divided Times; I wish I could say his scope had been healing, but
that I cannot; for his Sarcastical Pen has dropped as much gall as ink against
those who are not of his persuasion. What addition of Argument he has made to
the Subjects he has defended in these disputing Times, I know not, unless it
be his Ocular Demonstration for Episcopacy in a very pretty Gay, a Lay-mans
book; the Gay might be of use when Children cry. Nor do I know what person of
judgment that has skill to distinguish between a great word, and a strong
Argument, he has converted to his Episcopacy. I dare say, not many, by what I
heard from a learned man, Episcopal, Liturgical, one of Dr. Hammonds great
friends; for when his first Book came forth with that magnificent Title,
Hieraspistes, I mentioned this Book that Dr. Gauden had put forth, unto him; he
made a Pause before he gave me an Answer, then all that he answered, was this,
Good store of words. Surely if his own Party were not pleased with his
Writings, judicious men of a contrary persuasion would not be converted by them.

For this discourse of his about the Liturgy, I heard of it long before I could
borrow it (and resolved I was I would not buy it;) else I had considered his
Considerations sooner: A general distaste I heard it gave to sober and godly
Ministers, and some I am sure complying with His Majesty's Declaration; when I
came to view it, I found it just such a thing as he scoffingly compares the
Devotion of some men unto, that pray not by a Liturgy; Like a great skain of
yarn, Page 7.
course and snarl'd. Such I say I found his Book, full of words, so
immethodical, that I could not tell where to begin to answer it. I must then do
by his Book, ^s we do by such skains, break off what pieces I can, lay them in
order before me to use them, and throw away the knot.

Thus then I cased his Book.

First, He pleads for the necessity of a Liturgy, from the singusar benefits of
it.

Secondly, He takes into consideration our Liturgy; in which Considerations,

1. With extraordinary Caution he does almost acknowledge some small faults,
verbal defects, minutes, little errors, next to nothing.

2. He answers the Objections against it with zeal.

3. He commends it; yea, so admires it, that the man is transported; and though
Rhetoric be his glory, yet even that is defective, and cannot perform its
work, till he has given it that honor which is due only to the Word of God.
This he does from several Heads scattered up and down.

4. He exhorts, or commands us all to the use of it.

Some other things come in collaterally, but this is the best method I can make
of his consused piece; for which I am forced to turn backward and forward to
get things into any order.

Part. 1.
Sectio prima.
FOR his first Head, Liturgy, which, though variously, and more largely used,
he confines to Forms of Prayer; I cannot deny but a Liturgy may be useful to
many Ministers (at least who go for such) in this Land, men of meaner
abilities, and not able to express themselves publicly in every prayer,
(...). Yea, so far am I from conceit of my own gifts, (though the Doctor charge
us with pride and ostentation) that if my gifts be not sufficient, I will
freely use the Liturgy, (when purged from things offensive) as the Doctor would
have me; or rather lay down my Ministry, as thinking Christ never called me to
it, if He has not bestowed on me a gift of prayer in some measure sufficient:
So that this will clear me that I am not a man absolutely against Liturgies,
nor the Book of Common Prayer.

But because I am weak, and need it, that therefore it must be imposed upon the
ablest men; and so that in the Sacraments, page 27.
All Ministers must be commanded wholly and solely to use the Liturgical Forms,
as this Doctor would have it; this I am not as yet satisfied in, nor can I
yield to it.

However this man scoffs at men's private gifts, yet he cannot but acknowledge,
page 19. that some men have real and useful gifts, which he esteems, and denies
not their use; and in page 39. tells us, That God be thanked by Divine
permission, people may enjoy them. How is this, by Divine permission? Is this
all the Warrant we have from God for the use of the gifts which he requires to
be in a Minister, and gives to them whom he calls into the Ministry? What, no
more than for the foulest sin which God permits? What say the learned,
Permittere, proprie loquendo est, Twis. Vindic Gra. 2. p. dig. 3.
neque facere ut aliquid fiat, neque impedire ne fiat. But if you say,
Perm^ssion reaches to things that are (...). Have we no more warrant for the
use of our gifts from God, than we have to go this or that way to London, which
we please? This is strange Divinity.

For my part when I think of these things,

First, That Jesus Christ purchased, and when he ascended, gave gifts to men,
Ephesians. 4.8. and some of these men are Pastors, v. 11. and I am sure the gift of
Prayer is one.

Secondly, That God promised to give the gift of prayer, Zech. 12.20. which
Bishop Hall interprets thus, I will pour out upon my Church, etc. though I
think it has a more special reference to the Jews as yet to be converted, yet
the Lord does not only promise to them.

Thirdly, When I read Romans 8.26. That the Spirit is given to help our
infirmities, when we know not what to pray for as we ought.

Fourthly, When I cannot find that ever Liturgies were imposed upon the Church,
not upon the Jews in their best state, nor I am sure upon the Christian
Churches, though the Apostles had more ability to compose, and authority to
impose Liturgies upon the Church than any now.

Fifthly, When I observe the Arguments men produce for Liturgies, do take away
the whole gift of prayer from the ablest man.

Sixthly, When the same Arguments were in as much force in the Apostles days as
they are now, yet they were not so witty to invent Liturgies, or to impose them
on the Church.

Seventhly, When men may as well take away the gift of Preaching as of Prayer;
the same Arguments will remove the one as well as the other.

Eighthly, When I see the same Confessions, Petitions, etc. which are made in
the Liturgies read, are presently made with more enlargement by those who pray
by their own gift with the assistance of the Spirit.

Ninthly, When this tying up to Liturgies, and that wholly in Sacraments, etc.
quite destroys that Petition in our preparations and prayers for the assistance
of the Spirit, as to the matter of our prayer, acknowledging our own inability
to think one good thought, for we are tied exactly to words.

When I consider these with other Arguments, and some which I shall mention
when I come to the Doctors pressing our Liturgy, I cannot be satisfied how any
Liturgies can be imposed on any whom God has qualified; and they make me
question our use of them when they are imposed, especially when I come to add
what I find against ours in Dr. Gauden.

Sectio secunda.
NOw then to the Doctors reasons for Liturgy, which he gives us, page 9, 10, 11.

In general I may only say this, if the giving of seeming reasons for a thing
(in which the Doctor has some advantage through great words and Rhetorical
flourishes) will prove it a truth in Divinity, what Heresy shall not be a
truth? Then those reasons which Perronus offered to give the King of France to
prove there was no God, might have proved that to have been a Truth, which
Atheistical hearts would have to be true, and Vaninu like a simple man could
suffer in the defense of.

But in these things I provoke Doctor Gauden to King Charles the First his Rule,
i.e. the Scriptures of God. To Deuteronomy. 4.2. to Isa. 8.22. Matthew. 28.19, 20. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. Is the Word a perfect Rule or no? if it be, what do Carpenters
and Masons with their Rules, do they not apply them to their works and see how
they answer them? Do you the same with this Divine Canon, apply it to your
whole discourse, and see how it agrees, apply the second Commandment, if all
you have said accord with that Rule, we will readily obey, and fools we were to
stand out, to hinder our liberties and carnal preferments.

But however let us weigh his Reasons, he is so full of words that I must
contract what I can.

His first is this: A Liturgy conduces much to the more solemn august and
reverent worship of the Divine Majesty in Christian C^ngregations: where
otherwise the venerable Mysteries must be exposed to that rudeness, and
unpreparednesse, that barrenness and superficialnesse, both for matter and
manner, judgment and expression, to which every private Minister is daily
subject, as late experience has taught us.

Answer. Is there such a Divine Majesty as you speak of? then the good Lord
humble and pardon me for want of due reverence becoming his presence: it seems
you take care for the reverence of him, it is well done. But, Sir, has not this
Divine Majesty given to the sons of men a Rule according to which they must
worship him? then show your reverence to this Divine Majesty, by proving your
humane inventions in his worship, and of imposed Liturgies on his ablest
servants by his Rule, else what ever you talk of reverence, it is but
will worship, as the Apostle has it, Col. 2.23.

If I through my sin and infirmity am not able to reverence him as becomes him,
this is my infirmity, I desire to repent and fly to my High Priest for pardon;
but for men to bring in their Modes of worship, as more highly conducing to his
reverent worship, for which we cannot find warrant in his Rule, this seems to
be Gods infirmity, who did not reveal the best way of worship: This is brave
reverence to charge him with want of wisdom.

ruden^ss, etc. Yet you allow us once to pray.

reverence speaks of the inward frame of heart, a grace which the Spirit, not a
Liturgy, must help to; but if of the outward expression, it is like to be most
reverend where the heart is the dictator: without prescribed words, which may
be repeated with little or no regard.

rude and unreverent worshipers have this imposed on them, if it will help
them; but I never saw more rude worshipers than many, if not most of those who
use it.



Gauden seen all the behaviors of Ministers, heard all their prayers at
Sacraments since that Liturgy was laid by? No, I am sure he has not. Why then
does he charge all men thus? by nature we are bad enough, but what are men
nothing by grace, and that growing, nothing by gifts imparted, and these
excellent, and not only so, but assisted by the Spirit of God? And what if the
Spirit does not always alike assist to humble us, and make us know our
dependence on him, must we by and by bring in a humane invention? But O the
reverence that I have seen, the excellent prayers full of divine matter,
fluently poured out that I have heard from some Ministers who use not the
Liturgy; would to God many that use it, did appear like them.

all preaching; I am sure men have shown as much rudeness, deformity,
barrenness in this Ordinance, as in the other, especially your Liturgical men;
what stories do men tell of some of them? I hope the Divine Majesty is as well
concerned in preaching as prayer.

evils you mention be so subject to all men now, they were ever so since the
Fall: I am sure Paul was as careful of the Reverence of the Divine Majesty as
you are; yet he did not find out this means against those evils which you do.
What, had Paul no skill how to order and provide for the August, and Reverend
worship of God?

Sectio tertia.
A Liturgy is a great defense to true Doctrine, and a means to prevent the
spreading of corrupt opinions.

Answ. 1. Not every Liturgy, some may be bad enough; this was the first Reason
(as some conceive with laziness) which first brought in Liturgies, the Arrian
and Pelagian Heresies; in which time yet Ministers did compose and use their
own prayers, though they were first reviewed: But it may be the Doctor has an
honest design in this; for he knows well, that abundance of the Episcopal men
now preferred, are stout Arminians, of the same blood with Pelagius; and he
fears these men will spread Pelagianism under a little finer dress, and so
would have the Liturgy imposed, to keep them from doing this mischief. Ah
Doctor! this will not do, such men call for the Liturgy more than any; but if
this were your only intent, we thank you for your honesty.

Secondly, Confessions of Faith and Catechisms being sound, Orthodox and
Substanti^l, imposed on all, were the best means to attain this end; witness
the several Creeds of the four first general Councils of Nice, Constantinople,
Ephesus and Chalcedon, against the Heresies of Arrius, Macedonius and Eudoxius,
Nestorius and Eutyches.

Thirdly, By this, you must take away all prayer by our own gifts; for if men
pray but once, they may vent their Heresies.

Fourthly, By this, you take away all preaching, by our own gifts; for men vent
their Opinions, and people mind the Opinions of men, and take them more from
their preaching than prayer; and so the us to the Homilies, as necessary, and
of constant public use.

Fifthly, The Church of Scotland had no Liturgy for many years; yet what Church
so clear from Heresies, as that, and some other Churches I know? England had
far more when the Liturgy was in use.

Sixthly, The Apostles were troubled with corrupt Doctrines in their times; we
find indeed mention made of Catechisms in the Epistles; but for this way to
keep out corrupt Opinions, we find none.

Seventhly, If men be corrupt in Doctrine, they will be known; and if we be
such, turn us out of our places.

Sectio quarta.
Liturgy much advances a holy harmony amongst Christians, while praying the
same things, all men say, Amen, etc.

Answ. 1. If ever this specious Argument had any force, it was then when the
Apostles preached and planted Churches in Asia, Europe and Africa; for then had
they composed a Liturgy (which had been perfect we are sure) and imposed it
upon all these Churches, there had been a holy harmony; not only in Parochial
and National Churches, as you say; but in the Catholic visible Church through
the World, all Churches in the World, praying the same things, and then saying,
Amen: But this device never came in their heads, How do we excel the Apostles
in wisdom? In page 30. he tells us, That he has seen the most, and the best
Liturgies, Ancient and Modern. I entreat him that if amongst them he saw the
Apostles Common Prayer book which they imposed upon the Churches, that he would
please to get it reprinted; for the first impression (if ever any) is quite
out. We will use that without question.

Secondly, Are not these men more curious then God is? does He so call for a
verbal harmony? Is it not sufficient, that we pray the same things, though in
diverse Forms? if we keep to the Lords Prayer, begging the same things, though
in other words, ^s Austin says, Is not this Harmony as much as God calls for,
and cares for? Indeed for Doctrines, where the altering of a word (as in the
Trinity, etc.) may bring in a Heresy, there the same words are good; and it is
needful as much as may be, to hold to a wholesome Form of words; but this is not
the same case.

Thirdly, By this take away all prayer by our own gift; for verbal Harmony is
not to be found there, though we pray for the same things; here our National
Harmony, and Amen are gone. Why not uniformity of words in prayer before
Sermon, as at a Sacrament, or at other times in your Confession, and morning
prayers, if the Argument be of such force?

It is strange to me that this taking Notion was not known in the first nor
second Century; Why do not these boasters of Antiquity bring forth the imposed
Liturgies in these times, so as to take away the use of Ministers gifts? I see
the Doctor in his Gaybook, could beteam to prove from those words in Just.
Mart. Apol. 2. (...), That there were such prayers then imposed; but he does
but glance at the place, and will not, I believe, venture his credit upon it,
(for fear the next page in Just. Mart. should confute him; besides the very
place where Justin uses the words, show what he means by them, nothing to this
purpose.

Fourthly, If uniformity in praying be such a divine thing, why not also in
preaching? if verbal Harmony be so excellent in one Ordinance, why not in all?
every Congregation the same day taught the same truth from God in the same
words, is not this glorious? so take away Preaching.

You will allow us our own gifts sometimes, because of many particular
occasions which no Liturgy can particularly reach, page 19. Very true, your
Liturgy could not reach our King in His Banishment, if men could not have
prayed without it, how then? But so you may say for Preaching for some
particular occasion allow us our gifts; but for uniformity sake, read Homilies
instead of ordinary Preaching, this is excellent.

Sectio quinta.
Liturgical Form is not only of great benefit to the more judicious and
well-bred sort of Christians; but highly to their security, and humble
composure of their spirits in the worship of God; who otherwise are prone, not
only amidst public devotions curiously to censure, but scoffingly to despise;
yea, many times to laugh at, and at best to pity incongruities, etc.

Answ. 1. But a Liturgy will not prevent this carriage of your judicious
Christians, unless you take away prayer altogether; for if we pray but once
before Sermon, some expressions there may be which your scoffing, well-bred
Christians will laugh at.

Secondly, The question is, Whether those passages be so incongruous as your
well-bred Christians imagine; I have known (...) common for your well-bred
Liturgical Christians to sport with the Holy Scriptures: No wonder though they
laugh at some passages in prayer, which their wanton fancies like not. And
indeed a man may observe it, when once your Liturgical well-bred Christians
have mumbled over their Service, and now think they have devoutly served God;
their next work, if their eyes be (not elsewhere about the Congregation, but)
upon the Minister, is not so much to join with him in prayer, but to watch at
what expressions they may carp at, either in prayer; or in preaching, and then
to laugh; scarce ever see more profane worshippers, than many of them are.

Thirdly, You may take away all preaching also; for your well-bred scoffing
Christians are prone to laugh, if any incongruous passage be in a Sermon; but
laughing is forbidden there also.

Fourthly, There are some men so able, that the Devil himself cannot find an
incongruous sentence in their prayers, why must it be imposed upon these men?

Fifthly, I have known such as have had some incongruous passages, and being
told of them, have used them no more; this is a better way than yours.

I have known some wel-bred women, who when they have bred-well, and have been
safely delivered, have laughed, and that not without cause, to hear what a
suitable form of Thanksgiving your unparalled Liturgy has prepared for them;
blessing them from the burning of the Moon.

Sectio sexta.
A Liturgical Form does mightily conduce to the edification and salvation of
the meaner sort, to whom variety of expressions in Prayer or Sacraments is much
at one with Latine-service, etc.

Answ. 1. No, not much at one, our people understand plain English better than
Latin, unless all men used such high-flown words as you; for Sacraments, I
know no man varies from the words of Institution which Christ used; and as for
prayers at Sacraments (the Lords Supper I mean) your Liturgical men have not
that Ordinance so often for plain people to remember the prayers.

Secondly, If it be so good for the meaner sort, what shall we do with your
judicious well-bred Christians you mentioned before? will not they laugh and
scoff at the plain things which the vulgar Rusticks and Mechanics have
prepared to edify and save them? But it may be you will say, because it is a
humane invention they will approve it, and like it never the worse. Ay Sir; but
so will not the judicious and right-bred Christians.

Thirdly, But O ye blessed Apostles, and thou zealous Paul, who did so love and
labor for the salvation and edification of souls, and the meaner sort, 1 Cor.
1. were these who most what received the Gospel, here is a means mightily
conducing to the salvation of the meaner sort; for which thou Paul I am sure
did labou^ almost as much as Dr. Gauden; but could not thou, not all the
other Apostles hit of this mighty means? no wonder though you did miss of your
end; you or Dr. Gauden wanted wisdom.

Fourthly, But is it so mighty a means? What is the Reason then where this
Liturgy has been most used, people held most to it, and Ministers had no gifts
of their own, that in these places so few show forth any conversion? If any, it
was got in some other place by some other gifts; search, and see how true this
is. Number your Common Prayer Book Converts, and consider the Edification of
common Zelots for it.

Fifthly, Pardon, me, Sir, if I mistake, I thought Catechizing and Teaching, or
appointing them forms of prayer at home, suitable to their conditions, had been
a better means to edify and save them, than forms of prayer in a Church.

Sixthly, By this Argument, often Repetitions of the same Sermon were very good
to edify and save the meaner sort; but will your judicious and well-bred
Christians like this project?

His sixth and last Reason is, That a Liturgy is a Bulwark against Romish
Superstition, and Fanatic Innovations.

But here he slips out of the Thesis to the Hypothesis, and commends our
Liturgy upon this ground; I will meet with this in its proper place afterward.

Part. 2.
Sectio prima.
IN the next place he takes our Liturgy into consideration, 1. He excuses the
Liturgy.
and here:

First, As I said, he yields, page 5. some small faults, verbal defects, which
are very venial in any things of human constitution: But page 33. gives it a
fair absolution.

Answ. Could the Doctors Rhetoric help him to speak, and yet not to speak, he
would do it; but, Sir, you may speak out; not only our King that now is, (...).
but his Royal Father said, that He would easily consent, that what was
inconvenient for matter or manner, should be amended. I have seen a paper
printed, I think about the year 1641, in which were diverse things set down by
some of the Bishops, which they intended to Correct. I perceive you intend to
give it but a gentle purge: I pray, Sir, are you the man alone entrusted in
this work? truly I do not take your judgment to be the measure of all the
judgments of the Divines in England, though you say your Liturgy must be of all
our Devotions in public, page 27. But of this more afterward.

Sectio secunda.
THe second Consideration is, 2. He defends the Liturgy.
His endeavoring to defend it against the objections brought against it. given
to God because he has been pleased to regenerate this Infant: Here he defends
Baptismal Regeneration briefly, of which in a more proper place afterward.

The second Objection is this, That some men (and one Minister he says he
knows) have charged it with a Lie in the beginning, because the words are not
the same with the Text in Ezekiel. 18.21, 22. And these men he loads with
Impudency, Ignorance, Blasphemy, intolerable Confidence, page 24, 25.

The Doctor wants not words, what shame has he poured upon these men, and that
one Minister? I wonder who he is. This indeed I have heard; That take these
words.

1. As the Line before them orders the Minister to read with a loud voice one
of these Sentences of Scripture which follow, and this is the first, At what
time soever a sinner repents him, etc.

2. As these words are said to be the Sentence of Scripture, in Ezekiel. 18.21, 22.

3. As they have these words, says the Lord, annexed: In this sense I have
heard them charged with a Lie, not denying, what may be drawn by Consequence
from Scripture.

For my own part I have been much offended with these words.

1. Because they are said to be a Sentence of Scripture in such a Text.

2. As they have helped to procrastinate Repentance, and have been a Trap-board
for Hell; your meaner so^t whom you labor to edify, have got these words, At
what time soever, etc. laid them up.

3. As they help to bolster up many a wretch, who when he comes to dye, and his
lusts forsake him, now from the bottom of his heart (as he phansies) he
repents, and there is Comfort for him.

But all that you have said will not save those words from being very false in
the sense mentioned, in which I am confident they were spoken; and how much
that which is very false differs from a Lie in this case, judge you. And truly,
Sir, if this be the taste you give us how you will correct the Prayer Book, the
Jesuits have by their Index expurgatorius done more service to their Romish
Synagogue in purging out of Authors what was good, than you will do service to
the Church of England by purging out what is unsound. Let us read what you say,

All the words of that Sentence (in the Common Prayer book) are not in that
place, Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22. This is very true, say you: Then say I, it is very
false, that those words are the sentence of that Scripture: You confess it;
You say, All the words are not, etc. how many think you are? I have viewed
these Verses in the old English Translation when that Prayer Book was composed,
(as I suppose) there I find above 63 words, in our Translation about 59. and
though I easily yield you wicked and snner, turn and repent, for Synonomies,
yet I find not above five of the same words in the Common Prayer Book which are
in that Text which the Common Prayer Book refers unto: So that they are not All
indeed.

How then? But (say you) the Evangelical Soundness and Sense is more fully
united, and comprehensively set down in the Book of Common Prayer, than in
these verses cited in the Margin.

Hold a little. 1. The Lord inspires his holy Prophets immediately with such
words to express his will and mind, which are written by his Penman.

2. Shall ordinary men take these words and alter them, and that very much (as
I shall show) and this Sentence thus altered, be called the Sentence of
Scripture in that Text.

3. Yea shall men say the sense is more fully united, and comprehensively set
down in the Sentence altered, than in those words, the Lord did immediately
inspire, surely then it is better; well, let us see what will follow.

1. Thus we may alter the whole Scripture, and make a new Scripture of it, and
tell the people we give you the same Bible that God inspired his Servants to
Write, but in a sense more Evangelical and fully united, than in those words
the penmen wrote them. So that we have mended the Scripture; By the same
reason you alter two verses, you may twenty; so make a shorter Bible.

2. When we preach and quote Texts, we may read them otherwise than they are in
the Original, or any Translation, and when the people look for the Texts in
their Bibles, and cannot find the verses as we quote them, we may tell them, we
give the sound Evangelical sense, more fully united, etc. than you have in your
Bibles, or in the Original, were not this a good Answer? Doctor, who is bold.

3. This Doctor is so exact in our Prayers to God, that he will bind us all to
the very same words in a Common Prayer Book, we must not pray for the same
things by our own gifts, though more enlarged; thus he ties us up to men's words
in his humane Invention, but for Gods words he can plead for the altering of
them, leaving abundance out.

4. I deny what you say, That the Evangelical Soundness and Sense is more fully
united in the Common Prayer Book.

For the Evangelical sense must lie in the bottom of the heart: Now that you
are fain to interpret, else we could not tell what the sense is of those words.

2. But especially, thus it appears, it is not true; for in Ezekiel. 18.21, 22. The
nature of Repertance is opened, if you ask what is Repentance? I answer out of
Ezekiel. It is the turning from all a man's sins, and keeping all Gods Statutes;
But in your Common Prayer Book, there is not one word of this, only the
Definitum Repentance mentioned.

3. In Ezekiel there is nothing of the Time expressed, but in your
Common Prayer Book, there we must read with a loud voice the first words, At
what time soever.

The Texts you add, make nothing to your purpose. The question was not, what
may be gathered from Scripture by Consequence (this was yielded) but whether
those words in the Common Prayer Book were the sentence of Scripture in Ezkeiel
18. Methinks a great Doctor, yea now an elder Bishop, should understand
Ignoratio Elenchi.

Then you come to prove the lawfulness from parallel Texts in the N. T. where
the Apostles do quote Texts out of the old T. not verbatim, but to the sense;
as Hebr. 10.5, 6. from Psalm. 40.6, 7. and bid the Supercritical Censors compare
words. So Mat. 27.9. Not verbatim out of Jeremy, but most out of Zechariah.

Answ. What Franciscus David would say to this I know, but spare his words, and
I could propound a sad question here, which I should thank those who could
resolve me; I must leave it, and see your Logic.

1. Because the Apostles did so, when guided as the Penmen of the Scripture,
Therefore, ordinary men may do so; prove the Consequence.

2. As to the sense in Heb. 10. unless it be where the Apostle follows the
Septuagint in those words, A body thou have prepared; the sense and words are
the same with the Psalm, it is not as in your Common Prayer Book, to give us
five words of 59. and not the nature of the thing, though there be a little
difference from the Psalm.

3. As to your quotation out of Mat. 27. I can give you the same Answer, but
add withal, it seems I must needs take your Reconciliation of the Texts, when
I may make bold to tell you, as Learned men as your self (Salva Reverentia)
have other notions of that Text. See Voetius disp. Selat. l. 1. p. 159. Solomon
Glassius. Philolo. lib. 2. p. 156. So that your example fails. How well you
have cleared your Liturgy, and deservedly charged your Adversary with
Impudence, Ignorance, and Blasphemy, Let the Reader judge.

Sectio tertia.
AFter this from p. 26. to p. 35. he fills his pages with his Rhetorical
Encomiums of his Liturgy, and then Answers other Objections, so methodical is
this Rhetorician. Some discreet regulation in the Music he will allow.

singing of service is, I cannot tell, p. 35.
I was never acquainted with places where this Trade is set up, I suppose none
so void of Christian Reason to sing any thing but Psalms, Hymns, or Spiritual
Songs in the Church. Now as to Music, if the Doctor means only Vocal, I shall
declare my opinion thus, I could heartily wish, That in all Churches we had
some persons that had good voices, and skilful to sing their parts when we sing
Psalms. I think it does very much help to the very nature of the Ordinance,
that men should skilfully sing, to help raise the Affections, and not to make a
shreaming instead of singing. If the Doctor contends for Instrumental Music, I
shall only desire him to Answer Aquinas, Sum. 2a. 2ae. q 91. a. 2. against it.

Objection some make against the Liturgy, is, the Ceremonies, concerning which,
p. 36. he tells us his Opinion after the old fashion in Rhetoric, but in p.
38. his zeal breaks out, telling us, This National Church, as all others have
power and authority from God to judge what is decent, as to any Ceremony in the
worship of God, which God has left indifferent in its nature, which the
consent of the major part of the Church, etc. may enjoin, etc. and that this is
most true and undeniably to be maintained even to the death; he is so tedious,
that I am weary with transcribing.

What? Is it not only true, but most true? I know one thing truer Doctor, and
what to be maintained to the death? Bishop Wren, give him a clap on the back
for this Heroic Sentence, we shall have a Ceremonious Martyr at last, but
Doctor it shall be, you shall maintain it to the death for me. Reader, if you
have better eyes than I, pray see if you can find what Texts of Scripture he
brings for this bold Assertion, and why a National Church may do this, more
than the Church of Corinth, Philippi, Ephesus, etc. else it may be if we say
these Apostolical Churches know their power as well as Dr. Gauden, yet in them
we find no such Ceremonies as in our Liturgy, and if they be useful for us,
they were for them; it may be if we urge this, he will tell us they were indeed
Apostolical, but not National Churches, and could not: but prove that.

As to this Question, I only hear of excellent books written about it, my purse
and distance cannot reach them; but such they are in the judgment of
understanding men, as they are not Answered, so never can be from Scripture and
sound reason, but by the old way of Prisons and silencing.

Only a word to the Dr. in page 36. You say these Ceremonies are signal marks
of Faith, Humility, Purity, Courage, etc. I pray, to your Decency, and
Significancy, add Efficacy, and to Efficacy. Necessity, as it was of old, and
so without them no Ordinances, nor Ministry, then you are right.

They are indifferent before enjoined, but what are they when enjoined? I have
read Necessary; give me leave to say, What God has left indifferent in his
Church in matters of Religion (I do not say in common Humane Society, and
things of civil order, wherein I confess the Magistrate may direct and
restrain) it is not in the power of any creature to make necessary. That
creature who does it, takes one step above God; for God le^ves liberty, you
will not allow it: If a Lord should leave it indifferent to his Servants to
wear what colored Clothes they would (so not foolish) and the Steward will
force them all to wear White, or put them out of his Service, is not this
Steward above his Lord? What is any creature but a steward to God?

I cannot see but such a creature takes as much upon him as God did; for take
all the Ceremonies of the old Law, consider them abstractedly from Gods
command, they were as indifferent as your Ceremonies, there was no goodness in
them, why God did command them, when they were in the highest use of them; as
suppose in their day of Atonement, if God had declared that he repealed his
command concerning all those Ceremonies, in that very Instant, they had been
all indifferent to any use: What difference between the High Priests Garments,
and your Surplice, as to their own abstracted nature? I know no Moral good in
one more than the other; And truly if you can ordain things in the worship of
God, which shall signify spiritual things, and shall have in them an aptness
and Efficacy, to stir up our dull minds (as you were wont to say) and now these
must be used, for being enjoined they are necessary, I cannot see how much you
are inferior to God: only thus indeed, God did not make a sign of a sign, as
you do in the Cross., move a man's finger over the face of a Child, and say, I
sign with the sign, when there is no sign at all left, for Courage, Constancy
and Faith, and I know not what; but no more of this, I pray Answer the Books
upon this Question.

Sectio quarta.
HIS third Consideration about the Liturgy, is, He comm^nds Liturgy.
His high commendation of it; and here I must go search up and down to get
things into a method; I will do it as well as I can.

First, He commends it from the efficient causes of it; these were (says he)
Martyrly men who composed our Liturgy. p. 3.

Answ. 1. Did Martyrly men compose it all? you will not say so I hope; I think
the Romish Party did much of it, from whom they took it.

Secondly, However distingue tempora; they came new out of Pope^y, the Nation
wedded to that Whore; in a time when there were not so many well-qualified
Ministers in the whole Kingdom, as were lately in one City, that of London:
Rare to find a Pulpit with a Clapper (said father Latimer;) forced to admit
mere reading Protestants well-affected to the true Religion into the Ministry.
But, what must we enjoy the Gospel an hundred years, and men not grow in
knowledge, gifts and grace? Will you shame the Gospel, Promises, and English
Christians? Must they be ever children? I am confident if those worthy men were
now alive, and knew what the Lord had done for the English Ministry, they would
abhor to impose, as you would have the Liturgy imposed; only this remember, we
honor those Martyrly men more than many of your persuasion have done, or do,
it were well if all abhorred that Bishop of Rome as they did.

Secondly, He commends it from the Matter; the excellent matter, for the main
must still be retained, p. 3. If it be only the excellent Matter, let it stand;
but if you will only purge some verbal defects as you say, I fear you will
leave something that is not excellent. The Reasons showing the necessity of
Reformation, etc. published by diverse Ministers, show more than verbal defects.
I pray answer that Book like a Divine and Lawyer: Mr. Powel, with whom, though
I agree not in all things, has observed sixty nine offensive things in that
Liturgy, you may please to consider them.

Thirdly, Whereas great offense has been taken at the Form of it, popular
responds, versicles, intermixtures, abbreviations, abruptions, stops, with a
present posting on again with a Let us pray, when prayer before was in hand.

Thirdly, Now he commends it from this Form, the popular responds, page 34.
which he calls the Echoes of humble and intent affections, and in the two
honorable Temples finds, they excite the Ministers affections, etc.

Answ. 1. Yea Sir, your Templars are Lawyers I suppose; and as for Lawyers,
unless they be a very few, they are crucified men to the World, they keep firm
to their Baptismal Covenant, forsaking the Devil and all his works, the vain
pomp, etc. But in other Congregations, where we have persons very vain, love
money abhominably, drink Sack like fish, and very Drunkards, rap out Oaths
commonly, unclean, scoff at the power of their own professed Religion; to have
such as these in our Congregations, only to make the responds, when godly men
will not come at us to hear the Service; this makes a Ministers stomach sick,
instead of quickening his affections.

Secondly, I pray Sir, can you prove that this was the Form the Lord appointed
at his Temple? I have read in the Word, of the peeples saying, Amen; but I
never read this kind of worship.

Thirdly, Then it seems the Minister is not the mouth of the people, their own
mouths speak for themselves; and why should not the Minister say Amen to their
prayers?

Sectio quinta.
final Cause; the more August and Reverent worship of God, etc. of which
before; only page 27. I find another, it is to be the main Standard, Test and
measure of our public Devotion.

Answ. I pray open your meaning; what is the Test and the Matter of it? I pray
first make it pure; and when it is purged, yet we abhor to give that honor to
your. Book, which is due to the Lords prayer, and the Word of God only.

But do you mean the Form of it? then it seems we must make our prayers with
popular responds, intermixtures, abruptions, etc. It Is our measure you say; How
is that, as on a Yard-wan? they have one Nail, two Nails, a quarter of a Yard,
etc. so they measure cloth: So if we will make a prayer of three short lines,
or six, etc. we must measure by this, where we have variety of lengths, and
thus we must make various prayers suitable to this main Standard; what else you
intend I know not by your Measure.

Fifthly, He commends it from the effects, page 12, 13, 18, 33. It is the
Bulwark against, first, Romish Superstition, as the Mass and Popery.

First, For the Mass, while Bread and Wine are so consecrated and communicated,
as in the Liturgy, we shall for ever keep out the Mass.

Answ. 1. What the Doctor means by Consecration, I know no^; how others
understand it, I know: but I can see nothing in the Book that is done to keep
out Mass, that is not done by other Ministers, who yet stumble at a Liturgy
imposed upon all; a strange Argument, that only by reading of the words the
Mass is kept out, else nothing that makes against the Mass in it, but we use.

Secondly, But does not your Book by commanding kneeling, do something which
may help in the Mass; till Transubstantiation began to be started, kneeling
was not known; you know the gesture for some hundred years was quite opposite.

Secondly, it is a Bulwark against Popery, he says.

Answ. 1. How then did Bishop Davenant prove Papists ought to be compelled to
come to Church; for as to our Liturgy he says, Determ. 27.
What is there in it that is not approved of Papists themselves, which he thus
confirms, That some of the Bishops of Rome have offered to approve our Form of
prayers, provided we would accept it by their Authority.

Secondly, Why then said one of your Bishops, The Servicebook of the Church of
England was now so dressed, that if the Pope should come and see it, he would
claim it as him own, but that it is in English. Yea, the Papists boasted it was
a compliance with them, etc.

You would seem to be afraid of Popery, I know who is; and he that reads Bishop
Bramhal's book, printed at the Hague, will fear more.

Why then was that passage left out in this Liturgy against the Pope; which,
with diverse other things makes us sure, this is not the Liturgy which the Law
established.

Thirdly, It is a Bulwark against Anabaptism, for it maintains Baptismal
Regeneration; and this you are forced first to prove as well as you can,
knowing it is one of the things that give offense, and will do. Had you carried
this stoutly, I would have given you many thanks, and said it was a strong
Argument; though it does not follow we must be tied to a Book.

I observe two things in your discourse:

1. You give this Regeneration to all Infants baptized.

2. You mention nothing of the Parent. Then briefly I answer.

Answ. 1. Why then did Dr. Gauden refuse to baptize the Infant of a Parent
(being abominably ignorant) in his Parish, till the Parent got some knowledge?
(I am certain of the truth of this) what wrong did he to the Child, by refusing
to put it into a Regenerate and saved Estate, by refusing to Baptize it? What
if the child had died.

Secondly, You allow a person in a Regenerate and saved estate, and yet falling
from that state you cannot save this.

Thirdly, Infants, as Infants, are the subjects of Baptism, they need no
depending Title; I thought Abraham's seed (visibly so) had been the subject.

Fourthly, Though natural affection work, yet who in his judgment loving the
soul of his Child, would not wish it might die, when it is under a certainty of
salvation?

Fifthly, Though all the Ordinances of God are honorable, yet Baptism surpass
them all; for that puts all such Subjects into a certainty of salvation; but
the Word preached does little: Paul did not speak right, when he said he was
sent, not to baptize, but to preach; the first saved all, if died in such a
state. These are my sudden thoughts, but I pray view Mr. Gataker his Stricturae
upon Bishop Davenants Epistle to Dr. Ward about this question, and answer him;
when I read him long since he gave me satisfaction. It is true, he was one of
the Members of that illiterate Assembly that Dr. Gauden so much uses to
despise, and that in his Loosing Peter's Chains; but though he did not wear a
long Scarf, he need not go to School to Dr. Gauden; no more needed Dr. Twiss,
nor Dr. Reynolds, Members of the same Assembly; but if the Doctor will swagger
with his Rabbinical Learning, let him help Dr. Lighfoot (another Member) a
little, and he will talk with him; many other men there were of excellent
worth, for Learned, Orthodox, and truly plous men that understand the Gospel,
and live accordingly; I fear the like Assembly will not be in ours, nor in our
Childrens days; they get no honor who despise that Assembly.

Sectio sexta.
2ly. THE next Effect of the Liturgy is this; it unites the King and the
People; and this Reason he urges, so that on the contrary, he says, Subjects
cannot be so tite, firm, zealous, cheerful, nor constant in our Loyalty and
Love to our Sovereign; a heap of words, page 28.

Answ. 1. What mean you Doctor, to create jealousies between the King and his
Subjects, when He is newly come to His Throne, the Lord rebuke you? Why then
did you take the Covenant (so cross to what now you practice) the removal of
the Liturgy was in pursuance of the Covenant, as both Houses declared; because
you can bring no Scripture Proof, you go to State Policy; but let us weigh him.

Secondly, Why not then the same Sermon that is preached before the King, and
the same prayer the Minister makes before Him? that there be nothing in all the
Worship of God, through his Kingdoms, but verbatim, the same that is before the
King: This uniformity is stronger.

Thirdly, It is true, in were a desirable thing if the King and His Subjects
could agree in every punctilio of Religion, Doctrine and Worship; but His
Majesty knows it is impossible, and that He, though our King, is a Subject to
God as well as we; there is darkness abides upon us in some degree while we are
here; but if we be united to our King in the sound Doctrine of the Church of
England, as we are, and the same Ordinances of God owning all; if in lesser
matters and circumstances there be various apprehensions upon conscientious
grounds, Can we not be firm to Him in Love and Loyalty?

Fourthly, As to prayer: Is it not sufficient that we pray for the same things,
and for His Majesty, much more enlarged, than in the Liturgy, unless we use
just the same words and syllables? You can allow men to use other words, and
contract places of Scripture, which the great God inspired, and commanded so to
be written (as I instanced before in your Liturgy) and yet we must be tied to
men's words.

I think our hearts were united to him in Love and Loyalty, when we poured out
our souls for him under his affliction without a Common Prayer Book.

Fifthly, The union between King and Subjects is then surest, when he has the
hearts of his Subjects united to him; His Majesty took a better course for this
heart-union by His Declaration from Breda: I am sure no King ever had the
hearts of his Subjects more united to Him, than He had by that; not that His
Majesty is bound by that to tolerate every one who pretends conscience, then He
must sin in tolerating the vilest Heresies, and those who despise and cast off
all the Ordinances of God, and Civil Government also.

Sixthly, The King of France has those who are Loving and Loyal to Him,
unless you will condemn all the Protestants there; yet I hope they use not the
same words in their Worship that are used before the King: How much more we,
who are of the same Protestant Religion with our King, and use the same worship
only, though we express the same things in different words.

7. God has the hearts of People in his hand, and can turn them to their
Prince as he please; and the best way for that, I think, is both for King and
Subjects to keep closest to him and his worship, according to his own
Institution, which if your Liturgy only be, and you can prove it, you need say
no more, but for this Argument Doctor, you get no hearts I am sure from the
Kings Subjects. If a man look back to the times of our troubles, what began
them? you may remember what made these unhappy breaches, your Argument is
experimentally confuted.

Sectio Septima.
ab oppositis. First, here I think he does notably lash those who laid it
aside; but the efficient Composers, they were Martyrly men, but the efficient
Deposers, who are they? we know they were both Houses of Parliament, as the
Ordinan. 3. Jan. 1644. declares, and none else but those could lay it aside (I
mean no private persons) but let us hear the Doctor. And we see this piece of
policy wat early used by some Jesuitick Engines to foment our sad Divisions,
the Liturgy must be laid aside, etc. p. 30. If the Doctor will stoop so low to
read the Ordinance of Parliament, and the Preface of the Learned (for so I call
it) Assembly to the Directory, there read the Jesuitick Engines. Were those men
Jesuits?

2. He argues from the contrary evil effects which have followed since the
Liturgy was laid aside: These effects he tells us are Errors, Ignorance,
Profaneness, etc. p. 11, 12, 32, 33.

Answ. True, too many errors, and too much profaneness we have known; but did
they rise from this being laid aside? surely you mistake.

For Errors. First, Let us see whether the use of it now will hinder
Arminianisme from spreading; I am sure we have good store of those who are
deeply engaged in those Opinions, and they are cross to several Articles of the
Church, so that I think they are Errors, unless the Articles be erroneous; I
speak of your Clergy. Why are these men so zealous for it?

2. Fewer Errors in Scotland, than have been in England fifty years, and yet
they will not own our Liturgy.

3. The pressing of this Liturgy and other humane Inventions, have m^de, and
will make people separate from public worship, and te^ching, into Corners,
which at first gave the occasion to breed and foment many Errors.

2. As for Ignorance and Profaneness.

1. Go to the Parishes where the Liturgy has been most used, and see if
Ignorance and Profaneness be not there more than in other Parishes.

2. Were it not for that I intend but a short discourse, I would have given you
such instances of Ignorance; and of profaneness, in some persons who have been
devoted to your Liturgy in these divided times, insomuch that they abhorred so
much as to suffer any of their servants to hear a Presbyterian, yet their
profaneness such that is scarce found amongst Heathens, and ignorance in others
as abominable.

3. If among private Christians who refuse the Liturgy, I find not many, who in
the great points of Regeneration, Faith in Christ, Justification, and all the
main practical points shall give a better account, and in gifts of prayer, far
exceed many hundreds of your Liturgical Ministers, then I will bear the shame:
Indeed for some Terms about the Trinity, as Subsistentia, personum modus,
suppositum, they understand not, nor do many of your Curats, but else sound in
the Trinity, etc. How then is the laying aside of the Liturgy the cause of this
Ignorance? And for their Conversations, few of your Liturgical-men must come
near them for holiness.

Sectio Octava.
a comparatis: And here First, He compares it with the Directory. p. 6, 7.
which he adorneth with these Epithites: Useless, Suppositious, Loose,
Illegitimate.

Answ. Doctor, these are but four Epithites, have you no more? add as many
more, or as many as you will, yet I must tell you, there is so much Christian,
grave, and wise counsel, in order to the Worship of God, there is so much
divine solidity in that Book, that no judicious godly Christian will be beaten
out of love with it by all your flashy Rhetoric: Let but a man who knows
God, the work of Grace on his heart, and has judgment to discern the nature of
an Ordinance, but compare, I know where he will see the difference. As for the
Confession of Faith, the Catechism, the Directory, made by that Assembly (of
which Doctor Reynolds was one) let your new Episcopal men sit till doomsday,
they will never mend them.

He tells us of a wilderness of sin, stings of fiery Serpents, venomous
Inflammations, etc. that followed upon the removing of the Liturgy, and
bringing in the Directory. Ibid.

But, Sir, your Liturgy and the Directory respect the worship of God, have the
evils you speak of befallen those who cleave fast to the Directory? Name one;
but if men never observed the Directory, is the fault in that? Thus you stumble
upon the fallacy of non Causae pro Causa.

2. He compares it with all the gifts of other Ministers, this is frequent, and
exalts it above the gifts of any Minister, page 9. I give no answer to this,
the naming of it is enough to refute it.

inartificial Argument, and will prove the excellency from Testimony, which
were worth all he has writ, both in this book and all the rest; if it were
certain the Witnesses he allege would give in the Testimony he supposes: For
thus, p. 34. he writes, Nor can I believe but that the blessed Apostle St.
Paul, if living, and the other Apostles would have joined with it, and said
Amen; Rejoicing to see the soundness of our Faith, the Sanctity of Sacraments,
the Unity of Devotion, the Order and Decency of holy Duties, etc.

Answ. These blessed men are in Heaven, how shall we know their minds? We need
not ascend to know, the word is near, Romans 10.8. To Paul then let us go, who
Act. 20.27. when he sent for the Elders of Ephesus (whom also he calls Bishops,
making no difference) he tells them, I have not shunned to declare unto you all
the counsel of God. That Counsel it seems taught not him to set up a Bishop
above a Presbyter, neither now, nor when he wrote to Timothy and Titus, I never
thought of any difference, will holy Paul say, if I had, I would have somewhere
appropriated the word Bishop to a distinct Officer, as though in some places I
call my self a Minister, yet in others I say I am an Apostle. I told this
Church, Ephesians. 4.11. what Officers Christ appointed, and so 1 Cor. 12.28. But I
find amongst you Archbishops, Lord-Bishops, above Presbyters, Deans,
Archdeacons, Prebends, Chancellors, Chapters, etc. I never declared the
Counsel of God for such Officers; these are your own Counsel sure enough.

Nor did I, will St. Peter say, for Epist. 1. chap. 5. verse. 2. I thought
Bishop and Presbyter to be the same, and appointed them the same work.

2. I declared all the counsel of God; but I never told you it was his mind to
Consecrate a Day to God for the Nativity of Christ. Surely God has revealed
more of his Counsel to you than to me, if it be his mind, yet the cause was
existent in my time, and I suppose I loved Christ as well as Dr. Gauden.

3. I find you are imposing of your Forms of prayer on the ablest Ministers of
God, to whom he has given both sufficient gifts, and a Spirit to assist, as I
delivered in the Gospel: Had not I, and my fellow-Apostles, as much authority
and wisdom as you, but neither I nor they had ever such Counsel from God, nor
did we ever impose such Forms upon the Churches; though we often called for
Unity in Doctrine and Affections, yet not in the same syllables in prayer;
whence had you this counsel?

4. I find you are in matters of Religion pressing things indifferent on
Ministers and Christians; my Doctrine, Romans 14.20.21. and my Practice, 1 Cor.
8.13. you may find quite contrary.

I find you are urging of Ceremonies. Had not I and the other Apostles as much
Authority to invent and impose Ceremonies as you? Are you the men who only care
for the Decency of worship, and were we only careless? Were not we as
industrious and studious to advance the honor and worship of God, good of
Souls, as you? but we dare not act but as we had Counsel from God. I have
declared the mind of God, Col. 2.20, 23. concerning such Ordinances of men, and
call them Will Worship. We know God has not remitted his jealousy in the
second Commandment. As for our Commission it ran thus, Matthew. 28.20. Teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; but you turn the
Commission thus, Teach them to observe all things (in my worship) whatsoever I
have not forbidden, and that in particular also; else you might know I have
forbidden the Doctrines of men in general, Mar. 7.7. and the second
Commandment should tie you close to my Institutions.

To conclude these things, I find amongst you; after a solemn Covenant made on
the contrary, and for extirpation of these your humane inventions: I am not of
your Faith Doctor, that Paul would rejoice, but would send you such a kind of
Epistle as he did to the Galatians.

Sectio Nona.
THus I have done with all the strength I can find in his Book; only p. 31. he
strains his Rhetoric to the height to set out the expcellency of the Liturgy,
and the mischief that must befall us if it be not imposed; I will not weary my
self to transcribe all his words, thus he begins, Nothing will be considerable
in England for public piety, honor, order, beauty, etc. if in this point of
public Devotion, Ministers and People be left to eternal variations, etc. And
in the close of it thus; Farewell the Glory; Charity, Unity, and Safety of
England; farewell both Reformation and true Religion.

Give the Orator a Humm, but not very loud, for his Divinity deserves a Hiss. I
shall consider this presently.

The things which he touches collaterally, I thought to have spoken to; as the
fault he finds with many Presbyterians for not using these words in
Ordinations, Receive ye the Holy Ghos^^p. 20. But I must now let it alone,
only leave this with him if he will please, or any of his persuasion to
maintain this Thesis, viz. That Ordination by Presbyters is not Ordination
according to the Scripture; if he can carry it, I will be ordained again; or if
he will prove those words he has mentioned to be essential, or ought to be
used in Ordination.

The other thing is, page 28. his calling for Coercive Authority to be given to
the Bishops by the King.

I cannot but smile to see how the stupendous virtue of Episcopacy to heal
Schism, for which it was first invented by men, is now proved to be a fallacy.
What will not great Titles, Lordships, and Riches do the work, but you must
call for a Civil Law of the Nation? You use to laugh at the poor despised
Presbyters; Had they a Law which you call for, they could have done something:
But will not all your greatness and favor of great men be sufficient? you have
shamed Episcopacy extremely; for now we see it is the Law of the Nation, not
your Episcopacy, which can heal our Schisms, or do any good in the Church.

Now I come to his Exhortation, to the reading of the Liturgy, having before,
page 5. charged Ministers with peevishness, ingratitude, schismatical
petulancy, pride, if now they were averse; but page 41. he gives his Motives.

One is, The remembrance of the sore Tribulations which we have felt and feared.

Very true, we do remember them, and have not forgot the causes of them, why
did you not set them down? When we see the same things which afflicted the
Church before, coming so near us again, we do fear it indeed.

His other is, The Kings benignity and gentleness, etc. Blessed be God we have
such a King to stand between you and us, else we see how it would go quickly
with us.

^ut, Sir, we are at a stand about reading it upon these grounds.

First, Many are scrupulous about the lawfulness of using such Forms, being
thus imposed; for we find no Divine Authority for the imposing such Forms upon
all men, because the Holy Penmen were directed and inspired by God to pen a
prayer for the use of the Church at sometimes; that therefore ordinary men may
impose their Forms on able men qualified by God, so as to take up most of the
Ordinance of Prayer publicly, we think it to be a lame consequence.

You should show us what ordinary men made their Forms, and imposed them on
those who were able to pray without them; as for your part you give not one
Scripture-ground; and your Reasons being weighed, are found very light.

Secondly, Though His Majesty has declared, yet the Parliament could cast out
His Declaration; and as for some of the Bishops, they can act contrary to His
Declaration, imposing the Canonical Oath on some who have had His Majesty's
Presentation, and denying Institution and Induction for refusing it: Now we
fear if we should begin before the Book be thoroughly purged, we shall be forced
to go forward, over shoes over Boots; and when we have blemished our Ministry
(which Paul was tender of) by beginning; if now we will not go through-stitch,
the Bishops will turn us out. For we cannot forget the High Commission violence
used against sober pious Conformists who did use the Rites directed in the
Service Book, and yet were censured for not pasing it with the Prelates, to
rail-in the Table, and bow to it, and use other Ceremonies not therein
directed; nor yet the face of Bellum Episcopale animated by the hope of
Scotlands receiving the Liturgy; nor the Plaints pressed on the Parliament by
multitudes oppressed with Bishops, and humane inventions; to which, if men can
now again return, I must conclude they show themselves very blameworthy for
raising such stirs as were occasioned by their pressing groans.

Thirdly, We find that some have begun to read where they thought they could
most safely, according to His Majesty's Declaration; presently, the Christians
who walked most close with God, were offended, the Ministers lose their hearts;
and other men, because all is not read, they are offended also, and thus a man
loses all.

Fourthly, When I observe who they are that are so hot for this Liturgy, I find
out abundance of men who can rap out Oaths, and such as His Majesty's Excellent
Proclamation against vicious profane persons, would reach, these are very hot
for it; some Formalists, and but very few Christians that know the power of
godliness, care for meddling with it; now I thus think with my self, Can this
be of God? what spirit Acts these profane ones, I know.

Again, on the other side, If any men know the work of Regeneration, of Faith
with power, and are afraid of sin, walk up in good measure to Gospel-Rules,
have their Families in order, the body of such people distaste it: Now I am
assured God gives his Spirit to his people; and it is something to see the
chief part of that people twenty to one decline it; I know not how to Answer
this.

Fifthly, From that Sacred Oath and Covenant, wherein we have sworn to the most
High God to endeavor the Reformation of his worship according to his Word, and
the example of the best Reformed Churches.

First, As to the Word of God; we know no Text of Scripture which will warrant
this Mode of worship; we much desire to have that Word brought which will
justify a few ordinary men in their composing, and imposing such Forms upon
the Churches, to hinder the gifts which God requires to be in his Ministers,
and has bestowed on them, as in my first Reason.

Secondly, Much less can we look on this Liturgy to be according to the Word,
wherein we find so many things that agree not with the Word; the same humane
Law which binds to one, binds to all things in it for ought I know.

Thirdly, Yet further; when we find an humane constitution so cried up, and
Idolized, as if God had no true worship but that; Gods own Institution [the
brazen Serpent] when the people abused it, Hezekiah brake in pieces, much more
a faulty humane constitution; though Dr. Gauden sticks not to compare it with
the Ark of God.

Secondly, As to the best Reformed Churches, to say which are the best, is very
inconvenient; but this we know.

1. Some of them have no forms or Liturgies, nor will admit any.

2. Others who have such, yet tie not up gifted men to these Forms as we are
tied.

3. Neither is our Liturgy so clear from offense as theirs are.

4. The Parliament did abolish this Book in reference to the Reformation of the
worship of God, according to their Covenant.

Now for Ministers who have not only taken the Covenant themselves, but also
given it to their people [as our Congregations have taken it in a Solemn
manner, subscribing their names also to it] bring in this Mode of worship
again, at least before it be thoroughly purged, I think we should bring our
selves and people upon the brink of perjury, if not perjured; not only our
selves, but our people are concerned in this.

Sixthly, To use this Book as it is, we cannot conceive but it is a way to
blast our Ministry for ever doing good; for what may people say, These
Ministers have taken a Covenant, and given it to us; they have laid by the
Common Prayer Book in order to the Reformation of the worship of God, and now
they turn to it again! who will believe or regard these Ministers, or
Turn-Coats, in what they say? To be sure it will weaken our Ministry much; and
we ought to be wary of whatever might hinder it: And is it not one Reason why
some men do so urge it upon Ministers, that when they see men take it up again,
they may deride the Covenanted Presbyterians?

Sectio decima.
7thly. DOctor Gauden himself has suggested two or three strong Arguments
against it in my apprehension: As

First, He justifies all the things in it, only a few verbal defects, and he
lets us know that he is one, if not the chief Corrector. Mr. Crofton.
Analepsis. p. 34.
I hope he will take care to correct the sentence in Ps. 15.4. commended to his
care by Mr. * Crofton, that it may not speak so plainly against his Politic
Notion of an hurtful incommodious Oath.

Secondly, He grants, page 5. it is but an humane constitution, subject to
imperfections. Now

First, To have an humane constitution to be imposed upon the Church, as being
absolutely necessary, or as an essential part of Gods worship, I cannot yield
to that; but thus will he have this Mode of worship, this humane invention
imposed. Prayer, without any default, gives him no content; but these prayers
with such a Mode: For this Liturgy, he tells us, we must make it the main
Standard, Test, and Measure of our public devotions, p. 27. then surely that
must needs be absolutely necessary and essential to our Devotions. He tells us,
that public piety, reformation, true Religion are gone, bids Farewell to them
all, page 31. if it be not used.

Now as for the sound Doctrine in it, we own as much as himself; but the
contest has been about the things offensive as to matter, and the Mode; and he
does consider it as a Liturgy, a Mode of worship, and not as having Doctrine
which we own, when he speaks thus.

Again, page 27. He will have all Ministers commanded to use these Forms wholly
and solely at Sacraments.

As if Ministers understanding these mysteries, without which they are not fit
to dispense them, may not pray as sutably to them, as before a Sermon. Here
that part of worship must necessarily be performed by a humane constitution, be
men never so able to pray without it, and more aptly and affectionately than by
a Book.

Apollonius, in the name of the Walachrian Classis, declaring his and their
judgment about Forms of prayer which he determines for; Page 172.
having in his first Thesis shown his dislike of the Forms of public Worship
and Ceremonies in the Church of England, in later times, as being Superstitious
and Idolatrous, then he comes to his second, and thus he writes:

We also reject those Forms of prayer, and public worship, which are imposed
upon the consciences of men with a certain Tyranny and violent command, as
absolutely necessary and essential parts of Divine worship, although as to the
matter they be lawfully disposed, yet as to the form and manner by which they
are induced, they are made the unlawful instruments of cruelty, and pretexts of
wicked malice, and occasions of violent Tyranny, over the most worthy and best
sons of the Church, etc. His Reason is, Because Christ nor his Apostles did
ever prescribe any such forms as simply and absolutely necessary. When all
other prayers must be thrust out [unlesse before and after Sermon, and there
your Reasons will hold as well as in other Ordinances] be men so able, I think
you make your Forms absolutely necessary, when especially you will thrust the
ablest men out of the Ministry for not yielding to your Forms, I think
Apollonius is on my side.

Secondly, I cannot admit that Liturgy, being but an human constitution, when
it has that attributed to it which is proper only to the Word of God. The
Text says, To the Law, Isa. 8.20.
to the Testimony; Dr. Gauden says, To the Liturgy for your Test, your main
Standard, your Measure in your public worship of God. And look what the
Apostle said, Gal. 6.16. As many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be on
them; the same says the Doctor, as many as walk according to his Rule,
syllabically, peace to them, and ^o^e else.

Thirdly, Religion, Piety, Reformation, come or go, are put or removed,
according as Gods Word, Gods own Institutions are set up in their purity and
power; but they depend not upon a human constitution, a humane mode of Worship,
as Doctor Gauden makes them all depend on this Liturgy, so that they come or go
with it. I am sure this humane constitution wants Reformation, and it was taken
away by Ordinance of Parliament in order to Reformation. Liturgy is concretum
quid, it is not bare Doctrine; nay, the Doctor takes it strictly for a Form of
prayer. Since then he puts so much upon it, I cannot admit it; strange that
these three should depend upon such Forms of prayer.

Fourthly, Neither can I admit of such Forms of prayer as are imposed upon the
Church with desiance and scorn of all the gifts of the Spirit of God in all his
people; but so does Dr. Gauden impose this Liturgy. I have heard it called an
Idol, but I thought it a little too much heat, till now I have read Dr. Gauden,
who I fear speaks the mind and heart of our Liturgical men; thus much from this
Doctor, who sets me off more then ever I was before.

These things all laid together do so trouble me, that I know not how to meddle
with it as it is.

Besides, there are worthy Divines of the Presbyterian persuasion, both learned
and godly, whom we honor, who it seems declared their judgments for a Liturgy
to His Majesty; now we wait for their grounds, who we expect will deal with us
upon Scripture foundations, and to such we shall willingly li^en.

CONCLUSION.
Now I have done with your Book, I leave it to the godly judicious to
determine, whether you have carried your cause so thoroughly, that all must be
charged by you with pride, peevishness, etc. if we do not presently as you
would have us. Sir, though I am a poor sinful Creature, yet I have not so
learned the Gospel, nor do I so little desire the healing of our wounds, nor am
I so disloyal to my King, that upon such cursed principles as you mention I
would hold off one day. If you will let me speak in the Sea-mans phrase, I will
stretch my Bowlings, Haal sharp, keep my Luff, do what I can to come up for
peace; but when Christ, who Cuns the Ship, commands, No near, we must answer,
No near, no.

You tell us, page 40. of an aged Minister, who pleasing the Vulgar, forbear
against his Conscience to use Forms of prayer, and now came begging to you, etc.

As for the Lords prayer, sometimes I do use it; not because I must, but
because I may; yet I condemn no man who does not use it, if he holds to that
Substance; but for your Liturgy, and other things, we look to be outed
likewise; our prayer is, That God would go before us into affliction, clear our
way, that we may not mistake through an erring conscience; but if we do suffer,
we may be sure He calls us to it (your Book has made our way a little clearer,
if all be of your mind) and if my Bible will not maintain me and mine, I will
then go beg; but I resolve I will not come to your door.

The Title of your Book says, you published it in order to a happy union;
Alas, Sir, this, as your other Books show, you have none of that Spirit; I know
those who are farther off since they read your Book; and truly if that were
your aim, you have so fairly hit it, that I may fitly apply to you that
Disti^^on:

Aut Fabrum forceps, aut Ars ignara fefellit: (...) voluit cudere, cudit (...).
FINIS.

