A SAINTS MONUMENT, OR THE TOMB OF THE Righteous.

The Foundation whereof was laid in a Sermon preached at Knath in the County of
Lincoln, at the solemn Interment of the Corpse of the Right honorable and truly
religious Lady Elizabeth, Wife of the Right Honorable Francis Lord Willughby,
Baron of Parham.

March 26. 1661. and since finished.

Whereunto is annexed her Exemplary and Unparalleld CONVERSATION.

By WILL. FIRTH, M. A. and Chaplain to the Right Honorable Francis Lord
Willughby Baron of PARHAM.

LONDON, Printed for Ed. Brewster at the Crane in St. Paul's-Church-yard. 1662.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE FRANCIS LORD WILLUGHBY, Baron of Parham.
Right Honorable,
IT is usual for those that appear in public, to prefix some great name before
them, that they may gain the greater Esteem, and that the army of their words
may be looked on to be more considerable, when they have so valiant a forlorn:
It is no more then needs that some Coats have supporters, especially when there
are notes of abatement in the charge; Amongst whom I rank my self, who had I
not had a copious subject, should have desired invention; who now only desire
that my labor may find protection under your wing; and the more confident I
am, that I shall not be frustrated, when I consider who it is that is here
presented to your Lordships view.

I confess a fair front may be set before a mean Cottage by an unskilful
Builder; and I may rank your honorable Name as a Patron to that, which for its
own merits sake is not worth your Lordships reading, much less your protection:
But I shall not so much desire that the fashion of this monument be observed by
you, as the materials whereon it is built; and then I promise my self this,
that though you should not like the frame of the building, yet you would not
have the Timber lost. What I saw in her Ladyship (whom I here present to your
Honor) useful for such a work as this, I picked by mine own observation.
Another that could have built this Monument in more state, might have found
hewn stones fitted to his hand; though those, which for their curious
workmanship, I knew not how to place right, are lefr out, not because I see
them not, but because I could not place them to their worth. And having built
this small Pile of her virtues, not knowing to whom she more of right belonged
then to your self, I have made bold to give it your Lordships Superscription.

You may say to me in this attempt, as Aeneas did to Dido, when she desired a
Narration of the Trojan Wars, Infandum -- jubes renovare dolorem; That I bring
you again to the house of mouring, and open the sluices of those eyes that were
almost shut; and for this cause (did I not hope that the profit you may
receive, will countervail the sorrow which you will find in the renewing of her
remembrance) I should have been silent: but if the streams of your tears wash
your soul, and your sorrow for her terminate in sorrow for sin, I shall not
think my labor either preposterous, or in vain: if the flood turn inward, I am
willing to cleanse and open, rather then to stop or interrupt the free passage.

When Constantine had shown the Persian King the glory of Rome, and the stately
Monuments of deceased Emperors, he looked on them, and said, Mira quidem haec,
sed ut video, sicut in Persia, sic Romae, homines moriuntur; though you have
men of great renown, yet I see as we do in Persia, so at Rome all dye. I hope
your Lordship judged so of her; that though she was pure, yet she was brittle;
though precious, yet mortal. The Oak in time will decay as well as the Willow;
and the strongest tower, though a storm will not, yet a thunderclap will
shatter it to pieces: Fragilem frangi, and mortalem mori, to see a glass break,
or a Candle burn to the snuff, is no new thing.

It is a mortifying consideration to look over a dead wife, or a dead child;
but we who have corruption so apt to live, had need sometimes be told that our
frame is subject to dye: this consideration will still homebred Wars, namely,
to be told of an invasion; the flesh will sooner be mortified, and the spirit
will endeavor to be supreme the rather, when it considers that it is
accountable.

It was said of Alexander, that when he came to Achilles his Tomb, he wept,
because he had not a Homer to set him forth. For this purpose it is reported,
that Alphonsus of Arragon, King of Cicily, kept Panormitan the Poet, that he
might immortalize his name; and though that cannot be expected from me, what
another might have writ, who had known her longer; yet something I have
observed according to my knowledge; nay, I have seen more in her then I know
how to express here: For he had need be a neat Limner that draws a beauty to
the life; and he had need understand the tongue, that attempts to express her
language, and stands need to have trod in her steps too, that goes about to
describe them.

When I considered the remarkableness of the providence, the noise that it
made, and how loud it spoke to us all, I thought, God would not have it forgot:
and when I considered that in so short a time, the memory of that great stroke
was something more dark, and ready to wear out, I undertook this work, which I
formerly did not intend; namely, to build a Monument, whereby The mother and
the son both dying in a fort-nights space.
their names, whose persons the Lord has taken to himself, should not be
forgotten; and it is because we have almost forgot to read my Ladies virtues,
that I put them in print; had our memories been better to have retained more, I
should have spoken less, if any thing at all.

It seems God saw that we had need of such a great affliction, or else he would
not have doubled it; and if the smart of it do not make impression, he can plat
another cord, and be more severe: Oh therefore that what we have felt, might
make us say, Spare Lord, and we will do so no more. Could we but find the
pleasures of sin to countervail the torment for sin, we might be less cautious:
and if it were so, that brethren in iniquity who have drawn us to sin, could
get as much favor hereafter as they get us affliction and sorrow here, we need
not be much circumspect: but to consider that our very companions, nay, our
very Tempters will be our accusers; and he, for whose sake we became
transgressors, will betray us: Surely it is more rational to trust God in a way
of holiness, who will never forsake us, then man in a way of sin who will not
assist us in time of danger.

I have ground to believe, that your Lordship had not espoused her person only,
but her graces; and did not love her only for external accomplishments, but for
her inward zeal. What I here publish, is no more then you knew, no more then
you approved of: I wish none that are religious, were more unequally yoked. I
have seen some husbands canes in praesepibus, or like the Scribes and
Pharesees, Mat. 23. 13. who shut the Kingdom of heaven, and will neither enter
in themselves, nor suffer them that are entering to go in: had it been so with
her, she had not been so forward: she has often reckoned it a mercy which she
received from your Lordship, as well as from her heavenly Father, that you did
not offer to quench, but kindled the fire of her zeal; that you did not pull
off the Chariot wheels, but rather oil them; that you did not constrain her to
tread in those steps which were not suitable to her speed, nor force her to
wear that shoe which did not sit easy on her foot: considering that it is
uncomfortable for one in a race to be clogged with any burdens but necessaries.
I desire the Lord Almighty to bless you with the same blessing; that as they
have fixed their resolution for heaven, they may not be pulled back by those
that draw in the same yoke with them; and that they may never be constrained to
speak in a language they understand not; though there are many voices, yet none
of them is without signification; 1 Cor. 14. 10. They in this sense have been
used to speak in their mothers tongue; and though it should seem barbarous to
others, yet to speak in an unknown language, would make them Barbarians to
themselves. I hope the Lord who has made you a father, has given you a
fathers heart that is tender; not only to encourage their graces, but to bear
with their infirmities. And I hope, and have testimonies to convince me, that
seeing the Lord has blessed you with such Children, you will not be unwilling
that they should bestow themselves on the Lord.

As to my self and present work, it is my first fruits, which had not been ripe
yet, but that it was so soon Autumn with her; and because it grows in your
Lordships soil, I cannot but dedicate it to your self; wherein I do not desire
to be Theologus gloriae, but Crucis: As I dare not be found sinning, so I would
not be found idle when my Savior comes. Perhaps some who loved her not, will
censure me for what I have said; and those that desired her vvorth should be
blotted out, will be angry because I have put it in print; yet this is my
comfort, Non ignota cano; innumeros prompsit Britannia testes: her light was
not laid under a bushel; those that did not shut their eyes, might have seen as
much as I have spoken; these who knew her would have believed themselves,
though I had not spoken: and those that did not know her, I could desire them
to believe me, except they would have me to distrust them, when they speak
truth. And if I be censured, it is no more then I would freely undergo, rather
then her dear name should be forgot. Those that will speak evil, perhaps may
have some come after them, that will do as much for them. Valla condemned all
that writ before him; (which could not be wisdom, except he had been sure to
have been the last that had come upon the stage) Erasmus comes after, and does
as much for him.

This Treatise has swelled to a greater bigness then I intended at first it
should; therefore I hope it will nourish the more, if digested: And as to serve
you or yours, is the earnest breathing of my desire; so to perpetuate the
Memory of those that are deceased, was my greatest aim. I confess there is
nothing but my unserviceableness that does dissatisfie me with my condition:
Could I be more useful, I should never be willing to depart; If either you or
yours have any errand to send me on, whereby I may testify my real dutifulness
to your family, I should blush, and take it as a disgrace, if any man on earth
should either be more willing, or venturesome then my self: if opportunity
would permit, I hope I should make it appear, that I could do more then your
honor requires of me: what I have done here in testimony how I desire to be
employed when either the comfort or honor of them, or yours stands need of me,
I have made bold to sign with your Lordships name, that that may be to this
small Tractate, as Solomon says of a gift, Prove. 18. 16. Namely, to make room,
and to find entertainment for it; For I conclude, that those who would not look
upon it for the Authors sake, they will for the subjects sake, or at least for
the Patrons. I have neither silver nor gold, as you want neither, but such as I
have I give it you, as being under greater obligations to your self then any
other, making mention of you in my prayers, that God who has interested you in
the hearts and affections of men, he would also interest you in the heart and
affections of his Son; and he who has made you honorable on earth, would also
crown you with glory in heaven; for whose sake I am willing even to sacrifice
my dearest comforts, if it would ransom you from perils, or contribute the
least to your souls salvation; who can but now subscribe my self,

SIR, The unworthiest, But not the Most faithless Of your Lordships Servants,
W. F.

AN ELEGY Upon the Death of the Right Honorable and truly Religious Lady,
ELIZABETH, Wife to the Right Honorable Francis LORD Willughby BARON of PARRAM,
who dyed March 25. 1661. Her only Son dying a few days before her.
DEar friends, is there no Ornament in verse.
Nor tears to deck this noble Ladies hearse!
Swel waves of grief; let Lymbecks now appear:
Distill by drops, whilst sorrow has a tear:
Drop trickling eyes, sigh mournful heart, and creep
Into some Corner set apart to weep.
Thus we, in shadowy groves refuse our rest,
Prostrate our bodies, smiting on our breast:
Sigh begets sigh in us, mirth mirth does smother,
Fears pro^reate; one looking on another.
Such the Ocean in the seas will scarce suffice,
Or let a second deluge fill our eyes.
Where lies the sinner, even there lies the just:
Honor in the grave, Nobility in dust.
Let Tragic Elegies here take their turn;
Sarah lies dead, and Abraham's come to mourn:
Our earthly orbs stand still bereaved of sense,
Because each wants its Intelligence.
One drop another from our eyes does call;
One tear pursues to see another fall.
O dexterous soul! O strange mysterious skill!
Whose smiles did make alive, whose frowns did kill!
Poisonous malice she could countermand,
And charm the furies with touching of her hand.
Her favors when, and unto whom she imparts,
Are privy seals whereby she take up hearts.
Wisdom, parts, wit, with courtesy and love,
Her Jewels were, yet Grace sat Queen above.
When to the world she had brought forth her son,
According to his glass her hours did run:
Her life was bound in his; it came to pass
This Ladies Benjamin, Benoni was. Genesis 35. 18.
Being set, the night over shadowed our hopes;
She was the Sun, and we the Heliotropes.
She was our Center; the eyes of every soul
Like the trembling needle, point to her as Pole.
When Planets change their Orbs, when Stars their Sphere,
When glorious Constellations disappear;
Astronomers stand stupifi'd, and fears
The Sun will set, and clouds dissolve in tears.
Quake trembling shrubs, when stately Cedars fall,
Then showers of tears are Epidemical.
Could I have sacrificed my life so dear,
It should have Expiation made for her.
Had not my offering been both halt and lame,
I would, to have rescued Isaac, been the Ram.
If God his scourging hand would but have staid
My life should have been on the Altar laid;
But to appease his wrath he has devised,
Our Turtle Dove she must be sacrificed.
Then ebb your groans; shall grief our hearts annoy?
Though she was sown in tears, she is reapt in joy.
The grain we set in the earth, to heaven is grown;
The Dove is turned Eagle, and to the carcass flown.
She was transplanted thus in heaven to dwell:
The Rose was plucked that God might take a smell.
Her son with Fever burnt, the mother would
Become his Urn, his ashes for to hold:
They kindle in the Urn which was her breast;
They melt her heart, and so she dropped to rest.
So dyed the Phoenix of this Land; yet she
As the Phoenix does, has left her pedigree.
The Phoenix leaves but one to be her Heir,
Yet from these ashes here is sprung a pair;
Whose virtues, features, beauties, parts and grace
Discover them to be the Phoenix race.
Though we with grief oppressed should fall asleep,
Let after-generations for her weep:
And when their springs and fountains are wept dry,
The clouds with sable tears shall them supply.
Harmonious soul! now grace with nature sings
Melodiosu Anthemes to the King of Kings.
Love keeps the time, her tuned heart does raise
To Elamy in Alt, her songs of praise.
Her voice, nor Bassus has, nor Mean, for glory
Transcends all flourishes of humane story:
Her Notes are all in Alt, so high they sore,
The Mood is called Perfect of the more.
She reached to heaven, though on her knees by prayer;
Sweet change! a daily beggar made an heir!
Should I turn Romanist, I would beg that she
With Mary should propitiate for me.
The twenty fifth of March hereafter may
Of right by us be called our Ladies day.
Reckon, this daye's the period, when she
Uncaptivates her soul, and so gets free;
Triumphs, though stained in field, kills death and stings
The serpent, mounts to heaven on Angels wings.
She was too sweet a plant for earth: thus fate
In Paradise did her inoculate.
What heavenly joys at Gods right hand there be,
Our Sheba's Queen is gone to taste and see.
We have lost in her, Oh pity our complaint,
A Wife, a Mother, a Savior, and a Saint!
No more my Muse, give over, and cease to weep,
She lies in Abraham's bosom, let her sleep.
Haec flevit W. FIRTH.

AN EPITAPH ON THE Right Honorable and pious Lady, ELIZABETH WILLUGHBY: March
25. 1661.
STay Passenger, and read, under this stone
Here lies three Orient Pearls, all set in one:
Pallas, Diana, Venus; here you see,
Grace, Nature, Beauty in a high degree.
A Folio in a sheet is here comprised,
Great works lie in a shell Epitomis'd.
W. F.

EPITAPHIUM IN Sepulchrum serenissimae Dominae ELIZABETHAE WILLUGHBY,
Fidelissimae Conjugis FRANCISCI Baronis de PARMA, Quae obiit Martii vicesimo
quinto, 1661.
Sanctissima Domina, Evangelii sacri studiosissima, nec non pro ingenii,
naturaeque dotibus inter seculi heroinas merito numeranda, O. H. S. S.
FAemina, subsidium, conjux, jacet abdita Christi
Inclyta, dispositum, castaque fida sinu.
Clara Deo, jucunda viris, optata marito,
Blanda suis liberis, publica nostra salus.
Hunc lacrymae! filium ad coelestia gaudia matter
Quem peperit sequitur -- Desiderantur caetera.
W. F

AN Advertisement to the Reader of some very useful BOOKS lately printed for,
and sold by Edward Brewster at the Crane in St. Paul's Churchyard; 1662.
AN Elaborate Exposition on the whole 17 Chapter of St. John, by Mr. George
Newton of Taunton in Summerset in fol.

Magna Charta, or the Christians Charter epitomized by the same Author in 8.

Mr. Baxter of the Crucifying of the world by the Cross of Christ in 4.

An Help to better hearts for Better Times; by Mr. John Angier Pastor of Denton
Chapel in Lanchashire.

Mr. Elton his pious and profitable Exposition on 7. 8, 9. Romans; fol.

Mr. Benthams Christians Conflict showing the difficulties and duties, Armor
and special Graces to be exercised by every Christian; 4.

Mr. John Ball of the Nature and Life of Faith in two Tracts: 4.

Mr. John Stalt. against the Quakers; 4.

Against Universal Redemption; 4.

Against the Anabaptists; 4.

Dr. Jeremin his Exposition on all the Proverbs

A SAINTS MONUMENT, OR THE TOMB OF THE Righteous.
GENESIS 23. 2. And Sarah dyed in Kiriath-arba; the same is Hebron in the Land of
Canaan, and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her.
OUR heavenly Father in his great Wisdom, many times keeps his dearest Children
short in this world: they have famine as well as plenty; tears as well as joy.
Cold and Nakedness to drive them home to their Fathers house. Prodigal sons
miss of their expectation, or else they would take up lodging with the swine;
Beggars must hunger sometimes, or else they will not ask; nay, they must be
denied, or else they will not be importunate. Thus our holy Father lasheth his
children where he would have them obey, and causes the Sun to set, and
darkness to overtake them, when he would have them return home: Indeed, the
Pinnacle of honor in the world is such a slippery place, that when Satan had
set Christ there, he thought he could cast him down with more ease, and make
his fall the greater; and when he had let him see the kingdoms of the earth,
he thought he could more easily keep heaven out of his sight; when he had given
him to know the world, he thought by that means he could soonest cause him to
forget himself; and when he had mounted him so high, he thought it the only way
to make him overlook his own happiness. Now if Satan durst attempt to assault
the Lord, he is not without strong hopes of conquering the Servant; therefore
lest we should be oblivious of our frame and nature, our Father gives us a
Memorandum; and that we may know our selves, he lets us see our faces in a
glass.

Every image of death is but a representation of our own persons, and tells us
who we are. Nothing sets out man so much to the life, as the grim visage of
death. Paleness is the color wherein man is best limned. Calvin calls Saints
Lives, quasi specula, condimenta, Glasses wherein Christians may see their
constitutions: the odor that would give a fragrancy to every action. I may call
the Saints death Glasses too, wherein we may see our dissolution: And indeed if
a Saint be but looked through we may see from the womb to the grave, from
thence to heaven; not not only the mark, but the way is characterized in a
spiritual man's life; not only the good beginning, but the happy end in a
spiritual man's death. As the informations we have by Saints lives are useful,
so the admonitions we have by their death are needful. I do not know any that
ever lived, but had need be told sometimes that he must dye: never was there
any that became familiar with the flesh, but should be told he must leave his
companion: and there was never any so unanimously joined together, but it was
needful that sometime he should hear of their putting asunder; for which
purpose these words are very useful, for they are the unyoking of an
honorable pair, the loosing the marriage bonds of the Parents of the
faithful, Abraham and Sarah.

Here you may see, though no man may, yet God may put asunder, what he himself
has joined together. Abraham took him a wife, Genesis 11. 29. and here God takes
her from him, and the more justly, because she was his gift. True, Houses and
Riches are the inheritances of our Fathers, But a prudent wife is of the Lord,
Prove. 19. 14. Sarah had sweat at generation work, and God takes her out of the
yoke to her rest. Sarah was married to the body before she was marrried to
Abraham, which taught her the better to carry her self in that state: For a
birth, or the descent into the body, resembles the condition of matrimony: in
both they leave their Fathers house, and go into a strange land, it was so with
Sarah; The females do not only leave their habitation, but their name; so in
descent into the body; and therefore the Jews had this Maxim amongst them,
Matris familia non est familia; they reckoned not their Pedigrees after the
mother, but the father, as you may see in Christ's! Thus also Abraham when he
was married, he must leave his Country, and get into a strange land from his
Fathers house, and Fathers kindred, Genesis 12. 1. Sarah had done thus before; she
had, doubtless, better acquaintance above, whom she left when she came to be
clothed with mortality and with flesh; whom, she in the Text after her long
absence, goes to visit; as the opening of the vital powers of the body was the
door through which she enterred into this mortal state; (Corporis vita, est
mors animae; the life of the body, is the death of the soul) so the shuting of
those vital powers of the body, is the door at which the soul goes out, and
that is death.

In the words then we have Sarah's Joy, and Abraham's sorrow, that is Sarah's
death, and Abraham's life: What a strange world is this, that our best friends
should be the occasion of our greatest grief! a low condition of life, when our
dearest relations are grounds of our bitterest tears; when our most choice
mercies, put us to the most exquisite pain: We may observe many Doctrines from
them, which if I could do any more then mention, might not be without their
profit; to name some.

OBSERVATAON I.
This is a distinguishing mercy which the Lord affords his own; he places them
where they may often hear from him. Hebron, or this Kiriatharbae, was a chief
City in the hill Country of Judah, the place where God was most known: The
people of God are set on Mounts, to view and take a prospect of the riches of
the land; thus our Sarah did not only live in Canaan, but in Hebron, and that
on a Tower where she could behold the glory of the world to come.

OBSERVATION II.
The Sarahs of God, as they have dangers abroad, so they have safety at home:
although others in Canaan must be driven from their habitations before they can
find security; yet the Children of God many times have it near hand: others
were sain to fly before they could find refuge: it was Sarahs dwelling place.
This City Hebron was one of the Cities of Refuge, Joshua 20. 7. and here it was
that Sarah dwelt; thus the parallel will run with our Sarah; her house was not
only a Mount where she could behold Christ's glory, but a rock under which she
had her own safety; a place where one may be holy publico privilegio, with a
privilege; She lived under covert Baron.

OBSERVATION III.
When God has appointed the hour of death, no earthly circumstance can prolong
life: When God has determined, what can hold in suspense? if God resolves to
strike, none can evade; neither privilege, nor place can shield off the
stroke: This City, Hebron, that had saved many Malefactors lives, who run
thither for refuge, yet it could not save Sarahs, though she was not prosecuted
by the Avenger of blood; In a place of refuge where none must be slain, yet all
must dye.

OBSERVATION IV.
It is no new thing for loving Couples to be sometimes separated: no news that
a faithful wife and a tender husband; that a loving husband and an obedient
wife, sometimes lives a sunder: it was so with Abraham and Sarah, here employed
in this word, Bame, which imports his then absence.

OBSERVATION V.
The best of Gods people, and the ancientest have used the custom of
solemnizing the funerals of their deceased friends. Burial of the dead, is as
ancient, as it is decent. Joseph in the crowd of his employment in Pharoahs
house, yet will go up to bury his father, Genesis 50. 5. Thus was it with Debora,
Rele^cha, Rachael, Solomon, David, Jacob, and other Worthies of old. Thus it is
a part of that which goes under the name of the Apostles Creed, buried as well
as dead, crucified, dead and buried; and not only so, but they used, that
Relations should lie in the same Tomb; thence we meet with Asa, 1 King. 15. 24.
Jehoshaphat, 1 Kin. 22. 15. Joram, 2 Kin. 8. 24. Amaziah, 2 Kin. 14. 20.
Azariah, 1 Kin. 15. 7. Joash, 2 Kin. 12. 21. and Rehoboam, 1 King. 14. 31. all
buried with their fathers, therefore they used not to lie in common, as in the
kingdoms of Persia and Morocco, but their burial place was theirs in a
peculiar propriety, thence called their possession, Genesis 23. 4. Genesis 49. 30. so
it was a curse not to come to the grave, 1 King 14. 13.

OBSER. VI.
Then is a proper time for sorrow, when our mercies are absent: If Solomon say,
the Child has a time for joy, sure it is when the Father smiles; a time for
sorrow, it is when he frowns. Thus Christ tells us, Mat. 9. 15. Can the
Children of the Bride-chamber mourn, as long as the Bridegroom is with them!
but the days will come, when the Bridgroom shall be taken from them, then they
shall fast; so with Paul, Acts 20. 37.

OBSER. VII.
All sorrow for the dead is not sinful. Abraham's practice may be a proof; he
came to mourn and weep for Sarah: So we find the Prophet of Bethel mourning for
the man of God, 1 Kin. 13. 30. Alas my brother, alas my brother! All Israel for
Ahijah, the son of Jeroboam, 1 Kin. 14. 13. Jacob for Joseph, Genesis 37. 34. The
Egyptians for Jacob, Genesis 5. 3. The whole Congregation for Aaron, Numb. 20. 29.
David for Absalom, 2 Samuel 13. 37. All Judah for King Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35. 24.
Jesus for Lazarus, John 11. 35. Which you may be the rather persuaded to
believe, if you do but consider, that as it was a curse to dye and not be
buried, so it is a curse to be buried and not lamented nor mourned for: Thus
the sad curse that Jeremiah pronounces on the Jews, he thus expresses it, Jer.
16. 4. They shall dye of grievous deaths, they shall not be lamented, neither
shall they be buried, but they shall be as dung upon the face of the earth,
their carcases shall be meat for the fouls of the heaven, and for the beasts of
the earth. Enter not into the house of mourning, neither go to lament, nor
bemoan them, for I have taken away my peace from this people, says the Lord,
even loving kindness and mercies.

OBSER. VIII.
The chiefest of the Children of God are mortal; Sarah dyed: all the Worthies
of old included in this, And he dyed, and she dyed: and Methuselah himself
lived but to see his dying day: this was sufficiently evidenced to that man who
after he had seen the Caesar's, and the other Grandees of past ages in their
glory, drawn to the life, beginning to repine that his condition was so
infeferior to theirs, was presently led into another large room down a pair of
stairs of a few steps of descent, and there he viewed the same men's Tombs to
his satisfaction, whose glory he had but even now repined at; unravel the
longest thread of life that ever was spun on earth, and you shall find the
bottom of the clew whereon it is wound, to be rottenesse and corruption, if
not dust and ashes; walk into the gardens of the worlds pagentry, and view the
roses, lillies, and carnations, and tell me if they do not all wither when the
sun declines; the ripest fruit drops off first, and the sweetest flower shall
not escape plucking; if the great world, the heavens and the earth, must be
refined, perish, be burnt up, and wax old, and be changed like a garment; then
it cannot be expected, but man, the Microcosme, should undergo an alteration
too; when God shakes the heavens, man had need tremble; when such an inundation
comes as will drown the mountains, there can be no safety in the valleys; when
the lion shall roar and be hunger-bit, the worm is not likely to be thriving.
Poor man that layest up thy treasure on earth, thou providest against a storm;
but the sun may melt it, moth and rust cannot corupt, but is it so safe that
theives cannot break through and steal! O what if thou have goods so laid up
that neither moth nor rust can corrupt, nor theives break through and steal,
yet may not thy soul be fetched from thee in a nights warning; Eheu fugaces
Posthume Posthume Labuntur anni, swift time slides fast; Oh how soon is the sun
set after it begins to decline, and in how dark a night is a fair day
concluded; what stately palaces are now nothing but ruin, and what great Kings
have nothing to show but a heap of stones? Empires and Kingdoms do not only
undergo blotts, but many times are razed out. Stately Sodom and Gomorah are
sunk into a dead sea; we have heard of many that though they wanted nothing,
yet how soon all shall want them! God sent not his into the vineyard to build
tabernacles there, neither for themselves, nor friends, or posterity, but to
work all the day, and return home at night. Every Christian is but a servant,
must go when bidden, and must come at his masters command; life is a travel;
for as in travails the father sends his son abroad that he may learn to know
him the better, and being out of his sight, to prize him the more: So does God
with his; but the father lets not his child stay beyond sea all his life, but
sends for him home with expectations of improvement. Well, Christians, you have
goodly crops on the earth, but they must be reaped; ye have a fruitful vine,
but the fowls of the air will either pick the grapes, or they will fall when
ripe; thou have a foundation laid, perhaps it is on the sand, the sea will wash
it; on a rock, the thunder may batter it; on wood, hay, stubble, fire may
consume it; is thy body well liking; hunger or surfeit may change thy image. So
there is two to one, you shall not stand so long as thou thoughtest; all who
are awake must fall a sleep, to day you shall be embraced by this world, to
morrow perhaps stabbed; Caesar who the last night was in the clouds, and walking
hand in hand with Jupiter; was the next day in the grave: but a few paces
between the throne and the earth, the crown and the coffin.

And this will appear, as concerning the saints, the best of Gods people, that
they also go the way of all flesh, if you consider these particulars.

REASON. I.
The best and dearest of Gods children dye because they have not their portion
in this life; those whom God has betrothed to himself, and espoused to his
son, they dye that they may be in possession of their jointure, and that is not
of or from the earth, but out of their fathers own inheritance; their estate
lies in heaven, bounded with the pleasures at the fathers right hand for
evermore, watered with those Crystal streams that make all glad who do but
taste of them; within the confines of the new Jerusalem, beyond Jordan, and
therefore they must go over to posesse: the Arbor of a Christians rest is in
the Garden of Eden, and he must come out of the wilderness before he can lie
down, except he will make his bed on thorns. Those who have their mansion house
in paradise, are not at home while they are in the prison; God puts not his off
with Egyptian Crusts, or onions and garlic, but has better food for them
above; and therefore they must depart the Land; if they will gather Mannah,
they must not be in the tent of the flesh, but at the door of the tabernacle.
They cannot drink of the streams of pleasure, whilst they are in a dry and
thirsty land; they have little in their nonage of this life (for the Children
of Christ are but then at age when they can live no longer) they come not to
possess because they are not at years: Indeed the right of inheritance belongs
to them, but it is in the hand of their Guardion, until they come from their
travels: God puts them not of with this world; for then they would be of all
people the poorest; their portion is not in this life, for if so, they would be
of all people most miserable: therefore they dye, that they may be rich.

REASON. II.
The dearest children dye that the tendency of their soul may not be
interrupted; the soul has not forgot heaven, but has some breathing
thitherwards; now the flesh is the souls prison, and to be confined there, is
to be chained out of the society of their best friends; it is with the souls
arrival in the body, as it was with Lots wifes banishment out of Sodom; She
looked back, the eye is still lifted up; and this was the opinion of the
Egyptians, those ancient scholars of Moses, which they illustrated in this
Hieroglyphick. They painted Europa to be carried over the sea on a calf, who
afterward was stole by Jupiter; by Europa they understood the soul, by the calf
they understood the body, the flesh, which when the soul was clothed withal,
differed not much from the nature of bruits, according to that of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 49. 12. is become like the beasts that perish, and the Scripture terms
man brutish in more places then one or two; and the more brutish the the less
they cultivate their own understanding, Jer. 51. 17. Prove. 12. 1. Isa. 19. 11.
and thus was the soul carried over the sea through a multitude of waves and
storms, which does not alter much from, but seems fully to resemble the state
of this life; by Europa's being stole by Jupiter they understood they souls
return again to God, according to that Scripture, Eccles. 12. 7. Then shall
the dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall return unto God
who gave it. But this is that for which I mention this opinion of their's, and
which is most observable as to our purpose; in Europa's voyage, she was painted
with her face backward, still looking unto the place from whence she imbarqued,
whereby they signified that the soul has always a longing desire after the
country from whence she came, as indeed there is that (...), that identity in
the soul to the spiritual life, that where it is not extremely clogged or
chained asleep, it would be flying upwards: and that it does not, it is either
out of great constraint, being bound to the body, or out of great Love to the
body which knits it there unto, for holy souls will as naturally breath after
their native country, as the bird would do to be in the air, were she in the
water; or as a fish would do to be in the water, were she in the air; neither
was this illustrated by the Egyptians only, which likely had received their
traditions from Moses, but the Poets in after times aimed at it, though their
dogmata were delivered in fables, which may make us think they were in jest; it
seems to be shaddowed in that amongst the rest of the Minotaurus and Pasiphae;
by the Virgin Pasiphae they understood the soul in its primitive condition, in
the state of purity, as virginty does represent: and that was the souls
original condition; by the desire which she had to have familiarity with
Taurus, they understood the souls being attentive to hearken to the dictates
and temptations of the terrene and grosser faculties which should have been as
servants, not as commanders; as followers, not as guides: by that wooden
cabinet in the form of a cow, which was contrived by Dedalus (i. e.
providence) whereby she accomplished her desire of that near union and
conjunction with Taurus, they understood the Aerie chariot, animae vehiculum,
wherein the soul was locked, and wherein she sunk down to familiarity with the
body; and hence the offspring of Taurus and Pasiphae, was a Miuotaurus a
monster, which the ancients have thought the conjunction of soul and body to be
in respect of the virginity of the soul, in its aethereall globe of light.

REASON. III.
The choicest dye, because else the design of God would be crossed; the
design of sending man into the world; the Lords aim and end ought to be
accomplished by every servant; the purpose of the master is always that his
servant shall return to give an account, not only how he has been
entertained, but what work he has done; as there is a natural tendency in
the child after his fathers house, so there is a providentiall necessity, that
the child return to the place from whence it came. God never sent man into the
world to be an inhabitant for ever, but for term of years; the world is not
his inheritance; he has only a lease and that will expire. Thus it was with
Gods best beloved; when he had done the work that he was set for, he returns,
John 17. 4, 5. (...). I have finished the work which thou gave me that I
should do, and therefore he expects to ascend to the same state he had with the
father from the beginning; these are but stages of life, and we must not get up
but to expect to light again; man's life is as a tale that is told, and
therefore every prooemium must have a conclusion; the book of man's life as it
has its preface, so it has its finis, its end; man must go through the
condition of the body, and forget as well as he became acquainted, and though
nothing is done without the concourse of the allwise providence, (not so much
as a hair of our heads falling to the ground) who can direct bad means to a
good end: Yet this state of mortality is not a state come into so much out of
choice as out of neglect; for by reason of sin all dye, as the Epistle to the
Romans 5. (...). Now as this condition of of mortality is fallen on all men being
all have sinned, so God sending his only begotten son the second Adam, thereby
brings man again into a state of immortality: but how? not by continuing the
soul and body in their union, but disjoyning them.

For if by conjunction came death, then by separration comes life, well
agreeing with that of Plotinus (...). Who knows whether to live be not to dye,
and whether to dye be not to live? the Apostle looks on it as a gain. Phil. 1.
21. and the Apostle also tells us of some who are dead, though alive. 1 Timothy 5.
16.

REASON. IV.
The choicest of Gods Children dye, because in the flesh they are absent from
Christ; there is in holy Souls a strange longing and thirsting after his
presence: which none can obtain until they go through the strait gate; it is
the desire of every good soldier to be where his captain is; but before he
can attain to his presence, he must conquer the last enemy, which is (...), 1
Cor. 15. 26. his own children dye, and leave the flesh, that they may go to
their kindred, their father, John 14. 3, 4. And receive them to my self, that
where I am, there ye may be also. Even such as are Sarahs, they must leave
their own families, or they must want Abraham's bosom. Christ wills, that they
who are given to him of his father, be with him, where he is, that that they
may see his glory, Joh. 17. 24. there is a kind of union between Christ and his
children, so near that they cannot live asunder, no more then the other members
can live from the head; he who came from heaven to purchase them a possession,
will by all means have them come up and dwell there; he who has prepared
mansions, will have his to sit down and rest with him; Now while we are in the
body, we are absent from Christ; so when Paul got a clear sight of Christ, he
could not tell that he was in the body, ((...)) 2 Cor. 12. 2. whether in the
body I cannot tell, or out of the body I cannot tell, God knows; but more
likely out of the body; for if we be well acquainted with our bodies, we must
needs confess they darken and eclipse the sun beams from the soul, or else I
know not why we should not see God and Christ as the Angels do; but this is the
reason, we have a veil before our faces; now seeing in the body we are absent,
and can have no sight of God as he is, it is needful and useful that we
depart from the body to see and enjoy Christ; all the design of the grand
transactions of the Savior of world was that he might purify to himself a
peculiar people zealous of good works; and if so, we cannot think but they must
be admitted to his presence for whom he has been at such pains, which we
cannot be until flesh and blood be laid aside; no entering into our Saviors
presence till the door of the body be thrown off the hinges.

REASON. V.
The best of Gods Children dye that they may be delivered from the evil to
come; this is a material petition in that sacred form of prayer which Christ
taught his disciples, Deliver us from evil. Which he would never have taught
them to ask, had he not in tended to bestow.

There is several evils that God delivers his Children from, all which import
the removal of this tabernacle. 1. The world. 2. Sin. 3. Judgment. The two
first are present evils, the third is a future evil that God by death delivers
his Children from.

1. The evils of the world; that the Children of God meet with these evils in
the world, is evident from these or such places of scripture, John 15. 29.
Because I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you; and
John 16. 33. (...), in the world you shall have tribulation. So 1 These. 3. 4.
We foretold you that we should be afflicted (...). So 2 These. 1. 6. and the
Saints are described, Rev. 7. 14. by tribulations; these are they that came our
of great tribulations; thus Paul's experience testifies the evils of the world.
2 Cor. 11. 23. in labors, in stripes, in prisons, in deaths, scourged, beaten
with rods, stoned, sufferring shipwreck, in journeyings, perils of waters,
perils of robbers, by his own countrymen, by heathens, in the City, in the
wilderness, in the sea, and amongst false brethren, in weariness,
painfulnesse, watchings, hunger and thirst, cold and nakedness. So Heb. 11.
35. tortured, mocked, scourged, bound, and imprisoned, stoned, sawn a sunder,
tempted, slain with the sword, wandering in sheepr-skins, goate-skins,
destiture, afflicted, tormented, and all this was in the world too, and in the
meanest places of the world, verse. 38. (...). In deserts, mountains, dens and
caves of the earth. I might prove further the Saints obnoxiousnesse to the
evils of the world, were they not every ones experience; let not the disciples
of Christ promise much to themselves whilst they are here, least they be
mistaken; it is more then ever yet was known that the Citizens of heaven had
kind entertainment below; A little to consider what a place this world is, and
we shall be further satisfied that if God love any, he will take them out of
the world.

1. It is a dangerous place; like to a travailor in a deserts among many
serpents, he knows not where to tread but be stung. It was so with Christ's
enemies lying in wait to catch him in his words, Mar. 12. 13. but little
harbor, not knowing where to lay his head, Luke 9. 58. these are the
inhabitants of the earth; aut cadavera quae lacerantur, aut corvi qui lacerant,
either such as are fit to become a prey, or such as make a prey of the people
of God; little safety for lambs among wolves, for the travailour among
theives, for the partridg on the mountains pursued by the hawke; for Christ
with Belial; the world is a dangerous place; little safety for the heir among
the tenants, for the prince in a strange land.

2. It is a common place; here are serpents and vipers, snailes and worms, as
well as men; Lions claim their right here as well as men, and the Leopard, and
that makes it so unsafe for the Kid. Scribes and Pharisees, as well as
disciples; atheists, profane heretics, pagans, gospel-haters as well as
gospel promoters; unclean and polluted as well as holy and gracious; wolves in
sheepskins as well as Saints in Sheeps natures; nay Satan has his range here
too, here he hants, here he rules, God of the world, the Prince of the air,
Ephesians. 2. 2. The Ruler in the hearts of the disobedient. Thus we find him in his
walk too and fro, and that was in this world, Job. 1. 7. And the Lord said
unto Satan, Whence came thou? then Satan answered and said, From going to and
for in the earth, and from walking up and down in it; and you may see what end
he propounds in this walk on the earth, 1 Pet. 5. 8. (...) seeking whom he may
swallow up, whom he may devour; and this is another evil in the world that
calls for deliverance from. For sure the Saints cannot be at rest when such
tumults and uproares are every day; nulla libera meditatio habetur in
frequentia; the Children of God cannot enjoy their God with acquiescence when
the multitude are by: therefore is it that we find David mourning and bewailing
himself that he could not live where the wicked had their haunt, Psalm. 120. 5,
6, 7. Wos is me that I sojourne in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar!
My soul has long dwelt with them that hate peace. Children can but have little
safety where bastards claim a property.

3. The world is a dark place, therefore evil; little knowledge of God, and
less of the mystery of the Gospel; it is like the Israelites, under a cloud,
the sun ecclipsed, the moon in opposition, the stars disappear; no sight but
in a riddle, little knowledge but by guess, in a glass darkely, not face to
face; therefore heavenly things in respect of the world are called (...)
invisibles, God invisible, the King invisible, Romans 1. 20. Col. 1. 15. Heb. 11.
27. and this Christ confirms plainly, John 17. 25. O righteous Father, the
world has not known thee. Alas, Beloved, we see but in part, we know but in
part, and being much alienated from God, have our understandings darkened,
Ephesians. 4. 18. We only see the husks which the swine have, we see but little of
the bread in our Fathers house, and of that delicious fare which our Fathers
servants have every day. Now as those who have a sprightfull and vivid desire
of the light, count it a sore evil when they are locked in a dungeon; so do the
children of God judge that darkness is sorrow enough to their souls, which are
in some measure illuminated, and upon whom the day of Grace has dawned; this
is the world and dark place; and though it be a proper place for evil doers, so
it is a brave screen for error and sin, yet God sees it suits not with his
Children, and therefore he calls them into his mavelous light.

4. There is another evil in the present world, which God will deliver his
from, and that is bad Neighbors; here are men turned (...), devourers one of
another; it would be well if this bad neighbohood was not even among them whom
Christ has chosen out of the world, Gal. 5. 15. The Hungarians suffered,
because they were near to the Turks: the Pololians, because they lived near the
Tartars: so the Valleys of Piedmont, because of her Neighbor Duchess: thus we
have Mantua complaining, Mantua vae miserae, nimium vicina Cremonae: because
when Cremona was on a flame, Mantua felt the heat: Thus the wotld is an evil
place where the wicked take the righteous in a net, and catch them as in a
drag, and hook them with the angle; nay, where the wicked devours the man that
is more righteous then himself, Heb. 1. 13, 14. therefore God will deliver
David out of the hands of Saul, and Moses from a bloody Pharaoh.

5. There is another evil, and that is, it is full of deceit: not a step, but a
snare; not a morsel, but a hook: Locus quo alius alium circumvenit: A lying
spirit in the mouth of the Prophet, crying, Send me. Jacob supplanting Esau,
Micha^l deceiving her father, Judas betraying Christ, Pharaoh dealing
deceitfully with Moses: most in this world are like Saul, 1 Samuel 28. 8
disguising themselves, and putting on another raiment, and going about their
designs in the night clandestinely, and this makes the disguise more
dangerous, because it is frequently sheeps clothing, though it be on the backs
of ravenous wolves. My dear friends, it is an evil, and a deceitful world,
when rhere is no firm ground to stand on. This world is Theatrum hypocriseos,
as Anacharsis calls it: It Is dangerous acting on the stage, when the Teatre is
hung with hypocritical Tapesty, and Gospel stories the main thing they
represent. Sure it is an evil world where this defraud is, when oaths and
promises are made sloppings to help us over dry-shod; when Vows and
Protestations are made stairs, and trod upon, may we but reach the higher, or
be in any greater election of reaching the prize; this was Petronius his lash,
which he made his Auditors smart with all, Quisq: sponsam sibi suam; every one
his Wedge, every one his Dalilah, and then Nemo coelum, nemo jusjurandum, nemo
Jovem, pluris habet, cum omnes sua bona computant. When our designs only
conceive the gain of the body, the gain of the soul will likely miscarry: Oh!
it is sad, when heaven, and Oaths, and God himself, are all laid in the
balance, and yet cannot weigh down a carnal self designing heart; it is to be
lamented, when Cum paucis charior fides quam pecunia, when a wedge of gold is
valued more then truth, and thirty pieces of silver more then Christ; when the
Vineyard takes the heart more then the husband man whose it is; therefore God
will take his out of the world, because they must be deceived, except they
could be hypocritical, as others can.

6. The world is a vain place, and therefore evil, (...), as Antonius, or
(...), Omnia vanitas, all is Vanity, as Solomon: And indeed, the world though
it look big, and seem to delight, yet really it is empty, and will frustrate;
How ordinary is to see ea quae jam claruerunt, (...), those things that even
now every body knew, presently all have forgot: the shining Candle quickly gone
out by a little gust, or else burnt to the snuff; He or She, into whose
presence you durst not come without trembling, now you dare tread upon: he who
eats at your table, seeking to devour; he who dips in your dish, betraying;
your very Delilah cutting off your locks; this is not only vanity, but vexation
of mind. A mighty Monarch, (...), dust and ashes. He who had a mouth for
Mannah, became meat for worms. What is there in the world, but Rapina,
Latrocinia, Intemperies coeli, corporisque and what see we else! Treachery,
Fraud, Violence, Murders, Robberies, Diseases, Frosts, Heats, Droughts,
Deluges! and see what use divine Seneca makes of this, Now, says he, Delibera
tecum, and respondebis velle te vivere; Consider with thy self, and would
thou desire to live in this torment, all conditions attended by anoyance! make
choice of what garment you can in the worlds Wardrobe, and it shall pinch you,
as was well expressed by the Poet in a Farewell to the world:

Farewell you gilded follies, pleasing Troubles;
Farewell honored rags, you crystal bubbles;
Fame is but a hollow echo; gold poor clay,
Honor the darling but of one short day.
Beauties chief Idol, is but a damask skin,
State but a golden prison to live in,
And torture freeborn minds, unbridled trains,
But goodly Pageants, proudly swelling veins;
And blood allied to greatness, is but Love
Inherited, not purchased, not our own.
I would be rich, but that most men combine
To dig the bowels of the richest mine.
I would be high, but that the sun does still
Level its beams against the rising hill.
I would be wise, but that the Fox I see
Suspected guilty, when the Fox is free.
I would be fair, but see the Champion proud,
The worlds bright eye often sets under a cloud.
I would be poor, but see the humble grass
Trampled upon by each unworthy Ass.
Rich hated, wise suspected, scorned if poor,
Great feared, fair tempted; High, then envied more.
Then see what a noble resolution this inspired Poet takes upon himself.

Would then the world adopt me for her Heir,
And beauties Queen entitle me the fair;
Fame speak me honors minion, and could I
With Indian Angels, and a speaking eye
Command bare heads, bowed knees, strike justice, dumb
As well as blind and lame, and give a tongue
To stones by Epitaphs, and be called Master
In the loose lives of every Poetaster.
Could I be more then any man that lived,
Great, Wise, Rich, Fair, all in superlative,
Could I control the seas with Neptunes rod,
I would all these resign for Christ my God.
7. There is this evil, and that aggravates all; men will not confess their
misery, and so come to despise the Remedy; Ego mihi videor. Fancy is
intelligible by every ignorant Creature: Men and women all over defiled, and
yet they cry, They are every whit clean; sick and dying, and yet poor hearts,
cry, They are whole, and need no Physician. This was Seneca's complaint in the
time when he lived, and is proper for ours, Ebullit Ira, Discordia, Petulantia,
Invidia, Ignavia, Men's efflata, and nos tamen aegros esse negamus. Here a heart
nauseating holiness, there another turned into flint, another swimming in muddy
pleasures almost choakt, another well nigh scorcht in flames, and yet no need
of help; no body sick; all stung, and no body will look up to the Serpent; all
out of the way, and none will accept of a guide; this is the world, a present
evil, which is a reason that God will take His to himself.

2. There is another evil which God will delivet His from, which is a ground
why they dye, and are taken out of the world, and that is sin: an evil very
infectious, and mortal too. Hear the abomination of desolation (...), standing
where it ought not; in the heart, the Lords very lodging, his Temple; then it
is time for the Righteous to fly unto the Mountain, nay, unto the Rock, Which
Rock is Christ, (...), the whole world is subject to the evil one, the Prince
of Darkness; and there it must necessarily be, that there shall be evil
practices, where there are evil Laws, if people be but obedient; alas! men
turned to beasts, and the filthiest of those swine; it is a strange
Metamorphosis; silly souls, swallowing down corruption, and drinking down
profaness with greediness. Look over all the ranks of men, and all conditions,
and the common character they are known by, is san: Are all rich? Are all
noble? Are all poor? Are all Kings? Are all Slaves? Are all Merchants? Are all
Husbandmen? Nay, but all are sinners, Romans 3. 23. (...). All have sinned, and
come behind, been deficient in that which was their duty, to have promoted the
mark, to have aimed at the glory of God. Methinks men should tremble, and fear
to bring the heavens and earth together, or some hideous thunderclap from the
fierce wrath of the Lord, who let loose the reigns to all manner of Impiety,
and cry, Are not our tongues our own, who shall countrole us?

3. There is another evil, and that is properly the evil to come, which God
frees his Children from by death; and that is the evil of Judgment, which has
a connection to the former, and a dependence on them; as imprisonment has a
dependence on breaking the Peace, or Punishment on an evil action: for this end
was it, that God sends for Lot out of Sodom, because he had a design to burn
it: Genesis 19. 15. And when the morning arose, then the Angels hastened Lot,
saying, Arise, take thy Wife, and thy two daughters which are here, lest ye be
consumed in the iniquity, or in the punishment of the City. Iniquity and
Punishment are derived of the same root, and both grow together; only iniquity
is ripe first. When the storm arises, God tows his to the harbor: when the
Tide begins to flow over the Seas and Sand, he makes his mend their pace, and
hasten to their journeyes end: he invites them home to their fathers house when
they are beset with beasts of prey. When he intends to send a famine, then he
takes up those who would hunger most, and whose cries would make his bowels
yern: And where he sees thirsty souls in his dear Children, who could not live
without waters of life, without the streams of the new Jerusalem, he will take
them up before he dry the fountain, and send a drought in the Land. God sees
preparation making for destruction; the Lords vengeance breaking loose for sin,
therefore he will secure his own: He sees the bore breaking into the vintage,
and therefore he will gather the Clusters of grapes with his own hand. When the
Dog is leaping into the sold, the good shepherd will house his Lambs; When the
Wolf comes to devour, he hedges his own about with a high wall. Beloved, Who
knows what evils are falling on a sinful land? may we not fear Vltima
morientis Angliae suspiria, the last groans of a dying land! Who knows what the
Lords wrath will do, when it is kindled but a little! Oh! what unsuitable
conversations have we had to the Lords mavelous Love in Gospel discoveries?
What wretched disobedience have we manifested, when God has been following us
with loving kindness? What rebellion, when our Sovereign Lord of hosts has
been passing an Act of Oblivion? What new guilt have we contracted, when for
our former transgressions, we might have laid hold on the Act of Indemnity?
What grace have we turned into Wantonness? What Light have we shut our eyes
upon? What sweet invitations have we denied? What hard-hearted Children have we
been to a tender Father? Indulgency has not prevailed, Love has not
constrained, Goodness has not drawn: Nay, my dear friends, what could God have
done more then what he has done! and yet how ungracious we are, and how
unkindly do we require the Lord! What meanest thou, O sinner! is this thy Love
to thy God! is this thy tenderness to Christ! is this thy kindness to thy
Father! Is this thy loyalty to thy King! Consider and know, God does but wink,
thou can not blind him; the day is coming, and God will awaken. God has a
controversy with the light-hating land; and he will punish some, that others
may learn; he will cut off some branches, that others may thrive the better.
Zech. 13. 7, 8, 9. Awake, O sword, against my Shepherd, and against the man
that is my fellow, says the Lord of hosts; Smite the shepherd, and the sheep
shall be scattered, and I will turn my hand upon the little ones; and it shall
come to pass, that in all the Land, says the Lord, two parts shall be cut off,
and dye, but the third shall be left therein. And I will bring the third part
through the fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them
as gold is tried. They shall call on my name, and I will hear them: and I will
say, It is my people, and they shall say, It it the Lord my God. Now even
against such a time as this, against such an evil day, God will take his own
children to himself from the evil to come.

6. The best dye, because they are for the best things. God has been at great
Charges to make provision for them, therefore they must be his guests, and
there is no way but through the strait gate of death.

1. They are for the vision of God, whose face, if they see, they must go in.
Rev. 4. 1. A voice from heuven to John, saying, Come up hither, and I will show
thee the things which must be hereafter. So must Moses and Aaron do. Exodus 19.
20. And the Lord came down from Mount Sinai, and the Lord called Moses up to
the top of the Mount, und Moses went up. If the Children will see the Lamb on
the Throne, the City, the new Jerusalem, they must ascend, not only look, but
go up. Thus when Satan had a design to show Christ the glory of the world, he
took him up into the Pinnacle of the Temple, (...). A place to which if he
come, he must fly: so does God when he would show his glory to his Children, he
must give them wings, that they may fly where bodies are not capable of. When
Christ taught his Disciples, he gets up into the Mount, Mat. 5. The glory of
the world to come is not visible to us, until we be be in a rapture. So it was
with Paul, 2 Cor: 12. 2. (...). caught up into the third heavens; and verse 4.
(...). That he was rapt up into Paradise: thus it is with all the Children of
God, if they will see God, they must be both out of the body, and rapt up in
Paradise: it is only in the New Jerusalem, that we must have clear visions
without the Telescope of faith, where we shall need no glasses. The Temple of
old was the place where God made himself known, where he was visible: those two
great Oracles were in the Temple; the (...) Bath Col. Their voice from heaven:
so we find when they were led Captives into Babylon, they heard it no more;
which was the ground of that lamentation of the Prophet Jeremy, Lam. 2. 9. Her
gates are sunk into the ground, he has destroyed, and broken her bars; Her
King and her Prince are among the Gentiles; and then follows the darkness they
were brought to; the Law is no more, her Prophets also find no vision from the
Lord: This also you may see in David's desire, when he would have a sight of
God, he concluded he must be inquired for it in the Temple, Psalm 27. 4. One
thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in
the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord; and to enquire in his Temple; we must go up, as to worship, so to behold.
As to the other of their revelations or Oracles, it was their Ruach Haccodesh,
the inspiration or breathing of the holy Ghost, which was always had in the
Temple; and that too when it was in its purity, before they had blinded their
eyes with Idolatry and Heresy: for after that they had contracted the
Babylonish* Customs, and their Idolatry, and had began to worship God in an
heathenish way, more out of custom, then out of filial fear, they had this
revelation no more, which was very common in their purer times; so then you may
see when Christ comes, Acts 19. 2. to enquire, whether they had teceived the
holy Ghost; they answer, they have not heard whether there was a holy Ghost or
no. Here you may see, when they could not go up to the Temple out of their
Country, the place where they dwelt; and when they had drowned and immerst
themselves in Ethnicism and Impurity, they had not that sight of God which
otherwise they might have had. Thus it is with us, (for those passages are
signs and types of our vision in the future world) thus if we would see as we
are seen, know as we are known (which are privileges for the Children of God)
then we must be out of the flesh, our own Tabernacle, and carried into the
Temple not made with hands, eternal in the heavens: Indeed were not Gods
dearest ones designed to have a sight of himself, and to dwell in inaccessible
light, rhen they might stay in the body, they might still dwell in Goshen, in
Egypt; but they must view the promised land, the Tabernacles of the Lord of
Hosts, the Clusters of Canaan, the reconciled face of their compassionate
Father, therefore they must be taken out of the valley of the shadow of the
body, and be carried to the top of Nebo and Pisgah with Moses, that they may
view the promised land, and their inheritance which the Lord has promised.
Valleys are full of Mists, but when we get to the mountains, we shall see
clearly; and this is a reason who God takes his own out of the state of life,
because he may show them himself.

2. The best of Gods Children, as they are for vision, so they are for
fruition, and therefore they must depart from the body. Real enjoyments require
real presence: none can actually embrace an absent Christ; it is true; Faith
does reallize future joy, but it is but in part: and as we may say of the two
Covenants, Christ took away the first, that he might establish the second; so
here God will take away faith, when the soul comes into presence: when fruition
comes, faith shall vanish as the darkness before the Sun. Now indeed there is
need of hope, but hope shall be changed into possession, and then hope shall
vanish. Romans 8. 24. For we are saved by hope; but hope that is seen, is not
hope; for what a man sees, why does he hope for? so we may see, when this is
the purpose of the father to establish us on Thrones, and give us the
inheritance of sons, we must lay aside faith and hope. Now seeing it is for the
bodies sake that we have need of faith; then when we have no need of faith, we
shall have but little need of the body; this was clearly signified in the
Isratlites when they went out of darkness, out of bondage to liberty: yet we
find they must pass Jordan before they could enjoy; they must go into the land
before they can possess; thus those Realia gaudia, the real comforts, the
best of heaven must be for his children, as the best of the earth was. Abraham's
bosom is provided for Sarah to lie in; her face must travile to him; if she
will live in his enjoyment, then she must forsake her fathers house; so if
Christians will live under Christ's scepter, they must leave their habitation;
for his Kingdom is not of this world. The nurse must resign when the father
calls the child home to his inheritance; the heir ceases from being under
tutors and governors, when he comes at age, then he enters to his estate; they
must come from under the hedges, and out of the high ways, that will taste of
Christ's feast; and this is that which God has intended his for, that they
should be ejus participes, partakers of himself, and sit with Christ upon his
throne, and therefore they must leave the world; it is not likely for us to
grasp the wind, nor to embrace the air; there is an absolute contradiction in
the capacity; so is it with our bodies that are earthly, before they can enjoy,
they must be celestial.

3. The best of Gods people are for the best things, that is for triumph; and
therefore they must lay down their arms; the Apostle calls life a warfare,
which we may conclude to be so from the furniture, that God has made weapons
which are not useful but in war, 2 Cor. 10. 4. (...), the weapons of our
warfare; and though the weapons be not carnal, yet the bodyly life is carnal;
now as weapons are to be laid aside in a triumph, so ought a Christians body
which is but a bulwark, when he goes to the heavenly ovation; it is not the
proper time to enter triumph until the battle be concluded. Paul bids us not
boast when we put on our armor, but when we put it off; there are grand
adversaryes, great sins, wily temptations, a politic Satan, a treacherous
heart, an ensnaring world; yet the Children of God going in the steps of Christ
shall conquer these; he conquered and triumphed (...), etc. Col. 2. 15. Having
spoiled Principalityes, and powers, the commanders, and stout ones, he made a
show of it, and trampled over them on the cross; so shall Gods people do; and
as he afterward sat down, so must we sit down with him in his fathers glory!
Ephesians. 2. 6. And has placed us in heavenly places with Christ; yet this glory
must not be until we overcome, Revel. 3. 21. (...). He that overcomes, to him
will I give to sit with me on my throne, even as I have overcome, and set with
my father on his throne. Now Christian, who would not put off his armor to be
partakers of such glory; the shield of faith, the helmet of salvation, the
sword of the spirit will be of no use in the land where we shall meet with no
siery darts of the wicked one; Now seeing that Christians are designed for the
white robe of triumph, they must lay aside the garment of war; those that God
in mercy has set apart to sit on the throne, must not lie always at the
receipt of custom; those that must lie down in rest, must put off their
clothes. And this honor is promised in that full place, Romans 8. 37. where the
Aposte does not only give a child of God the victory, but names the enemies
that are beaten, tribulation, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, sword,
Angels, Principalityes, things present, things to come, life, death; the last
enemy that a Christian fights with is death; yet the Apostle gives the victory;
in all these we overcome, nay more, (...), we do more then overcome through him
that loved us; and what is this that is more then a conquest but a triumph?
take it in these particulars.

1. A Christian is more then conqueror in this; they are slain in the field,
and yet win the day; we do not ordinarily say that they are conquerours who are
slain, but that they are conquered; yet Gods children are such, verse 36. as it
is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are accounted sheep
for the slaughter; are Christians slain in the field, and yet overcome; dye
and yet vanquish; fall on the place and yet conquer; what is this but to be
more then conqueror through Christ who loves us!

2. A Christian is more then conqueror, in this, because he so conquers as
never to be assaulted more: the grave, death, and hell have struck their last
stroke, and sin has done its utmost; but is overcome, is fallen and will never
rise again; for who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God
that justifies. And this the Apostle tells us of, Heb. 12. 11. where he
attributes a peaceable fruit of righteousness to our being exercised, he calls
it (...). alluding to those wrestling in the Olympic games, as indeed there
are such adversaryes that put a Christian to his shifts to stand; but this
exercise brings fruit and it is peace, (...), and (...) are both joined in the
word, intimating that peace immediately follows upon victory; thus when
Christians have their sins so blotted out as they shall never be legible more,
charged upon the soul more; when they so conquer Satan that he never assaults
more; when they bury death in its own grave that it never rise more, and so
charm the serpent that he sting no more, they may be said to be more then
conquerors.

3. A Christian is more then a conqueror, does more then overcome, because he
gets the victory without any great damage, or any great loss. Afflictions get
but the dtosse, what the furnace gets from the gold; death and the grave get
but the body, and this is but to refine the soul; when the gross part the body
falls off, no great damage, they lose not their captain in the war; they lose
not their sight or their hearing by death, but have all more purified then
before; therefore they may be said to be more then conquerours; it is reported
of Pyrrhus, that when he had overcome the Romain army with the loss of many of
his own men, a friend of his came to congratulate his victory, to whom he
answered, vicimus quidem; sed si nobis talis itidem victoria contigerit, omnino
funditus perd^remur. It Is true I have got the day, but if ever I see such
another, I am utterly undone, such another victory will quite overthrow me; now
it is not thus with Christians; they lose not in the war, but come off both
conquerours and gainers: and therefore they may be said to be more then
conquerours.

4. Lastly for which I mention the rest, A Christian may be said to be more
then conqueror, because he triumphs; this is it which he fought for, and this
is it that he will lay down his arms for; he cannot then triumph before he go
out of the field; the world is the field, and the body the robes wherein the
soul is clothed for war; so that when he appears in triumphant apparel, it
is both in another place, and an other guise. After conquest the army used to
go into the City their Metropolis that they might there triumph, where the
noise of their victory would be most public throughout the Land; thus it is
with Christians; that there may be an open publication of their conquest, they
must go to heaven to triumph, and therefore leave the body; and indeed who
would not lay aside the flesh, to be glorified with Christ? who would not give
a mortal for an immortal body? who would not put off coruption, to be
clothed upon ^ith incoruption? Who would no be willing the ^rain should dye in
the earth, so that it bring but ^orth increase? this triumph is one of the
pre^ious pearls of the Kingdom, which Christ gives ^o his own; therefore they
must come out of the company of swine; and do but rightly consider, and you
must needs confess the solemnity such, that no faithful soldier but had
rather march with his captain in the posture of triumph then stay in the field
to plunder his conquered adversary; what are the pillages and spoils of the
day so bewitching as to hinder any from the glory of the conquest! here
Christians may see pure love, that God designs so well for us, when we pitch
our aim at lower objects: and thus you may see why Gods own Children dye; they
are for the best things; Vision, Fruition and triumph; the first cannot be had
while there is a veil before the face of the soul: the second cannot be had
til there be a capacity in the subject recipient, which cannot be in the body,
no more then there is a capacity in a quart-pot to hold wisdom; but we must be
deiformed, before we acquiesce; the third cannot be had until every enemy be
conquered, the last whereof is death.

USE. I.
Application, Do the best of Gods Children dye? this may serve for Information
in these particulars.

1. THat death is not so horrible as most men think it: misinformation is a
ground of fear; and when things are not represented in their own shapes, they
are more formidable; the prisoner will not count himself miserable, because the
jalour comes to tell him he must strip him and turn him out of doors; no, that
is his freedom; the merchant gains, when his wares are taken off his hand, and
house emptied; this was Paul's judgment, whatsoever life was, yet death was
gain. Phil. 2. Some think death takes all a way, nay it does not diminish but
add; some think it beggars, nay it makes rich; some think in death the soul is
naked; nay it is in its holiday garments, when the rags and corruptible shreds
of the flesh are laid aside; If there was no gain in it, Gods own Children
should not trade with such a customer; If death came only to plunder, God would
arm his against it; no my frinds, if the dearest of Gods children must drink
of the dregs and bottom of the cup, you may persuade your selves there is no
poison in it; since Christ tasted death, there is a sweetness in it; since he
took away the sting, it is tractable, 1 Cor. 15. It moves not in its own orb
and vortex, since it was absorpt as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15. 54. (...),
death is swallowed up; then it cannot bite; it has no sting; then it cannot
wound. Death would not be at all frightfull, would we look upon it as indeed it
is in its self; not an (...), not a destroyer, but a restorer; not as that
which comes to take all we have, but as that which comes to conferr on us all
we have lost; not as the evil spirit thought of Christ, Mat. 8. 29. to torment
us before our time, but to preach liberty to captives, and set open prison
doors: fear not death; your savior has tasted it before you; though is be
like afflictions, gtievious for the present, yet there is a peaceable fruit of
righteousness following; it is a dark hour, but the next after it will be
mote light; it looks pale at the first sight, but after it the soul will clear
up: though it be a strait gate, yet it opens into stately palace; it pulls
down the body, but raises the soul; it divorceth kindred, but joins Lovers; it
looks grim at its approach, but smiles at it return; when you go to bed and
bid good night to your friends, it seems something melancholy; but you are
cherefull again when you awaken; surely to have the union of soul and body
dissolved, and the knot of nature cut, is no great matter when thereby we are
knit to Christ; to forget to swear is no loss, if thereby we learn to pray; it
is a good exchange to get a spiritual body for an earthly, an incorruptible
for a corruptible, an immortal for a mortal; how fitly the Apostle compares it
to going to bed and putting off old clothes! and will that appear formidable if
we have new ones in the morning! (...) we shall be clothed in the morning of
the resurrection, and you may see how our new garments shall excel the old
ones; (...), 1 Cor. 15. 54. This corruptible shall put on in corruption, and
this mortal immortality, and then death shall be swallowed up in victory.

2. If the best dye, it informs us that God has a controversy with the Land;
if he be cutting down the tall trees, sure he intends to burn the shrubs, and
improve the ground; when Lot was fetched out of the City, then Sodom was near
ruin; when God removes his into the Arc, then we may fear a deluge, that the
floodgates of heaven should be set open, and the world drowned.

O sinful nation, with whom perhaps God will strive no more! but least the
wheat should be burnt with the tares, he reapes it and gathers it into the
barn before hand; it is time O profane sinner, for thee to fear thar a storm
is coming, when thou see the Lord fetching his home; the servants are about
to pay their reckning, and give up their accounts, when the master calls his
son out of their company; O shall not our former miseries cause every one to
reflect on our selves and reform one! see a parallel cause to Englands, Josh.
22. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. The place, if you Judge your sins to have had a stroke
in the late troubles of the Kingdom, is worth the reading, return not to the
same rebellion, and build no altars that you may sacrifice to other Gods; oh
take heed, there are but a few righteous in the land, and when these are out,
what may follow!

USE II.
Must the chiefest of Gods Children dye? then let me counsel you,

1. TO take the time of death into consideration; the hour is at hand, and this
day I bring you the tidings of death; the case is determined in the Court of
heaven, and the Judge has past sentence, and you must every one dye: linquenda
domus, and Tellus, and placens uxor: your new built house, new hired land, and
new married wife, must all be left; the hour is at hand when you and I must see
the faces of one another no more in this life: we must shake hands, and bid
farewell until another world. If Jerusalem must be destroyed, what must Tire
and Sidon? if Sarah must die, surely so must Agar: Caeterae urbes sunt
mortales: We must all follow them who have gone before us: the fairest face
must lie in the dust, and the noblest body must turn to ashes, and feed worms:
the tallest tree must fall to the earth, and the properest man must stoop into
the grave; the bravest actor that ever you saw on the stage of the world, must
leave his Spectators, with vos valete and plaudite, exit mortalis, and descend,
and give place for another. Man's life is but a randevouze, and he a trained
Soldier; men come into the front, and give fire, but presently as they were:
the body to the dust from whence it came, and the soul into the hands of the
Lord that gave it. The longest day ends in a dark night, and the most glorious
sun will set, and disappear: This was it that troubled Adrian, because he had
not preconsidered that he must dye, and that his soul must depart; he therefore
makes a wonder of it: Animula Vagula, Blandula, Pallida, Rigida, Nudula,
Hospes, Comes corporis, quae nunc abitura es in loca? Nunquid amplius dabis
jocos? O my pretty soul, my companion, my dear friend, whether now, what, no
more of thy company! must I be left alone! he should have acquainted himself
beforehand, that he had been born on a woman, and therefore might dye: Oh
beloved, we must all reckon to leave one another, and bid adieu. God intended
not that our abode here should be any other then a pilgrimage; not as a
conversation, but as a visit; your sweetest Child, your dearest father, your
faithful wife, your loving husband, must all part, and leave one another.
Meditate on this: Lovers and friends are not knit in eternal bounds: reckon
upon the noble seize that ever any arrived at, and death is the total
sum: and we may write on the most flourishing flower, But it must whither; on
the most lively body, But it must die.

2. Counsel or advice is prepared for death: take it in the Apostles words
counterchanged, (...), the day is far spent, the night is at hand, in which no
man can work, Romans 12. 13. prepare therefore for a dark hour; the Philistines
are ready to fall on you; then it is not time for you to be on Dalilahs lap;
the soul unprovided, is near beggary: the heart unprepared, is half conquered;
at death you shall have all your enemies endeavoring to lead you captive: oh
then it behooves you to be in a posture to resist: ere long you may hear the
bridgrooms voice calling you to the marriage feast: Oh take heed that your
lamps be not untrimmed: be ready at what hour of the day, at what watch of the
night soever he shall call, that you may go with him into his rest. Let me
speak to you in the words of Joshua; Josh. 1. 11. Prepare you vctuall, for
within three days you shall pass over this Jordan, to go in to possess the
land, which the Lord your God gives you to possess. Make haste to prepare thy
self; for perhaps the Messenger is at thy door, and even now calls; consider
Gods dealings with those that have gone before us; some have been smitten with
blasting and mildew, some with pestilence, some with sword, some with famine,
some consumed, others plucked as a firebrand out of the burning; and what
know thou, oh man, what God will do to thee! therefore prepare thy self to
meet the Lord. Upon this account it is that one compares life rather to a
Wrastler then a Leaper, (...). and the reason is, because in the former we
should look (...), To stand firm, and well prepared for a jostle: Agendum est
Christian, antequam agere cogeris; O Christian, dye daily, before thou dye
indeed. Cosmus used to shur his eyes often, and said, it was that he might not
be to learn when he should be compelled. Oh my friends, it will be too late to
have ours sins to get off, even when we are going to rest: it will be too late
to repent, when the sentence is past: Sero animus ad periculorum patientiam
post pericula instruitur; its folly to endeavor, or think of standing, after
you have fallen and broken your limbs; Non putavi hoc eventurum, nunquid hoc
eventurum credidissem! it will but be a bad salve to heal a wound, to say, I
never thought he was in earnest; or that he would have struck so soon. Do
thou expect this harbinger to morrow? but what if should come to day?
Christian, I beseech thee consider, Horae tantum momentum interest inter regnum
and aliena genua; necesse est igitur ut magis corruamus, qui quasi ex inopinato
ferimur. There is but an hour, for ought I know, or for ought thou know
either, between the throne and a footstool, between a Commander and a Slave,
between prodigality and beggary: and will not his flight be more dreadful,
whose enemies like a storm of flies come ravenous, and by surprisal! Oh how
terrible will death be when it was never thought on before it came! it if come
unexpected, I fear it will find thee unprepared. Take these two helps for
better preparation.

1. Be not entangled in the chains of sin; that soul cannot go out freely with
comfort, that carries the sense of guilt in his bosom; you will be ashamed to
appear before the chief of the Congregation, where you are leprous, for fear
you shall be excommunicated: you dare not venture to be served up at Gods
throne, whilst you are unclean vessels. Christian, I appeal to thy own heart,
do thou not blush when thou art in the presence of those whom thou believe
are privy to thy sins; dare thou come, or can thou come boldly before the
Judge when thou art guilty, and art persuaded that he knows it? then thou will
be best prepared against the assaults of death, when thou art environed with
that brazen wall, Nil conscire tibi, not to be conscious of any offense.

2 Keep Faith and Love in their brightness; Love to draw, and Faith to
encourage, makes the soul it dare tread on Serpents, or wade through fire, that
the desire may be fulfilled. What can hold thee back if thou love, and what
can hinder thee if thou believe? See Peter's faith, The waves could not hinder
him; though it is likely he could not tread the water, yet he had a faith bore
him up. Mat. 26. 27, 28, 30, etc. He believed it was Jesus, and therefore he
went: Lord, says he, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the water; and he
said, come; and when he was come out of the ship, he walked on the water to go
to Jesus. See his love also which he had for Christ, and this constrained him:
when Christ propounds it thrice, yet Peter answers, Lord, I love thee; nay, he
durst appeal to himself, Thou know that I love thee; and this prepared him
for any thing, for good report, or bad report, for freedom, or bondage, for
life or death. Luke 22. 33. Lord, I am prepared (...), I am ready fit to go
with thee, both into prison, and into death. Love can break through the grate of
the prison, and faith can look through the wall: so you may see Paul's
resolution, who wanted not the eye of faith to see beyond the grate, when his
friends would have dissuaded him to stay from Jerusalem: how with indignation
does he answer? Acts 21. 13. What mean you to weep, and break my heart! for I
am ready prepared, not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem, for the
name of the Lord Jesus: this is the preparation of the Gospel: that (...),
Ephesians. 6. 15. which you must have on before you dare tread in the grave; then
we are said to be shod therewith: therefore the most stout and valorous among
the Grecians that durst attempt any thing, that would venture their lives, pro
aris and focis decertantes, they are called (...) and (...): they were looked
upon as shod with brass; so they who are thus shod with faith and love, will
not much matter where they tread, fire or water, life or death, all is one to
them.

3. The third brand of Counsel is, if all dye, then be weaned from the world:
set your hearts loose from the world, and then, though it should be pulled from
you, it would not shake you so much: be not deluded with the flatteries of a
gaudy life, and let not a smileing world bewitch you: and as to our
particulars, we find at present, that the real sorrows are more then the
seeming joys. Me thinks I should not need endeavor to disgrace the world, to
those who have seen its vanity as we have done; let the present condition and
posture of it speak, and it will condemn it self. Sure there needs no arguments
to draw us from the earth, who are driven, as it were, by its bad enterrainment
it gives us, to seek out another place; Oh what sad evidences have we had as to
this particular family, of the worlds emptiness! in how short a time may we
heap up a fourfold admonition! and in how few days have we seen glory laid in
the dust! here has been such a tragedy in a short-time within these gates, as
cannot well be paralleled in an age, as though God had endeavored to use all
manner of arguments to convince us, not to have confidence in the flesh; a
little to view what we were not long since Spectators of. First comes on to the
stage the honorable and virtuous Lady Thorney of Fenton in the County
Nottingham, who came to act the prologue of this Tragedy; she intending a
visit to her sister the Lady Hickman of Ganisburgh, only called as she came
by, not out of intent, but driven by a providence; and indeed now we may guess,
why God sent her, to tell us we were mortal; she as soon as ever, or rather
before we alighted from the Coach, fell sick of an Apoplexey, which according
to the nature of that disease, was A sensu, and totius corporis motu privata,
obstructo cerebro; aeger jecit, stertuit, and difficul er spiravit; she lay
deprived of sense and motion, the brain obstructed, the breath difficult, and
she speechless about the space of seven hours, and so she expired: after her
followed a household servant very speedily, who did not only show us that we
must dye, but how we ought to dye: and there were sent before the main body,
that we should be put in a posture of resistance; but lest these arguments
should not convince us, presently the Lord proves it by a double demonstration:
the son and the mother, the two great Pillars of the family, they fall; and now
it is time for us to cry out, Lord, strike no more, we will obey: These
demonstrations has God shown us, why our hearts should be weaned; and if any
of us need more to soften us, let us consider the same wisdom can conclude
more contradictorily then he has yet done: If the world be not too bitter for
us to delight, yet he can put more gall into the Cup, or brew another of more
bitter ingredients then this. Surely our hearts idolize the world when nothing
but the image of death, and that of so dear and honorable friends and
relations can disintangle us: and if there should be need farther of pressing
this argument, though indeed it already is come to the quick, yet consider
these particulars, lest it get into favor again.

1. Consider the troubles and sorrows of this life, Pains, Distempers, Fears,
Disappointments, Losses, Jealousies, Temptations, vast Journeyings, Hunger and
Thirst, Cold and Nakedness: We reckon of Pearls, and it is but dust; of Roses,
and they prove Thorns: optima quaeque dies fugit, the best day makes haste:
Subeunt morbi tristisque senectus, Diseases and Ages arrest the most active
body: our pleasantest time passes in a dream: and our opportunity either in
nihil, male, or aliud agendo, in doing evilly, or nothing, or to little
purpose: many vexation, if thou will be a man, and more if thou will be a
Christian. Palace, Cottage, City, Country, all are very hard seats for a Child
of God to sit on, Enecat assidum rus triste laboribus, hard toil to the poor,
little content to the rich; the peasant on the dung hill, destitute, robbed of
all; the King on the throne overloaded, more then he can bear: how do we see a
merry day ending in a sad evening! and our laughter terminating in a sigh! How
ordinary is it for us to sees tears on every ones cheek! The mercy we thought
to have enjoyed and rejoiced in, how soon it vanishes, and leaves, Nil nisi
triste cadaver, nothing but a dead carcass behind! The Butterflyes painted
wings moulder into dust, when we conclude we have them in our hands: are you
such as never met with trouble, never with cross? I bless the Lord for it, I
have met with both. Had you never any cause to weep? Oh live in fear, others
have: Have you lived in rejoicing all your lives? yet others have been used to
mourn, and you know not, you that laugh now, how soon you shall have cause to
lament, Job 16. 20. Psalm 6. 6. Eccle. 4. 1. Psalm 42. 3. Isa. 16. 9. Psalm 80.
5. Lament. 1. 2. Job 17. 7. Isai. 5. 30. Romans 9. 2. Jer. 13. 21. 1 Samuel 1. 15.
Luke 2. 48. Mar. 14. 34. 1 Kin. 14. 13. Isai. 38. 14. Hos. 4. 3. Joel 9. 5. 2 Samuel 18. 32, 33. Genesis 50. 11. 2 Samuel 19. 2. And if you never tasted of sorrows,
sighs, tears, mournings, lamentations, then there is a woe rather then a
blessing belongs to you. Luke 6. 25. Woe unto you that laugh now, for you shall
mourn and weep: but I have spoken before of this subject: therefore I will be
but brief; only let me add these lines of the poet.

The worlds a bubble, and the life of man
less then a span,
Cursed from the cradle, mournful from the womb,
So to the tomb.
Who then to frail mortality does trust,
But limns the water, or but writes in dust:
Courts are but only superficial Schools
To dandle fools.
The rural parts are turned into a den
Of salvage men.
And where is the City from all vice so free,
But may be termed the worst of all the three!
Domestic cares afflict the husbands bed,
and pain his head.
Those who live single, count it for a curse,
or do things worse.
Some would have children, those who have, none,
or wish them gone:
What is it then to have, or have no wife,
But single thraldom, or a double strife!
Our own affections still at home to please
is a disease;
To cross the seas to any forraing soil,
peril and toil.
Wars with their noise affright us; when they cease,
we are worse in peace,
What then remains, but that we still do cry,
Not to be born, or being born to die!
2. Consider times uncertainty and unconstancy: who knows what a day may bring
forth! Soles occidere and redire possunt: but when our Sun sets, it rises no
more, but nox est perpetuo una dormienda, an everlasting night approaches.
Therefore Ausonius well admonishes, Collige virgo rosas dum flos novus; wait
thy opportunity; trust not to that time which thou have not the command of.
Trust not to that which has deceived thousands: it will be too late to look
for the oil when the bridegroom is gone by. The Heliotrope, if you would see it
flourish, you must look before Sun set. Hora praeterita, the past hour is but a
broken reed to lean on. Dum bibimus, dum serta, unguenta, puellas Poscimus,
obrepit non intellecta senectus: even while we adorn and trim our selves, the
time is gone which we waited for: Oh who would trust to that which does deceive
and delude them! Life is but only in transitu; quicquid vides rapitur cum
tempore, fluminum more, it runs as the river, still a succession, though of
different waters: wave follows wave, till at last it overflows: year follows
year, until the fatal hour come, and then adiue. Thus Horace describes the
successions of time very well, Novus incola venit, Nam propriae telluris herum
natura, nec illum, Nec me, nec quenquam statuit, new actors come on the stage,
one man cannot represent all the play: nature has not made any particular man
sole heir of his own, but another comes, and he must out of possession.
Christian, thou know not who may come in thy place to morrow, and whether
this night thy soul must not be fetched from thee. Can thou command the time
to be prolonged! will the Sun stay thy leisure? Can thou recall an hour which
thou have misspent? Oh then trust not to the world, be weaned from secular
concernments.

3. Consider man's glory is transitory, therefore how often are they compared to
leaves! Frondibus arbores similes, born naked coming ito the world, and going
out of the world in tears: quod libet quassum vas, cujuslibet ferae pabulum, a
brittle vessel, a tossed barque, a wild beasts food, Job 14. 1, 2, 22. Man that
is born of a woman, is but of a few days, and full of trouble, he comes forth
like a flower, and is cut down; he flees also as a shadow, and continues not;
his sons come to honor, and he knows it not; they are also brought low, and
he perceives it not of them; but his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his
soul, within him shall mourn. A sorrowful soul, an aching body, a diseased
carcass; Oh how is poor man arrested, and in thraldom! Quandoque nervi,
quando^; pedes, sometimes pained in the head, and then convulsions of the
Nerves; now his stornack, but by and by his heart: Nunc Cor, nunc pulmones;
pridie distillatio, postridie hepatis morbus, Atrophia, Cachexia, Lien,
Schyrrus, Hydrops, Sco^butus, Hypocondriaca affectio, vulnus and ulcus, and
what not! Oh what peace can that creature have, who has so many enemies in
ambush, who presently imbody themselves, and appear aperte le v^eu, face to
face! what part free from assaults! the Castle batetred, the roof fired, the
Walls stormed; and a poor plundered soul may sit with Job on the dunghill,
telling his sores. Some aim at the head; a great troop, very near forty: such
as are Cephalalgia, Paralysis, Tremor, Alopecia, Lethargus, Apoplexia,
Psilothra, and the like: others as many at least at the eye; such as are
Amaurosis, Glaucoma, Hypopyon, Crithe, Hippos, Milphosis, and the like; others
at the Breast, Tussis, Asthma, Peripneumonia, Syncope and Rhagaedes; Others at
the stomach, as (...), apepsia, vomitus anorexia, boulimia, with many others;
head, heart, breast, Stomach, Liver, Lungs, Arms, Joints, Nerves, Arteries,
Spleen, Liver, Brain; nay, every part of man is obnoxious; and how often by
these Armies are our glories turned to nothing! our joy sets in mourning, our
mirth in tears. Lord, what is man? a walking image of death (...), vox and
prae^erea nihil: Measure the Poles altitude by the sensible Horizon, and you
must bait some degrees. Well might the Apostle give man the Epithet of
Miserable, especially when he had considered, that to all these outward
accidents, was added sin; and upon all the assaults sin comes as an Usurper, he
cries out, (...); Oh miserable man that I am: Thus let us but reckon of the
ruins that we have seen of Kings Palaces, stately Castles, pleasant Harbors,
great Families, and honorable Names, we must be forced to confess man's glory
as the flower of the field: Jam seges est ubi Troja; Corn grows probably in
the very Temple of Minerva at Troy; Et quem felicem Cynthia vidit, vidit
miserum abitura dies.

Thus poor Eumenes of a Potters son,
By fickle fortunes help, a Kingdom won;
Yet she for him such diet did provide,
That he of hunger shortly after died.
Oh! consider his passions, fear and hope, love and hatred, joy and sorrow;
distracted man, in a labyrinth, in a maze, between Scylla and Charybdis, if he
shun the one rock, it is to be feared he will be split on the other: Lord, what
is man? he is not unlike that herba Solstitialis which Pliny tells us of, that
rises in a swelling bubble; but if it be touched, it vanishes: thus in man we
may well say as Seneca of a famous City; Una dies tantum interest inter magnam
civitatem and nullam, there is but one day only between the Scepter and Coffin;
be then weaned from the world, when the noblest creature in it is but a bubble.
Should you gather up the excellencies of all men into one; they would fall
short of a felicity. Could you have Sampsons hair, Milos strength, Solomon's
wisdom, Absoloms beauty, Craesus his wealth, Caesar's valor, Tullies eloquence,
Paul's languages, and all these for Nestors years, yet all would be but vanity,
and vexation of spirit; all this would dissolve, and fall to dust: thus
Claudian disciples great Pompey after his death, Nudas pascit aves, jacet en
qui possidet orbem, Exiguae telluris inops; he who the other day had the
possession of the habitable world, now cannot command as much as will make him
a grave; Lord, what is man?

4. Consider the fullness of heaven, and this will estrange you from the world.
A taste of sweet and delicious food will help to wean the child from the
breast; Oh there is a sufficiency; the fountain set open, the stream pleasant;
aere and rore pasti, milk and honey, better then they have in Egypt: Christ's
bosom, the face of the Lamb; there will be supplies for all wants, all tears
wiped away, all heavy hearts cleared, all complaints heard, all sorrowful
groans abated, wants lessened, and treasures increased: this will be a full
state; as the Sybil, (...), the Lamb Christ shall both reward and crown thee
with glory. Read over Rev. 1. 7. and you may see the number, a great multitude
of all Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues. 2. Their posture, they
stood before the Throne and before the Lamb; and this is felicity; that wherein
many place happiness, is contemplation; therefore Eugubinus (...); felicity is
in contemplation; glory and happiness is when we are in presence; and though
that be not all that goes to felicity; not only a sight of, but an Acquiescence
in our beloved; or it consists in sight and love, in contemplation and delight;
but these two are linked together in visione, sed charitativa, in sight, but a
delightful one; in amore, sed oculatissimo, in love, but it is full of eyes;
this their posture, they are in the presence of the Lamb, etc. 3. Their
garments and Ensigns, clothed with white robes and palms in their hands,
innocent and reconciled to their Father. 4. Their work, and they cried with a
loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sits upon the Throne, and
unto the Lamb. 5. Their entertainment; he that sits on the Throne shall
dwell among them; they shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither
shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat: for the Lamb which is in the midst
of the Throne shall feed them, and shall lead them into living fountains of
water; and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes: This will be a
Christians glory, he shall be recovered into the image of God: something like
to this Seneca aims at, when he counts an imitation of God to be the true
felicity; Haec demum vera est felicitas imitare quem colis; Thus the Apostle
John: Here we are the sons of God: but it does not appear what we shall be, but
when he shall be manifested, (...), we shall be like him, (...), because we
shall see him as he is: We have here both Love, Sight and Likeness, or
Imitation: and this is true happiness; here likeness does depend upon the
sight, and so in heaven; because we see not the pattern clearly, therefore we
vary in our imitation, which will not be so in heaven; but having a full view
of the way, we shall walk in it: Oh what joyful entertainment shall we have
there who art thrust out of doors in the world! God bidding welcome, the Angels
shouting for joy Christ ready to entertain his beloved, Gelida sub umbra,
antiquos paulum recitemus amores: Now, O Child, sit down on the fathers Throne,
and now look back, what a tossed sea poor souls are in below: now look how
mortals swim in tears, and hale toward the haven: how disconsolate! how
forlorn! how destitute! see what a gulf thou have escaped, what waves thou have
swom over! what a storm thou have gone through! and now behold the promised
land, the Throne of glory, and pure light, riches in abundance, with this
inscription on them, All this will I give thee, because thou have falln down
and worshipped me; Oh how will a soul acquiesce here! this made Paul desire to
be dissolved to be with Christ; he could be willing (...), the earthly body of
this Tabernacle should be dissolved, that he might dwell in a spiritual Temple,
2 Cor. 5. 1. This made St. Austine breath, O gaudium supra gaudium, vincens
omne gaudium, extra quod non est gaudium, quando intrabo in te, ut videam Deum
meum qui habitat in te, Oh joy transcendent! joy, without which there is no
joy; when shall I enter into thee, that I may behold my God that dwells there!
Sorrow indeed is the Prologue and Epilogue of the present life; but joy,
praise, thanksgiving are the Prooemium of a future: so Chrysostom in Psalm
144. Laus and gratiarum actiones, (...)* How does Buchanan flourish upon this
pleasure, and unbroider this glory: Psalm 36. Cum repetet (scil anima) limen,
sidereamque domum, illinc egestas, and dolores exulant, passim voluptas, pura
passim gaudia, Delicias largo flumine ritusagit; Illinc fatiscunt mentium
caligines, vultuque radius purus effusus. Englished thus:

In Angels state when I appear,
Sorrow and wants are banished there.
Joy, glory, praise will be my theme;
Pleasures flow like a mighty stream.
My soul once lost in pitchy night,
Now shines much like an orb of light.
My dear friends, when you and I, who could not walk here without stumbling,
shall sit down secure; when we, who were in daily fear, shall be out of Satan's
shot; when we, who were blind and naked, shall be clothed upon, and see face
to face; when we, who were hungry and thirsty, fed among Swine, with the husks
of the earth, shall satiate our selves with varieties at our Fathers table;
when we, who were entangled in bondage, shall be set free; who were sick and
diseased, shall be made whole; leprosies cleansed, eyes enlightened, hearts
inflamed, judgments rectified, affections well ordered; who can tell what this
will be, until we experience it! but let this we know wean us from a vain world.

USE III.
DO the dearest of Gods children dye, and leave their friends? then this may be
for a lamentation: And this brings me to the second part of the work, the
second act of this Tragedy; Abraham came to mourn, and to weep for her. When
Sarah dies, the land loses a Preserver, Abraham a Comforter, and the people
of God a mother, Sarah the mother of the faithful dying! Oh then Children
should lay it to heart; when the Children of God are taken away, what will be
the Portion of strangers? if the grand Pillars of this great fabric, the
kingdom of heaven be puld'd down, then the bare and naked walls may expect to
stand only as ruin. The righteous dye; Oh then should not we lay it to heart!
the merciful, the kind, and the godly perish, and are taken away; should not
we then consider? when the wheat it cut down, the Tares have cause to fear; and
when the Timber trees fall, the shrubs may tremble; if we do but now consider,
it may well put an accent upon our sorrow. He came to mourn. This My Lord came
from London about ten days before his Lady dyed, and the day after his only
son was buried; had left his son in law very sick at London, and found one of
his Daughters very sick at home, the othermuch spent with grief, fear, and want
of rest, by reason of her exceeding tenderness and care of my Lady, her dear
mother: This was Abraham's entertainment
is a spectacle would pierce an Adamant, a sight would cause a rock to gush out
tears; who can refrain to see the sorrowful looks of a pensive Abraham? how
does he seem to express himself in the words of the Prophet, Lam. 1. 12, 16. Is
it nothing to you all, O all ye that pass by, behold and see if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me in the day of his feirce anger! he has trodden down the virgin,
the daughter of Judah, and made my Children desolate, and for these things I
weep; mine eye, mine eye runs down with water, and the Comforter that should
relieve my soul is far from me: Oh here is more cause of sorrow then Abraham
had; he left his Sarah; but here, both Sarah and Isaac; Sarah so dear to her
Lord, so tender to her Children, so kind to her friends, so precious to all;
Isaac a Child in his fathers image, an only son, a top branch of an ancient
family, hopeful for bearing fruit, the record only of his fathers name; both
dead, and Abraham came to mourn, and to weep for them: Oh what hard heart will
not sympathize^ it is very hard in aeternum valedicere, to bid adiue till
eternity. A final absence of our dearest relations, is an occurrence, quale v^l
impia molliret Thracum pectora, that would make the heart of a Jew or Turk to
bleed: Quis matrem inops in funere nati Flere vetat: who can forbid a mother
weeping over her dear child! Quis desiderio sit pudor aut modus Tam chari
capitis: Oh who can measure their sorrow for so dear a relation or friend, when
their Love has overflown? Surely Christian, whosoever thou art that see, or
shall but hear of this providence, had thou the same occasion, thou would
expect Partners, and think them none of thy best friends, that would not lend
thee a tear to water such seed in the earth: Est quaedam flere voluptas,
Expletur lacrymis egeriturque dolor, it is a great ease to a heavy and
mournful heart, when it can disburden it self in tears: Oh friend, Tam charus
filius and veneranda matter; so dear a child, so gracious a mother; so dutiful
a son, so tender a Parent, both stock and branch at one stroke; the Ax is very
sharp, and it cuts deep: Quis temperet a lacrymis? who can refrain? The beauty
of Israel, a Pillar of the Temple, a harbor for the distressed, a guide to the
blind, a support to the weak, a feeder of the poor, is now departed; Oh take up
a lamentation, she lived not without your love, and without rejoicing your
hearts: oh let her not dye without your sorrow: hang your harps on the willows,
and sit by the salt waters: turn your melody to mourning, and your pleasure to
pensiveness. Alas, alas, that precious Lady, so shining an instrument in the
work of her God, so enriched others, so accomplished with humane and divine
endowments, now become desolate: Oh what sorrow is like to our sorrow! Though I
should not make this use of her death, yet I know others would, lest she by
whom so many were comforted in her life, should be unlamented at her death: the
tears which she has botled up, now the bottles break, and they gush out; the
eyes that she wiped, now overflow: here is Abrhams sorrow, his dear Sarah;
oculis charior, more dear then his own life: sanguis sunt, bone of his bone,
flesh of flesh; animae dimidium, his very self, plucked in pieces at once; Oh
this is difficult, this is a deep wound, and is this nothing to you, O all ye
that pass by! Be you actors in this Tragedy; when Abrahma mourns and weeps,
wipe off the tears, or wash them off with yours: when you see such tragical
spectacles, bear a part; when the burden of sorrow lies heavy on the backs of
Gods dear, tender and precious Children, as now, put under your shouders; let
not her relations have cause to say to us, We have mourned, but ye have not
lamented: (...) to be a scoffing Ishmael when Abraham mourns, would be a
character of an ungrateful heart in most, of an ungracious heart in all:
beloved, this is a pleasing Subject to me at present, which makes me so much
promote it. I confess I had more need wipe away tears then pump them, but that
mine own prevail against me; I had need speak in another ditty, and strike
another key, but that my heart is not tuned for any Notes but mornfull ones. I
have need to shut the floodgates of sorrow, but that mine own stand open, and I
cannot swim against the stream; Facile omnes cum valemus aegrotis rectum
consilium damus; it would be easy for me to council the diseased, if I felt no
pain my self. I am to learn how to comfort others' when I have not so much as
will content my self: if I should, it would not be probable my counsel should
prevail, because I cannot set an example; therefore think not strange that I
administer so little cordial, because I am faint my self; and that I endeavor
not to stop the streams of sorrow; for with me the tide is up, and the stream
is violent and irresistible, and I am driven downwards. I cannot wipe away your
tears, because mine eye runs over. I think it therefore needless to reprove
that in another, which I cannot resist my self; neither would I offer to pull
the mote out of another eye, when perhaps it is a beam that is in my own: when
it is falling water, then we may cast anchor; though now when the billows are
high, it is best to float; when it ebs, the vessel will stay; now she must have
her course with the eager tide. Now (because it is probable that our cheeks may
need watering for future increase) I shall be willing that sorrow flow; only
let it keep within the banks; and because it is not likely you should be
comforted with that direction that ends in a sigh, and have your dry grief
quenched with those waters that come through the valley of tears; I shall not
endeavor to stop the course, only guide it in the right channel.

1. Mourn for the absence of comforts or relations, not as to neglect mourning
for the presence of sin, the loss of the integrity of heart, of the sense of
our reconciliation with God, of the testimony of our interest in Christ; the
loss of the peace of our conscience, of the death of our sins, our souls mortal
enemy, is more then the loss of a friend or relation; it would mitigate the
sorrow for our friends, did we consider that we have sins to mourn for, which
will make greater breaches then any outward enjoyment can repair: let sorrow
terminate in sin; lay the ax to the root of the tree, whence the causes of our
grief and tears spring: Did we not sin, we sheuld have no cause to mourn; if we
never offended, we should have neither cause to feel, nor fear the rod; thus
the Apostle Paul writes in the Corinthians, there was a great sin among them,
and yet they were puffed up, and would not mourn; 1 Cor. 5. 1, 2. This was a
frame blameworthy; for ought you know, had you not sinned, your father, mother,
wife, child, no friend had dyed. And had not we let the garden of our hearts
grow over with weeds, this lilly had grown and florish'd still; had we never
stopped our ears at Gods voice when he has entreated for our hearts, and
begged our Love, he would not have stopped his ears at our manifold (and I dare
say) ardent prayers which we have put up and presented at the throne, on the
behalf of our deceased relations and friends: Oh it is sin that deserves daily
tears. God would not have taken away ours, if we would have given him his: but
alas, the iniquity of our hearrs, the Cancerworm we lodge there, will in time
eat a greater hole in our tenderest comforts. God has taken away a son, but
sin will cause him to take away a daughter also; God has taken away a mother,
but sin will cause him to take away a father also. God has deprived us of
Creatures, but sin will cause him to deprive us of Christ too. Now the Lord
has seemed to frown; but Oh sin will make him hid his face; and then I believe
your hearts will refuse to be comforted; you can now go to him as to a tender
father, when your fellow servants and brethren forsake you, and you can
acquiesce^, and take complacence in him; but poor hearts, what will you do, if
your father cannot be found? Consider these things in sin, and then let us see
whether we had not more need mourn for living sins, then for dead relations.

1. Consider that it is sin that has been, and is the death of what is mortal:
we may lay the deaths of all our friends, of all mankind, from Adam to this
moment, whose funeral we now celebrate; we may now lay it at sins door: for
ought I know, had we never sinned, we should not have had cause to have mourned
for death; for by sin came death, even as a fearful reward for fearless
rebellion: Oh see how blood runs down the streets of Babylon, of Nineveh, of
Troy, of Jerusalem, of Constantinople; see the dead carcases so thick, that you
cannot tread beside them; it is for sin; we may say whatsoever other disease
our friend has, yet he dyed of sin: Age has killed its thousands, but sin its
ten thousands. Thus the Apostle, Romans 5. 12. if we take it literally, Wherefore
by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed
upon all men, in that all have sinned: Oh take heed of sin, that is your mortal
enemy; be not familiar with sin, it will betray you; do not entertain sin, it
will rob you; lodge not sin in your bosoms, it will stab and mortally wound
you; it strikes no where but at the heart; it is satisfied with nothing but
blood. How has sin unbowel'd some, burnt others in fire, drowned others, hewn
others in pieces, robbed, stripped, made desolate, and cruelly butchered poor
souls; therefore mourn for sin.

2. Sin will make you deformed, misshapen monsters; therefore mourn for sin more
then for the absence of our friends. O what a glorious image was man in!
righteous, holy, and had dominion over the Creatures; and now a guilty deformed
slave! Oh man, how is thy honor cast down by sin! How is soul defiled by
sin! thy will inslaved by sin! in what a glorious shape was thy soul made,
and now clogged with flesh! what lovely characters, and his own name engraven
thereon, and now not legible! from which likeness of thine sprung a relation;
God therefore called us sons because in his likeness; but by sin we have both
lost similitude and relation too, and are now by Christ called Progenies
viperarum, Offsprings of Vipers, Mat. 12. 34. Seed of the Serpent, Mat. 23.
33. Children of the devil, by the Apostle, Acts 13, 10. O full of subtilty, and
all mischief, the Child of the devil; so by Christ, John 8. 44. Ye are of your
Father the devil, and the works of your father ye will do. So the Apostle
James, James 3. 15. The sinners wisdom descends not from above, but is
earthly, sensual, devilish. Oh how deformed must his offspring be, that is so
deformed himself! how false must the proportions be of his children when the
father abode not in the truth! What a heart does sin turn into stone! what an
eye does it blind! what a love does it quench! what a power does it weaken!
what light does it extinguish! it changes upright walking into crawling on the
belly, angelical brightness into serpentine darkness, and hot affection into
coldness or lukewarmness at the best: This glorious image, the pattern of all
beauty defaced, we must needs be deformed; thus the glory of the incorruptible
God is changed into the image of corruptible man, and to birds, and to
fourfooted beasts, and to creeping things.

3. Sin endangers the soul; it makes the souls standing-place slippery; the
Angels descended by reason of sin, the souls slipping inro sin soon fell;
hereby we contract enmity with God; that glorious and almighty God that can
consume us in his wrath, and vex us in his hot displeasure, we make him out
adversary, to whom we must necessarily run for help in a time of danger: it
proclaims you open Rebels to our Lord and King; it brings under the curse and
malediction of the Law, it alienates our dearest friends love from us; thus the
first sin was forbidden under no less penalty then death, Genesis 2. 16, 17. And
the Lord said, Of every tree of the garden thou may freely eat: but of the
fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it: for
in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye: where sin is
harbored, eminent danger lies at the door. After Phocas, like another Zimri, 1
Kin. 16. 8, 9, 10. had slain the Emperor Mauritius, and reigned in his stead,
he was rebelled against (if I may call fighting for ones own rebellion) by the
right Heir; but Phocas being in a walled City, had secured himself that none
could approach under loss of life: when one was told, that Phocas had hid
himself, they sought but in vain; he answered, Though we cannot, yet his sin
will find him out. See how Moses in like manner admonishes the Israelites;
Numb. 32. 24. Well, says he; do, build cities for your little ones, and folds
for your Shepherds, and do that which has proceeded out of your mouth: but if
thou will not do as the Lord has commanded, then kn^w that thou have sinned
against the Lord, and be ^^re your sin will find you out: Oh then if there be
this danger in sin, we ought to mourn for it when we can weep best.

4. Sin wounded Christ; it was sin that brought him to the cross, Isa. 57. 4,
5. He is despised, r^^^cted of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with
grief; he has born our grief, and carried our sorrows; he was wounded for our
transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace
was upon him: we have gone astray, and God has laid on him the Iniquity of us
all. Sin was the cause why Christ came from heaven, that he might put away sin,
Heb. 9. 29. Heb. 2. 17. (...). that he might reconcile or make propitiation for
the sins of the people: and sin was the cause why he was so badly entertained
in the world: had not the Jews been sinners, Christ should never have been
reproached, contemned, stoned, buffetted, spit upon, crowned with thorns: had
not we been sinners, we had not need that Christ should have become a
sacrifice; but you may see, his agonies, his blood, his cruel usage, and his
death are all laid at the door of sin, Heb. 10. 11, 12. and every high priest
stands daily in the temple ministering and often times offering the same
sacrifice which can never take away sin: here is the reason why the sacrifice
was changed, the former could not take away sin; and see now how Christ does
it, ver. 12. but this man after he had offered one sacrfice for sin, for ever
sat down on the right hand of God: it was sin that sacrificed Christ; It was
sin that wounded and slew the Lord: therefore mourn for sin.

5. Sin is that which opposes Christ's Kingdom, and Christ's design in the
world, God has made his son a Savior: he came to seek and to save that which
was lost, Luke 19. 10. and men will not come to him that they may have life,
Ioh. 5. 40. God sent his son to be the light of the world, that whosoever
believed on him, might not perish in a dark way, Joh. 12. 46. and sin makes men
love darkness rather then light, Joh. 3. 19. (...). the reason why they loved
darkness was sin: it was because their deeds were evil; God has made his son
A King and Prince of the world; and sin will not that Christ shall rule over
men; God sent Christ to cleanse and to purify to himself a complete peculiar
people, zealous of good works. Tit. 2. 14. and sin defiles and casts dirt upon
whomsoever Christ has engraven his image; it pollutes what Christ has washed,
and besmeare what he harh made clean; God sent his son into the world to take
possession, and sin as the strong man armed keeps the house and will not yield:
thus sin countermands the Law of Christ; God sent his son that he might take up
lodgings for him in the hearts of his servants; but sin locks the door and
keeps the key, and denis entrance: as it countermandes, it countermines: when
he would lay his power to convince the judgment, sin opposes there; when to
the affections, sin oposeth there: when he would speak, sin stops the ear;
when Christ shines, sin darkens the eye that we cannot see: when he draws, sin
benums and stupifies that we cannot feel; when he would allure us with pleasant
food, sin diseases the pallat that we cannot taste: It is a sad disease that
does enfeeble and alienate the soul from the physician; and thus it crosses
Christ's design. Christ would have gathered Jerusalem, and the sinful City
would not; Christ invites to come to the feast of the Lamb, but the sinner will
not: Christ would have men return and get strength, and they will not; Christ
would sit in the soul, and sinners will not: sin is a contradiction, and
sinners are full of it: and this Christ suffered; (...). Heb. 12. 3.
Contradictions of sinners against his blessed self! Oh who can consider these
things and not rather mourn for sin that would separate both us and friends
from Christ, then for death that does give us a rest unto Christ!

2. Let not your mourning be without hopes; she has left sufficient
testimonies behind her of her glory; she lived not so upon earth that we should
doubt her title to heaven; She carried not so much like a stranger to God
below, that we should doubt of her kind entertainment above; She has left
strong grounds that she is accepted: we may therefore rather rejoice that she
has made so blessed an exchange; had we been dubious of her performing her
journey, we might have desired her to have staid with us: did we doubt the gate
would be shut, we should desire her not to leave us; but knowing she has a
father so willing to entertain, it is no sign of love in us to be unwilling to
let her go; She has left such evidence of her peace and reconciliation, that
if we rightly consider, we may rather mourn for our selves, and weep for our
selves, not for her; For it cannot be but those that were (as she was) begot
again to newness of life, should have admittance to the incorruptible
inheritance, 1 Pet. 1. 3. 4. Blessed be the God and father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which according to his abundant mercy has begottea us again to a
lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an
inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
heaven for us; It is not likely but she should be owned by the father who had
his image and superscription upon her; and that she should be known to whom
she belonged, that had the characters of the Lords name written so legibly upon
her heart; It cannot be but that such familiarity as she had with God upon
earth, should prevail for admittance into heaven; She was no stranger to
Christ, and therefore he will entertain her as a friend. She that owned Christ
on earth, shall be owned by Christ in heaven. She that was so true a labourer,
will not want a sure rest; therefore mourn not without hope, 1 These. 4. 13,
14. I would not have you ignorant brethren concerning them which are asleep,
(...); that they sorrow not as the rest do which have no hope; for if we
believe that Jesus dyed and rose again; Even so them also which sleep in Jesus,
will God bring with him; If such as she was, should not be saved, where would
your souls and mine appear? if we had cause to doubt for her, we have ground of
fear and trembling for our selves.

3. Mourn not with murmuring, grudg not that God has taken her away now: he
might have done it before: murmr not that God has taken her from us and
deprived us of her company; he might have swept all away with her we had; It
was sin, a ready way that the Chrildren of Jsrael took to provoke God to carry
them back again into Egypt into a land of darkness, when they murmured that
they were kept but a few years in the wilderness; It was the way to provoke
the Lord to have carried them back again to their enthralling taskmasters, when
they grudged to serve him, whom to serve was perfect freedom: is it not the
ready way to fetch a curse on our remaining mercyes, when we murmr that God
has taken again some few which he did but lend us! It is the part of a child
to throw all, away because the father takes that again which he gave us only to
look at: should our children refuse meat because we our selves make use of the
plate, we should threaten them with the rod; may not the Lord in wrath cut down
every vine and tender branch which he has planted in our gardens, when we
grudg that the husband man takes a cluster of grapes to taste of them? may not
the Lord in anger blast every pleasant flower, which he himself harh planted,
when we murmr that he should pluck two or thtee? Do not murmr but be
silent; God takes but his own, we ought to wait quietly, to bear the yoke, to
sit alone and keep silence, to put our mouths in the dust, Lam. 3. 27, 28, 29.
See what a sweet frame David was in when he had as much cause to weep as we
have; Such a stroke that made him stoop, such rebukes as made his beauty
consume like a moth: and yet David was dumb: I was dumb and opened not my
mouth, because thou Lord did it, Psalm. 39. 9. and see what was his direction
in the greatest calamity, not only to wait, but to praise; not to murmur, but
to be silent, Psalm. 65. 1. Lechadh, majah tihillah shoe him batizon, praise and
silence to thee O Lord in Sion.

Praise and silence to thee O Lord in Sion, O how disingenuous is it in a child
to murmr! why, God has called away his own: it is Pharisaical to repine at the
al-wise dispensations of Christ, Luke 5. 30. this was the very cause why God
makes the chiloren of Israel stay so long in the wilderness, because they
began to murmur in it so soon: Number. 14 27. unto 34. ver. God may keep us under
afflictions the longer for our murmuring: it will never help us out the sooner;
it is as unlawful to grudg at Gods withholding mercies that we want, as at
withdrawing what we have; and may not God give when and what he pleases! may he
not also take away as much and as soon as he lists! Oh be not angry with God:
he that has done this, can do greater things; he that has afflicted with
rods, can do it with scorpions: he who has but imhittered the stream, he can
turn it into blood; and he who has taken away a drop, can dry up the
fountain.

4. Let your sorrow keep within its limits: Jacob mourned for Joseph many
days, Genesis 37. 34. the Egyptians for Jacob seventy days: there is a time to
mourn, and I know not but this may be it; only let not your grief be
unlimited; It is not my purpose, and if it were I have neither Rhetoric to
charm yours, nor strength to contain my own tears; only let them flow in their
proper stream, and to their proper stage: those waters may be profitable if
they keep within their bounds; but if they rise into a flood, what may they not
sweep away! the drops of tears may cherish the seeds of grace, but showers may
drown them. Let it not be said of your sorrow, as it was said of Edward the
Firsts joy for the birth of his son, that it was gandium immortale an immortal
joy: so let it not be said of sorrow for the death of your friends that it is
gemitus immortalis, an immortal sigh; but you that are interested in this
loss (and who of us is not concernd in it?) will say it is a heavy stroke, and
it is hard to bear: such providence go deep; and such misfortune is mournful.
I answer, as Eustazares did to the King that pitied his unfortinatenesse,
being he was fallen from a high degree, to sit at the Kings gate for alms;
well says Eustazares: nulla o rex imfortunium mihi accidit in hac terrena
domo, quamdiu Christum non negavero; O King, no misfortune can befall me in
this cottage so long as I deny not Chtist; So let me say to you, As long as you
have Christ, and this Gospel, let, God deny you what he will; Now were it
either possible for you to receive comfort, or for me to speak it; might speak
to many particulars leading that way: let me even but mention some, which if I
had but leisure to speak of, or you were in a capacity of receiving them, might
take place and be effectual. I shall but name them, because the smart of the
present affliction does take off serious deliberation: and my present grief
denies the liberty of speaking feelingly: and it is but only this which we
should consider, What do we see in death that we avoid it so much, and that we
are loath to let our friends go into the jaws thereof!

1. Mors Quies: Vita tumultus. Death is a rest, Life is a toil. Many a sore
labor, many a hard hour do poor creatures find in their journey; but in death
they sit them down to rest; the wearied body may repose it self in the grave:
and he who is almost tired out and faints in the way, may be refreshed, when he
goes to bed; this was confirmed unto the Apostle John by the voice from heaven.
Rev. 14. 13. And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me write, Blessed are
the dead which dye in the Lord: from henceforth, yea says the spirit (...);
That they may rest from their labors and their works follow them.

2. Mors pax, vita praelium. Death is peace and life is war; the Apostle found
(...) another law making warlike oposition to the law of his mind: endeavors
of captivating the soul, attempts of bringing it into bondage: these are
ordinary in this life; fear and dread on every side, our enemy at hand, our
hearts betraying us, our consciences afrighting us: we placed to be a but for
sin and Satan to shoot at: but in death there is a cessation: all slanderings,
plunders, clashing of armor, wounding, captivating, wars and rumors of war,
in the soul all ceased, and a great peace with all adversaryes, enemies all
reconciled.

3. Mors portus, Vita navigatio. Death is a haven, Life a voyage, a poor vessel
tossed on dangerous, and narrow seas, would cast anchor, but cannot, tackling
broke, the stars disappearing, the compass out of order, and the vessel
leaking, this is life. But death is the haven, the harbor where the soul
shrouds it self after a difficult voyage, hope and fear filling the sails: but
in death their is no need of either; thus Franciscus Puccius a Florentine, was
reported to have said at his death, Inveni portum, spes et fortuna valete.

Farewell hope, for I am come safe unto the harbor.

4. Mors epulae, Vita fames. Death is a banquet, life hunger; Oh how noble
entertainment have those that dye in Christ, when those that live in the world
are but fed with the crumbs that are under the table! here we have instead of
bread stones, and instead of a fish a scorpion; bitter banquets, if any at all,
unsavory meat, hard of digestion: we are here fed with bread and water of
affliction: here we cannot satiate our hunger and quench our thirst: but after
death we shall have such spiritual food and that in plenty: and once tasting
we shall hunger no more, and thirst no more.

5. Mors bravium, Vita cursus; Death is the mark, Life the race. Thus the
Apostle, Heb. 12. 1. there are all things which happen to racers.

1. There is (...), a cloud of witnesses standing by to see how we speed it. 2.
Here is the stripping of our selves, as they that run do, if they intend to win
the prize,
1. (...) putting off every weight.

2. (...), putting off also every intanglement though it be not heavy, as
wrastlers do.

3. Here is the posture with a qualification, (...), let us run with patience.

4. Here is the mark the price (...), the mark that is set before us: and how
do we weary our selves and are ready to sit down and dare not! but death is the
mark, which if we once obtain, we run no more, we may then rest us without
fear.

6. Mors asylum, Vita fuga. Death is a refuge, life the flight. Oh how does the
avenger of blood pursue, and how does the guilty creature fly for life! with
what eagerness does Satan and sin follow poor creatures in this life, and they
even spent, fit to yield, and give up their lives into that enemies hands: now
in death the soul comes to the altar and looks back at sin without fear, can
see Satan and hell, without trembling at them at all, and this we find to be in
Christ. Heb. 6. 18. This we are informed of, (...), that we might have strong
consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before us.

7. Mors serenitas, vita tempestas. Death is a calm, Life a storm: Oh what
Waves, what Tempests, Billows, Gusts toss us on this sea of troubles! now
lifted up to heaven, presently thrown down to hell:

Jam jam tacturi sydera summa --
Quantum diducto subsidunt aequore valles!
Jam jam tacturas tartara nigra putes.
Shallow waters, rocks on every hand, the split, the tackling broken, the
anchor lost, the mast cut down: Oh how is a poor child or God exposed to
merciless waves, in this storm of life! now death is a calm, all tranquillity
of mind; iratum mare, the angry sea, and swelling waves styled, the storm gone,
Oh how sweetly may the soul sail in its vessel, in its barque after death!

8. Mors libertas, vita incarceratio: Life is a prison, death is a liberty: how
is the soul in chains! how is it fettered! like Austins bird which he saw tied
with a thread; it attempted for heaven, but dragged down again; it would mount on
the wing, but the thread confined it: Thus the soul would soar aloft, its
spacious desires would carry it into the clouds: but it is imprisoned in the
body: it would be skipping among the stars, but the flesh clogs it: yet death
will ease it of this weight: there will be a Jubilee, the servant sent home,
the captive delivered, the arrayed soldier disbanded, the prison doors set
open, and the chains and shakels knocked off.

9. Mors lumen, vita tenebrae. Death is a sight, Life blindness; Death light,
Life Darkness; Death is Canaan, Life Egypt: what stumbling, what groanping,
what wandering in this life! a long jorney, and a difficult way, strait and
narrow, and a dangerous way in the wilderness, and the time uncomfortable in
the night: the travellor unfit for journeying; blind, or at best a vail before
his face; this is very uncomfortable: but in death the vail shall be rent off,
the morning will dawn, the scales fall from off the eyes, the Way made broad;
we need not choose our steps to God, Libera aura, the open air is our path, the
first step is our journeys end.

10. Mors possessio, vita spes. Death is Possession, Life Hope. We are here
Vana spe lactati, fed with expectation, and that is often frustrated. Credula
vitam Spes fovet, and melius cras fore semper ait. Indeed had we not hope here,
we should be most miserable: for experience of sorrow and despair of joy;
experience of pain, and despair of ease, is a double torment: therefore hope
tells us to morrow will be better: but this hope in respect of possession, is
but a Tantalizing apple, but a dream. O when we come through the valley of
death, we shall soon be at home: When we have got an enjoyment, we shall lay
aside expectation: both faith and hope shall cease, Prophesies, Tongues,
Relations, Knowledge, all cease, 1 Cor. 13. For when that which is perfect is
come, that which is in part shall be done away. Romans 8. 24. (...): Hope that is
seen is no hope but fruition: (...), For what a man sees, why does he yet hope
for?

11. Mors paterna domus, vita porcorum grex: Death is the fathers house, Life
the herd of swine: We are all Prodigals, have spent our primitive maintenance,
have lost our father and lives among swine, and feed upon husks, hard fare: and
if you lived with such as I have, who would wallow in the mire, and when you
offered Pearls, would both trample them under feet, and turn again, and rent
you, you would say that they were swine. But death is our fathers house, a
place where interest and relation have all things common, where a tender father
provides for, and accepts of a prodigal son: a place where wants are supplied
of free cost: Garlic and Onins are turned into milk and honey, and husks into
Mannah.

12. Mors adoptio, vita abdicatio: Death is adoption, Life disinheriting:
thrust down, cast out of our fathers house, made bondslaves to the body like
Ishmael and Agar; we lose the privileges of our fathers house; imagine a
disinherited child, utterly cast off for his misdemeanor; beg he cannot, steal
he dare not; if he go forward, he sees perils in his way; if he stand still,
hunger and thirst will be his executioners; poor man must be in a strait, and
this is life: Now death is a bringing a servant into the liberty of a son;
(...), as Theophilact. God comes like the Romans Volumus jubemus ut Lucius
Valerius tam jure legeq, filius siet, I command and ordain that this man be
made my child, and admitted to the possession of the purchased inheritance: Oh
this is a state that may glad the heart, when a forlorn wretch in familiam Dei,
and liberorum locum transfertur, when a poor strangling soul is fetched out of
his Cottage into a Kings Palace, and this is by death.

13. Mors amplexus, vita desiderium; Death is an embracer, Life but a longing
desire; we want, we ask, and yet have not; we seek, and do not find; we stretch
out our arms, but the shadow flies away. The present world is but a Spectrum,
an apparition: it looks like a reality, but is not. We are in the body much
like Ammon: we have either seen or heard of Tamar, 2 Samuel 13. but she a Kings
daughter and a Virgin, there is but small hopes: so Ammon was grieved, vexed,
lean, pale, sick for his sister Tamar. We have a glimering light of heaven, but
it is above, and we see living waters, but the Well is deep, and we have
nothing to draw with, while in the body; and so we hunger, thirst, desire,
long, and cannot be satisfied. Now death will transport thither where we shall
fully embrace, and satisfactorily enjoy him whom our souls love; we shall lie
their Alter in alterius jactantes lumina vultus. each in one another arms;
there the Lord Christ will do as the Father to the Prodigal child, Luk 15. 20.
But when he was a great way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion, and
ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him.

14. Mors est ver and aestas, vita autumnus and hiems; Death the spring, Life
the fall; Death the harvest, Life the Tillage. We toil here, Redit labor actus
in orbem. the seed to be sown, the ground to be watered, the weeds to be plucked
out, the tares to be weeded away, if we intend to have an early crop, or a
fruitful increase: poor man, how many stormy days does he abide, how many
frosts and blasts is he exposed to in the time of his growth, sometimes
complaining of heat, presently of cold! now the Sun scorcheth, now the rain
drowns; Poor man! but when death comes, then is the soul gathered into the
barn, jewel'd up amongst Gods own precious Pearls in his Treasury: At death
either all things grow fresh, or they are ripe, fit to be gathered in.

15. Mors securitas, vita periculum; Death is safety, Life danger. I need not
reckon the perils and dangers that man in this life is exposed to.

Omnia sunt hominum tenui pendentia filo. A twind-thred breaks, and all is
lost: Man walks on the brinks: a sudden gust, a small stumble, or slip with his
foot, plunges him into the pit. The Trap laid, and tread where he will almost,
he must either tread on Thorns, or upon the snare. Oh how dangerous is a man
life! please man, and God is angry; study the world, and you forget God; O sad
state, when the procurement of bodily food endangers the life of the soul! Now
death is a Rock, a Refuge, a Harbor, where we may step without fear, work
without pain, walk without caution, tread without timerousness, pitch our tents
without surprisal.

16. Mors status Angelicus, vita humanus: Death an Angelical privilege, or
that which conforms us to the Angels, Life but to men: and what is man! Putris
esca vermium; such as worms dine on. What is a humane condition, a slender
vessel, -- Multum terris jactatus and alto. tossed between hope and despair,
between confidence and fear: Bur death is that which resembles us to the Angels
in light. Luke 20. 36. Neither can they dye any more, (...), but are equal to
the Angels, and are the Children of God, being the Children of the Resurrection.

17. Mors Nuptiae, vita divortium; Death is the day of the Espousals, life the
bill of divorce: As Christ assigns no other cause a sufficient ground for
this; so he intimated that this would be enough: so we need look to no other
cause of this divorce into the body, but an adulterous inclination, and a
lascivious desire of copulation with inferior and feminine faculties; and God
for a new relapse into this sin, even in the body, he devorces further from
himself: as for the first adultery he devorced out of heaven into the earth; so
for the second adultery, out of freedom into captivity. Jer. 3. 8. Back
sliding Israel committed Adultery, therefore I put her away; and gave her a
Bill of Divorce: It is not for every small fault that God will divorce his, not
as the Jews were wont to do; Si quanquam viderent formosiorem, if they had but
seen one more fair then their own wives, they would presently divorce their own
wife, and take another: but God does not so, except in case of Adultery. Now
death is the reuniting of the soul with God; it is that joyful day of wedlock;
it is the souls nuptial to her former husband.

18. Mors Lucrum, vita damnum. Death is gain, life is loss. I might insist in
many particulars; what we lose in life, that shall be found in death. What do
you think of those pleasures at the fathers right hand, Love and Joy in our
fathers presence for evermore! What do you think of a restoration to spiritual
bodies, as well as spiritual lives! Of an identifying sight of the Lord of
heaven and earth! What do you think of an unalterable, and an unestimable state
of glory! What do you think of those (...), 2 Cor. 12. The words that no man
can utter. What do you think of 1 John 3. 2. (...), that it was never yet
revealed: it is a Phainomenou unexplicable, what we shall be hereafter: your
gain will be sure, as the soul is both incapable of comprehending and
apprehending whilst in the flesh. There is one thing in heaven, that the
Apostle thought such gain, that he would with the Merchant sell all he had to
purchase; sure it is a precious pearl, such gain that he would lose all for, it
is a Christ. Phil. 3. 7. Nay, he is very clear, Phil. 1. 21. (...), Death is
gain.

19. Mors resurrectio, vita sepultura: Deaths the Resurrection, Life the Grave:
And if you do but consider how in this life we are bound up from a sprightly
exercise of our faculties, and how capacious our faculties will be after death,
you would say no less.

20. Lastly, Mors vita, vita mors; Death is life, and Life is death. It is not
unlike the seed sown in the ground, which without it dye, it cannot live. 1
Cor. 15. 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. That which thou sowest, is not quickened, except it
dye. Now these things considered, what remains but that we bespeak our souls to
a silence and an acquiescence in the wise dispensations of the Lord Jesus!
Speak to your souls as Musculus does to his soul after he had looked into the
Tomb, and saw what was there:

Linque domum miseram nunc in sua fata ruentem,
Quam tibi fida Dei dextera restituet.
Peccasti? scio; sed Christus credentibus in se;
Peccata expurgat sanguine cunea suo.
Horribilis mors est? fateor; sed proxima vita
Ad quam te Christi gratia certa vocat,
Praesto est; de Satana, peccato, and morte triumphans
Christus; ad hunc igitur laeta alacrisque migra.
O Leave this house verging to fatal night,
And sit at Gods right hand in Thrones of Light.
Have thou transgrest? full sore I know: yet hope,
Christ's blood can cleanse more then Niter or Soap.
Do fear to dye! why man, to dye is to live:
And it is a deathless life which Death will give;
And thy victorious Christ has quel'd the Alarms,
And thee secured from sins and Satan's charms;
Has made thy bed in peace; lie down and rest,
Drawing soul-consolations from his breast.
USE. 4.
Lastly, must Saints dye, then what manner of lives ought they to live, surely
they had need be circumspect that have so many enemies, and can be so easily
overcome, they had need be eautious that may so soon be slain. And here I shall
lay down a few Directions, which I hope may by the blessing of the Lord be
useful for you. I am sure such Directions are needful.

Direction 1.
LIve in the Consideration of the means of grace which God has afforded: Oh
how has God shone about you, and appeared in a pillar of fire by night, and a
cloud by day! as a light in darkness: as a shadow in heat. What occasions,
privileges, comforts, helps, talents, opportunities, Directions, motives,
arguments, convictions, entreaties, expostulations, have you had, (for I speak
to Professors, and those that live under the Ministry.) May not God say as he
said to the Vineyard, Isaiah 5. Planted on on a fruitful hill, fenced about,
the stones gathered out, planted with the chiefest Vines, a Tower built in the
midst of it, and after all this to bring forth wild Grapes, or be barren: then
let any one in the World judge if that was suitable? go to the remoter corners
of the World, and you shall find dark ways, few guides,, little day, many
storms, small Vessels, rocks and mountains, yet few helps: precipices, mists
and stumbling blocks, and yet vails before their faces, no Sun rising, no
Gospel preached, no Christ declared, no Heaven discovered, no lights set up,
and yet the Land dark: and what will become of the People where they want
visions? but God has not dealt so with you. Behold the prize set before you,
the way made plain, the Invitation gone out, the guide ready, the Father real,
the Table spread, meat provided, Guests bidden, the day appointed, the
Bridegroom adorned to meet his Spouse. Oh! what things are these? Oh! how
ought men to live, who consider this great Preparation? Oh! walk while ye have
the light, put not out your own understanding, stifle not conscience, charm not
the admonitions of your own hearts, blot not out the words of the Gospel, spit
not in the face of Christ, trample not on his blood: view over your privileges
and see what they call for at your hand. Oh! who can laugh when Christ weeps,
and a sinners denial draws tears from his tender eye. Oh! Jerusalem, will thou
still rebel, still proclaim war, when Christ is weeping over thee, that thou
would be at peace? Look up, Professor, and view what God has done for thee:
how the Sun is already risen, the Laborers at work, the night approaching, and
a storm at hand. Who will love the Cave when the Sun shines clearly? See Nehem.
9. 5. When he had considered the great deliverance from captivity; see the use
he made, which stopped the mouths of the wicked. Ought ye not to walk in the
fear of the Lord? and they held their peace and had nothing to answer herein.

DIRECTION III.
LIve, as in the sight of God, considering that he sees you, and will e're long
call you to an account. Remember who overlooks you, who views your works:
therefore be sure that it be well done. Oh! what a stop it puts to the child's
wickedness when he is bid beware, his father sees him. The Romans had a
Proverb much in use, and of great consequence, which they used to say when they
saw any one breaking the Law, Cave, spectat Cato. Take heed, Cato looks at you.
I may say the same of that Eternal Lawgiver. Cave, spectat Deus, beware God
sees you, he knows your corner sins, your private iniquity: his eye pierces to
the very heart, scrutator renum, the secrest Meanders of the whole humane frame
are visible to him. (...)? Great Jove has an eye in every corner, which must
necessarily be, if you grant his omnipotence, for he is (...), all light, all
eye. Consider you that think darkness can hide you from that face that is its
own representative. You delude your selves: is it wisdom to deal with God as
the Jews did with Christ. First cover his face and then buffet him, they
hoodwincked and then smote: what do you to get out of Gods sight, and then sin
securely? do you say, tush, God sees us not, and then transgress? will you
trespass when you think the owner is out of the way? poor souls, God is always
by you, within your curtains, your very bosoms: therefore if you will dye, live
after Seneca's direction, sic cogitandum, tanquam aliquis in pectus intimum
inspicere posset, so to think God is privy to thy secrest imagination: sic
loquendum cum Deo, tanquam homines audire: and sic vivendumcum hominibus,
tanquam Deus videret. So to approve thy heart to God as though men could
discover the reality of thy pretenses, and so to behave thy self in the world,
as though God was by and by to call thee to an account. Remember there is a
(...): a depth of wisdom and knowledge in God, that it is impossible for man
to wade through.

Consider that this God who knows all, wi^^ be he who judges all, there will a
day come when you and I must give an account for whatsoever we have done in the
flesh. Mercies received, duties neglected, providence not improved,
opportunities slighted, gospel seasons despised, grace contemned, heaven
unsought after, glory unprepared, the work of Salvation badly managed, and the
Judge, the Eternal God, coming to call the World to an account: Oh what manner
of persons then ought we to be in all godliness and holy conversations? when
we must come and render a reason of our profaneness, looseness, deadness,
worldly mindedness, abominable Idolatry and superstition, our cursed oaths, our
grand blasphemies, our breathings against the people of God; God will have an
account what we have done with our power, our riches, our parts, our pleasures,
etc.

This would mightily deaden our sinful plots, did we but consider they will all
be discovered, and we judged for them.

Direction 3.
LIve in consideration that you aim at no less then at the participation of
God: what Christ brings as an Argument for his little flock against fear, let
me use as a motive to circumpection, to diligence, because it is the Fathers
pleasure to give you a Kingdom. Christians, you are in a race, the Prize is
set before you, such as was never run for before: the mark is set, the stakes
are down your own precious souls, the adversary swift, to stumble in the way
very easy. Consider this, and surely you will let no golden apple stop you in
the way, or ^ivert you. Thus Leonidas a Lacedemonian Captain kept the Straits
of Thermopylae, with a few hundreds, against Xerxes his Army of 100000. and he
encouraged his Army with this consideration, that they should sup with him at
night in Hades, in the state of immortality: now for Christians to consider
that they shall Sup with Christ, and sit with him on his Throne, this is sure a
great encouragement? Who would not fight might they be sure to triumph? Who
would not obey might they be sure to reign? There is an improbability that they
should Reign who never were subject; can he the Scepter sway or rule, who never
yet learned to obey? will a Christian stick at any thing, when he has Heaven
in his aim? will he be stop in his way when when the prize is glorious, and so
soon lost? surely the glory of the World should be counted loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ, by whom the World is crucified to you.
Are not joy and pleasure evermore worth striving for? can we not leave a dinner
of herbs for a Banquet of Nectar, not our wooden chair for a golden Throne? not
our corruptible Tabernacle for one that is made without hands? not our earthly
Cottage for a heavenly Palace?

Could Achilles leave all his friends for Polyxena? Thysbe for Piramus? Dido
for Aeneas? and cannot we leave a sin for Christ? not a cup of Poison for a cup
of Cordial? then we bid low for Heaven, it is not to be sold at such a rate. To
consider with what ravishing expressions it is figured out to us, one would
think it should allure more. When I think of Diana, Thamar, Aristoclea,
Susanna, Bersheba, etc. what hearts they drew after them; it is strange that
Christ can draw no more: surely people see him not what ever they pretend: it
is heaven you aim at, lose it not for a little more, bid the other Farthing ere
you forgo a Kingdom. It is Seneca's consideration, and we may learn at him,
Dum mihi solemn, lunamque intueri liceat etc. When I (says he) can have leisure
to view the Sun and the stars, and to contemplate their motion, their
retrogradations, their risings, settings, distance, influence, correspondence
and brightness, dum cum his sins, and coelestibus admiscear, whilst I am
amongst these, and can steal a moment to get a glance of them: Dum animam in
sub: limi habeam, non refert quid calcem. While I can have my soul fixed there,
I value not what is under my feet. Thus should Christians do, who aim at
spiritual things, they should not matter what they tread on.

DIRECTION IIII.
LIve in the Consideration what other Professors have done: where, had I time,
I might set before you Abraham, Moses, Josuah, Joseph, Nehemiah, Job, David,
Zachariah, Daniel, Jeremiah, Paul, John, Peter, etc. With the rest of those who
have undergone fiery trialls, bonds, imprisonments, reproaches, contempts; view
those that have gone before us, and consider what active souls we have amongst
us, and then compare your selves with them, and so walk as you have them for an
example.

DIRECTION V.
LIve in the Consideration of those notorious and remarkable judgments that
have fallen on offenders, on those that have despised God. I need not reckon
them to you, you may remember that hideous cry of the Egyptians, when not a
house but thetein was one dead, and their firstborn too: and what a final
overthrow was there of that Host in the Red Sea. Remember Jerusalem, when
Vespasians Son, Titus came against them and put them to the sword,
whompestilence and Famine had not destroyed to his hand. I could relate such
Judicial proceedings on earth, that would even make a heart bleed: Oh! if you
would be terrified to obedience, consider the Lord stands at your backs with a
rod: but I suppose your knowledge in the Scripture, and your intelligence from
other Authors, does not leave you ignorant in this point.

DIRECTION VI.
LIve in the Consideration and remembrance of your Sonship: Live as children:
not that I would encourage all to believe themselves: but seeing all do look on
themselves as such. Give me leave then to put you upon the duty which belongs
to such. Christians, are you not strangers, but sons and daughters? then you
are under an engaging relation; you are then to live exactly, because you are
about your Fathers work. God when he considers this relation is moved to
tenderness. Oh! let this consideration move thee to obedience; see how God
argues for his peoples good, when he looks upon them as children. Exodus 5. 2.
22, 23. And thou shall say unto Pharaoh, Israel is my son, says the Lord, even
my first born: and I say unto thee, let my son go that he may serve me, and if
thou refuse to let him go, behold I will slay thy son, oven thy first born:
when once children, Oh then what great good has God in store!

Now if God make it an Argument of his tenderness because we are children, Oh!
let us make it an Argument of our duty: what Sons, children, and do such
things! who could expect and who can accept such things at our hands? we should
remember our relation, and that would win upon us, or at least put a stop to
our rebellion; when Satan tempts and thou art ready to consent yet say, but I
am a child, and this will not be taken well from me: God will accost us, as you
find it. Prove. 31. 1. etc. when he takes us trangressing. What my Son? and what
the Son of my womb? and what the Son of my vows: It is not for Kings sons O
Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink Wine, nor for Princes strong drink: but to
particularize how we should be wrought upon by the consideration that we are
sons and daughters;

1. Let it move us to love our Father, let it be an Argument of our love to God
our Father, which he makes an Argument of his to us, even the bare relation:
You may see it in Ephraim, she was guilty of great sins; yet when God remembers
that Ephraim is his dear child, then his bowels yern: see her sin, She was
Consederate with Sina against the House of David, Isai 7 2 took evil council
against Judah, to vex Judah, and make a breach therein, Isa. 7. 5. rent off
from Judah, Isa. 7. 17. comitting whoredom and defiling her self. Hosea. 5. 3.
comitting iniquity, discovering wickedness, committing falsehood, spoiling, as
a Thief or a Troop of Robbers. Hos. 7. 1. mixing her self with heathens, Hos.
7. 8. going up to Assyria to hire lovers. Hos 8. 9. departing when God taught
her to go, and held her by the arms. Hos. 11. 3. compassing God about with lies
and deceit. Hos. 11. 12. feeding on wind and increasing desolation. Hos. 12. 1.
boasting of her Independency, I am rich and have found me substance* there is
no iniquity in me nor sin. Hos. 12. 8, provoking God to anger most bitterly.
12. 14. now one would expect a signal judgment upon Ephraim, but consider,
God remembers it is his child, and how that moves him to compassion and
tenderness. Jerem. 31. 20. Is Ephraim my dear Son? is he a pleasant child, for
since I spoke against him I do earnestly remember him still. Therefore my
bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him says the Lord

Thus should we argue our selves into love, when we consider God to be our
father, our dear father, our merciful and heavenly Father.

2. Let the consideration of our sonship or filial relation draw us to obey
our Father, there is an equity in this particular. Ephesians, 6. 1. children obey
your parents (...)? for this is but right and equal: so as it is right and fit,
so it is commendable and acceptable. Col. 3. 20. Chibdren obey your Parents for
this is well pleasing to the Lord, it is God the Father, O! where is the
obedience? What more just Law under the Sun, then that those who derive their
being, should obey him from whom they derive it. Luther was wont to prize this
duty much, he would say maluit obedirequam miracula facere he had rather obey
then do wonders. Oh! beloved is it not unworthy in children to say to their
father they go and do not go? to say they do this and yet do it not? is it not
base in children to be like those slothful Soldiers Tacitus tells us of qui
imperatoris juss a malunt interpretari qvam exequi? not base to be quarrelling
which should stay the longest behind, when the Father bids go? And will not God
be as severe with stubborn and rebellious children, as he would permit natural
parents to be, see the Law, Deuteronomy. 21. 18, 19, 20, 21. if a man have a stubborn
and rebellious son, which will not obey the voice of his Father, or the voice
of his Mother; and that when they have chastned him, will not hearken unto
them, then shall he be apprehended and brought to the Elders, and his Father
and Mother shall say, this our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey
our voice, he is aglutton and a drunkard, and all the men of his City shall
stone him with stones that he dye, etc. Surely this Law is of force, in respect
of our heavenly Father.

3. Let the consideration of our sonship oblige us to honor our Father, prefer
our Fathers glory before our secular or private concerns, (...), that is,
honor brings it self up in the fast place, and performs all before it, To. 12.
So that this will necessarily follow upon this relation of sonship, namely,
that we wbo look upon our selves as children should honor him whom we call
Father, Malac. 1. 6. a son honors his Father, and a servant his Master: if
then I be a Father, where is my honor? if I be a Master, where is my fear,
says the Lord of hosts? now we honor our Father.

1. When we consult in our actions, before we do them, whether they be
according to his good will and pleasure; for this see Isaiah 30. 12. Ye be the
rebellious children, says the Lord, that take counsel but not of me, etc. That
go down into Egypt, but have not asked at my mouth. So Christ the first born
of God the Father before he would peremptorily conclude, see in what a sweet
resigning frame he was to his Father, Luke 22 41. 42. he kneeled down, and
prayed, saying, Father if thou be willing, remove this cup; nevertheless, not
my will but thy will, be done:

2. We honor our Father, when we show our selves displeased, if we see him
wronged: it is said of Atys son of Croesus King of Lydia, when the Father was
taken prisoner, and Cyrus his Soldiers were going to kill him he burst out and
cried parce parce, parce regi, though he never spoke before. But alas! it is
otherwise with some who yet will be children, though Atys never spoke but when
he saw his Father in danger, yet they are never silent but then; such as are
dumb only then when they see their Father abused cannot be said truly to honor
him.

3. We may then be said to honor our Father when we have appretiating thoughts
of him, when it cannot be objected to us as to Eli; we honor our sons, our
estates, our persons more then him. If he be uppermost in the seats of our
hearts then we look on him as most honorable, when we have none in heaven but
him, and there is none on earth we can desire in comparison of him; when we can
throw any thing out of our arms that he may have the place, then he is honored
as a Father should be honored.

4. Let the consideration of our Sonship draw us to imitation. This is a duty
flows naturally from this relation, be the imitators of God, Ephesians. 5. 1. (...),
as dear children, and as that speaks of the ^osse so I may say of the debere,
if he say the son cannot, I may say he oughe to do no thing of himself but what
he sees the Father do: for whatsoever things the Father does, the son does
likewise: children should not only do the works of the Father, but speak in the
language of their father, the work of their Father they ought to do, and the
words of their Father they ought to speak.

1. Children ought to imitate their father in holiness, 1 Pe. 1. 14. as obedient
children, not fashioning themselves according to their former lusts in
ignorance, but as ^e who has called you is holy, so be ye belly in all manner
of conversation. 1 Jo. 3. 2, 3 Now we are sons and immediately follows, every
man that has this hope in him purifieth himself as he is pure

2. Children should imitate their Father in love 1 Ioh. 3. 1. behold what
manner of love is this that we should be called the Sons of God, this the
Father has bestowed on us; Therefore ought we to love one another.

3. Children ought to imitate their Father in humility. Ioh. 13. 13, 14. they
call me Master and Lord and Father, and they say well, for so I am, if I then
your Lord and Master have washed your feet, you ought also to wash one another
feet: if I have given you an example, ye should do as I have done.

4. Children should imitate their Father in mercy and forgiveness, if he have
forgiven us, we ought to forgive one another. so Luke 6. 36. be ye therefore
merciful as the Heavenly Father is merciful.

5. Let the consideration of our relation as sons, incline us to take
corrrection without murmuring: this frame is a necessary consequent of such a
relation. Heb. 12. 7, 8, 9, 10. What Son is without chastning? if ye be without
chastning ye are bastards and not Sons. Furthermore, we have had fathers after
the flesh which corrected us and we gave them reverence, shall we not much
rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits and live: for they verily for
a few days chastened us after their pleasure, but he for our profit, that we
might be partakers of his holiness. The Father has a Sovereignty and is not
liable to be contradicted by the child: you would judge it strange, should the
child look upon you when you were correcting it for a fault, and should enquire
the reason, or say why do you so, who made you Lord over me: you have that by
right of your relation. So it is with God.

6. Let the consideration of our sonship prevent unnatural carriages in us to
our Father. Oh! it will be a sad rebuke for us, if when we expect to be owned,
God call us unnatural children, if we be children at all.

1. They are unnatural children that have no delight in their Fathers presence
or Fathers person, that love not, who have no complacency in him, those who
want this union and indearedness they may say they are children, but they are
but unnatural who love not their Fathers. To be (...) without natural
affection, is rather a Character of a Heathen then of a child. There should be
a reciprocal love between parent and child. Is there more delight in strangers
then in the beloved, more affections after the creature then after Christ: more
hankering after the servant then aftet a father: then we are unnatural
children. God will deal as Fathers, such a day thou had such a gift from me
and will not that win thee? So God, in the day says the Lord that I brought
thee out of Egypt, in the day when I delivered thee out of the wilderness, in
the day when I gave thee bread to eat and water to drink. God reckons the day
of his mercy as a father does, and therefore it will argue unnaturalness if he
should find the heart on other objects when he comes for our love.

2. They are unnatural, that will not relieve their father: thence the Apo. 1 Timothy 5. 4. calls it a showing piety at home, to require parents: therefore
children were not to defraud their father nor abridge him, though they
pretended that was consecrated to an holy use which should have nourished him.
Matthew. 15. 5. though it was Corban, a gift dedicated to the Temple, yet it
might be fetched back rather then the Father should not be relieved: thence the
Jews had this maxim, tenetur filius ad cibandum, potandum, and vestiendum
patrem, immo pro part mendicare: the son was under an obligation to feed and
cloth; nay, rather then he should want, he was bound to beg for his Father.
Now! alas how does our unnaturalness appear! have not we abridged God our
Father, when we could not say, it was Corban dedicated to the temples? when God
has waited at our door, have we not entertained others? When he has stood to
knock, has not another been in our arms, and in our embraces? when he would
have had an hours service, have not we pretended we have been busy; we had
Oxen to try, ground to till, etc. Oh, does not this speak us to be unnatural
children; we have not wearied God with the fat of our offerings; Christ has
been hungry, and we would let him starve at the door, he has been naked, and
we pitied him not, unnatural children. It is said, that Albertus Tudorus, a
Huxters son, received of Charles the ninth of France, in some, years 600000
crowns, besides all degrees of honor that he was capable of; and all the good
that the King had of him, was only this, that he learned of him to swear by
the name of God: A bad requital for such kindness; thus we deal with our Father.

3. They are unnatural who deride their Father, they who make a mock at the
ways of God, at purity, that jeare at holiness, and despise a strict
conversation, Deuteronomy. 27. 16. Cursed be he that sets light by his Father or
Mother, and all the people shall say, amen. There are many such unnatural
children who set light by their Fathers command, that contemn the gospel, that
deride and scoff at Heaven, there are two sorts of these.

1. Such as question their Fathers doings, and seem to control his wise
providence. Isa. 45. 9, 10 Woe unto him that seeks to destroy his Maker. Let
the potsheard strive with the potsheards of the earth. Shall the clay say unto
him that frames it, what make thou? Woe to him that says to his Father, what
begettest thou? or to his mother, what have thou brought forth?

2. Such as make a mock of the holy ways of God, Prove. 30. 17. The eye that
mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his mother, the Ravens of the
Vallyes shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it. Thus there are
many which the wise man calls fools, who make a mock at sin, fools they are
indeed, naturals, natural men, but unnatural children.

4. They are unnatural who smite their Father. Exodus 21. 15. He that smites
his Father or his mother shall surely be put to death: and is not every sin a
smiting of God, and a wounding of Christ? a crucifying him a fresh, and putting
him to open shame: sin is a conspitacy, and a stroke at the foundation of our
Fathers Kingdom, and God cannot but take it ill at his sons hands, at his
childrens hands, to be guilty of throwing their fathers honor in the dust.
Thus did Julius Caesar with his son Brutus; when he found him also among the
Conspirators, he comes to him, (...) what you my son? what was it that troubled
David but this, 2 Samuel 16. 11. Oh that son that came out of my bowels seeks my
life. Then how much more might this Benjamite do it? though God might put up
Rebellion against him, in his professed enemies that never promised other, yet
it cannot but be dreadful in a child.

5. They are unnatural children who curse their father, Lev. 20. 9, 10. For
every one that curses his father or his mother shall surely be put to death;
he has cursed his father or his mother his blood shall be upon him.

The word in the 1. Original signifies Jus*jurandum an Oath which I wish common
swearers would take notice on, and see whether they are not unnatural children
which curse their father.

1. it signifies Vilipendere, to dis-esteem or despise. Now I tremble to
consider how many unnatural children God has in the World who set at naught
the chief corner stone, nay many builders that count but that glorious name as
rubbish and dross.

Thus should we live, as looking on this relation, if we will be children, we
may soon see whether we behave our selves as children ought to do. Behold is
God your father? then do you find any thing in him why you should provoke him,
any thing why you should blaspheme or profane his name? can you find in your
hearts to grieve, to rebel against, to vex, to unbowell your father? then you
are not children. Oh the tenderness of a father, the patience, the love, the
long-sufferance! when one would have expected children should not have needed
bidding, but you have flatly denied him, and resisted him, is this to deal as
Sons? is there any other Argument under Heaven more winning then this: now
sons, but it does not appear what we shall be. O! what use might we make of
this Relation?

DIRECTION VII.
AS to our Brethren in the World, those with whom we have to live, the men that
we converse among two things only.

1. Walk in love, then may one be said to be in love, when love has the
command, when it is supreme: as a man may be said to be in drink, when that
has got the predominancy. Thus you should not only love, but be servants of
it, which is to have the same mind in us, that was in Christ Jesus: and though
this be a primer Lesson, one of the first rudiments, to love our neighbor as
our self; yet there is need that some hear it repeated over again, for they
have not learned it yet. Consider these things.

1. To love one another is the command of God, the new command of Christ, and
that it should be more cheerfully obeyed, he has set us an example, such a one
as was never set before, that one should dye for his enemies, 1 John 3. 23. and
this is the commandment, That we should believe on the name of his son Jesus
Christ, and love one another as he gave us command.

2. To love one another, is a sign that God loves us, for this produces a
similitude with God, which is a ground of love. 1 John 3. 16. Hereby perceive
we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us, and we ought to lay
down our lives for one another.

3. To love one another testifies the truth to be in us. 1 John 4. 20. If a man
say he loves God, and yet hates his brother, he is a Liar. He is not in Christ
who is the (...) the truth and the life, John 3. 19.

4. To love one another, is the great hinge of society the (...) that wherein
Christians have been taught from the beginning.

5. Love is a necessary consequence of Gods love to us, the end of that love
was to generate its likeness in man, as Christargues his mercy and perfection;
and humility and righteousness, etc. to do; all aim at producing their
likeness in the soul, thus love, 1 Jobn 4. 11. Beloved if God so loved us we
ought to love one another; there should be a conversion into the nature of God
by considering the love of God.

6. Love is of the nature of God, 1 John 4. 7, 8. 12, 13. 16. Let us love one
another, for love is of God, and every one that loves is born of God; and
knows God, he that loves not knows not God, for God is love; no man has
seen God at any time, if we love one another God dwells in us, and his love
is perfected in us. God is love and he that dwells in love, dwells in God
and God in him. And if we consider, love is of equal existence with the supreme
being, the first emanation of God, and the Original glimpse, the morning, or
first dawning of his person was not visible, or knowable under any notion
before this, to wit his love, for that broke forth in the first creation as
Anteeedan cons to his power: and how does the Apostle John run immediately to
the explanation of the grand mystery of the Trinity, from the precious
considering of the love, 1 John 5. 7. for if we rightly consider we shall find
that Demiurgical love, has the same propinquity and affinity to the divine
nature, and is as apparent at the first view; as Original goodness the sourse
of life, or (...) the all comprehensive wisdom has.

And lastly, To love one another testifies that we are past from death to life,
1 John 5. 4. Every one that loves him that begat, loves him that is begotten,
and he that does this is born of God, which is a passing from death to life; 1
John 3. 14. We know that we are passed from death to life because we love the
brethren, he that loves not his brother abides in death. And 1 John 1. 1.
unto the 4 verse, there are remarkable passages; we may gather these notes.

1. Though the fall or first sin brought man into the state of death, yet there
was life in the bosom of the Father, verse 1.

2. Those who were eyewitnesses of this life, were so graciously qualified
with the communicative nature, received from Christ, that they imparted the
knowledge of this life to us, that we should not discern our selves in the
state of death without hope of escaping, verse 2.

3. The Lords wisdom appeared so much in this communication, that the first
message that should be delivered, should be the first ground of credency,
namely that God is light and in him there is no darkness at all, verse 5. Who
cannot deceive nor be deceived.

4. To say we partake of the nature of God, and have a resemblance to his
image, and yet not be of this communicative spirit, not to love our brethren;
This is to lie, and that is deceit and darkness, contrary to God who is
light, and contrary to Christ who is truth: that must need be a lie and
darkness that opposes the first principle of credit to wit, that God is
light, verse 6.

5. The fellowship or communion with, or participation of this light, and truth
and life, is manifested by this; our love one to another, our communication one
to another. And this is a passing from death to life, from darkness to light,
for illumination enlivens and the more the soul partakes of the light or the
more it is conformed to the first principle of truth, the more it is a live: so
that to affirm signs of life where thcre is no love to the brethren; is all one
as to affirm expertness in the way when one is born blind and could never see.
Sin is death, grace life, which grace must be measured according to the Law,
which Law the Apostle epitomizeth (...) Gal. 5. 14. The Law is in a word Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self; and in this similitude the pattern of
righteousness, the image of God is placed, as well as in knowledge and
dominion. This is the conformity to the Law, which will speak one just, the
great Law is, says Christ, there is one God to be believed; and the Law like
unto this, is, That we must love our neighbors as our selves. Evangelical
righteousness consists in a participation of the nature of Christ, I mean in
fore humane, now was not this substantial love as conspicuous in his life as
his holiness or as his greatness or truth? so that that must needs witness it
self to be a branch of that tree of life which brings forth the same fruits.

The world may be fitly divided into two sorts Terrestrial or Celestial.

1. Terrestrial (...) sprung from the earth or cheaked up with the earth, who
sit yet in their Cave-door, and have no light sprung up among them, only
sensual light that will gratify the vegetations of the life of the body; and
these are not stamped with this love; nor partake of this life, but are these
the Apostle speaks of who are dead while they live.

2. Celestial or heavenly, who are translated into the limits of the (...) or
Royal Law. (Royal, that which Christ the King gave originally to all beings,
for enmity was a lapse) For every King, if he himself have a propensity to love
as Christ had, and see how sweet this will make all his commands to all people,
he will enjoin this in them first, for whatsoever prompts him to enjoin such
Laws as they will will ingly obey; it must be the same thing that makes them
willingly obey what he enjoins. And this is love which is the fulfilling of the
Law.)

These celestial are they who have the fast tie of the Law even within them,
not to sink into carnal flesh pleasings, but are vigorously set on motion, and
that motion facilitated, by the spiritual life; grounded on love. And in these
the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled who walk not after the flesh but
after the spirit: now the mark whether we be under the Royal Law, and so have
left the state of death (which is the obedience to the whispers of the earthly
part, and hankering to satisfy the contractive lump of the flesh that narrow
vessel, far from free emanativeness and communion that is in the voluntary
subjects of the Royal Law) this mark I say is love one to another, he that
loves not his brother abides in death. And this is (...) to simplifie our
selves and reduce our selves to the Original, an investing our selves of the
righteous son, verse 16. In love the Law is obeyed in will though there want
the explicit act, John was well rooted in this love and he found that it would
grow up into obedience, therefore he is at, keep his commandments so frequently
in this first Epistle: he was sensible of the pleasure of obedience where love
was the motive, none dived so deep into this bosom mystery as he did, surely
he was inflamed by Christ's love, and softened by that fire which made his heart
be in such a melting frame; sure he discerned how this love knit him, and
changed him into the similitude and converted him into the nature of the stock
whereinto he was ingrafted, as a mixture of juice does in plants, and this made
the Apostle honor it so much, and indeed there is a sweet resemblance with God
where the soul is swallowed up in this love, this characterizeth a Disciple,
and how can it be but there shall be some conversion into the fire when the
gold has laid long in it. The sparks of love from God, (for he loved us first)
they should take place and diffuse themselves and kindle all objects about
them, and so they will if the matter be not very gross and obdurate, thus it
should be with hearts. Thus if we live as we ought, or as those who expect to
dye, we should live in love as God does, who can no more hate that which is not
irregular, then he can be blind to love it as essentially in God, as power or
goodness, or being: so that we have found all along in the several
appearances of God, that goodness or love has been the Medium, the Rise, the
Spring, the Beam, the Chariott, the Vehicle of all comfortable Discoveries
that have been made ever since the World was. Now were this Principle tightly
settled in our hearts, we should ^^ willingly be one another Servants, as we
desire to be Masters. And those Laws would easily be obeyed, where the
Principle of obedience is the Rule of the Command: and could we look upon our
selves as Members one of another, we should seek our Brothers good equally
with our own.

2. As to our Brethren. Walk in the Spirit of Meekness, bear with one
another, be not bitter, except you be sure you do not err: for else you make
your selves Judges, and so not doers of the Law, but Popes, or worse if
possible: Live at peace with all men, set not your own Torches as the Sun to
others, whereby they must reckon day, and from which they must borrow their
light. There are many like Thendas that would be somebody, but they are not
willing to be so, except their Brethren be no body. They would stand but not
so only, but it must be by another fall: who fall from the Spirit of Christ,
will break the bruised Reed and quench the Smoking, nay the flaming Flax; that
cannot do a good Work, but come see my zeal, and in this their Brother must
be overlooked: You have all one Father, all one Heaven, all going to the same
place, fall not out by the way; you differ in judgment, but you are all
Christians; therefore be not one another enemies, durst any of you swear or
take it upon your salvation that yours is the way which God will be worshipped
in, or do you think you are so certain that you are in the right, that you are
beyond the capacity of being in an error. If not, then how know you but your
brother may be in the truth, and will you let him be to you as an enemy,
because he tells you the truth, or are you willing your brethren should do so
to you had they power? The Apostle bids every man be persuaded in his own mind,
however it is fowl play amongst brethren in fighting, to strike when your
brother is down. Joseph did not disown his brethren though they had sold him,
Genesis 45. but come near I pray you I am Joseph your brother whom you sold into
Egypt, if your brethren have dealt so with you, requite you good for evil, and
that will heap coals of fire, soonest kindle his affections in love to you;
what if they be more despicable, yet they are your relations? What if they have
not on the same apparel or the same trimming, yet hold they not the same
natures, and as straight bodies? are they not sons because their coats are of
another color? must all the children be disinherited, because they are not all
made directly after the proportions of the Eldest, or strongest? should the
heir disown all those that are his brethren, because they are either of
greater or lesser stature then himself, he would be judged to vary from his
father, that would not do it: though they have not a right to the inheritance,
yet they have to their Legacy, of as infallible a conveyance as is his, and of
as firm a tenure: who ought to be beaten because they cannot see, except it be
those who have put out their eyes? should not the weak in faith be received,
and yet not to doubtless disputations: What if your Brothers Palate relish
flesh, and yours Fish, and another Herbs; who dare make his own tooth the
standard for another diet? Peter was for Circumcision, Paul against it; but
they neither of them endeavored to imprison their Adversary. If Paul would
abstain from any one one kind of food to satisfy his brother, why may not I
abstain from one kind of Raiment? is not food more then Raiment? if he would
abstain from the eating of flesh, then he would not scruple abstaining from
such a certain joint. 1 Thessalon. 4. 9. I wish it might be said of Christians
in England, as Paul speaks to the Thessalonians: that as concerning brotherly
love, they need not be written to. Take Peter's directions, where there is heart
purity, though there may not be a perfect conformity, yet Love, yet bear with
one another. 1 Peter 1. 22. seeing that ye have purifyed your souls in obeying
the truth through the spirit, See, that ye love one another with a pure heart
fervently. Or 1 Pet. 3. 8. Finally, be all of one mind; but if the Objection
should be put in that all are not, then see what follows; having compassion
one of another, Love one another as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous, not
rendering evil for evil, nor railing for railing, but blessing, knowing that
thereunto ye are called. Fathers and brethren, do we not all bear the same
Image? though we may not be of the same stature, nor wear the same apparel,
yet we are a kin in Christ: And why should your garment be an example or a
binding rule to me, more then mine? have we not all the same Father? Right to
the same Inheritance, Title to the same Crown? are we not all Heirs of the same
purchase? one can claim nothing by birthright more then another, and shall
any man go about to defraud his Brother in what there is the same right to,
with himself. Can any man take away the Liberty from me, of determining in mine
own mind, more then of thinking? Consider the Relation; you are Brethren, and
wrong is in-consistent with Brotherhood, though not as to the being, yet as to
the Lawfulness. Thus when Moses found two of the Hebrews striving, See how he
applies himself to them. Acts 7. 26. And the next day he showed himself to
them as they strove, and would have set them at one again, Saying, Sirs, Ye
are Brethren, why do ye wrong one another. Thus did Judah also concerning
Joseph, when his brethren were going to banish him, shall I say, nay to kill
him, see how he bespeaks their Compassion. Genesis 35. 26, 27. And Judah said to
his Brothren, What profit is it that we slay our Brother, and conceal his
blood? Come let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and let not our hand be upon
him; For he is our Brother and our Flesh. And this was Abraham's motive for
peace with Lot. Genesis 13. 8. And Abraham said unto Lot, Let there be no strife
I pray thee between me and thee, between my Heards-men and thy Heards-men, for
we are Brethren. Oh! What a Consideration would this be for peace, and for
bearing with one another: You are Brethren, do noe wrong; let not your hands
be upon your Brethren, let there be noe strife among Brethren. This will be
an encouragement to the Enemy (...). When Brother and Brother go to War the
Stranger will encourage himself. cum pectus amici cum fell, and Lingua veneno
suffusa est, when those that lay in the same Womb, live in deadly hatred, Oh!
how great a curse may this bring? and behold this is the ready way to
Desolation, when Brother is set against Brother, Neighbor against Neighbor.

Isaiah 19. 1, 2, 3: The Heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it. And you
may see the way how GOD will bring this to pass. Verse 2. I will set the
Egyptians against the Egyptians, and they shall fight every one against his
brother, and every one against his neighbor, City against City, and Kingdom
against Kingdom, and the Spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof,

Let us therefore as many as are Brethren in the Lord approve our selves such.
May not one say of ^s, to consider the strict command of our Savior, and our
dissonant practice, that if his command be Evangelice, nos male sumus
Evangelici: if those be Christ's enemies who disobey, then we are not his
friends. Tempestate contentionis serenitas charitatis ^^^^bilatur, we blind the
truth and darken it by our despite one to another, we consume our grace by the
heat of our contention. Brethren, for so give me leave to style all that fear
the Lord and would walk in the spirit of Love: Will it not be sad to the
public interest of souls, poor captives, when the Ambassadors of peace, in
semet ipsos versi mutuis cadunt vulneribus, when they destroy one another in
the way? in the mean time, do not poor souls continue in captivity, and in
their enmity? That is a well managed power where those in subjection can kindly
greet one another. When Philip King of Macedon had contentious servants, as on
a time he was relating to Damarathus his design of attempting the Government of
all Greece Amarathus reproved him, telling him he was very unfit for such a
command, who had not settled peace in his own Family. So we may conclude they
are unfit to govern their Brethren who are not at peace with them, unfit to be
Ambassadors to reconcile God and man, who themselves are not at peace with
their brethren. Ioint-Embassadours, Ministers I mean, ought not to differ about
their private instructions if they can agree about their public. God never
revealed any private Command. but he would have that man follow it to whom it
is revealed: yet it is not obligatory to him that stands by, and has it not
revealed to him. God had a particular message for Moses into Egypt, whereto he
was bound: yet this was not obligatory to all the rest of the Tribe: if we
pretend our errand to sinners, to be the same, to reconcile them to the same
God, to lead them to the same Heaven, Shall any one endeavor to stop all
because they will go in another way? God forbid. Or shall they stand in contest
which way the Lamb shall be carried home until the wolf come and make a prey of
it? God forbid. I have read a passage concerning Aristides and Themistocles,
which does very much s(...) with the posture of the Christian Ambassadors in
England, they being sent by their Emperor, both to one City about some weighty
Affairs, to negotiate a business of concernment: as they were on their Journey,
through some small occasion, they fell out in their way and grew to words, so
they were both almost discouraged from prosecuting their design: which when
Aristides saw, at last recollecting himself, bespake Themistocles after this
manner, Sir, You and I are now in a strange Land, among those who could make
this their desire that our business should miscarry: we must return also to
our own Place, and give an account of our negotiation, and the matter in hand,
as it is weighty, so is it difficult, and one of us is not like to perform it
well, and I judge that we have not leisure now to dispute: Let us first
dispatch our business for which we are come for, our employment allotted us
by our Country: it will be soon enough to renew the quarrel, when our work
is done and we returned home. Thus Ministers, surely brethren, we who are
joint-Embassadours, ought to do our work to reconcile Sinners, to plead our
Saviors cause, to promote our LORDS glory, to strengthen our Christ's Kingdom,
to make sure of Heaven, and then if we have any time after we come thither
then renew the quarrel, then be bitter and severe one to another.

DIRECTION VIII.
LIve in the serious meditation of all those glorious things which Christ has
done, in order to Salvation, to reconcile us, and to make our peace with an
offended Father. Ponder what he has done for Redemption of souls, for the
delivery of Captives, and those in extreme and ineluctabili miseria positi, who
were under the sentence of death, and in the Jaws of Despair, and in the
heaviest thraldom; What he has done for the cleanseing and washing of those
unclean souls that were in their blood.

1. Consider the Descent of his soul to the Earth. 2. Consider the
Entertainment he had, Put to Death. 3. Consider his Return again to the Father
into glory.
1. The descent of the soul of Christ unto the earth. He left Heaven to
purchase sinners, and to save what was lost. Doubtless; his soul was in honor
with the Father, it was (...), more Noble then the rest, as the Apostle says
of Stars (...), so (...): as one Star differs from another, so one soul
from another in glory: and such was the soul of Christ, composed of love, so
that when Sacrifices rendered no sweet Savor, and when Offerings were not
acceptable then Christ comes to do the Fathers will. In the Volume of thy Book
it is written, I delight to do thy Will Oh my God, When Sacrifices thou would
not, thee Christ offered his body which was prepared of the Father: and
therefore it was that he was made like to us, sin only excepted, He therefore
appeared in humane shape that he might have familiarity with men. Thus his
blessed Soul descended into a Corporeal shape, and became clothed with flesh,
and that for man, for our good. Ephesians 4. 9, 10. Now that he ascended, what
is it, but that he descended first into the lower parts of the Earth; he that
descended, is the same also thar ascended up far above all the Heavens, that
He might fill all things, which cannot be meant of his Divine nature, for
that neither can descend, nor ascend, as in local motion, being it fills all
things; Therefore it must be his soul. Now reflect here and consider this
descent.

1. The Terminus a quo, the place from which He descended, it was Heaven, the
Fathers presence, the society of Angels and glorious souls, a place where
their pleasures are eternal, their words unspeakable, their joy unalterable,
their natures undefatigable, and yet Christ descended to save us.

2. The terminus ad quem, the place to which Christ came, the Earth, into a
humane shape, to travel about like a stranger from God, amongst carnal and
sinful men, in the range of evil Angels, and where they exercise their
Dominion; a common; dangerous, filthy, obscure, nartow place: consider the
Kings Son, the Prince of peace, the Heir apparent, to become a prisoner, a
slave, a Bonds-man, a Vassal. Oh! what a change was this, from Heaven to
earth, from Honor to disgrace, from a spiritual to an earthly state, from
glory and the Throne to the footstool, from liberty to bondage, from a
Heavenly host to feed among swine.

2. Consider his entertainment on Earth: read but over the Gospel, and I may be
silent here, hunger, thirst, peril, nakedness, reviling, scorning, buffets,
reproaches, abuses, shameful usage, hard-hearted Creatures judged him such a
one as themselves, a Male-factor, nay they conspire to take away his life, and
thus Stephen plainly expressed, Acts 7. 51, 52. A stiff-necked generation and
uncircumcised in hearts and ears did always resist the Holy ghost, as their
Fathers had done, so did they: which of the Prophets did not they persecute?
and they have slain them which showed and told the coming of the just one, of
whom also they were the betrayers and murderers. This Entertainment also Peter
rels us of, Act 2. 22, 23. Jesus of Nazareth a man approved of God among you,
by miracles, wonders and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye
your selves also knew: he being delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain, this was the entertainment that he had in the World, meaner then you
would allow your Servant, you could wish your enemy no worse. Yet Christ
under-went this, he waded through it undauntedly; he would not shrink though
the Spear was in his side; though the thorns were on his Head, the nails in his
Hands and Feet; and though he had Gall and Wormwood to be his drink, He was not
only ready to do, but to suffer the Fathers Will: not only ready to go but to
dye at Jerusalem, and when he put up that Petition, Father, save me from this
hour, yet he presently corrects himself: Yet for this hour came I into this
World. Oh! how was he bruised and broken for our sins? and how did he groan
under the burden when he was here below?

3. Consider his Return again unto the Father, where he sits at the Fathers
right Hand in glory. Where 2. things may particularly be understood by us.

1. What this fitting at the right hand is? 2. What advantage we have hereby,
or how he is employed for us, now that he is at his Fathers right hand.
1. What we are to understand as employed in this Session at the Fathers right
hand.

1. This Session at the Fathers Right Hand, imports to us Christ's being made
partner with God the Father in the Everlasting Kingdom. Therefore we find the
Apostle attributing the Receipts of grace to the son as well as the Father. Ph.
1. 2 grace be unto you, peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus
Christ. so Gal. 1. 1. Paul an Apostle not of man nor by man, but by Jesus
Christ and God the Father. so Col. 1. ^hanks are to be given to the Lord Jesus
Christ, and God the Father.

2. To sit at the Fathers Right hand, is to be beloved of the father, deep in
the Fathers affections, and this was confirmed by that infallible Oracle (...)
that voice from Heaven, Mat. 3. This is my beloved Son i^ whom I am well
pleased. He is the man of Gods right hand; Thus David expressing the different
degree of Gods affections to his people, Kings daughters are among the
Honorable women, and at thy right hand d^^ stand the Queen in gold of Op^ir.
The Queen nearest in love was to be at the Kings right hand of whom he always
had a remembrance, and to whom a more intimate love. Nemo obliviscitur dextrae.
Therefore a man may as soon forget his right hand. Thus it was a Testimony of
Solomon's love to Bathsheba. 1 King. 2. 19 Bathsheba therefore went into King
Solomon to speak unto him for Ad^nijah, and the King rose up to meet her and
sat down on his Throne, and caused a seat to be set for the Kings mother, and
she sat on his right hand: and that this was a posture wherein he expressed his
affection, you may see in the 20. Verse. because he bids her ask what she would,
he would not say her nay. Thus in patris gre^^io requievit.

3. To be at the Fathers right hand, imports to be in a posture of helping.
Thus David Psalm 16. 8. I have set the Lord always before me, because he was at
my right hand I shall never be moved, therefore my heart is glad, and my glory
rejoices, and my flesh shall rest ^^ hope. So when he was in his straits and
his Spirit overwhelmed, then he looks at the right hand for help. Psalm. 14^. 4.
I looked on my right hand, and behold there was no man that would know me,
refuge failed me, no man cared for my soul, yet if he expect help ^e looks at
the right hand.

4. It is to be in a state of great joy and pleasure, Thou will show me the
path of life, in thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are
pleasures for evermore. Immortales deliciae, gaudium immortale.

5. It imports his being established upon his Throne, it imports his security:
thus we find two great Pillars 2 Chronicles. 3. 17. One on the right hand and the
other on the left, that on the left hand was called Boaz strength, that on the
right hand Jachin establishment.

6. Christ being at the right hand of the Father, imports his fidelity. Thence,
this was the hand whereby men swore, implying that they would be faithful to
their Oath. Thus it is said of Christ's fidelity. Heb. 2. 17. He is not only a
merciful but a faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people. Therefore we find the Cermans when
they would testyfie to a dying man, that they will be faithful to their trust
imposed on them whether it be in managing their Estates which they leave, or in
providing for children, or the like: they give him this testimony, Dextram
morientis attingentes juravere, they take hold on the dying man's Right hand and
swear to him, which Oath he is not to doubt of: thus it is with Christ at the
Right Hand of the Father.

7. To be at the right hand of the father imports a readiness for employment,
in this sense we find it used, 1 Chr. 39. Asaph the son of Berachiah the Son of
Levi stood on his Fathers Right hand ready to serve at the Altar: so the right
hand is more apt for exercise, readier to be used, in this respect, Christ is
at the right hand of the Father, ready in his ministration:

8. To be at the right hand of the Father, imports the partaking of the same
glory which he had with the Father from the beginning. Christus Patri coaevus
Patri coeternus. Thus Damascen understands it, gloria Christi ad patris
dextram, est status Christi primitivus: the glory at the Fathers right hand is
the participation of his former dignity. Thence is it that Christ prays, Joh:
17. 5. And now O Father glorify me with thy own self, with the same glory
which I had with thee before the World was.

9. It imports the consummation of his Princely Office, he who was to be the
sacrifice himself for the world and having done that, is now with the Father,
it speaks his acceptance, that he is approved of; had his work been unperfect
he had not been taken up:

Heb. 1. 3. Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express Image of
his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by
himself purged our sin, sat down at the right hand of God, the Majesty on high.

10 It imports, that he is invested with great power; as it is the more active;
so it is the more strong. Thus it is spoken of the most remarkable
deliverances, they are deliverances of the Right hand, the Lords right hand,
his stretched-out armhath brought things to pass. So 2 Samuel 16. 6. They were
mighty men that were at David's right hand, ready, and not so only, but able
to Aid and assist.

11. To be at the Fathers right hand, imports a having all power committed to
him, the Dominion over all things in heaven and in earth.

1. The power of judicature. Joh. 5. 22. For the Father judges no man, but
has committed all judgment to the Son:

2. The power of Governing. Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22. Set him at his own right
hand, in the Heavenly places far above all principality and power, might and
dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this World, but also in
that which is to come, and has put all things under his feet, and gave him to
be the head over all things to the Church. Thus 1 Pet 3 22 Who is gone to
Heaven, and is on the right hand of the Father, Angels, and Authorities and
powers being made Subjects to him.

3 The Power of Conquest, In this sense we find it. Psalm. 110. 1. Sit thou on
my right hand till I make thy Enemies thy footstool. So Exodus 15. 6. Thy Right
hand O Lord is become glorious in power, thy right hand O Lord has dashed in
pieces thy Enemy.

12. To be at the Fathers right hand, imports to be blessed with increase, thus
Jacob laid his right hand on Ephraim, and his left hand on Manasses, Joseph's
sons; and Ephraim multiplied, but Manasses decreased; thus the flock of Christ
increases, since he went to the Fathers right hand, Genesis 18.

3. To be at the right hand implies, to be in great honor, in high esteem,
exceedingly dignified, and reckoned much of, thus the Jews used in their
accounting to let the fingers of the left hand stand for unites, thence called
digits; but the fingers of the right hand stood for thousands, sua dextera
computat annos, he reckons his years by his right hand, is spoke of one of a
great age, thence, Prove. 3. 16. length of days are in Wisdoms right Hand, and
in her left hand riches and honor. Nay, nor only honorable, but it imports
the highest top of honor he could be raised to. Therefore the Jews called
Merid^es, Dextra, expressed the noon day by the right hand; thus Christ in the
Zenith of glory, the Pinnacle of honor and dignity.

14. It imports to be in a very prosperous state, therefore David calls such a
time the time of Gods right hand. Psalm. 77. 10. Ha^^ God forgot to be gracious.
Nay, (^o argue this was his infirmity.) But, I will remember youres of the
right hand of the most High. The time wherein David had experienced much grace,
many bowels of compassion, wonderful appearances of his God.

15. It imports that Christ is on the throne to judge righteous judgment. Thus
David, Psalm. 48. Let Mount Sien rejoice, let the Daughters of Judah be glad
because of thy judgments, and the reason is, ver. 10, according to thy Name O
God so is thy praise unto the ends of the Earth. Thy Right hand is full of
righteousness.

2. What advantage we have by his sitting there, or how he is employed for us
at the fathers right hand; four things especially.

1 He tills or fulfills all things; all promises, they are fulfilled by Christ.
Ephesians. 4. 10. He that descended is the same that ascended, that he might fulfill
all things; promises are therefore in Christ Yea and Amen: they are verifyed,
he does not only fulfill but fill, hence the abundant grace of Christ given to
Paul, to Joh. to Cephas, to Stephen, He went to Heaven to open the Treasury of
the Father, and to give out gifts, Ephesians. 4. 11. When he ascended up on high,
he led Captivity captive and gave gifts unto m^n, Some Apostles, some Prophets,
some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. For the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ.
Christ is a Joseph exalted to the Throne, and distributing of the fullness of
the Land, grace for grace, so that empty souls, pauperes ubique ^acti, the
poor, fainting* hungry, thirsting soul may have a Recourse to the overflowing
fountain: the poor may enrich themselves by his treasures: therefore in our
application of our selves to the Throne, we are to go to the Father through
Christ, who is placed at the Fathers right hand: with Bathsheba ask what we will
we shall not be denied, so those good things Secondarily are derived to us:
this Christ expresses clearly, Job. 14 12, 13, 14 He that believes on me the
works that I do shall he do: also and greater works then these shall he do,
because I go to my father; and whatsoever ye shall ask in my name that will I
do that the Father might be gloryfied in the Son, if ye shall ask any thing in
my name I will do it. From him proceeds every good and perfect gift, life,
light, pardon, peace, health, Heaven; etc.

2. He sends his spirit: this was the (...) the other Comforter. Joh. 14. 16.
that he promised to send, but it could not be given before he was at the
Fathers right hand. Joh 7. the holy ghost was not yet given because Jesus
Christ was not yet gloryfied: And that this is the Comforter spoken of that
should show them all things, see John 14. 26. but the Comforter which is the
(...) the holy Ghost, which the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you
all things, and bring all things to your remembrance. Oh! what a posture was
Christ's poor disciples in, who had left all for him, who had forsaken Father
and mother, who had left their callings, renounced the World, abandoned the
pleasures of life, to go with Christ? They had stayed with him in his
temptations, tasted of his entertainment, lodged and fared as hardly in the
world as he had done, and should he have left them in a world where they were
hated of all men reproached, maliciously used, contemned, despised, this would
have been enough to have broke their hearts, or at least to have put a stop to
their profession; but Christ therefore knowing what need there would be of
inward support to them (and there is the same to all other Christians treading
in their steps) in his absence, he knew they could not walk but stumble when
the light was gone, therefore he sent a special guide; he knew that the
children of the Bridechamber would mourn when the Bridegroom was gone away,
therefore he provides for every one of his, a bosom comforter; he sends the
spirit to witness to the truth of what he taught when he was in the world, and
to convince the World of sin, of Righteousness, of judgment to come: the
presence of which spirit assisted as much the holy Apostles in their work, as
mightily as the presence of Christ had done before, and this is as equally
satisfactory to a child of God, and as sufficient a Demonstration of the truth,
as though Christ himself was here in person. It is an invisible manifestation
(I mean to the World) but to the children of God it brings apparent and
uninterruptible consolation.

3. He being at the right hand of the Father, intercedes for his people, this
was the work of the High Priest in the holy of holies (which typifyed Christ's
glory at his Fathers right hand) ut interpellaret, ut assisteret pro populo.
Levit. 16. he shall go into the holy places to make an atonement before the
Lord, and though perhaps Christ needs not supplicate, yet he presents himself
which is equivalent to a supplication, and his very appearance is acceptable
and prevalent. Heb. 9. 24, 25 For Christ is not entered into the Holy places
made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but into Heaven it self,
(...) that now he might appear before the face of God for us; and this cannot
but be full of inward consolation, to consider that he who was so mighty with
the father, is at his right hand, sincerely embraced, shall not be denied
whatsoever he ask, that such a beloved Savior should be employed or presenting
himself in our behalf to the Father, this is love, here is joy. Such a friend
in the Court of Heaven, always in the Kings presence, the man of his right
hand, is no low mercy, no contemptible privilege. There needs no more to the
answering of our prayers, then this, namely if they come through our
intercessors hands; no more to the granting our Petitions, then, that they be
presented by our Mediator: when God sees a sigh, a groan, a prayer or tear,
signed in his Sons Name, He will have a gracious aspect: when he sees our
supplications sanctified by his Sons blood they are then prevalent. It is
reported of Chretildis Queen of the Franks, by Gregorius Turonicus that she was
very cruelly used by Amal^icus her husband, but she not daring to send a letter
to her Brother King Childebert for fear she should be discovered by her
husband, she sent a linen cloth dipped in blood, as though she had said, Oh!
Brother Childebert you may here see how inhumanely I am used, Oh! let this move
thy bowels of compassion toward me, to come and assist me for my deliverance.

Thus if Christ do but present himself before the throne, Oh! how loud a voice
will his very blood speak withal: if he write but his own name in blood to the
saints names in tears, God can interpret the voice and such an intercession
shall not go without acceptance.

4. Christ at the right hand of the Father Ratifies and confirms the Covenant;
his presence there is sufficient confirmation of that great promise, the seed
of the woman shall break the Serpents head. His presence in Heaven, convinces
of righteousness, as he sends his spirit for this work, so his personal
appearance, is an ample testimony of the state of immortality brought to light.
The Covenant of grace which God has established on a sure foundation, and on
better promises, is now no more to be doubted of, now it cannot be called into
question, for Christ is gone to the right hand of the Father to set to his seal
that God is true, and God has accepted of him, in testification to the world
that he has wrought righteousness. The engagement on both parts is now
ratified. Thus coeunt in faedera dextrae, and deus and Christus. The Romans
used to acknowledge that Covenants made by giving the right hand were
inviolable, and esteemed the strongest engagements that could be made; thus it
is between the Father and Christ, the Covenant unquestionable, the bond
indissolvible; in such Obligations they thought there to be more then a civil
tie, dextris quaedam religio^n^st, Pliny. There is a certain sort of religion
in the right hand, and thus we use for farrher confirmation to join hands even
till this day. Di^^ though the conttact to be firm when Aeneas had given her
his hand, so Phyllis, when she desires T^mop^oon to come again, she expects no
other confirmation and ratification of his promise th^n his, to join hands with
her; Jura, fides quo nunc, commiss^que dextera dextra? Thus the Israelites
Covenanted with the Assirians to serve them only for food, and the Ceremony
used betwixt them was only this, they gave their hand to the Egyptians and to
the Assirians Lament. 5, 6. so they who are treacherous deceitful
truce breakers, they are specified only by this, they have a lie in their
right hand. Herodotus tells us of a custom among the Arabians which will give
us some light here, it is this, Arabes (says he) servant fidem inter homines
ut qui maxim, etc. They look upon themselves as under a strict Obligation,
when they have made this Covenant. They prick the ball of their hands, and so
join hands, and this they call arcanum faederis, the secret of the Covenant;
and the Covenant they call faedus inviolabile, quasi mutuo cruor^ sancitum, an
inviolable Covenant laid in blood, and the Mediator betwixt them, takes a
piece of their garments, and dips in the blood, and gives either of them to
keep. Thus Christ has done sufficient to convince us of the inviolablenesse of
the covenant of grace (That whosoever comes to the Father in his name he will in
no wise cast off) by this arcanum faederis, by this secret of the covenant
ascending by blood unto the Fathers right hand, Heb. 10, 10. by the which Will,
ye are sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for
all. And every Priest stands daily ministering, and offering often the same
sacrifices, which can never take away sins, but this man after he had offered
one sacrifice for sins for ever; sat down on the right hand of God, from
thence expecting, that his enemies be made his footstool; for by one offering
he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified: and that this was not done
without blood you may see, Heb. 9. 22. and almost all things are by the Law
purged with blood, and without shedding of blood there is no remission. So
Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for
him he shall appear the second time unto salvation. Directions from hence; if
Christ have done such things,

1. We should deal tenderly with the people of God, for surely they are
precious for whom Christ would do such things. Oh! take heed, they are chosen
vessels; and vessels of honor: hurt them not, the blood of the Saints in the
Revelations was such as did intoxicate, The whore which drunk most liberally
thereof was made drunk, drunk with the blood of the saints, is a character of
Antichrist and none else. Oh! take heed of wronging the meanest child, the
Father will not take it well if the child complain, Exodus 22, 23. If you
afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear them
cry, and my wrath shall run hot, and I will kill you with the sword, and your
wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless.

If Israel be a Son, then Pharaoh upon pain of death must not keep him as a
slave, Exodus 4. 22, 23. it is a heavy thing to have the cries and prayers of
those who are dear to God, to be before the throne against them. When Paul
prayed, the prison door flew open, so I have read in Eusebius of a servant of
the Emperor Theodosius, that was thrown into prison, because he would not
renounce his christianity, and the saints met together to pray for him, after
which Eutichianus and Auxanon went to the prison, and the doors flew open on
their own accord, to the astonishment of their adversaries, and fear fell upon
the Emperor so that he presently commanded that he should be released: it will
be a sad alledgement and crime at the day of accounts, when Christ shall tell
sinners he had but a few whom he had chosen out of the world, a few whom he had
set his love upon, and yet they are the men only that sinners have a design to
destroy: But a few that are in his likeness and these must be objects of the
worlds contempt and malice. A few that kept their garment clean, and they only
must be spit upon; there are not any under the Sun dearer to the Father then
those that are holy, Romans 1. 7. called ^o be Saints, then they are beloved of
God; they are (...) a considerable, a precious a substantial, a peculiar
people, Titus 2 14. and see David sets a note of admiration before them, Psalm.
105. 6. O ye seed of Abraham his servants, the Children of Jacob his chosen.
Oh! quanti pretii est fidelis apud deum, impii vero pro abject^ssimis mancip^is
habeantur. What an esteem does God put upon the godly? how valuable are they to
him who thought no his own son to dear to be a ransom for them; Clemens
Alexand^. thinks them to be the rarest jewels in the creation. The quintessence
of the world that is, and the heirs of that which is to come; (...) the most
holy soul is precious in the superlative degree. So when we find the Scripture
comparing the saints to any thing, it is to the best of that kind, if to a
flower, then it is the Lilly the fairest, if to a Cedar the tallest, if to an
Olive the fruitfullest, if to any living creature they are the most harmless,
as doves; or most profitable as lambs; if to grains, it is the wheat the
purest. Thus we find David making a solemn acknowledgement of the saints
excellencies, and pre-eminence, considering what God had done for them, 1 Chronicles. 17. 20, 21. O Lord there is none like thee, neither is there any God
besides thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears, and what one
nation in the earth is like thy people Israel, whom God went to redeem to be
his own people, to make them a name of greatness, and terribleness, by driving
out nations from before thy people. Oh! Christians I beseech you consider
saints are precious to God, therefore to be dealt gently with all, and I do
grant that there are some that say they are of the house of God, but are not
they in saying so liars? yet this does no^ null their reality who are. Because
some paint the outside, and are rottenness within, should this encourage any
to neglect both outside and inside too, both reality and profession, both heart
and conversation? or is i^ wisdom to abstain from all meats because some is but
only for a show. Well may such starve, who will pity them: some say they are
Christians but are not, yet this will not encourage any to be public Heathens.
Because some confess kindness to God and deceive him (though God is not
mocked they deceive themselves the rather) should that encourage any to
profess open rebellion; because they would not be reputed hypocrites, they
will profess an open enmity. (...) professed fair but he miscarried, he
betrayed Christ, would this have patronized the rest of the Apostles to have
left him ever after and have conspired his death. Oh! is it not sad that this
should be a hinderance to many men's becoming professors because many that are
professors do but cheat; suppose there be many Wolves natures in lambs skins,
must therefore the Dog be let into the fold, and though the pretense may be for
the destruction of Wolves, yet take heed that a lamb suffer not, the mistake is
easy: what man breathing could put it up to have his Sons condemned and his
servants exalted? I would not have the blood of a saint upon my account at the
terrible day of the Lord, no, might I for my whole life time be the idol of the
world, and would the inhabitants thereof fall down and worship me.

2. Has Christ done such great things, then wait his coming and entertain him,
put not so good a friend from thy door, you may see the Lord appeared to
Abraham by his Angels, Genesis 17. 1. 2. And how cheerfully does Abraham entertain
them, verse. 6, 7. And Abraham hasted into the tent unto Sarah, and said, make
ready three measures of meal quickly, knead it and make cakes upon the hearth.
And Abraham ran unto the heard, and fetched a calf tender and good, and gave it
unto a young man and he hasted to dress it. This preparation was for an Angel,
Oh! then how should we prepare for Christ, The Samaritan women seemed but to be
hard hearted to deny Christ water out of the Well, because it was deep, when he
would have given her water of life out of the inexhaustible fountain, if she
would have asked him, though Christ found it hard to purchase. If you would
know whether Christ ever yet came to you, consider his second coming foretold,
Luke 21. The appearance of Christ to grace, will be like his coming to glory.
There is a resemblance between his first and second appearance: would you know
whether you be such as are under the Scepter of Christ, as have had
entertainment for him in your souls, try by these discoveries, all which will
be seen at, or before his second coming, Luke 21. 28. And when these things
begin to come to pass, lift ur your heads for your redemption draws nigh.

1. There will be (...) great earth quakes and shakings, tremblings of heart by
reason of sin, Oh! how will a guilty soul quake for fear, when the sense of his
eniquity is charged home upon him, verse 11.

2. There will be (...), wars and rumors of wars. Thus in the heart there will
be commotions, seditious conspiracies, it will be frequent to hear alarums and
desperate charges that sin will make against the soul, neighbor against
neighbor, nay, a heart aginst it self:

3. There will be (...) verse. 25. The Sun and the Moon darkened, no light appear
to a lost soul, no comfort but darkness on every side, the condition forlorn,
the stare full of horror.

3. There will be (...) want of light, want of Direction, perplexity of mind,
the waves roaring, the Sea raging, the corruption in the conscience boiling
like the rage of the Sea in a storm. verse. 25.

5. There will be (...) disspiriting of the soul for fear, and in expectation
of the severe wrath of God, such doubts and jealousies that a poor Creature
knows not to whom to betake it self: for the very powers of Heaven shall be
shaken, the very Foundation of all comfort in the soul will be dissettled, and
dug up even to the lowest stone, Verse. 26.

6. There will be (...) great signs from Heaven, and fearful signs. Oh! the
hideous noise that sin will make, and the frightfull apparitions in the soul,
Oh how ghostly will corruption look? and in what deformed image, and ugly
representation does i^ co^^ in? ^^^s. 11

7. There will be (...) a delivering ^^ to (...)nd into Syn^gogues, and bringing
before Rulers and Kings; there the Conscience shall attach and at rest the
guilty soul, and rack it and carry it into prison a bondage to the Law; a great
thraldom and slavery, verse. 12.

8. There will be such a dominion given to the supreme power of the soul, that
it shall not only imprison, and enslave and bring into bondage, but (...) but
shall betray and condemn, nay your conscience your bosom friend, your
acquaintance that has been privy to your sin this will deceive you, verse 16.

9 There will be (...) famines and pestilences, nothing but infection at home,
nothing but hunger thirst nakedness, wound, bruises, sores, leprosies a soul
dying for btead of life, thirsting for a drop of the fountain. Oh what a case
is it in, look to Heaven God is displeased, look to Hell the wicked are
tormented; look to friends they are under the same condemnation, look to your
own heart, that condemns and says the soul that sins must dye verse. 11.

10. After all this has sufficiently humbled and cast down the soul; and made
ir very inquisitive, what it should do to be saved, (...) then shall a poor
fainting disconsolate child, look up and see the Son of man coming in the
clouds with power and much glory, verse 27. Now wait and expect Christ coming
especially when you see any of these, then look up, Chtist would have a seat in
your soul, he is descending from his throne to dwell with you to abide at your
house.

3. Has Christ done such things in order to salvation of sinners, Oh! then let
us esteem him precious; he is the chief cornerstone, (...) elect and precious,
1 Pet. 2. 6. and the more pretions for his loves sake; has he suffered for us?
Oh! then how he lovedus? has he been faithful to us Oh! then let us be
faithful to him; Oh! let us perform our baptismal vows, which we so early
engaged in Does he interceed for our souls? then let us stand up for his glory,
Oh! he is a treacherous disingenious soul who can stand still and see Christ's
cause perish seeing he could not do so when our souls was at the stake, know it
that all Christ is precious, and to be found opposing the least Law, to be
found cutting up the smallest branch of the Fathers planting this will be high
treason crimen laesae Majestatis, a crime against the Majesty of his Person
Think not meanly not lowly of the most humble truth, contemn not the very
crumbs of his table, the dust that falls from his feet. Evagrius reports a very
observable passage to this purpose in his fourth book, and 36. Chap. it fell
out immediately after Epiphanius mas dead, and in the time that Me^^ was Bishop
of Constantinople; it seems it the was custom of that Church, when any of the
bread used at the Lords Supper did remain after the Communicants were
departed, they gave the Relics to children, such as frequented Christian
schools, and were training up in the knowledge of the Gospel, it happened once
that amongst these Children there was one whose Father was a Glasier and an
Hebrew, he staying among the rest, unknown to his Father, was longer from home
then his Father expected he should be, who when he returned home, his father
enquiring the cause of his long tarying. Quod cum alijs pueris commed^sset,
significavit, the child told him he had been eating in such a place with such
children, which when his Father heard, ira and furore commotus, growing ragious
and wrathful, he heat his furnace in which he was wont to melt his glass, and
when it was hot he thrust his child into it and shut it up. His Mother missing
the Child a day or two dreading his death, went up and down the City Deum
obiestans, and ejulans, weeping and howling for her Son: on the third day, she
was at the VVork-house-door, she was still calling her Son by his name,
thinking possibly he might be a sleep: he within the furnace, knowing his
mothers voice, made answer to her, who no sooner heard her child answer, but
burst open the doors and r^n in unto him, and took him out of the Furnace,
where she see him stand in the middle of the fire untouched. Qui interroga^us,
quomodo illaesus permansisset, Who being asked, how he was kept without
burning, he told her that a Woman in a purple colored garment, came frequently
to him, and brought him water, with which he quenched the f^re that came near
to him, cibumque mihi dodit (says he) qvot^es esurivi. And she gave him meat
as often as he was an hungry* and when this was told to Justinian, He preserved
the Mother and the Child, but caused the father to be put to death as a
Parricide, with the same death that the Son should have dyed, had he been
guilty of the murder of his Father.

DIRECTION. IX
ABove all things, be sure to keep a constant watch over your ways, stand upon
your watch Tower, take heed of falling into a slumber, take heed of shutting
your eyes or falling asleep. Oh! security will betray you into your enemies
hand. Labor against blindness and mopish ignorance. What, dead or asleep when
such transactions are on the stage, when thy soul is at the stake: jam tua res
agitur, paries cum proximus ardet, now comes thy cause to be tried, bestir your
selves, your neighbors house is on fire and you drowsy in your beds, Oh this
is blame worthy! Continue not in a carnal state, Behold the Lamb of God taking
away the sins of the World. Rise out of your stupidity. Gross hearts, do you
neither feel nor see the wonders of the Gospel, the glory of Heaven, the
immortal light? and will you let these by unobserved? open your eyes, you have
sin to mourn for, a hard heart to soften, a rebellious nature to conquer, a
Satan to shun a hell to avoid, a Heaven to obtain. Oh! then beware of loosing
your souls in a sleep. Secure your selves (for to such only I intend to speak
to in this Direction) What will you you lie in the Den of ungodliness, when
such glory is passing by. What? will not the Lance pierce to the quick, nor
will the Canons of thunder and lightning terrify you? will not the sword of
the Lords mouth (...), nor the sword of his wrath terrify you? are you in such
a state that one may as well speak to the deaf, and set open gospel treasures
to the blind, as to you? is it not sad when one must speak as the Appostle
does, 1 Cor. 3. 1. not to them as spiritual but as carnal; it is sad for one*
(...). When you have the light of a rational soul and the light of the gospel
of Christ and yet mind not heavenly things; be not quadrigemina porta quicunque
voluerit intret and quicunque voluerit exeat, and non intelligetis quocunque
aguntur, as the common Exchange, let enter in who will and go out who will,
all is one to thee Oh careless sinner, Oh secure professor beware least you be
surprised? consider these things to keep you awake on your watch out of sleep.

The condition which you are in is a state of very great danger to your souls,
heresies and divisions, and is not the Kingdom then in danger to fall, being
divided against it self, winds of doctrine and high tempests on the sea, and is
not sailing then dangerous to the ship of the Church. J^zebel which calls her
self a Prophetess, teaching and seducing the servants of Christ to commit
fornication, and to ea^ things offered to idols, ^ Rev. 2. 20. The Harpyes of
Italy, Anglicana ad lit ^a ventae, come unto English ground; who have virgineos
vultus, a modest countenance, but there is faedissima ventris proluvies, a
nasty train following them. And as Virgil speaks of those Birds so may I speak
of some errors crept in to this land, Thalamos, caenacula, mensas, compita,
tompla, vias, agros, mare, flumina, montes; incest are solent, Oh dangerous
world the best thing turned to the worst use, the most precious truths of the
Gospel perverted, the person of Christ, the spirit of the gospel, the
righteousness by faith, pure love, close walking, the precious blood of the
Covenant all set light. Lo here is Christ and lo there is Christ surely the
body must needs be sick when it is thus rent, and thus the heart of religion
and the soul of devotion torn in pieces, and is not this dangerous Critical
superstition the garb of the times, where (...) a timorous worshipping of
every thing we fear, a reverencing what is not reverent, an inscribing that
were holy to the Lord which is profane. Oh to see that made divine which is
humane, and that clean which is unclean, when men like the Indians must wash in
the river Ganges, or their sins cannot be expiated, when they must with the
Egyptians worship, and offer sacrifice to the River Nilus or they shall fear a
dearth. Oh! will of petty Gods, and demi Gods rob the Lord of go glory; to see
people bless themselves at the crowno of a Cock the croaking of a Raven, the
barkingith a Dog. To see men and women more observant o the Bird in the air,
then they are of Christ on th Throne, is not this dangerous? Ephraim making
altars to sin, hiring lovers, and resolutely bent after them, sin on the Throne
and God at the Bar, iniquity uppermost in the heart and Christ on the
footstool, when men are in grati gratiae acceptae, nauseate the taste of the
world to come, throw of that jugum suavo that sweet and easy yoke of the
Gospel, where men despise the consolations of the holy ghost is not this
dangerous? when men after, they had got the sight of the ravishing presence of
Christ, and have laid in his bosom many a long hour and have known what it
is to see Christ in the spirit, for such to grow cold and stint themselves
below that which they have attained, when men deal with the holy Son of God,
as though they had seen unkindnesse in him, and cast of the purity of the
Gospel, as though it were but a phantasme, a spectrum, an apparition. when
those who have run well are now hindered from obeying the truth, this is
dangerous? when men make an exchange of earth for Heaven, when those which
have been Vines in Canaan laden with clusters of Grapes, are become degenerate
Plants; those that have been Palms always flourishing and green are now
withered and bare; when men could anchor their souls on Christ, are now
trusting themselves to the mercy of a wave; when men who have sit in the light
and brightness of the Sun, now creep into the shade, and those who have been
fed with Mannah from Heaven, are willing to return to the Onyons and Garlic of
Egypt. Oh! it is a dangerous state. Is it not dangerous for poor souls, where
iniquity is let loose, where profaneness is not scrupled at all. Should we
see a body infected with the plague, pining in a Con^umption, burning in a
Fever, puffed up with a Dropsy, overspread with a Leprosy, trembling with the
Palsy, stupyfied with the Vertigo, we should say such a man's condition is sad
and deplorable; even so it i^ with many souls, head-diseases, ignorance, pride,
error; of the heart, as rebellion, hardness, stonynesse, palate unsavory,
eyes darkened, ears stopped, lips poisoned, tongue set on fire, members
rebelling against the Law of the mind. Oh! how dangerous a state is such a soul
in? is it not dangerous to be mortally diseased, and thus are sinners. Oh then
consider if you had not need to keep awaken, if you had not need to look to
your selves.

1. In Diseases, the body is under a distemper and pain, so in sin, Oh to see
memoria testis, ratio judex, timor carnifex, a man his own witness, Condemner,
and Executioner: this makes this State dangerous.

2. Diseases weaken and indispose, so sin, arms out of joint, knees feeble,
face pale, heart beating (...) a languishing trembling Paralytique soul, (...).
Romans 5. 6. A great weakness as well as a great wickedness in every profane
person.

3. In Diseases there is decay and consumption, so in sinners, not any power
left to resist an enemy, grace in the Autumn, sin in the spring, the
flourishing leaves of our very nature in this State drop off, decays in
knowledge, decays in love, decays in faith, consumptions as to spiritual
breathing. Oh then how dangerous to be in such a state.

4. In deseases the Palate is vitiated and out of order, thus with the sick
sinner, no liveliness in Christ, no relish in spiritual food, undigested raw
meats savor best, and that has the sweetest taste in a profane man's mouth
that has the least nourishment. Alas there is no further longing desire, nor
hungring nor thirsting after the bread of life, and waters of the wels of
salvation, every drop of the sincere milk of the word goes against the
stomach, and makes the sinner loath it, Oh then is not such a one in danger?

5. In diseases, there is usually a deformity, so in sin. All former beauty
withered, he who was lovely, and had some sparks of grace and grains of
beauty, is now a loathsome spectacle, ugly and mishappen: inflatus est tamens
animus ferreum cor, tumidum caput, curvae in terras aniusas, crooked souls,
hard hearts, swelled heads, pale looks, ghastly wan Visages.

6. In the disease of sin, there is that which is not Ordinarily in any other
disease except a Delivium. A dislike of the Physician, a resisting, a
gainsaying, an opposing, a contradicting the wholesome prescriptions of the
soul saving Physician.

Should you see any one sick of the Physician, you would soon conclude, his
wound incurable, his case to be desperate. But, Oh sin! refuses a Physician of
a thousand, who need but say the word, and dry bones shall live, and the dead
shall be raised. A Physician that comes willingly without inviting, that prings
his Balsome him: that will not be discouraged with the Patients hard usage,
that asks no reward for the cure be it never so remarkable: that prescribes a
sweet potion. And will pawn his life in the sick man's place, and yet he
refused. Oh, therefore whatr need of keeping your eyes open, your souls on you,
Watchtower. But to proceed; to see holiness counted more then needs, a strict
conversation blameable a pure life contemned. O is not the time dangerous When
as Antoninus tells us (...) to do every work as though it should be our last
work (...) and to live every day as though we should live no more, and may put
the evil day far from them. Oh sure the time is dangerous to see in
building, that Religion is not laid as the Foundation, nor Christ as the chief
Cornerstone, when personal projects are the square of our works, and the
measure of our heights. to see Datbau for the wedge of Gold, Caesar for his
Tribute, Ggliah for his honor, Paul for the Law, Belshazzar for his Vessels of
the Sanctuary, to see Wood, Hay, Stubble, Silver, Gold, Riches, Precious
stones, to be the building and the foundation too, this is dangerous. To see
the children of God cannot be eased, for all their groans, the Lamb is become a
prey, the Wolf broke into the Fold, and the Shepherd smitten and sheep
scattered, is it not dangerous? To see the shell valued more then the kernel,
the Cabinet more then the jewel, men Tithe Mint and Annisse, and Cummin, and
yet the weightier things of the Law neglected; to see men strain at a Gnat, and
a Swallow, a Camel, adore the gold, but set at naught by the Altar that
sanctifyeth the Gold, Reverence the House of Prayer, but dishonor the God of
prayer like the Jews who would not go into the Temple with a staff because it
was a house of peace; but they would carty in their Oxen and sheep and make
market of it. No man might enter in without his shoes, but they heeded not
being shod with the preparation of the Gospel, not with money in their purse,
but they might with the thoughts of it in their hearts, their faces must be to
the East, but they heeded not that their backs were turned upon God and Heaven.
They were not under pain of Excommunication to spit in the Temple, but they
could spit in the face of Christ, who was greater then the Temple, they were
wholly set on the shadow, but she substance they minded not, and was not this
dangerous? to see, men minding all Garments but the Garment of righteousness,
more curious about a neat and white robe then about a white soul; more cate of
a Canonical coat, then of a Canonical life; more scrupulous in the form then in
the power, (mistake me not, innocent garments may be made Pleas to hide fowl
hearts; Harmless postures may become evil when sin lurks under them) now to see
these things, like the abomination of desolation, standing where they ought not
(I mean uppermost in the heart where Christ should be) then may we say the time
is a dangerous time; and if so, I hope every sober soul will stand on his
watch, will open his eyes. Oh! be no^ ^ sleep in the day of such danger? this
advice the ship-master gives to drowsy Jonas when they were in a s^^r^, and
the ship ready to sink, see what a posture (...), in this their fear, into
which (...) us (for that is it which I (...) the mariners were afraid (...)
unto his God, and cast forth the (...) the ship, in the Sea, to lighten it,
(...) gone down unto the sides of the ship (...) he lay and was fast a sleep.
And the ship-master came unto him, and said unto him, what meanest thou O
sleeper? arise call upon thy God if so be that God will think upon u^ that we
perish not. Thus sinner, secure soul, thou had not need be a sleep when thy
sins expose thee. When Satan is so busy, when thy soul would betray, when
dangers of miscarrying are round about the, when sin and Satan assault, the
soul had need watch and be a wake.

2. We should keep our selves out of a secure frame because therein we shall be
naked, unprovided and weak much unable to resist danger, sleepy souls are in a
naked posture, and sin that durst not have appeared against us when in our
watch, dare now stand hard by us; the fly dare creep upon the sleeping Lion,
and the Lamb dare come near him when his senses are bound: Satan rests not day
nor night, id est he sleeps not, and shall Christians? Jael durst encounter
with Sisera then when he was asleep. She could go softly and smite the nail in
his temples and fasten him unto the ground, for he was asleep, Judge. 4. 21. Oh
how unprovided will you be, should your enemy beat up your quarters, neither
provision, nor ammunition prepared whilst the providore sleeps. Now consider,
shall the seed of the woman lie dorming in the rent, when the enemy, the seed
of the Serpent is in battle array ready to give a charge, see how it was with
Saul how he was exposed when asleep, 1 Samuel 26. 7. 12. David and Abishai came
to Savl by night and he lay sleeping in the trench, and his spear stuck in the
ground at his bolster. And David took the spear, and the Cruse of water, and
gate them away for no man knew it, for they were all asleep. Oh what danger is
the weak unarmed soul, unprovided soul in when asleep? thus the virgins in
slumber were unprovided, Math. 25. 6. And at mid night there came a cry, behold
the bridegroom comes go then out to meet him, but they were unprovided of Oil
in their Lamps verse. 8. And the foolish said unto the wise, give us of your
Oil for our Lamps are gone out; (none will be so blind but they will see their
want at the great day though they have been so foolish as not to provide before
hand) and the reason why it came to pass that they wanted Oil, was verse the 5.
while the bridegroom tarried they slept, and as they are unprovided who are
asleep, so they are impatent.

1. There is an impotency in their apprehension, Matthew. 19. 11. (...) all men
especially natural and sleepy men cannot apprehend the divine mysteries of the
Gospel.

2. There is an Impotency in fruit-bearing, though they be watered, Joh. 15. 4.
(...), etc. The Branch cannot bear Fruit of it self, except it abide in the
Vine, no more can a Christian, except he abide in Christ.

3. An Impotency in the embracing what does appear to be lovely. Jo. 14. 17.
(...), They are not in a capacity of embracing the glorious Spirit.

4. An impotency of receiving their necessary Food, (...), 1 Cor. 10. 20. Ye
cannot drink the Cup of the Lerd.

5. An Impotency of enjoying that which they lay claim to, and presume to have
a Title in. 1 Cor. 15. 50. (...), They cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.

6. An Impotency in practice, (...) Romans 8. 8. They that are in the Flesh
cannot please God,

7. There is an impotency in their Spiritual walk (...) where I am says
Christ, thither you cannot come. John. 7. 36.

8. There is an impotency in the Spiritual optics (...), Except a man be born
again he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Ioh. 3. 3.

9. There is an impotency of obeying the very Dictates of a sober
understanding, if, in a carnal state, much more in a sleepy dead state (...).
Galat. 5. 17. The flesh lusts against he spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh, so that you cannot do the things you would.

11. There is an impotency in the perseverance, (...) Mark. 3. He cannot stand
but to an end,, and an untimely one too. Thus you may see what an unprovided,
naked, and weak State it is for one to be in, to be asleep, and

3. To be asleep is a state of darkness, ignorance, and misconstruction. Oh
Christian consider, the Day Star up on high, the clouds vanished, the skies
clear, the mist exhailed, the morning star risen, and men in their sleep miss
its shining. It is night, that is the time to sleep in. Thus the Apostle
exhorts. 1 These., 5. 6, 7. Ye are the children of ^he light and the children
of the day, we are not of the night ner of darkness, therefore let us not sleep
as do others, but let us watch and be sober, for they that sleep, sleep in the
night, and they that be drunk are drunk in the night, nothing but horror,
dimness and darkness when we are asleep. Thence is it that men are so ignorant
of soul affairs, they cannot be awakened they will slumber on theit life;
thence is it that men see not the glorious joys that are in Heaven, the
refreshing showers of pleasure that flow at the Fathers right hand, and the
drops of consolation that feed the heart. Thence is it that we see not Christ
standing at the door, till his hair be filled with dew and his locks with the
drops of the night; we are asleep and so blind and ignorant, of what belongs to
our peace: nay this is the reason why God may stand by us many times and we not
rise, be asleep, Genesis 28. 16. The Lord surely was in this place and Jacob knew
it not, and the reason is because Jacob was not awaked out of his sleep.
Therefore are we so alienated from divine contemplation, because of our
blindness and ignorance, Ephesians. 4. 18. having their understanding darkened,
being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in rhem.
Wonderful privileges, strange providence, remarkable provisions nothing
regarded; when a poor soul is asleep, glimpses of Christ's, footsteps of the
Father, the voice of God in the clouds, in the heart, in providence not at all
regarded, when we are asleep. And it is not only a time or a condition when we
see nothing; but a state where we judge falsely, we misconstrue all
appearances, and our fancy rules us, we judge all things to be well with us,
that we were inceased with goods, and stood in need of nothing, but alas! men
asleep only dream of happiness that is not so. Thus Solomon, 1 King. 3. thought
he had a long discourse with God, where great things were promised, large
privileges, joyful tidings but he awakened and behold it was a dream Oh will
it not be thus with men who are asleep; they thought they saw Heaven open, and
the Angels ascending and descending, they thought they had made a fair progress
toward the new Jerusalem, they thought they saw themselves clothed in white
and following the Lamb, they thought they saw themselves among those ten
thousand worshippers who had washed their garments in Christ's blood and were
become whiter then snow. But alas! they are asleep, and when they awake it
proves but a dream, and as they judge falsely and misconstrue their own
condition, so do they misconstrue the condition of the children of God, they
thought true Christians to be a despicable and an unworthy generation, as Eli
judged of Hannah, 1 Samuel 1, 13, 14. because she prayed in her heart and made no
such cry as many in those days made he thought Hannah had been drunken, thus
these men that are asleep they think every Christian a fool and every sincere
convert an idiot, they think the Scripture to be in jest that Christ does but
to terrify them. That Gods holiest children are but a many giddy headed
childish people, but alas! they dream but they are asleep, and so they cannot
pass a true judgment of things: like those Isaiah. 29. 8. their apprehension
of their own happiness is even as a dream in a night vision; as a hungry man
when he dreameth and behold he eats but he awakeenth, and his soul is empty;
or as when a thirsty man dreameth and behold he drinks, but he awakeneth and
behold he is faint, and his soul has appetite; therefore awake O sleeper,
because you do but fancy things in this state of yours, nothing is real.

4. We should keep out of a secure drowsy sleepy posture, because else we
shall be looked only as dead men? plurima mortis imago, there is a resemblance
to death in sleep and a similitude of the grave in the bed; ut mortis somnus,
sic lectus imago sepulchri. Therefore the spirit of Christ, Rev. 3. 1, 2. as
soon as ever it had told the Church of Sardis that it had but a name to live
but was dead, the immediate remedy which follows in the 2 verse is (...), be
watchful therefore as though to be dead was only to be asleep, and
watchfulness or awakening was as the resurrection, here are two things that
resemble sleep to death.

1. In both all senses and motion is ceased, ears to hear and the dead man
hears not; no more does the man asleep? eyes to see and neither he that is dead
nor he that is asleep sees. Head to understand but they understand not; as in a
dead carcass no breath, no life, no sense, no motion, pale faces, cold hands,
stiff hearts, altogether stupid, senseless; so in those that are asleep and
secure shake them they feel not, cry alovd in their eats they know not what you
say, chatm never so sweetly they stop their ears. Thus Epaminondas did with his
servant whom he sound asleep in the face of his enemy; he run him through and
said mortuum inveni, and mortuum reliqui. I left him as I found him, (...), the
mystery of death is opened in them that are asleep.

2. As there is a privation of motion or sense in those that are asleep, so
there is no desire of changring the condition. The dead desire not to rise,
no-the sleepy in that state desire to be awakened, go and stir one out of his
slumber and he will scarce thank you? Oh he would not be molested he was in a
sweet sleep, in a pleasant dream and was secure, and thought no harm (nor no
good neither) he took his rest with much content, he was in a rare dream and Oh
what pleasant sights did he see and why did you molest him? Thus it is with
secure sleepy sinners, they are well as they are; they would not be troubled
with too frequent thoughts of Heaven, they can do well enough without such a
stir, and they have a mind to be at quiet like the evil spirits, Mark 1, 2 4.
crying out, let us alone what have we to do with thee thou Jesus of Nazareth,
art thou come to destroy us and torment us before our time? Oh! therefore take
heed of such a state, because it is so like death.

5. To be asleep frustrates the expectation of Christ, lays us open to
temprations; and impoverisheth the soul. What a Christian, a professor and
regardless of thy everlasting state? then Christ is deceived in thee, and how
sad will that be? you have taken his name on you in baptism; there as you say
entered into the number of visible worshippers, and have not you pretended
great friendship? did you not then say you would forsake the Devil, and all his
works, the pomps and vanities of the world, the lusts of the flesh, and all
inordinate desires and what do you fall short? Oh! then how is Christ's
expectations frustrated by you? you have it is likely with Peter told God you
have been ready not only to go for his cause, but to dye for his cause and what
are you now fallen asleep? Oh! then you frustrate the expectation of Christ
thus it was with Peter, He would never deny Christ, though he should dye with
him, and though all should forsake him; but Peter forgot that and fell asleep
and we find that Christ, accosts him, particularly though all the rest was in
the same sloth, Mark 14. 37. though he found them all sleeping yet he speaks
only to Peter (...). he says unto Peter, Simon do thou sleep? could not
thou watch with me one hour? so to be in this drowsy frame will lay us open,
and expose us to all temptations. The souls time of sleep is Satan's hour of
temptation, this was the way whereby Dalilah overcame Samson in knowing the
Riddle, Judge. 14. 26. she wept before him, and said then do not love me, but
hate me, thou p^^test forth a Riddle unto the children of my people, and have
not told it me. But you may see this was the very engine she used to conquer
him namely by casting him asleep, Judge. 16. 15. how can thou say I love thee,
when thy heart is not with me, thou have mocked one these three times. But when
he had told her, see the wile she used to overcome, verse 19. she made him
sleep upon her knee, and so she cut off his locks and when he awoke the Lord
was departed from him; Thus poor souls Satan casts into a sleep and then he can
lead captive at his pleasure; and as this state of sleep and slumber exposes
us to temptations, to Dalilah and the Philistines; so it inpoverishes the soul.
The soul neither feeds, nor thrives in a slumber, when drowsiness and heaviness
possess the brain, projects of living are laid aside thus, Provb. 6. 9, 10, 11.
How long will you sleep O sluggard? when will you arise out of sleep? yet a
little folding of thy hands to sleep. So shall thy poverty come as one that
travelleth, and thy want as an armed men.

6. To be asleep when Christ calls, may ptovoke him to stop his ears at our
cries, you believe I suppose, that the day of the Lord is at hand, that he
slumbers not, that he will one day call all to account for their sins, that the
trump shall sound and the dead rise; and the heirs shall be translated to
glory, and will not all then desire entertainment? will not all formalists,
secure hypocrites, profane, all cry Lord, Lord open unto us, but Oh! how sad
it will be if he shall say he hears you not, if he tell you he desires to be at
rest, disturb him not as you have desired many time. Oh! will not this be
dreadful? when the execution is out, and the avenger of blood at the door, and
you came for refuge and knocked at the gates, and the door be locked and within
all asleep? this would be terrible. Should it come to pass that you should be
brought into the strait of the Sons of Cerah, Psalm. 44. 23, 24, 25, 26. Our
soul bowed down, our belly cleaving to the earth, the Lords face hidden and we
forgotten; in our afflictions would you not cry O Lord arise for our help and
redeem us for thy mercies sake? would you not cry awake O Lord why sleep
thou, arise cast us not off for ever. And if God should suffer you call and
make no answer, to cry and not to deliver you, to groan and yet he take no
notice. And what if the Lord should be provoked to cast you into a dead sleep,
and stupifie you because you have eyes and will not see, this was the judgment
on Jerusalem; Isaiah 29. 10, 11, 12. for the Lord has poured out upon you the
spirit of dead sleep, and has closed your eyes, your Prophets and your Rulers
and your Seers he has covered; and the vision of all is become unto you as the
words of a book sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned; saying read
this I pray thee and he says I cannot, for it is sealed, and the book is
delivered to him that is not learned saying read this, and he says I am not
learned. This is a judgememt suitable for such a sin as this drowsy secure
frame: or as it is, Jeremiah 51. 57. and I will make her drunk, her Princes and
her wise men, her Captains, and her Rulers, and her mighty men; and they shall
sleep a perpetual sleep and not wake says the King whose name is the Lord of
hosts.

7. Consider that this life time is your harvest, and the night approaches
when no man can work, what, asleep in harvest time? then the Winter will starve
you, because you have missed your opportunity in the Summer of providing, Prove.
10. 5. he that gathers in Summer is a wise man, but he that sleeps in
harvest is a ^^on that causes shame, filius confundens, a Son that will
confound himself. Oh! could we imagine such an ones complaint, Oh! my folly my
folly, I had fair hopes of a large increase, and all about me gave me good
encouragement, that my ^^^o^^es would be very considerable, but while I slept,
the Bear broke into my vineyard and laid wast my vineyard and now I have not so
much as hopes of being kept from want; eternal life proffered on very fair
terms but my drowsy heart would not be kept awake and my opportunity lost, and
quo me vertam nescio. and consider what Christ says, Joh. 12. 35. Yet a little
while and the light is with you, walk while you have the light, lest darkness
come upon you; for he that walks in darkness knows not whither he goes.

8. Consider it is full time to waken, and the end why God sent you into the
world was not to sleep away your opportunity; that time is not lived which is
slept. How many days and months, and years have many slept; few can say that
they are but newly laid down to rest, no, sinners have been asleep ever since
they were born, and will not the time past suffice to have wrought the deeds of
the Gentiles, Romans 13. 11. knowing the time that it is now high time to awake
out of sleep, for now is our salvation nearer then when we believed; the night
is far spent the day is at hand, let us therefore cast off the works of
darkness, and let us put on the armor of light, etc. Salvation now ready to be
declared, God passing by with his glorious train, the mighty King now
descending to the Tribunal. Oh! is it not time to awake out of the sleep of
sinners? and consider that God did notcreate us to sleep, all other creatures
move unwearily in their several natures; and man, Christians, Professors only
laid down to rest? is this the end why God made them? (...) etc. (...), As
sober Antoninus.

Did God make you that you should lie upon your beds and ease your selves? that
you should study your own pleasure, and not rather that you should be doing
something for him. Do you not see the Lillyes of the field? do you not see the
grass of the earth, the birds of the Air, the beast of the stall, the
provident Ant, and the busy Be? and will you not mind the things that are
proper for men, and consider the time is lost wherein you sleep, and you your
selves are dead: Gelidae nisi mortis imago, faces pale, hearts hard, necks
stiff, eyes shut, breath and desire gone, and what are such but dead while
they are alive?

9. To be asleep testifies you are none of Christ's children: his fr(...)e she
keeps awake, I sleep but my heart waketh (...) cor vigil my heart watches,
from (...) expergefieri, expergisci to awaken out of sleep, the voice of Christ
kept her eyes open, kept her out of a slumber, thus it is prophesied. Isaiah 5.
26, 27. His people shall none of them be weary, none of them stumble, none of
them sl^mbler nor sleep: the Girdle of your souls shall not be loosed, the
latchet of their shoe shall not be broken And the Apostle as soon as he had
told the Thessalonians that they were children, then he enjoins therefore, let
us not sleep, but let us watch and be sober.

10. A Christians work is too curious, and the time is coming when you shall
sleep as long as the World endures, it is not easy for a sleepy man to keep
his soul clean you have sin to mortify, ptivate corruptions to spy out which
you cannot do if your eyes be shut. The way is far and the Snares are many;
and the passage between Rocks, and the vessel weak, soon split, the time is
also coming that is allotted for sleep, Oh! now therefore when it is day keep
awake, Job. 14. 9, 10, 11, 12. The man dies and wastes away, the man g^veth
up the Ghost and where is he? as the waters fail from the Sea and the ^^ud
decays and dries up, So man lies down and rises not till the Heavens be no
more, they shall not awake nor be raised out of their sleep. You and I must lie
down in the grave, and put of mortallity and not awake again until the
Elements melt with fervent heat, and the more we sleep now the unfitter shall
we be to sleep then; and here is this also follows our security, our
condemnation hastens never the less for our carelessness, that great day
slumbers not, that vengeance cannot be charmed, 2 Pet. 2, 3. (...), Whose
judgment lingereth not, and whose damnation slumbereth not. Oh! therefore what
cause have we to keep awake, and be vigilant, what have you never felt the
scourge upon you for your laziness, have you not judged Gods afflictions many
time to be, because you would stir no more? God does usually deal more severely
with those whom he finds laid to rest because they are to be raised before they
can be set on employment. O Jerusalem, thou have drunk the dregs of the cup of
the fury of God, and the wrath of God, the dregs of the cup of trembling and
what is the reason you may see, Isaiah 51. 17. awake, awake, etc. It was
because they were not awake.

11. Consider the time of sleep is the time of Satan's temptation, and he may do
you the greatest injury when he surprises, and also Christ will soonest be
provoked to leave us and depart if we be asleep when he comes. Oh! what
mischief may a subtle and a perverse adversary do you and your souls when he
finds them sleeping? Oh! may not the Philistines break in when thou art on
Dalilahs lap? is not hell set open, and ate there not thousands of wicked
spirits a broad in the air, do they not swarm like the locusts or frogs in
Egypt? do they not come even to thy bed side, under thy chair, thy table, thy
co^c^, thy pallet, and will thou still sleep, will thou be slain in bed? when
thou art surprised will it not be easy to overcome thee, and besides may not
thy enemy mix poison amongst thy choycest mercies; may he not sow tares? Math.
13. 25. but while the men slept his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat.
Oh will not Satan sow prophain seeds, weeds, and brie^s and brambles; sleep on
a while, and you will surely find that the tares will cover and choke the
wheat, sin will eclipse if not wholly extinguish grace, and besides the enemy
may steal away thy greatest mercies, how many have lost their happinesses when
asleep, how many children have lost their Father when they have laid them down
to sleep in the way, intravit latro, the Thief breaks in to steal. See the
Woman. 1 King. 3, 20. Her Beloved Child gone when she slept: and she arose
at Midnight, and took my son from besides me while thy Handmaid slept, and
laid it in her bosom and laid the dead child in my bosom: and consider sleep
will not expose our grace and precious privileges to theft, but will also
soonest provoke Christ to depart from us; probably the time of thy greatest
security will be the time of Christ's call, and what if he come and find thee
sleeping? Oh then awake to Righteousness and sin not; not to be on your watch
when Christ comes it will be your perpetual shame. Oh! what a sudden does he
come on, and what little warning does he give; the old world, the Cites of Tire
and Sydon, Sodom and Gomorah had not much warning given them, the people of
Laish lost all by this drowsinesse. Judge. 18. 27 The Danits came to Laish, a
people that were quiet and secure (O dangerous posture) they smote them with
the edge of the Sword and burnt their City with fire: and then was it that God
calls Samuel when the Lamp of God went out in the Temple of the Lord, where the
Ark of God was, and Samuel was laid down to sleep. 1 Kings 3. 3, 4. And Samuel
had much a do to distinguish the voice from his earthly Fathers, though it was
his Heavenly Father that called him. Well Christian thou know not but thy
God will call thee presently after thou art laid down to rest thy self, and if
he come and find thee asleep, Oh what a shame will it be to thee, who have
professed thy self to be one of his Soldiers. Oh may he not say as he said to
his Disciples he will come no more? or was it not pathetical his coming to his
Disciples, when he found them asleep. Matthew. 26. 40. 43, 45. And he ^emeth to
his Disciples and finds them asleep, and says unto ehem, Peter, could you
not watch with me one hour, and he went away and came and found them asleep
again, for their eyes were heavy, and he comes the third time, and thou he
says, sleep on now and take your rest, behold, the Son of man is betrayed into
the hands of sinners. Oh, was not this a pathetical salutation: and may he not
do so to you: what? yet sleep after so many calls, so many knockings, then
sleep on; take your fill I will see your faces no more: but I go away and leave
you, and where I am there you cannot come, Oh! therefore my dear friends, and
Christian Reader, as you tender the safety of your souls; take heed of this
careless, sleepy frame.

1. Have you not sin to mourn for? is not misery ready to fall upon you, and is
it not time to awake and arise out of your bed of security? See to this purpose
in the Prophet Joel, That which the Palmer worm has left, will not the Locust
eat, and that which the Locusts leave, will not the Cancker worm eat, and that
which the Cancker worm leaves will not the Caterpillar devour? Oh! sins to
mourn for, and Judgments impending; Then awake Oh Drunkard, verse 5. Awake Oh
Sinner! weep and howl for the miseries that are like to fall upon thee: the
field wasted and the Land mourns, the Corn wasted; and the new Wine dried
up, and the Old Languishing, Oh then awake and be ashamed, Oh the Husbandmen,
howl O the Vine dressers; the Vine dried up, the Fig Tree languishing, the
Apple and the Pomegranate withered from the Sons of men. Verse. 13. Gird your
selves and lament you Priests, howl ye Ministers of the Altar, come, ly all
night in sackcloth ye Ministers of my God. And indeed we, of all other, can be
least unexcusable. Should Watchmen fall asleep? the case is sad. See what
advice the Lord gives by the Prophet Jeremiah to Ministers. Thou therefore Jer.
1. 17. gird up thy Loins and arise and speak unto them all that I command thee*
be not dismayed at their faces lest I confound thee before them. There is a sad
woe. 1 Corinthians. 9. 16. Yea Vae mihi si non Evangelizavero. Woe is me if I preach
not the Gospel. Oh it is sad to see those who are set to watch the souls of
others, inter pectinem speculumque occupari, to be all day employed between the
Comb and the Glass, Otiosus minister abscondit lumen sub lecto, etc. As a
Worldly Minister hides his light under a Bushel, so an idle one hides his
under a bed; therefore they of all others are to stand on their watch, to be
diligent. Nullus non move^dus est lapis, etiam si sub quo dormit scorpio, They
should leave no stone unturned, nay, though there be a Serpent under it: so
consider as you have judgments to fear and sin to mourn for,

2. So you have mercies to praise for, and what will you sleep and overlook
them all. What distinguishing love has God laid out on you? what glory has he
provided? What hidden Mannah? what Breasts of Consolation? See Psalm 107. 1, 2.
etc. Oh give thanks unto the Lord, for his mercy endures for ever. Has he not
redeemed you often out of the hands of your enemies? has he not gathered you
out of Bondage, supported and guided you in the Wilderness, and in a sollitary
way when you had no City to dwell in? Has he not fed you where you were a
hungry, thirsty and faint? Did he not deliver you out of your distress when
you cried unto him, and led you by the right way, and made you go into the
place of your Habitation? Satisfied the hungry soul, and appeared to such as
sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death? And when he reckoned up these
and the like mercies, Verse. 8. He concludes with this, Oh that men would praise
the LORD for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the Children of men.
The Jews were much in this duty; when they saw Locum in quo editum erat
miraculum, a quo eradicata Idololatria, eum quis Aethiopem, cae^um, mancum,
surdum, When any saw the place wherein they had experienced a great
deliverance, when they saw the place where a miracle had been wrought, when one
saw a Negro, one lame, blind, deaf, etc. They would presently bless God, that
had not made them so. (though this grew into vain Ostentation, afterward Luke
18. 18. 11. God I thank thee that I am not as other men are, Extortioners,
unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican.) Nay when any one saw faciem
formosam a fair face, they would bless God. Benedictus sit ille qui creavit
Creaturae formositatem, praised be that God who has made such a Creature. Oh
Christian had I time to reckon thy mercies, it would soon appear that you would
have cause to spend much time in praises and so sleep the less, The soul that
has praises to sing had not need to be asleep. Judge. 4. 3. 12. Hear O ye
Kings, give ear O ye Princes, I will sing unto the Lord, I will sing praise to
the God of Israel, Therefore awake, awake Deborah awake, awake, utter a Song.
Arise Barach, and lead thy captivity captive, thou son of Abincam, and not only
praise for mercies but to pray for mereies also. Luke 22. 46. Why sleep you?
arise and pray lest you enter into temptation.

3. You have a vain World to fly from, and then you had not need to be asleep.
O arise therefore and awake thou that sleep, and come home to thy Fathers
house and leave the worlds husks and vanities, consider thy sin pursuing, Satan
ensnaring, a heart betraying, and Christ standing with open arms, then let me
speak to you in the Language of David. 2 Samuel 15. 14. Arise let us fly, for we
shall not else escape, make speed to depart, lest the Enemy approach us
suddenly, and bring evil upon us, and smite us with the edge of the sword.
tali causa non est dormiendum; when salvation lies at the stake sure a wise man
will run his fastest. Your souls are in danger, heed not what wicked men say,
see how diligent Micha was, Judge. 18. 23, 24. and the reason is manifest. What,
says he, you have taken away the Gods which I made, and the Priests, and are
gone away, and what have I more, and what is this you say unto me, what aileth
thee? When thy salvation, and thy Eternal Happiness is about to be hindered.
Oh! let not thy soul fall asleep, let it not drop to misery in a dream. This is
the Ninth Direction.

DIRECTION X.
LAstly, Live in a constant Observance of, and a subserviency unto the Offices
of Jesus Christ. When he had the management of the Reconciliation of man put
into his hand, he stood in a threefold capacity: in as much as 3. things were
very requisite as conducible to the reduction of them, who had made defection
from God. For he had to do with a very ignorant and gross generation, men who
were almost metamorphosed into Brutes, and had lost that clear apprehension of
divine truth: therefore he comes in the capacity of a great Rabbi, a Prophet, a
Master*Teacher. So he found not only ignorance but alienation, wicked works had
made them averse to come to the knowledge of the truth, to the participation of
God therefore he became a Priest for ever, that he might reconcile them to God
and God to them, and this was not all, but he found a reluctance from within
and from without, in opposition to the knowledge of the truth, therefore he
became King or appeared under that qualification and capacity: there was an
impotenti a redeundi, an impotency of returning to him from whom they had made
defection, so that power must be exercised as well as wisdom and mercy: by the
one he is considered as a Prophet, by the other as a Priest, for mercy became
him that he might have compassion on the ignorant, and those which were out of
the way, and he performed all things authoritative with authority.

1. Thence we are look upon him as King.

2. In luce in light not obscurely, thence we may consider his Prophetical
office.

3. Solemniter solemnly, hence we may consider him as Priest now members of his
Kingdom are to consort to Christ, or to yield to him, to behave themselves in
this threefold posture, yielding to him as King, hearkening to him as Prophet,
complying with him as Priest.

1. I shall briefly show some resemblances in these Offices, to those persons
who are properly called by these names. 2. Direct you in your behavior to
Christ under those several considerations.
1. Consider Christ as King live in subservience to him as bearing that office*
and here consider.

1. How he does resemble a King. 2. What our behavior ought to be to him under
that consideration.
1. How Christ does resemble a King.

2. Kings have a tender and a benign aspect toward their people I do not now
speak of the solet but the debet, not as though all were so but all should be
so; for the more conformity any one in this office has to Christ, the more
they are regular. And I do not think only that Christ had these qualifications
as King, because Kings ought to have them. They therefore who are not
heterogeneal, of another similitude and kind then Christian, have a benign
aspect toward their people: hence Kings have been called (...), as Aeneas (...)
the shepherd of the people; therefore was it that Archicas used to call Kings,
Altars, pariter enim ad utrumque fugiunt, qui injuria afficiuntur, for they who
are injured fly unto them both for recompense, or at least for protection,
thus Philiscus advising with Alexander how he should carry to his subjects, he
tells him, (...): study not destruction but preservation; be not a plague but
an Antidore, not a disease but wholesome. When John had taken the French Kings
part against Richard the first, who was his brother, and after that John found
the French King to be worsted, he comes ^o his brother Richard and tenders
himself; if he would but please to pardon him, to whom the King, dear brother,
God forbid but I should be as ready to forgive an offense, as you are to commit
it; Oh rare testimony o^ the spirit of an English King? Thus it was in Adrian,
where mercy and justice seemed to salute each other, when he had given out his
edict, against a pirate who was very noisome to his coasts, that whosoever
could bring his head should have a large reward, the pirate understanding the
edict and rather desirous to commit himself to the Emperors mercy, then to the
vigilance of those who soughr to take him, he comes in his own person before
the Emperor, and lays down his head at his foot imploring forgiveness, and he
would reclaim his evil courses; which the merciful Emperor did not only
grant, but also gave him that reward which he would have given to an^ other who
would have brought ^i^ head. Thus he obliged ^he pirate not only by mercy but
by gr^c^ by pardoning the penitent and rewarding them, for a farther
obligation. Oh how Christian-like an action was it in him! who made application
of such an Antidote before the infection was too far spread, being persuaded of
the Italians Proverb, l'avaritia de re paste de regni. A self denying frame
most establishes a royal interest, when Constantine bespake any of his
Christian subjects, he would use no other terms but (...) my fellow brethren,
and fellow servants of the Church of God; an easy yoke knits hearts, when the
heavy burden makes one either stand still or go back. Rehoboam found it, when
if he had eased the yoke his father lay on the people, their love would have
been more firm; but when he followed the advice of the unskilful young men, to
make his little finger greater then his fathers loins then they forsook him, 2 Chronicles. 10. you may see the people come to him verse 4 ease you somewhat the
grievous servitude of thy father, and we will serve thee; thus the old men or
(...) the ancient or graver sort of the people verse 7. if you be kind to this
people and please them, and speak good words to them, they will be thy servants
for ever. But he took the counsel of the young men, verse 10. who said thus
shall you say unto them my little finger shall be thicker then my fathers
loins, my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with
scorpions; and when Israel saw that the King would not hearken to them, they
answered the King saying, what portion have we in David, we have none
inheritance in the sons of Jesse, to your tents O Israel, and now David see to
thine house, and Israel rebelled against the house of David and ten Tribes
forsook their allegiance; Archilaus that merciful Monarch was wont to say he
lived as they do that are at Sea in a storm, in the blast ready to be
overwhelmed, but in the calm he was revived again (...) when he see any of his
good subjects wronged or suffer injury, then he afflicted himself and would
hazard his own person but he would relieve them. But when he see them prosper
then (...), then he thought he was even in Heaven.

Thus Christ is King he has this tenderness to his subjects, such a divine
love that is all the motive he uses to incline them to obedience; he is also
called the good shepherd who does not only feed, but lay down his life for the
sheep, Isaiah 40. 11. he shall feed his flock like a shepherd, he shall gather
his Lambs with his arm, and shall carry them in his bosom, and shall gently
lead those that give suck or are with young. So John 10. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
verses Thus his compassion appears throughout the gospel, when he saw a tired,
fainting scattered multitude, like sheep without a shepherd; (...) he was
moved with compassion, Math. 9. 36. when he beheld their sick people he was
moved with compassion, Math. 14. 14. when the leper came beseeching him and
kneeling down, saying if thou will thou can make me clean, he was moved with
compassion saying be thou clean, Mark 1. 40. 44. when he saw the widow weeping
for her only son, Luke 7. 13. the Lord saw her and had compassion on her and
said weep not, when the multitude had continued with him three days and had
nothing to eat, he had compassion on them and would not send them away hungry,
lest they should faint in the way, Math. 15. 32. this is prophesied of Christ,
Micha. 7. 18. 19. he will not retain his anger for ever, he delights in
mercy. He will turn again and have compassion, he will subdue our iniquities,
he will cast our sins into the depths of the Sea. Thus Oh his tenderness, when
the blind men ran after him, even groaping to find him, and cried; have mercy
upon us O Lord thou son of David, and when they were rebuked by his Disciples
they cried with more earnestness Lord thou son of David, that our eyes may be
opened; Jesus had compassion and touched their eyes and immediately they
received their sight and followed him, Math. 20. 31, 32. 34.

Kings preserve the privileges of their subjects which is done auro and ferro
by gold and iron; or as Solon, pretio and paeno conservatur respublica,
punishment and reward are the too sound foundation stones of the Kingdom; it
was therefore Pharaohs house not the Kings Palace, that was the place of
bondage to the children of God. Thus as soon as the Widow of Tekoah had learnt
the Parable, 2 Samuel 14. 1, 2. etc. She runs to the King to be righted, verse 4.
and as she spoke to the King she fell on her face to the ground, and did
obeisance and said Save or help me O King, and you may see his tender heart,
verse 8. 10. go to thine house, and I will give charge concerning thee, and
whosoever says any thing to thee bring them to me, and they shall not touch
thee any more. Thus Christ does not only give but secure to his people many
precious privledges, such as the world knows not of, their inward rejoicing and
heart consolation, aheir claim and title to the eternal Kingdom; their
stedfastness in the way of truth, their adoption and sonship, their earnest of
the spirit whereby they cry Abba father, their right to the everlasting
inheritance their joy in the sight of Christ which no man takes from them;
their spiritual liberty and freedom and exemption from foul-bondage. Their
peace and quietness of their mind, their fight of those things that are only
visible to the eye of faith, their spiritual hunger and thirst though they be
satisfied, their emptying of themselves though they desire to be full; their
pressure forward though it is with them many times, that in a warm gleam of the
Sun they desire to be heard; their clearness of sight though the Object be
beyond the capacity of sense, or the reach of the eye. Their eternal life
though they are dying daily? their white raiment though they every hour be spot
rhemselves, their Princely dignity though they be the of-scouring of the world.
Their redemption though they lie under the sentence of condemnation? Oh what a
cloud of witneses might be brought to testify Christ to be King in this
particular, Isaiah 31. 5. he shall come down to fight for mount Zion, and the
hill there of, as birds flying so will he defend his children, defending also
he will deliver, and passing over he will preserve; Zech. 12. 8. in that day
(when Christ shall have ascended the throne) he will defend the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and he that is feeble or abject among them, at that day as David,
and the house of David shall be as God, and the Angel of the Lord before them.

8. Kings are nursing fathers, especially Christian Kings and Protestant Kings,
and then it is the most like that the childran of grace thrive when Kings
become their nurses; and that they do in these particulars.

1. Kings may be said to be nursing fathers when they themselves are holy. When
they themselves love to taste of that food which makes grace well likeing, then
it will be precious and dear; piety is the richest, the most Orient jewel in a
Kings Crown, Socrates being asked which was the most amiable creature he
answered, homo eruditione and disciplina orna^us, a man that has a capacious
understanding, and a well regulated conversation. I should answer, if the same
question should be put to me, Rex misericordia and prelate praeditus. A King a
Monarch, merciful and pious; this is the milk which if the King feed on the
nation will thrive, and rhen also may he expect obedience from his people, when
he himself is obedient to God. Oh! how may a King promote holiness, the life
and soul of a sincere professor, when he is holy himself cum regis ad exemplum
totus componitur orbis. When it is every ones ambition to wear the Kings Image,
and have Caesar's superscription upon them; the fashion at Court would soon be
public if it was piety, and if godliness were denied to be gain there, would
not every man trade in it. Thus we find good Hezekiah, to be a nursing father,
for he himself was holy, 2 King 18. 5, 6. he trusted in the Lord God of Israel
so that after him w^e none like him among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that
went before him ^^ clave unto the Lord, and departed not from following of him,
but kept his commandments, which the Lord commanded Moses. A rare Character of
a pious Prince, an encomium that it may beseem a King to be ambitious of.

2. Then may a King be said to be a nursing Father, when he countenances a
godly and laborious ministry; and this must needs be, because they are breasts
through whom the people suck the sincere milk of the word. No Bishop no King
was not a saying unbecoming a Christian Magistrate, therefore has it been of
old that the Throne and the Chair was possessed by the same Person, the same was
both King and Priest. So Melchisedech, so David, so Aeneas rex idem hominum
Phae^ique sacerdos, he was King of men, and Apolloes Priest; and it is usual
that they stand and fall together, for if the Cedar be cut up the Olive cannot
escape; if the master of the family be slain, the candles must be put out for
fear of discovery. Thus also was good Hezekiah, mentioned before (whom I shall
mention again before I pass this particular) 2 Chro. 30. 22. and Hezekiah spoke
comfortably to all the Levites or to the heart of the Levites, that taught the
good knowledge of the Lord. See also his care of the ministry, 2 Chronicles. 31. 2,
3, 4. and Hezekiah appointed the courses of the Priests and the Levites, every
man according to his service for burnt-offering and meat offering, to minister
and to give thanks, and to praise in the gates of the tents of the Lord, and he
appointed also the Kings portion of his substance for the burnt-offering for
morning and evening, and see verse 4. moreover he commanded the people that
dwell in Jerusalem, to give the portion of the Priests and the Levites, that
they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord. A nursing Father protects the
hand that gave it suck, and the hand that anointed or consecrated him to such
an office, for it has been the custom that Kings should receive their unction
from the hands of the Prophet. Thus Samuel anointed David, Zadock and Nathan
anointed Solomon. Elias anointed Hazael over Syria, and Jehu over Israel, 2
King. 19. 1. 23. And see when Jeroboams hand was withered, he repairs to the
Prophet, and by him it was restored whole as the other; and see also how
worthily he carried himself to the Prophet, for the benefit he received from
him, you may see the passage. 1 King. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. A man of God comes to cry
against the Altar of Bethel, where the King was offering incense,

OBSERVATION I. (Prophets must deliver their message, though it be to the
pulling down the very Altar where a King worships)

And the King was displeased at Jeroboam, and put forth his hand from the
Altar, saying, lay hold on him.

OBSERVATION II Jereboam could not bear a message from the Prophet when it so
nearly concerned him.

And Jereboams hand withered, the hand that he put forth dried up, so that he
could not pull it in again.

OBSERVATION 3. God will blast those who resist his Messengers in doing, or
persecute them for doing their Errand.

And the King answered and said unto the Man of God, entreat now the face of
the Lord thy God God and pray for me that my hand may be restored again

OBSERVATION 4. The time may come when they shall stand in need of the prayers
of the people of God, who have hated them because they could pray.

And the Man of God besought the Lord and the Kings hand was restored again and
became as it was before.

OBSERVATION V God will not ordinarily deny the prayers of his own people, so
that it is dangerous to displease them, and the safest condition to be in
favor with them.

And then behold Jereboam became a Nursing Father tender to the Prophet of God.
And the Ring said unto the Man of God, come home with me and refresh thy self
and I will give thee a reward.

OBSERVATION 6. [Courtesies from a Prophet ought not to go unrequited]


3. A King may be said to be a nutsing Father, when he discountenances
profaneness, thus David Psalm. 45. 7. The anointing of the everlasting King
was so rich, because his Scepter was a right Scepter, and he was anointed above
his fellows, because he loved Righteousness and hated wickedness. Oh! what a
man of sin do those people make their King, and how do they dishonor him; who
with one and the same breath they curse and swear, and damn themselves withal,
with the same breath they say they are for their King. I hope a Christian
Prince is not so ill beloved in his Kingdom, that he should have no better
friends then such; and I should be sorry that the Kings Majesty of England
should ever behave himself that he should have the love of none but these.
That person whosoever he be that lies the carnal and profane and bloody in his
bosom, and treads down the holy, sober and gracious under his feet, we may
baptize him into the name of Phineas his child, Ichabod, for the glory of the
Lord is departed from him.

4. The King may be said to be a nursing Father, when he abrogates Idolatry an
superstition; these are enemies to the child, the one makes him forsake the
other forget his Father. Thus was it with Hezekiah 2 King. 18. 3, 4, 5: He did
that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his Father
David had done, and what that was, you may see Verses 4, 5. he removed the
Highplaces, and brake the images and statues, and cut down the graves and brake
in pieces the brazenserpent: it is said of K. Josiah, that he did that which
was right in the Lord. 2. Kin. 22. 2. and what that was which he did you see 2
King. 23. ver. 3. He made a Covenant to walk before the Lord, and to keep his
Commandments and Testimonies with all his heart and with all his soul. He
burnt all the Vessels that were for Baal, for the Grove or the Host of Heaven,
verse. 4. He put down the Idolatrous Priests, which burnt Incense to the high
places, and to Baal, to the Sun, and Moon and Planets, and Constellations,
verse 5. he brought out the grove, and burnt it to ashes, and stamped it as
small as powder, verse 6. he brake down the houses of the Sodom^es where the
women wove hangings for the Grove verse 7. etc. This was a nursing of the
Children of Christ, when the Children of Balial are dashed against the wall.

5. A King is a nursing Father, in not having confederacy with Babylon. This is
that great Dragon with seven heads and ten Horns and seven Crowns upon his
head; which stands before the woman that is ready to be delivered, for to
devour the Child as soon as it is born. Now the King would not be a nurse, but
an executioner, should he conspire with this Dragon: there is a remarkable
place to this purpose which shows us as it is not safe for the Child, so it is
not safe for the nursing Father to be too familiar with that City, mystery,
Babylon, 2 Kings 20. Hezekiah was indeed a nursing Father, but see a great
miscarriage, for which not only his people, but himself also smarted very sore;
and were lead captives into a strange land, verse 12. At that time
Berodach-Baladan the Son of Baladan King of Babylon sent letters to Hezekiah,
and he hearkened to them and showed them the house of his precious things, his
silver and gold and spices and precious ointments, etc. There was nothing in
his horse, and all his dominion that Hezekiah s^^wed them nor; this was great
familiarity, and the ^^r was the King of Babylon. But see what a sad event this
kindness had, and how the Prophet Isaiah reproves the King for it, verses 14,
15, 16, 17, 18. the Prophet asked what be these men, and whence came they, the
King answered they are come from a far country even from Babylon. And Isaiah
said, what have they seen? and Hezekiah answered, all the things that are in
mine house, there is nothing among my treasures that I have not showed; and
when Isaiah heard this see his prophecy. Hear the word of the Lord, behold the
days come, that all that is in thine house and what thy Fathers have laid up in
store unto this day, shall be carried unto Babylon, nothing shall be left says
the Lord, and of thy Sons which shall issue from thee which thou shall beget,
they shall take away, and they shall be ^^^^chs in the Palace of the King of
Babylon. Familiarity, is a ready way to be led into captivity, or too much
kindness is a cause why Babylon desires to enslave and bring to bondage.
Therefore (...) counsel will not be amiss, Rev. 18 4 whosoever intends to be a
nursing Father, let him come out of her, that he be not partaker of her s^n,
and that he receive not of her plagues. For her s^ns are reached to Heaven, and
God has remembered her iniquities.

6. A King may be said to be a (...) Father, when ^e purifies the worship, and
clea^^eth the ^^^se of God. This did Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29. 3, 4, 5. and
speedily, in the first year of his reign, in the f^^st Month he opened the
doors of the house of the Lord, and repaired them, and he brought in the
Priest: and the Levites, and gathered them together, and said unto them, hear
me ye Levites, and sanctify your selves, and sanctify the House of the Lord
God of your Fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out of the holy place, etc

7. A King may be said to be a nursing Father, in ordering the Righteous
administration of the passover. This would make him a nursing Father, when
they shall have meat that nourishes, and not meat that choaketh, when every
hungry soul shall have food in due season, and every full stomach shall rather
have physic then food, when the meat is suited to the stomach, for that which
will feed one will choke another; some eat damnation, though others eat eternal
life. That which is Childrens bread ought not to be given to dogs, nor such
pearls cast before swine who trample on them; nor bastards to be fed with
childrens sweet meats. This was also taken care of by holy Hezekiah. 2 Chronicles.
30. 1. unto the 12 verse. He sent to all Israel and wrote letters etc. that
they should come to the house of the Lord at Jerusalem to keep the Passover of
the Lord God of Israel, in such sort as it was written, and he also took care
that they were cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary. This is
the third particular wherein Christ resembles a King, he is a nursing father.
Thus Christ prepares food, I might be large in showing all these particulars,
let any one look upon the children which he has begot, nourish^ and brought
up, nay though they have rebelled against him, which he has with Mannah from
Heaven with spiritual food, crumbs from the fathers table, his body and blood
which is meat indeed and drink indeed. When his children were like Pelicans in
the wilderness, then he gave them drops of blood from his own breast; confide^^
that and let i^ suffice for this particular.

4. Kings are such whose right is to command and whose prerogative to claim
obedience; thence those in authority are called Commanders. Thus we meet with
the peoples own acknowledgement, 1 Chronicles. 28. 21. the Princes and all the
people will be wholly at thy Commandment, whosoever he be that does rebel
against thy Commandment, and will not do whatsoever thou command shall be
put to death, John 1. so overseers made in the house of God for the cleansing
the house, at the Commandment of the King, 1 Chronicles. 31. 13. King Pharaoh
giving Commandment, 2 King. 23. 35. David giving Commandment, 2 Chronicles. 29.
25. Solomon giving Commandent, Nehem. 12. 45. so it is looked upon as a wonder,
when Vashi refused to come at the Kings Commandment, Esther 112. and thus it
was in Mordecai, why transgressest thou the Kings Commandment, Esther 3. 3.
and this Commandment takes hold of the people, provided that it be not
contrary to the Commandment of the Lord. We are under an injunctions to the
language of the King, provided it be not contrary to what has proceeded out of
the mouth of the Lord. There are three foundations or grounds of the prosperity
of the Jews. After their return from Babylon, which was a threefold attention
unto a threefold voice, the voice of the Lord, the Commandment of the King,
the prophesying of the Propher, when these three are included in a command,
then is obligatory; then obedience to it is a duty, and may expect from it a
blessing. Ezra. 6. 14. And the Elders of the Jews builded, and prospered
according to the Prophesying of Haggai the Prophet, and Zachariah the Son of
Iddo, and they builded, according to the commandment of the God of Israel, and
according to the commandment of Cyrus, Darius and Artaxerxes King of Persia.
Temple-work is made according to the Pattern, and will stand longest when these
three directions are observed in building, The voice of the Lord. The Command
of the King the teaching of the Prophet. Thus we find that the people
transgressed when they slew Zachariah the Prophet, and stoned him with stones,
though it was at the command of the King, and the reason is because it was not
according so the oice or Commandment of the Lord, 2 Chr. 24. 20. 2. 1. It is a
sign of Faith to disobey an unlawful Comm2nd, Heb. 11. 23. but as for other
things where he Lord is silent, where we ought to hear what the King saiith.
therefore (...), says Isacius. The ancients used to call their Kings Jupiter,
supposing a Sovereignty to reside in his person.

Thus Christ is King, he has an impartive as well as a Legislative power. Thus
the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. 1. by the Commandment of God, our Savior and Lord Jesus
Christ. so Tit. 1. 3. according to the Commandment of God our Savior, and you
may see the Central Law, as I may call it, from which every Circumferential
Line is drawn, which in other terms is called the fulfilling of the whose Law
(for all obedience is servile, not filial, without it, Job. 15. 12. This is my
Commandment, that ye shall love one another, even as I have loved you, and this
was the Original wheel of Christ's Obedience to the Father, therefore it must be
so with us. John 14. 31. that the World may know that I love the Father the
father gave me commandment, so do I. His obedience was commensurate to the
fathers pleasure, when love was the rule he obeyed by. But that Christ is King
in this particular, you may see it supposed by the Conturion, he granted this
as a postulatum in mathematique, a thing out of question, Mat. 8. 8. and the
centurion said, I am unworthy that thou should come under my roof, speak the
word only, and thy servant shall be healed: for I am a man under authority,
having soldiers under me: I say to one, Go; and he goes; and to another,
come, and he comes; to another, do this, anu he does it.

5. Kings succor those which are in distress: Thus the woman of Teboa in her
distress ran to the King, and fell on her face to the ground, and did
obeisance, and said, Help O king, 2 Samuel 14. 4. Thus the woman, who had slain
her son in the famine, ran to the king. 2 Kings 6. 26. as the king of Israel
was passing by upon the wall, there cried a woman unto him, saving, Help my
Lord, help O king. Succurrere militi vere imperatorium est, it is a point of
Majesty of succor those that are in misery. This was the reason that the
Isralites when they went against Absalom, under Joab, Abishai and Ittai, they
would not suffer David to go out of the city, that in case they had been put to
flight he might succor them. 2 Samuel 18. 3. but the people answered, you shall
not go^ forth, for if we slay away they will not care for us; neither if half
of us die, will they care for us: but now thou art worth ten thousand of us;
therefore it is better that thou be to succor us. It was said of Trajans, that
when any of his soldiers were wounded, he would rend his own cloths to wrap
their wounds in. This would take off the smart when the Kings hand bound them
up; and imbolden them the more when they had such a physician with them, regum
est parcere subjectis. It is both the Kings dignity and duty to be sparing and
favorable.

Thus Christ succors those in distress; not a faint heart, but he gives it the
water of life; he sees none wounded, but he drops Oil into their wounds, none
sick and weak but he visists them, naked; are clothed by him, the hungry fed,
the weary refreshed, the frightful encouraged, and when he saw the world in
their blood none eye pitying, wallowing in sin all overspread with leprosy
that none wo^ld touch them, then comes Christ the tender King to succor,
though he knew before what entertainment he should have, yet he comes to lay
down his life for his sheep, 2 Cor. 6. 2. he heard in an accepted time, and in
a day of salvation did he succor his people, for in that he himself has
suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2.
18. thus they run to Christ, Lord help us, Lord succor us, Lord diliver us,
Lord have compossion and mercy on us.

6. King^ have dominion and authority over the people, which another ought not
to invade, and from which none ought to depose him. This was the reason why the
Jews seemed to have so fair a Plea against Christ, Luke 23 3. they accused him,
saying We found this fellow perverting the nation, and forbidding to give
tribute to Caesar (though that was a false testimony as they was false witness)
and saying that he himself is Christ the King. Thus Pilate (whether in policy
or in conscience being warned of his wife to have nothing to do with that just
man) having a desire to release him, he brings this argument against them, that
their King must not be put to death, John 19. 15. shall I Crucify your King?
to which they answer, we have no King but Caesar, and verse 12. if you let this
man go thou are not Caesar's friend, for whosoever makes him self a King
speaks against Casar: because they could not have justified their cry
crucify him, crucify him, therefore they deny that he was their King. Thus
when David had Saul at his mercy, he would but eat off the skirt of his robe,
and yet his heart smote him, and he said the Lord forbid that I should do this
thing unto my master, the Lords anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him,
seeing he is the Lords anointed, 1 Samuel 24 5, 6. so he admonishes Abishai. 1 Samuel 26. 9. 11. destroy him not, for who can stretch forth his hand against the
Lords anointed and be guiltless?

This Christ is King, all Power, all Authority, all Domimion is put into his
hand; power over Hell, sin, the World, Satan, Death, the Law; 1 Pet. 3. 22.
authorities and powers being made subject unto him, Ephesians. 1 21, 22. above all
principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named,
not only in this world but also in that which is to come. All things ^ut under
his feet, he being made the head of all things to his Church, he taught as one
having authority, Math. 7. 29. he commanded the unclean spirits with authority,
Mark 1. 27. having authority over all the devils, Luke 9. 1. and the father
has given him authority to execute judgment, because he is the son of man;
Thus Daniel 4. his dominion is from generation to generation, his dominion is
to the ends of the earth, his dominion is an everlasting dominion. All
dominions shall serve and obey him, Dan. 7. the Kingdom and dominion, the rule
and dominion, strength and dominion, shall be given Christ, Dan. 11. there is a
full place for this purpose, Col. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18, etc.

The image of the invisible God the first born of every creature, by him were
all things created, that are in Heaven or Earth* visible or unvisible, thrones,
dominions, principalities powers, all things were created by him and for him.
And he is before all things and by him all things consist; and he is the head
of the body the Church, the beginning, the first born from the dead, (...),
that he should be the chief over all or have pre-eminence, for it pleased the
father that in him (...), all fullness or abundance inhabit, not only lodge, but
dwell; not only be but remain.

7 Kings provide for their people, such things as they stand in need of that
which they cannot provide themselves, thence they are so ordinarily styled
(...) bestowers of good things.

Thus Christ he is King, who has provided large portions for all his followers.

1 He has provided a place, prepared an habitation, Joh. 14. 3. I go to
prepare a place for you. Matthew. 25. 34. Come ye blessed of my Father inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you.

2. Ammunition, Ephesians. 6. the whole armor of God the girdle of truth, the
Breast Plate of Righteousness, the preparation of the Gospel, the shield of
faith; the Helmet of salvation, the sword of the Spirit.

3. Provision, food, meat and drink, bread of life water of life. The meat
whieh will endure to everlasting life, which the Son of man will give. John 6.
27. His body and his blood which are meat and dtink indeed, and has sent his
Servants, saying, Come now, for all things are ready. Luke 14. 27.

4. Because I would not be too large in things so commonly experienced, take
all in that word, 1 Cor. 2. 9. The eye has not seen nor ear heard neither have
they entered into the heart of man the things which God has prepared for that
love him. Now the grounds of this conveyance of privilege and mercy is
radicated in Christ our King as he is in this threefold relation.

1. As he the fathers Steward and chosen of God as a faithful Steward of the
manifold wisdom of God, Math. 12. 18. beholding servants whom I have chosen, my
beloved in whom my soul is well pleased; in whom I put my spirit, and he shall
show judgment to the Gentiles, is the Joseph to whom the Lord seems to speak
as Pharaoh did to him, Genesis 41. 38, 39, 40. can we find such a man as he is, a
man in whom the spirit of God is, and Pharaoh said, forasmuch as God has
showed thee all this, there is none so discreet as you are you shall be over my
house; and according to thy word shall all my people be ruled only in the
throne will I be greater then thou, as Joshua divided the land so does Christ,
Psalm. 105. 21, 22. He made him Lord of his house or Steward, and Ruler of all
his substance; thus John 16. 15. All things that the Father has are his, as
being made Steward of the family of God. Thus when the glorio^^ preparation is
made, he does not invite the guests to come sit down, but to eat, Cant. 5. 1.
etc. (...) drink, yea, inebriat your selves, my dearest, my beloved.

2. He is the Fathers Heir, and in that respect he provides and prepares. He
has the inheritance wholly conveyed to him, and is but given to us, as Donum
gratuitum a free gift, not as Co-purchasers nor Coheirs with the first born,
he is the first born of God, the first born of every creature, so of right, the
heir of God: Estates among the Grecians were passed to others, either (...), or
(...), by descent, or by Will and Testament; now when it came (...) by
Testament, the Heir must come under qualifications or he was incapacitated.

1 He must be no Idol.

2 No stranger.

3 No prisoner.

4. No adopted one, but when a man had a Male child it descended to him (...)
by kind, by bitth-right. Thus Christ is Heir, the surest way by birthright,
the only begotten Son of God, though he comes under all the quallifications
besides. The first born was to have a double portion; though the man had two
wives, the one he loved, the other he hated, and if the first born should be by
the Wife that was hated, yet he was to be heir, for he was the first born and
the beginning of his fathers strength. Deuteronomy. 21. 16, 17. and it is looked on as
a rarity, that Zimri should be made chief, being he was not the first born. 1 Chronicles. 26. 10. Thus is Christ of right the heir of God on whom it lies to
provide for his brethren for he is not ashamed to call Christians brethren Heb.
2. 11

He is the head of the body and in this respect it is that conveyances are made
to us through Christ our King, Col. 1 18. in him we are complete, he being the
head of the body; it is the property of the head to influence the body. A body
without a head is a spectrum or ghost, or at best a dead carcass, to make it a
little more obvious, consider in what capacity the head is to the body, and
then the mystery of our deriving through him will appear more plain; the
mystery of his union with his Church under this relation will be more
conspicuous.

1. The head is sons luminis the fountain of light; so Christ is the head to
the Church, the bright morning star. The light that inlightens every one that
comes into the world: as the lightning that lightneth out of one part under
Heaven shines unto the other, so is the coming of the Son of man, which light
of his is now dilated abroad, and not kept within the narrow limits of Judea,
the Law was; for Gentiles or those of any other Nation might not be suffered
under the Law to come near the Temple, but stood in the third conwith such as
were unclean, and a partition wall of three cubits high separated them from the
other courts; names ly, the court for the women, a second for men, a third and
that was adjoining to the Temple for the Priest; and this wall had an
inscription on it (...) let no stranger presume to approach near the holy
place; but when Christ came this wall was broken down, and the tail rent and
the head distased its light from one end of the world to the other, Ephesians. 2.
10, 11, 12, 13. but now in Christ Jesus, ye, who were sometimes afar off has
he made nigh by his blood.

2. The head is partium ornamentum, the ornament of the body. This is Christ
not only (...) a light to the Gentiles, but (...) the glory and splendour of
his people Israel, Luke 2. 28, 29, etc. So is he called (...) the bright
shining glory of his father.

3. The head is the seat of the soul, from whence proceeds all action, some
place is to that part of the brain that is most secure and environed with a
double cavity, called glandula penealis or conation, the Queen regent of the
understanding; thus Christ is the head, the principal of all vitality or lively
motion, especially all pleasing actions must have Christ as their principle
operative cause, for whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and nothing can be of
faith when the Object is not considered, are no more then a man can hear that
which is not a sound.

4. The head is partium tegumentum, the covering or defense to the body. So is
Christ, Psalm. 89. 18. for the Lord is our defense, the holy one of Israel is
our King.

5. The head is morborum Index, the touchstone whereby deseases are descerned,
and as the way to know the desease of the body is to feel the pulse in the
head, so to know the desease of the soul, consider how it affects Christ the
head, and if you do any thing that makes the head complain, know that it is a
distemper not a duty.

6. Lastly, for which I name the rest is the head Canalis nutrimenti, the way
whereby or why through the parts receive nutriment, thus Christ; no glad
tidings, but by Christ no strength, no peace, no grace, no gifts, ^o
consolation but by Christ the head. And thus I have shown in these particulars
wherein Christ resembles a King.

2. I shall now only lay down three of four directions, concerning our
behavior to him under this office and so pass on to the other two offices of
Prophet and Priest.

1. If Chhist be the King, then stand in awe and sin not; subject thy self unto
the Kings Law, regard not what the children of Belial say, Sam. 10. 27. the
children of Belial will say, How can this man save us, and they despise him and
bring him no presents, but behold him whom the Lord has chosen, that there is
none like him among all the people. Oh! be real in your obedience, let it not
be Jacobs voice, but Esaus hands; not foris calo in vus Nero, abroad a saint
within a Leper, a Lamb abroad but when none sees a Lion, in trorsum lurpis,
speciosa pelle decora, let not the holiness be only skin deep, like a painted
sepulcher but rottenness at the heart, not in Lambs coat but inwardly a
ravenous wolf. Oh be real in obedience, Christ is King, shall the Kings of the
earth have this prerogative, to say to one go and he goes; do this and he does
it, and must your heavenly King be forced to command twice? shall not the King
of Kings, the Lord of Lords have his followers in subjection, when every man in
authority has? shall a tyrant have your obedience, when Christ your royal King
shall not be observed? will you be a betters of an usurpation? considering that
you are but mortal. Oh be not unjust (...) a mortal body, then let not sin
reign over it, whose image do you bear? who is the author of your lives, from
whom have you received your beings? does your very essence cease, your dearest
comforts, your most precious contentments, bear the image and superscription of
King Jesus? Oh then pay him tribute you give to man what is man's, then give to
Christ what is Christ's. And obey the rather because you are under such a King,
that cannot command unjustly, his Law is not only obligatory but directory, not
only the duty but the direction. Take heed of disobeying his legislative, least
you taste of his executive power, that righteousness is illegal: a
contradiction in adjection consist; in crossing the righteous Law: though you
be in power, yet know you have one above you though you are armed Christ has
the longer sword, say not with Pompy, egone armatus leges ut cogitem? shall I
confind within bounds when I am armed and can cut mine own way. Power should
then defend not withstand duty and obedience if not, it is but potentia not
potestas strength not authority. There are a sort in the world, who have got on
gospel armout, Evangelical rigteousness, and then they deny the bare rule,
Moses his Law. Like Achilles, pura negat sibi nota, nihil non arrogat armis, no
Law can take hold of him, who is able to cut the bond asunder by his sword.
Take heed, Evangelical Laws are regal, and Christ the wise dispencer of the
gospel is King as well as Priest; a Commander as well as a Savior. It will be
more then an ordinary crime to transgress against a King, it is treason crimen
lesa majestatis, an undervaluing his prerogative royal. Remember, Rex in regno
suo est minor solo deo.

A King on his throne is lower then God only so Christ on his throne, the
Kingdom is now in the hand of Christ; 1 Cor. 15. 25, 26, 27, etc. he must
reign, until all his enemies be put under his feet; For he has put all things
under his feet, yet it is manifest that he is excepted which did put all things
under his feet. So God is all in all, yet Christ has the management of the
world as King, until all enemies are made subject. Therefore submit to him, and
know that he has an executive power, see Psalm. 110. Christ must sit at the
right hand of God until all his enemies be made his footstool; and those his
enemies that will not that he shall rule over them their punishment is to be
brought out and slain before Christ the eternal King. Is Christ King? Oh! then
stand in awe, tremble at his word, come befote his face with reverence and
godly fear; they are impudent that fear not the face of man, their King. Oh!
then what are they that dread not the presence of Christ? their state is both
inchristian, and inhumane, that have cast off a sense of Majesty. Oh! what
irrevetence is it to blaspheme, swear, curse in the presence of the King; wage
not war with Christ, who ever resisted him and prospered? it will be horrid
rebellion to proclaim war against your King, your peace maker, hosrida bella,
ubi tumultibus orbis, regna crepant, sonitis mox ruitura gravi svmal uterque
pobes. Then plunge your selves into a Laborynth of calamities, when you rebel
against your King. Oh! sinner be therefore at peace, seek not to wound him, nor
persecute his, for what you do against his, he takes it as done unto himself,
and at your dying day you would give all the world that you had never resisted
his holy will. Pax una triumphis innumeris potior nomen pacis dulce est, and
res ipsa supra quam dici potest salutaris. Oh to go to rest in the sense of the
Kings favor will make your sleep pleasant, when others must expect to be
awakened by the voice of thunder.

2 Is Christ a King? then his faithful Subjects his own children may comfort
and encourage themselves and be undaunted. Fancibus, panisque noster, tu
pernuis suavitas nescit esurire malum qui non tuum sumit dapem. He is the
adequate abject to your necessities, your joy, your wisdom, your strength, and
Sanctification and redemption, your peace. Oh what ^ name is Christ's Name?
Frustra Graecta gloriatur septem sapientibus, Roma ne gloriatur Lalium and
Augustum, Mantua Maronem, Sulmo Ovidium genuisse, Silent Prophetae, obmutescant
Apostoli, nefari valent martyrs, dum lequitur Christus. Where is boasting? it
is excluded, that all the honor might be to Christ, when he alters his voice,
all other Creatures are but umbratiles sciutilla, creatae gloriola. Dusky,
twinkingling stars before the glorious Sun. Oh may not a christian comfort
himself in such a King? and how undaunted may he be in the face of his enemy,
nay in the midst of his enemies when they compass him about, seeing his
Savior is his King?

Consider that a Christ is King, and if he bid the billows and the waves be
still and calm, they shall be so, if he say to the Mountains be you cast into
the depths of the Sea it shall be so, if he strike the waters of the Red Sea,
they shall divide and permit a passage to his people. Be encouraged, Christ
your King, Ten shall chase a hundred, and an hundred shall put a Thousand to
flight. Gideons handful shall conquer an Host. The Army of sin shall not
prevail where Christ the Captain, Christ the King is in the field, in the
Battle in his own person. Every grain shall become a tree, every spark of
grace shall kindle into a flame. Nil desparandum, Christo duce and auspice
Christo. If Christ be for you who shall condemn, Is it not Christ that dyed
and rose again, and now makes intercession for you? Thus Caesar when he was
crossing the narrow Seas, and the Vessel had like to have been sunk, the
Mariners were afraid, to whom Caesar nil timea Caesarem vehis, what art thou
afraid for, Caesar is in the Vessel? So Antigonus, when his Soldiers were any
whit dismayed at the approach of their numerous adversaries, he thus encouraged
them, (...) what are you afraid ofm their number? Consider that I am amongst
you, and how many may you reckon me for? Thus Christ, if he be but with us,
though our enemies increase to the number of the hairs of our heads, or the
stars in the skies, as David's iniquities did, why should we fear, in the
strength of the Lord we shall destroy them; we shall be Conquerours through
Christ who loves us. Pluris est, unus Christus, quam universae creaturae. One
Christ is more then the whole creation besides. It is reported of Evagrius,
that at Antioch, about the Year 52 there happened a great Earthquake which
overturned much of the City, many houses and Churches and Castles, and no less
then 4870 men and women were slain by their fall, and the Citizens seeing the
danger they begun to be afraid, and were about to leave their habitations, they
prepared for flight, crebris ejulatibus and exclamationibus (...) O Lord be
merciful to us, and as they were running away there appeared a certain man,
divinitus uti ferunt admonitus and missus, that had some familiarity with God,
and he stood before them, and cried (...), stay O Christians, for Christ is
with you at which words the people were so imboldened that rhey returned, and
the earth quake ceased. O Christian consider your King and prosecute your
salvation, and the destruction of your sins undauntedly with a Christian
courage.

3. If Christ be your King, then when you go to war go in his name, and labor
for his presence, the less sin will daunt a stout heart, if Christ the King
stand not by, dare not encounter with sin, hell, and death; and the grave when
Christ the King is not at hand. Rush not into a temptation without Christ the
spiritual warfare will but be a disordered battle, when Christ the King and
Captain of your salvation is absent. Thus we find that the children of Israel
durst not go to War with the children of Ammon without their supreme Jephthah
went along with them Judge. 11. 6. and they said unto Jephthah, come and be our
Captain, that we (...) Thus the Apostle Paul was bold, but it was when he had
the Kings Majesty's strength a long with him, Phil. 4. 12, 13. I know how to be
abased, and I know how to abound, every where and in all things I am
instructed; both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer
need, I can do all things, a great word, but it is through Christ that
strengthened him. So David he will go, but it must be in the strength of the
Lord, Psalm. 71. 16. So many mighty men rose up against him, but in the strength
of the Lord he would destroy them; and Psalm. 122. 2. if it had not been the
Lord, who was on our side when men rose up against us, then they had swallowed
us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. Thus the Apostle exhorts
us, to run our Christian race looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our
faith, Heb. 12. 2.

4. If Christ be King then let us beware of three things, which are great
impediments of his ruleing over us. Prsde, coverousness, and self-love; as
intemporal dominion, so in spititual dominion, misera est reipublica facies ubi
haec tria dominantur. The King shall but have small authority, where these bear
rule.

1. Pride spurns at the very foundation of the Kingdom: the reason why they
would have no superior, Psalm. 12. 4, 5. they had a tongue speaking swelling
words, (...) great things stipped with pride, who have said with our tongue we
will prevail, our lips are our own, who shall be Lord over us, or control
us? This was the reason too why Joseph fared so hardly amongst his brethren,
because their slaves were to do obedience to his, Genesis 37. 8. and his breath en
said to him, shall you indeed reign over us? or shall you have dominion over
us? and they hated him yet the more. So his Father was displeased, when he
dreamed that the Sun and Moon and the eleven stars made obeyseance, verse 10.
pride cannot endure a superior, no more then love can bear a rival. Thus
spiritual pride is a great hinderance to Christ's supremacy: Pharisaical
righteousness will not vail to the Scepter of Christ. Oh take heed of that to
be just only in your own eyes, is not to be just at all. Thus the Pharisees
conceit of freedom kept them in perpetual bondage, John 8. 32. 33. Christ tells
you he was come to make you free, and they answer, we are Ahrahams seed, and
were never in bondage to any man: how say thou: ye shall be made free: if
you conceit your selves whole: then you will cry, what need of the Physician?
if you have strength of your own, you will not be beholden to Christ: take heed
of pride.

2. Take heed of covetousness, this is an enemy to dominion both temporal and
spiritual. This is clear in Jupiter, who had the Giants invading his dignity,
it was because they were greedy and he rich when he had no garments to divide
then there was no traitors, donec erat pervus, donec puerilia sensit, incoluit:
when he was empty he had not your envy, sed mox regno victor adempto.

But as soon as he was got into the Throne, illa propago, contemptrix superum,
avidissima divitiarum, affectasse ferunt, regum coeleste gigantes. Then that
greedy generation, contemners of dignity, despisers of authoriry, they attempt
to de-Throne him. Other instances of this might be brought* not done in
corners; but I will not rip up old sores, they bleed already.

Thus in spiritual supremacy, this is a great impediment, covetousness which
is idolatry, and when any thing besides Christ takes place in the heart, when
the creature is taken into our bosom, then is Christ cast at the footstool,
the ground of the husbandmens rebellion against the son whom they should have
reverenced, was this greedy appetite; this is the heir let us kill him, and the
inheritance will be ours. When the world is got into the heart there is no room
for Christ, and if that be so precious in our eye it will abate that esteem
which we ought to have of Christ our Sovereign and King.

3. Take heed of self-love; this also hates dominion, thus when the Oracle had
told Saturn that Jupiter should rule in his stead, he presently wages war with
Jupiter, it was for his own preservation, though he went against the Oracle;
therefore was it that the Jews hated Christ. They had taken it into serious
consideration, and debated in their council and the determination was, not to
let him alone, etc. John 11. 48. there you may see the ground of your
determination, if we let him alone, all men will believe on him, but this was
it which lay at the bottom, namely they feared least the Romans should come and
take away their place, their possession; and their Nation. Where self is at the
bottom of designs then the Lawmaker must be trampled on, and the Law
oblitterated.

Thus Christ in his dominion is opposed by this self-love, when men know that
they are full; or at least fancy they are full and stand of nothing they are
not come to the fountain.

Poor souls have a tendency to please the flesh; and should they become
Christ's subjects, then they must put off self, and that goes sore; what follow
a beloved sin to its death, and a Dalilah to the grave! no they will rather
oppose then submit to him, who will not be content that they may be his
followers and bring their corruptions with them, but must forsake all, and take
up the cross; this is the reason that many will not come at heaven, because
they must not carry their sins with them; These three may be called Kings
evils, whose swelling if it be not some way abated by the gentle touch of the
Kings hand, they will turn to gangreens, if not to a plague.

2. Consider Christ as Prophet, walk in subserviency to Christ as in that
office, or relation; and here also I shall show,

1. Wherein Christ does resemble a Prophet. 2. How we are to direct our
behavior, under that resemblance.
1. Wherein Christ does resemble a Prophet, that will appear in these
particulars.

1. Prophets were such as were acquainted with the mind of God, his secrets
were declared unto them. Thus Nathan had it revealed that it was in Gods mind
for David to build a house to the Lord, 1 Samuel 7. 17. and Psalm. 89. 19. God
spoke in a vision, he spoke openly and visibly unto David; so God appeared to
the Prophet Isaiah in a vision, Isa. 1. 1. thus God showed Ezekiel the image of
Idolatry, the worship of the Sun, and the wrath of the Lord for it; Ezekiel. 7. 4.
etc. he showed him the rerurne out of the Babylonish captivity, and the glory
of the temple, Ezekiel. 43. 3.

The great secret of Nebucchadrezzers dream was revealed to Daniel, Dan. 2. 19.
Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel, in a night dream, and Daniel blessed
the great God of heaven; and this made the King cry out; Dan. 2. 47. Of a
truth, your God is the God of Godt, and a Lord of Kings, and a revealer of
secrets, seeing thou could reveal this secret; So Pharoahs dream was
revealed to Joseph, Genesis 41. 25, 38, 39. Thus it was revealed to Peter, Mat.
16. 17. Blessed art thou Simon Bar-jonah: for flesh and blood has not revealed
this unto thee, but my father which is in heaven.

Thus was Christ a Prophet, one that knew the will of the father, he might say
with Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20. 2. Behold my father will do nothing, either great or
small, but that he will show it me; and uncover mine eye; you may see it fully
proved, how privy the son is to the fathers mind, Mat. 11. 25, 26, 27, And
Jesus said, I thank thee, O father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have
revealed these things unto babes, which thou have hid from the wise and the
prudent. So father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. And all things are
delivered unto me of my Father: and no man knows the Son but the Father:
neither knows any man the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will
reveal him. Nay there is a secret which Christ knows, which is not manifest to
any other, for he is more then a Prophet; and that the secret of all hearts; he
is (...), the searcher and tryer of hearts by whom the secrets of men shall be
judged, Romans 2. 16. he knew their blasphemous reasonings, in their hearts, Mar.
2. 8. knew their very thoughts, Mat. 9. 4. he knowing their thoughts said, Why
think you evil in your heart?

2. Prophets were prevalent with God, he usually would grant the desires of
their hearts; this we may see in Elisha, 2 King. 6. 17, 18. Elisha prayed, and
said, Lord, I pray thee, open his eyes, that he may see. And the Lord opened
the young man's eyes, and he saw: and again Elisha prayed unto the Lord, and
said, Smite this people, I pray thee, with blindness. And he smote them with
blindness, according to the word of Elisha. Thus 2 Chronicles. 22. 20. When
Hezekiah King, and Isaiah the Prophet prayed and cried to heaven, the Lord sent
an Angel, which cut off all the mighty men of valor, and the leaders and
captains in the camp of the King of Assyria: So that they that came forth of
his own bowels, slew him there with the sword; this was the Judgment of
Zedekiah, when the Chaldean army rose up against them, he sends to the
Prophets to entreat the face of the Lord, Jer. 37. 3. Zedekiah the King sent to
Iehucal, to Zephaniah and Jeremiah the Prophet, saying, Pray now unto the Lord
our God for us.

Thus Christ is a Prophet, potent with his father he cannot deny him, no not to
the half of his Kingdom; God will not deny his adopted sons, and give them
stones when they ask bread, or scorpions when they ask a fish, Luke 11. 12.
Christ is so Powerful with the father, that asking any thing in his name
renders our petitions acceptable; Joh. 14. 13. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my
name, that will I do, that the father may be glorified in me. Thus it is Joh.
15. 16. Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name, I will do it. So Joh.
16. 23. Math. 7. 7. If ye abide in me, and my word abide in you, ye shall ask
what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. And if God will not deny his
adopted Children, much less his only begotten Son; this he makes a
supposition, as though it needed no proof: Math. 26. 53. Think thou not,
that I can now pray to my Father, and ^e shall presently give me more then
twelve Legions of Angels?

3. Prophets were ordinarily gifted with the power of working miracles; thus
Elishah did for the the woman, who was a wife to the Son of a Propher; that out
of a little pot of oil she poured out till the vessels were all full, and then
the oil stayed; 2 King. 4. Thus Elijah by raising the widows son from the
dead. 1 King. 17. 20, 21. He first prayed to the Lord, there was his prevalency
with God. Then he stretched himself upon the child three times, saying O Lord
my God, I pray thee, let this childs soul come into him again. And the Lord
heard the voice of Elijah, and the soul of the child came into him again, and
the child revived.

Thus Christ was famed for miracles, therefore his name was to be Wonderful;
Isa. 4. Take a view of the Gospel, and this will be very evident; wonderful
in his conception, born of a Virgin; wonderfully preserved, when the edict went
out, that all male children should be put to death; wonderful in his works;
Joh. 2. 9. He turns water into wine, he cures a disease of thirty eight years
continuance. Joh. 5. He fed 500. with five loaves and two fishes. Joh. 6. He
healed a woman crooked, and bowed together 18. years. Luke 13. Cleanses a
leper, with only saying Be thou clean. Mat. 8. Heals the palsy. Mat. 9. The
lunatique. Mar. 4. dispossesseth Devils, cast out unclean spirits; Mat. 15.
Thus Christ answered the disciples of John and gave a full testimony of
himself, Luke 7. 22. Go tell John what things ye have seen and heard, how that
the blind see, the lame walk, the deaf hear, the Lepers are cleansed, the dead
are raised, and to the poor the Gospel is preached. Herod confesses, Math. 14.
2. that he was some great Prophet, or John Baptist that was risen from the
dead; therefore mighty works did show themselves in him; and Christ pleads this
as a testimony of himself, the works that he had done; Joh. 14. 11, 12. Believe
me, that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else believe me for the
very works sake. The works that I do, they testify of me.

4. Prophets were set to give warning of approaching evils, Jer. 6. 10. To whom
shall I speak and give warning that they may hear? behold, their ear is
uncircumcised, that they cannot hearken: behold, the word of the Lord is unto
them a reproach: they delight not in it.

Thus Jehosaphat set the Levites and the Prophets for Judgment and
Controversies; and they should ever warn them that they trespass not against
the Lord, and so wrath come upon them, and upon all their brethren. Thus Ezekiel.
33. 2, 3, 4, 5 6. They shall take a man of their Coasts, and set him for a
Watchman; if when he see the Trumpet come upon the Land, he blow the Trumpet,
and warn the people, then whosoever hears the sound of the Trumpet, and
takes not warning, if the sword come, and take him away, his blood shall be on
his own head. He heard the sound of the Trumpet, and took not warning, his
blood shall be upon him; but he takes warning, shall deliver his soul: But if
the Watchman see the sword come, and blow not the Trumpet, and the people be
not warned; if the sword come, and take any person from among them, he is taken
away in his iniquity, but his blood I will require at the Watchman hands: This
is a Prophets duty to warn.

Thus Christ he is a Prophet; he warns the people; this was his Message into
the word, which he discovered in the Gospel, namely, to warn the people that
that they should flee from the wrath to come; and not only in person, but he
sent his Messengers for this purpose. Paul, Acts 20. 31, Who by the space of
three years, ceased not to warn every man night and day with tears. Also Col.
1. 28. Christ the hope of glory, whom they preached, warning every man, and
teaching every man in all wisdom, that they might present every man perfect in
Jesus Christ.

5. Prophets had the gift of foretelling future events, and that according to
divine revelation, as they were inspired of God. Acts 3. 24. Yea, and all the
Prophets from Samuel, and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have
likewise foretold of these days. Prophets of old were called (...),
Counselors, wise and prudent. Thus David's being King and Prophet, are
paraphrased on, 1 Samuel 16. 18. The son of Jesse, the Bethlehemite, a mighty
valiant man, a man of War, and prudent in matters, that is, both a King and a
Prophet: And that these prudent men had the faculty of foreseeing, is clear.
Prove. 22. 3. A prudent man fore-seeth the evil, and hides himself. And so
Prove. 27. 12. Thus it is interpretable of the ceasing of Prophecy. 1 Cor. 1.
19. I will destroy the Wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the
understanding of the prudent.

Thus Christ was a Prophet; he could foresee future events; he could foretell
what was to happen in after generationr; he is the (...), the Counselor. Isa.
9. 6. His name shall be called Counselor as well as wonderful; he is the
wise and prudent, the (...), Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God; 1
Cor. 1. 24. Thus Christ could foretell the destruction of Jerusalem, and the
signs thereof, and hereby he proves himself to be the true Christ. Mark 13.
22, 23. False Christ's shall arise, and false Prophets, etc. but that I am the
true Christ, and the true Prophet, you may know hence; behold I have foretold
you all things. A full testimony of his Prophetical Office, and therefore the
Samaritan woman looked for no other argument to prove Jesus to be the Christ,
then this; John 9. 29. Come see a man which told me all things that ever I did,
is not this the Christ? and that this was the received opinion of those people,
you may see verse 25. I know that Messiah comes, which is called Christ. When
he is come, he will tell us all things; therefore the Jews and the Samaritans
when they had found any thing which their Neighbors had lost, they were not to
convert it to their own use, though the Owner could not be found, but to lay it
up until the coming of the Messiah, who should restore it in Righteousness:
nay, in this Christ was more then a Prophet, he knew things they were ignorant
in. Luke 10. 21. I thank thee, O Father, that thou have hid these things from
the wise and prudent, (that is, from the Seer or Prophet) and have revealed
them unto babes; even so Father, for it seemed good in thy sight: For I tell
you that many Prophets and Kings have desired to see these things which you
see, and have not seen them; and to hear these things which you hear, and have
not heard them.

6. Prophets were lights for the people to walk by; and in this respect it was
that David was called The light of Israel; not only because he was King, but
because he was Prophet, 2 Samuel 21. 17. Thus Christ is very plain, (...), Ye are
the Lights of the world; Thus Prophets were not only called Columnae Domini,
but Lucernae Israelis, Candles of the Lord; therefore was it that Christ had
such a Recourse to the Light and the candle to express a Prophets duty by, Mat.
5. 15, 16.

Thus Christ is a Prophet, a great light. John 12. 32. I am the Light of the
world. And John 8. 12. I am the light of the world; he that follows me, shall
not walk in darkness, but have the light of life. Other Prophets were as the
light of the Moon and Stars, borrowed lights, and divided lights, but Christ
shines with his own brightness; and thus we find the discovery made by the Son
more glorious then all that went before, though the former were (...), at
sundry times, and in diverse manners. Heb. 1. 1. God appeared unto the fathers
in times past by the Prophets, but has in these latter days spoken to us by
his Son, whom he has made Heir of all things, (...), who is the brightness or
splendour of his Fathers Glory, and the express image of his person, or a lively
Character of his Hypostasis or subsistence. Hab. 3, 3, 4. The holy one came
from Paran, his glory covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his
praise, and his brightness was as the Light, and he had bright beams out of his
side, and there was the hiding of his power. Thus the Prophet Isaiah
illustrateth this office, Isa. 9. 6. For unto us a Child is born, unto us a son
is given, his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the
Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; and in him it was that those that
walked in darkness have seen a great light; and those that dwelt in the land of
the shadow of death, upon them has the light shined. This was the clear
Prophecy of Christ, which we find fulfilled in him. Luke 2. 32. A light to
lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of the people Israel, (...). A light
revealed, a light in order to a farther manifestation of God to the Gentles.
This testimony Christ gives of himself, who like other light cannot make a
false representation of its self. John 12. 46. I am come a light into the
world, that whosoever believes in me should not abide in darkness. Christ has
all the properties of light; to this purpose consider a few particulars.

1. Light was the first Creature in the visible creation that God saw any
beauty in. Genesis 1. 3. God said let there be light, and there was ligbt; till
then the earth was without form and void, a Chaos, Rudis indigestaque moles.
and darkness was upon the face of the whole earth.

Thus Christ is the light, in whom the Father takes complacency, and in him
also does he accept of men. In whom we have redemption, Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we
are made acceptable, Ephesians. 1. 6. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased, Mat. 3. 17. He is the Benjamin whom we must carry with us, or we must
not see the Lords face; For without faith in him it is impossible to please God.

2. Light is good; and this appeared as soon as it was created. Genesis 1. 4. God
saw the light that it was good, and God put a distinction between the light and
between the darkness.

Thus Christ will be acknowledged by all those whom he has redeemed from
Egyptian darkness, that he is good. You that have tasted of his goodness, I
appeal to your own experiences; as for those that have not tasted, they will
not believe, because they see not.

3. Light manifests it self and other things to the eye; light discovers it
self and other Creatures to the understanding. Ephesians. 5. 13. But all things
that are discovered, are made manifest to the light; for whatsoever does make
manifest, is light.

Thus Christ he bore witness, or manifested himself. John 8. 16, 17, 18. I
judge of my self, and my judgment is true: Is it not written in your Law, that
the witness of two men is true? Deuteronomy. 17. 6. I am one that bear witness of my
self; but yet I am not alone; the Father that sent me, bears witness of me
also. Thus John 14. 21. They that keep the Commandments, love the Father; and
such Christ will love, and manifest himself unto. So he manifests his Father
glory. John 17. 6. I have manifested thy name to the men which thou gave me;
I have declared thy name unto them, and will declare it.

4. Light reproves, judges, betrays or condemns: thence false Teachers abide
not the light, because it detects them. False Wares are not vendible, but in
the dark; thence is it that the Workers of iniquity seek darkness and the
shadow of death, that they may hide themselves, Job 34. 22.

Thus Christ he discovers, betrays, judges, reproves, condemns; therefore a
believing in Christ is an exemption from condemnation, and not a Believing in
Christ is Condemnatio. See for this, John 3. 18, 19, 20. A very clear place, He
that believes on him, is not condemned; but he that believes not, is
condemned already; and this is the condemnation, that Light is come into the
world, and men love darknss rather then light, because their deeds are evil;
for every one that does evil, hates the light, lest his deeds should be
reproved; but he that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be
made manifest that they are wrought of God. Here we may see Christ is the light
that both manifests and reproves.

5. Light is a pleasant Object, and desirable; it draws the eye, clears the
heart of all Creatures that are not blind; whither it appear in a Spark, a
Candle, a Comet, a Star, a Worm, a Meteor, or in the Sun, it ia very pleasant;
it is akin to the tree of knowledge, pleasant to the eye, and a thing to be
desired to make one wise: therefore the Epithet of Aurora the morning, is
jucunda; the Epithet of the night, Opaca, tenebrosa, horribilis, darkness and
horror.

Thus Christ, he is light, the pleasant morning Star, the dayspring from on
high. Luke 1. 7, 8. Very desirable; for Nations that knew not him shall run
unto him. Isa. 55. 5. Thus when the Watchmen knew not what the Spouses beloved
was more then another beloved, she tells them that he is white and ruddy, the
chief among ten thousand; and thence is it that the promised seed is called The
Desire of all Nations. Hag. 2. 6, 7. Once more I will shake the heavens, and
the earth, and the sea, and the dry land, and the desire of all Nations shall
come, and I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord.

6. Light is such a thing, that without it ones happiness cannot be completed.
We look upon them as objects of pity, who cannot see, who cannot apprehend the
light. Thus it seems to be as great an Emphasis of the curse for disobedience,
as any that can be expressed. Deuteronomy. 38. 28, 29. The Lord will smite thee with
madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart; and thou shall groap at
noonday, as the blind groapeth in darkness; and thou shall not prosper in thy
ways, and thou shall be only oppressed and spoiled evermore, and no man shall
save thee.

Thus Christ is the Light; him, without whom we must necessarily be miserable.
May not every poor soul cry out as Abraham in desire of a son, Genesis 15. 2.
Lord, what will thou give me, if I go childless! May not self-condemning
sinners cry in the same language, Lord, What will become of us, if we go
Christless! Hence it was that the Apostle could count all things loss that he
might gain Christ. He would be willing to be a fool for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord. Thus David's soul was sore troubled, Psalm
6. (...) Non acquievit mihi, his soul could not be at rest in the absenee of
his God, no more then the Spouses could be in the absence of her beloved; the
word (...) took no rest, is the root from whence (...) Pater, a father comes.
Christ is as a Father, in whom alone a trembling Child can acquiesce, can take
complacency and satisfaction; so as soon as just Simeon had but seen him, this
gave him content; Luke 2. Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace,
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

7. Light is in antipathy with darkness; in which all things are frightful and
unintelligible; (...), all things are illegible in the dark, and all things are
frightfull too, which are not easily discovered what they are; thence the dark
night is a time of terror: but there is an antipathy between light and
darkness, and they cannot be both together; Light expels that as a mist before
the bright beams of the Sun; therefore it is said, God divided the light from
the darkness; for such contraries cannot possibly dwell together, or agree in
one.

Thus Christ is light in antipathy with darkness; Types, Shadows, Vails,
Partitions, Clouds, Mists, all dispersed, and were rent insunder when Jesus
Christ was fully manifested; he was the (...), the Life, John 1. 4, 5. In him
was life, and the life was the light of men, and the light shines in darkness,
and the darkness comprehends it not; therefore Christ is not only the power,
but the wisdom of God. 1 Cor. 1. 24. He is made of God wisdom, as well as
righteousness, sanctification and redemption. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Thus the reason
that the Jews were blind, was, because there was a vail before their faces;
they have it until this day. 2 Cor. 3. 14, 16. But their minds were blinded,
for until this day remains the same vail untaken away, which vail is done
away in Christ. They needed not to groap in the shadow when the substance was
come so near them; this keeps them in ignorance, to wit, their poring on that
which is abolished, and their overlooking the more glorious tabernacle laid on
another foundation. Christ as he is this light that is in such antipathy, he
came to put away deeds of darkness and evil works. Ephesians. 5. 11. That we might
not have fellowship with unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them;
he came to put away Hypocrisy, which is a lurking in holes, and a loving of
darkness. 1 Cor. 4. 5. To lighten the hidden things of darkness, and make
manifest the counsels of the heart. He came to deliver from under a cloud of
darkness, the pedagogie of the Jews in types, and shadows, and carnal
ordinances, which Christ calls their day, and the power of darkness. Lu. 22.
53. Therefore the state whereinto he brings his, is called a passing from
darkness to light. 1 Pet. 2. 9. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal
Priesthood, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth his praises, who has
called you out of darkness into his marvelous light: and so the state of grace
under the Scepter of Christ, is absence from darkness. 1 John 2. 8. The
darkness is past, and thr light now shines, and the reason is, because he is
light, and in him there is no darkness at all, 1 John 1. 5. There is a clear
place, Col. 1. 13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has
translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son: and we may see in what this
darkness consisted: Cap. 2. 14, 16, 17. In the handwriting of ordinances or
traditions, or Judaical ceremonies, meats, and drinks, and holy days, and new
Moons, and Sabbaths, which things were shadows (only dark adumbrations of
things to come) but the body is of Christ: so that as the Tabernacle ceased,
when they got a Temple, and the sacrifice ceased when redemption was made, so
shadows vanish before the glory of the sun.

8 Light is obscure as to its original; though it do manifest it self and
other things to the eye, yet we are in some darkness about the essence of it,
whether it be a flame, or an impression, a substance or an accident, whether it
be something or nothing; for accidents must be one of them.

Thus Christ is light, obscure as to his birth, after the order of
Melchisedeck, Heb. 7. 3. Without Father, and without mother, without descent or
pedigree, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life: but made like unto
the son of God abides a Priest for ever. Joh. 9. 29. As for Moses we know: but
as for this man, we know not whence he is.

9. Light is necessary for employment.

1. Necessary for walking, Joh. 11. 9, 10. Jesus answered and said, Are there
not twelve hours in the day? If any man walk in the day he stumbleth not,
because he sees the light of this world. But if a man walk in the night, he
stumbleth, because there is no light in him.

2. Necessary for searching what is lost, Luke 15. 8. The woman that has ten
pieces of silver, and loses one, does she not light a candle, and sweep the
house, and seek diligently till she find it?

3. Light is necessary for work, Joh. 9. 4. I must work the work of him that
sent me, while it is day: the night comes when no man can work.

Thus Christ is the light, necessary for acceptable service; when the Apostle
can do all things, it is through Christ who strengthens him, and you may see
this clearly, Joh. 15. 4, 5. Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot
bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine: no more can ye, except ye
abides in me. I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abide in me, and I in
him, the same brings forth much fruit: for without me, or if you be severed
from me, you can do nothing.

10. Light spreds it self and disperseth its beams far abroad; thus Act. 9. A
light shone from heaven, so the prison walls could not turn the beams; a light
shone in the prison, Act. 12. 7. What cloud can hinder the light, when the
glory of the Sun appears! how does the whole Hemisphere welcome it coming!
what a large room will a spark fill with its light and brightness!

Thus Christ and the knowledge of him, how is the Gospel dispersed in
comparison of the law that fleeting shadow, which was confined to the nation of
the Jews! but, under the Gospel, or since Christ came, those that were afar of,
are made nigh, and we Gentiles who by nature were not branches, are now
ingrafted into the living olive; Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. Aliens and strangers, Gentiles
in the flesh, of the uncircumcision, without promise, without hope, without God
in the world. Now by Christ Jesus we who were sometimes afar off, are made nigh
by the blood of Christ. So the Ark, the Testaments, and Aarons rod, the pot of
Mannah, etc. was confined to the temple; thus in the day of atonement the
trumpet should be caused to sound throughout all the Land, but no farther, Lev.
25. 11. But now that the light, Jesus Christ, this great Prophet has apeared,
the knowledge of him has extended far and wide, Romans 10. 8. But I say, Have
they not heard? Yea verily, their sound went into all the earth, (...). It is
Emphaticall, their words went as far as there is any habitation in the earth.
Thus we meet with the Queen of Sheba, coming from the utmost parts of the
earth, to hear of Solomon, but Christ was greater then he; the wise men of the
East saw his star at such a distance, and they came to worship him; and this
was the Jews fear that it should spread abroad, Act. 4. 17. When the Gospel was
manifest, and they could not deny it, then they thought to hinder it here; but
say they, that it spread no farther among the people, let us straightly threaten
them that they speak no more henceforth in this name. The name of Jesus cannot
be clouded though it fall in a wilderness; cannot be extinguished, though
mighty waters are let in upon it, Luke 17. 24. For as the lightning, that
lightneth out of the one part of heaven, shines to another part of heaven, so
shall also the son of man be in his day; but first he must be rejected, and
suffer many things from this generation; and thus you may see how Christ
resembles a Prophet.

2. I shall now give you a few Directions concerning what our behavior ought
to be to Christ under this relation.

1. I shall beg leave to speak a word or two, to my Reverend Brethren in
Christ, and sons of the Prophets. 2. To the people, or the (...), the
multitude.
1. To the Sons of the Prophets, or the Reverend Ministers of the Gospel,
briefly. Let us

1. Labor to shine, and appear in the likeness of him whose name we preach,
and whose office we under take; let us be as lights on a hill top, not only
shining, but burning. Let us not be as lights under a bushel to consume without
profit; Oh how did Christ consume himself in the world, all the night burning
and shining! Joh. 9. I must do the works of him that sent me. So Joh. 10. 16.
Other sheep I have that are not of this fold, them also I must bring in, and
they shall hear my voice. How sad a reproof is it that Christ gives to those
laborers he saw in the Market place! Mat. 20. 6. He found others at the
eleventh hour, and said unto them, Why stand ye here all the day idle! This is
the end why the candles are lighted, that they should shine to others; See,
Mat. 5. 15, 16. How Christ brings in this as a consequence of their felation,
Ye are the salt of the earth; but if the salt have lost its savor, it is then
good for nothing but to be trodden under foot; Ye are the light of the world;
but men light not candles, to put them under a bushel, but on a candlestick and
it gives light unto all that are in the house. Let your light so shine before
men, that they seeing your good works, may glorify your Father which is in
heaven. This is commendable in stars, in darkest nights they shine the
brightest; Are there not many in the Land, of whom I have hinted before, and
now speak in heaviness of heart, who are enemies to this great light, haters
of this Prophet? who do not only sit in darkness themselves, but instead of
reflecting the Sun beams eclipse them; whose dark conversation misguids and
blinds more then their bright doctrine leads and informs; what do the stars in
heaven if they reflect not the beams of of the Sun? and what do the
candlesticks in the Church if they be not supporters of the light? I hope my
boldness is pardonable; I do not take upon me peremptorily to direct those
reverend and holy, of whom I am not ashamed to ask information; yet a small
candle may discover the beam, as well as a torch can do the mote; as for the
gracious and painful in the Lords vineyard, they are not concerned: what I say
is not intended to you; and as for the impious, and profane (for (proh dolor!)
I know of both sorts,) I am not concerned what they think of me; Oh that none
of the vessels of the sanctuary might be empty vessels, nor those dry breasts
that are set, or that have undertaken to feed and fill a hungry and an empty
people.

Oh how necessary is a capacious judgment, and how dangerous is it to cease
drawing until it be full! it is more commendable to have a profound and a deep
understanding then a gliding and voluble tongue; though it be requisite in the
Prophet to speak, yet more requisite to know; therefore of old the Prophets
were called seers, workers, and laborers, but never till of late days that I
meet with were they called Speakers; nay, Prophecy by the Apostle is preferred
before speaking with tongues, 1 Cor. 14. 5. I would that you all spoke with
tongues, but rather that ye prophesied; for greater is he that prophesies,
then he that speakesh with tongues, except he also interpret. For in that one
may speak what neither their selves, nor their Hearers understand; May not this
be judged a reason why so many in the land be in bypath, and go astray,
because there were more Speakers then Laborers, and more Deluders then Guides!

Two things that make the condition calamitous, and that is when the Prophets
are either ignorant or unclean; these you may see in the Prophecy of Hosen;
Hos. 4. 6. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; because thou have
rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee; thou shall be no Priest to me,
seeing thou have forgot the Law of thy God. And what shall they be then, that
never knew the Law of their God! And as for pollution or defilement, see the
same Prophet, Hos. 9. 7, 8, 9. The days of visitation are come, and the day of
recompense is come; and the reason is, not only because the Prophet is a fool,
and the spiritual man mad, but for the multitude of their iniquity, and their
great hatred, and because the man of the Spirit (for so Prophets are called)
hates the house of God, and they have corrupted themselves, therefore will the
Lord remember their iniquity, he will visit their sin. Hence the Apostle
promotes that (...), the fulfilling of the Law, that love or charity to God far
beyond his power of speech. Though I speak with the tongues of men and Angels,
and have not this Love, which is the spring and principle of subjection to the
royal Law, (as I have said before) yet I am but as a sounding brass, and as a
tinkling Cimbal. Nay, though he have the gift of Prophecy; and understand
mysteries as they do, and can do miracles as they were wont to do, yet without
this all would be nothing.

2. Let us labor to minister holy things with holy hearts, to reach out
spiritual food with washen hands. Prophets ought not only to have light in the
understanding but heat in the affection. How should the Prophets of Christ who
are lighted, and set up by him, be burnt up with zeal for him! which heat would
cause a thirst in the sold that could not be quenched without some refreshing
streams from the fountain; they who tell others the way, had need walk in it
themselves, or their hearers will think they speak untruths. Oh how sad was
Elijahs condition, when he only remained a Prophet of the Lord! but Baal^
Prophets were 450.

Illuminated directions and scandalous conversations are nothing but truth in
unrighteousness: For this purpose was that judgment denounced. Jer. 23. 9, 10,
11, 12. Mine heart is broken within me because of the Prophets, for the land is
full of adulteries; and because of swearing, the land mourns; for both
Prophet and Priest are profane; in my house have I found their wickedness,
says the Lord, therefore their way shall be slippery as ways of darkness,
etc. If profaneness be not enough to degrade a Prophet, yet it is enough to blot
them out of Christ's book of remembrance. Mat. 7. 22. Many will come in that
day, and say, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have
cast out Devils, and in thy name have done wonderful works? And I will profess
unto them, I never knew them, Depart; and the reason follows, (...), ye workers
of iniquity.

3. Let not our light discover all things as they ought to be, but as they are:
call not darkness, light; Rebellion, Loyalty; Treachery, Fidelity: call not
shadows, substances; forms, power; profane, holy; falsehood, truth: Can light
blush at any thing, except because it is privy to darkness? and that is not
possible. True light puts no false gloss upon a painted Sepulcher: this would
be pleasing to the people; and this is that which a rebellious generation
desire most. Isa. 30. 9, 10. Note it, says the Prophet, that this is a
rebelliout people, lying Children, Children that will not hear the Law of the
Lord, which say to the Seers, See not; to the Prophets, Prophecy not right
things; speak unto us smoath things, prophecy deceits; go out of the way, turn
aside out of the path, etc. But should the Prophet hearken to this? see their
judgment. Ezekiel. 14. 10, 11. And if the Prophet be deceived, I will stretch out
my hand upon him, and will destroy him from my people Israel, and they shall
bear the punishment of their iniquity; the punishment of the Prophet, shall be
even as the punishment of him that seeks unto him: And those are ranked among
the woeful; Isa. 5. 20, 21. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil;
that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that call bitter sweet,
and sweet bitter. Brethren, it is no shame for the Sun to shine in its usual
brightness on an evil deed; what will light pull down its beams when it lights
on a defiled subject! Oh then how should they be discovered! And though the
world would speak evil of us, if we speak but the truth of their evils: yet it
is no new thing. John 15. 18. Marvail not that the world hates you; ye know
that it hated me before it hated you: And as Christ, so other true Prophets
shall not be honored in their own Country: Joh. 4. 44

4. Let us direct our Prophesies according to revelation: surely the travailour
must be in danger, where his guide directs contrary to the true way; was not
Ahab thus? sincere Michajah spoke truth, though it was unacceptable tidings to
the King, namely, that he saw all Israel scattered upon the hill, as sheep
without a Shepherd; but he was hated for his pains, and the 400 Prophets were
hearkened to, who had spoken to please the King, though it was contrary to the
mind of the Lord; for they said, Go up up against Ramoth-Gilead, for the Lord
will deliver it into thy thy hands, 1 King. 22. 6, 7. Yet see the event, verse
34, 37. The battle was lost, and the King so wounded, that he dyed. Christ the
great Prophet, would neither do, nor say any thing which he had not received
from his Father; therefore minor Prophets should shine according only to their
illumination; they should speak what rhey hear, and not run before they be
sent; To speak a vision which one has nor received, makes Prophets false, and
causes shame. Zechar. 13. 4. 5, 6. In that day the Prophets shall be ashamed
every one of his vision, when he has prophesied; neither shall they wear a
rough garment to deceive; there is much danger when the Prophets prophecy
plenty against a year of Famine; and Peace against a year of War, and salvation
to sinners, when they are at the very brinks of hell. See Jer. 14. 13, 14, 15.
Then said I, Ah Lord God, Behold the Prophets say unto them, Ye shall not see
the sword, neither shall ye see the Famine; but I will give you assured peace
in this place; then the Lord said unto me, the Prophets prophecy lies in my
name. I sent them not, etc. They prophecy unto you a false vision and
divination, and the deceit of their hearts; therefore they shall perish by
sword and famine, and the people shall be cast out in their streets; for the
Lord will pour their wickedness upon them. Surely to proclaim peace to sinners
is a dangerous message, when there is no peace to the wicked, says the Lord.
Thence they are termed to be like Foxes in the deserts that go about to
deceive, who have spoken, and have seen no vision, Ezekiel. 13. 3, 4. This Law God
gave of old, that Prophets as Ambassadors should not stir, nor vary an inch
from their instructions; Oh that this sin could not be laid to any of the
Prophets charge. Deuteronomy. 18. 20. But the Prophet which shall presume to speak a
word in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak
in the name of other gods, that Prophet shall surely dye; and whatsoever the
vulgar may say of revelations, though they are not in that manner visible to
bodily eyes as formerly; yet the Messengers of God have private instructions
many times what to deliver; he of old spoke by the Prophets, and now in latter
times he has spoke by Christ; and those that he fends, though they cannot
clearly discern this appearance, who have not the Sun risen upon them, for the
Gospel is mysterious, yet there is a revelation made by the Sun. Mat. 11. 27.
They are indeed humble truths, and therefore a Pharisaical people will not
stoop into the grave to find them. God makes his own his Secretaries, those to
whom he reveals himself; the secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him;
and though some have made bad use of this mercy in promoting their own dreams
in pretense of Gospel revelation, and under a color of divine inspiration,
have promoted their diabolical delusions, which may make a sober man look upon
them rather as Enthusiasts then Prophets; yet if that be Enthusiasm which
Suidas calls so, (...), when the whole soul is illuminated by the Spirit of
God. I could wish that all the members of the Church of God, and all the
Professors of the Gospel of Christ were Enthusiasts; for this is the way
wherein Christ now reveals his Will, by enlightening the understanding, and
shining into the soul of man by the glorious rays of his divine light.

2. Here are two or three directions to the people, the (...), the multitude
that sit under the light of Prophets.

1. Take warning of the Prophets; When you hear Christ's voice, or the voice of
his Messengers, be diligent, and hearken; What! will no persuasion, no terror,
no threats divert your courses, nor stop you in the way! then you cannot miss
the pit, if you go forward; has God set Watchmen to preserve your souls! for
so Prophets are called; then the enemy will suppress you, and destroy. Ezekiel.
33. 3, 4, 5. If the Watchmen see the sword come upon the Land, and blow the
Trumpet, and warn the people, then whosoever hears the sound of the Trumpet,
and takes not warning, if the sword come and take bim away, his blood shall be
upon his own head; he heard the sound of the Trumpet, and took not warning; his
blood shall be upon him; but he that takes warning, shall deliver his soul.

2. Prize the Prophets of Christ according to their worth; it is dangerous to
abridge the Prophets of what is their own: See Abimeleck reproved for it in a
dream by God. Genesis 20. 7. Now therefore restore the man his wife, for he is a
Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shall live; and if you restore
her not, know you that you shall surely die; you, and all that are thine; Men
are usually valued according to their serviceableness; now we may see what
remarkable service the Prophets have done in other times besides their wonders,
and their acceptableness with God; see Hos. 12. 13. And by a Prophet the Lord
brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a Prophet was he preserved; And see what a
Promise Christ leaves upon Record, Mat. 10. 40, 41. He that receives you,
receives me; and he that receives me, receives him that sent me. He that
receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward;
and he that receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous, shall receive
a righteous man's reward. Thus when Jeroboams hand was healed by the Prophet, he
invites the Prophet home, and profers him a reward. 1 King. 13. 7, 8. But alas!
have not the Prophets, the Messengers of Christ, cause now to compalin, Who
has believed our report, or to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed! Isa. 53.
1. Or may not the Lords Messengers make the same objection that Moses made,
when God sent him into Egypt; They will ask me thy name, and they will not
believe me, nor hearken to my voice; for they will say The Lord has not
appeared to him; and thus do hard-hearted people stop their ears at the
Prophets voice; nay, many, as the Jews did with Stephen; Act. 7. 57. They cried
with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and ran upon him, and cast him out
of the City, and stoned him with stones; and was not this the very crime that
Christ lays against Jerusalem, for whose desolation he wept! Luke 13. 34. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent
unto thee! A heavy crime, and the judgment is as heavy, no less then
desolation. Woe to that City where there is the blood of the Prophets found at
the great day of accounts; they are so much prized by God, that he reproved
Kings for their sakes; and shall they be so despised by men, that they must be
hated for the truths sake! God forbid; if the Lords anointed must not be
touched, then his Prophets must not be hurt, 1 Chronicles. 16. 22.

3. Labor for the truth, and the knowledge thereof, as it is in Jesus the
great Prophet; and the way to know, is to enquire of Christ, who is the
infallible Moderator of Controversal points; it is dangerous to abide in error,
like the sandy foundation: what Superstructure soever is laid upon it, it will
not abide the storm; it is no safe rock either for a Kings Throne, of Peter's
Chair, and it is more deformed when it comes from the Prophet; Corruption optimi
pessima, greatest lights becoming false guides, lead many wrong; the sharper
the edge is, it does the more mischievous execution when it is wrong set;
therefore God threatens both root and branch, head and tail; Isa. 9. 14. 15. He
will cut them both off: and it does appear who it is that must be thus cut off:
verse 15. The ancient and honorable is the head; and the Prophet that teaches
lies, is the tail; for the Leaders of the people cause them to err; and they
that are led of them are destroyed; in the original it is, Are swallowed up. It
is bad in both buyer and seller, to speak falsehood: thus Chrysostom complains
in his time, as we have cause to complain in ours, Calumniatores vendunt
mendacium, heus nostra atas; alas for that age where falsehood is sailable, and
error takes place of truth! Now beloved, as ever you would eome to the expected
home, labor that you miss not your way; as ever you tender missing heaven, and
losing your own souls, inquire after the truth, follow Christ this great
Prophet and Luminary, who cannot misguide, who cannot deceive; it is in his
breast that truth is hid, in his Gospel that it is discovered: so the measure of
judging as well as walking, the line or rule for opinions as well as
conversation, is the Gospel; and to differ from that is to be disorderly, to be
Non-conformists, Gal. 2. 14. and this was typified to us under the Law, that in
Christ only was the ultimate resolve of dubious inquiries, and that was from
their Vrim and Thumim, in the breast plate of the High Priest; the High Priest
who was also a great Prophet, who informed the people of the will of the Lord,
as well as offered sacrifice, he wore a brestplate, which was set with ptetious
stones, and in the midst was a Damond of great price; so that when the prophet
went to inquire of the Lord, (for under that capacity I now consider him, being
he was so, Exodus 7. 1. Aaron was High Priest, and yet Moses his Prophet) he
lift up his hands to heaven, and if he had not the filia vocis, the voice from
heaven speaking to him, neither did find the testimony of the (...) the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, then he beheld the Diamond, in the brestplate,
and this was the way of discerning; if God was pleased, then Adamas
ardentissimo splendore promicabat, radijsque fulgentissimis coruscare quodam
modo videbatur; the stone appeared exceeding brigh and Orient; If God did not
promise to hear their cry, nor answer their desires, then Lapillus nihil
quicquam commutatus, sua se specie continebat; there appeared no alteration at
all in the stone; if God was displeased, sanguineus apparebat, it looked red or
bloody; if he threatened death, nigro obfuscari videbatur; then it looked dark
and black; thus they consulted by their Urim and Thummin; and this should
direct us to Christ when we hesitate in the determination, of the nearest or
the directest way; he only is able to declare the will of the Father, for no
man knows the Father, but he to whom the Son will reveal him. Mat. 11. 27.

4. Wound not Christ privately; he is a Prophet, he knows who it is that wounds
him though they pretend to heal. Oh how larg a volume of folly was it in those
people, Mat. 26. 68. to think to blind Christ, and then to spit in his face,
and bufet him and smite him with palms of their hands, and then to cry
Prophecy unto us, thou Christ, who it is that smote thee! Oh are there not
many in the world, nay professors that deal thus with Christ! take heed of
wounding him that has such a descerning eye, that nothing can be hid from;
think that Christ only winks at you, but he will not put it up.

5. Humble your selves and hearken what Christ says by his messengers; this
was part of the evil which was percedaneous to the captivity, that Zedekiah
humbled not himself, before Jtremiah the Prophet, speaking from the mouth of
the Lord; and not only Zedekiah, but also the people mocked the messengers of
God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets. until the wrath of the
Lord rose against the people, until there was no remedy; a sad state to be
diseased and to despise the Physician: a dangerous journey, when the travailour
misuses the Guide. We read that Hezekiah his solemn sacrifices were all ordered
according to the commandment of Gad the Kings seer, and of Nathan the Prophet;
2 Chor. 29. 25. Oh shall not our conversations then be regulated according to
their directions! and what a check was it that Naamans servants put upon their
Master! 2 King. 5. 13. My father, say they, If the Prophet had bid thee do some
great thing, would thou not have done it? how much rather then, when he says
to thee, Wash and be clean? Implying that great things are not to be denied,
when the Prophets command them: and what more is it that the messengers of
Christ desire of you? is it not your clensing they breathe for? is it not to
present you a holy sacrifice, acceptable to the Lord that they labor for? is it
not that your souls may be saved, that they are so earnest with you for? Oh
then what mean you to stop your ears, or to refuse obedience when their
commands are no more then what they have received from their Lord and your
Lord! and consider if you will not hear, what Christ your Prophet shall say at
your peril, Act. 3. 22, 23. And Moses said unto the fathers, A Prophet shall
the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall
ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to
pass, tbat every soul which will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed
from among the people. Oh deaf and stubborn hearts, hear and tremble;
therefore let not that dissuade you, because they prophecy no good; perhaps it
is most true; and what they have received from the Lord, would you have them to
fashion, and alter it according to the time or place, (no Nineve must be told
of their sin) or not rather to bring the place into conformity to the direction
which they have received? and for any man to be hated because he prophesies not
good to sinners, is the worst sin of all; it is no less then an unaccountable
usurpation to constrain the eye to carry other colors to the understanding
then the object is clothed withal; to expect to be healed and never hurt, to
be guided and yet never controld, takes away the essence of the offices; the
very multitude of the Jews, you may see, what esteem they had on a prophet,
Mat. 21. 46. so that when the chief Priests, etc. would have apprehended Christ
they feared the multitude, and it was because they took Christ for a Prophet;
and now there needs no other ground of fearing the multitude then to be a
prophet; those that speak the truth are hated; it is a sign that iniquity
domineers, and every one refuses to take direction; then it shows that they
make no difference of ways, the way to heaven or hell is of the same moment
with them, so they be but passing forwards; Oh Christians, if Christ be a
Prophet, then sit in the light, and have not fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness, but rather reprove them! Ephesians. 5. 11. Shall the children of
the borders, be wiser then the children of the Kingdom! will the one hate the
light for fear of reproof, and will not the other hate darkness for fear of
defilement! will one hate light, for fear it correct him! and will not the
other hate the darkness, for fear it corrupt him! we need not be afraid of
sunburning or surfeiting by Gospel Truth; though we look worse in the eye of
the world, yet better in the eye of Christ; though black, yet comely; though
contemptible to the wicked, yet desirable to Christ; and is it not more
refreshing for yout souls to sit under the warm beams of the sun, then to
lose your selves, and groap in Egyptian darkness? Is it not more noble and
praise worthy to contemplate Gods glory, and inquire in the temple, then to
feed our swinish nature in the cave, and den of fleshly delights? but because
some seem to have good grounds of their contrary walking, and a sufficient
pledge for their refusal to obey the command of the Prophet, I shall a little
examine them, and leave them to fall of their selves; and most of their
objections, may be brought under these four.

1. Some refuse to come to the light of this great Prophet, because it is too
glorious an object for their eyes; they are not able to behold it, and
therefore they desire to be excused; they tell us, they are not Eagle-eyed, and
they cannot look upon the brightness of the sun; they cannot pierce into
Gospel mysteries, they are not able to discern any brightness in them, which
others admire so much. I shall only say this to such, if you cannot behold that
brightness, and cannot look upon the Gospel Truth and the Sun of
righteousness, then you are not right bred: you are not of the second birth;
your eye is weak, you your selves are aliens and forraigners, borne in some
cold Climate, if you cannot behold the sun, when you come under the Equator,
the place where it shines brightest.

2. Others refuse to come under the light of this Prophet, because the light is
not conveyed in the chanel which they are impropriators of, or at lest claim a
propriety in; when light is not conveyed in their line, they suffer it not to
come near their eye when the Prophet comes not in the way wherein they use to
travail, they will not receive him; nay, many stubborn hearts will not
entertain a message, if the messenger come not in the way which they use to
walk in, though his way be plain, and his message necessary, for life and
death; now this is not fair dealing with Christ; may not he who is the way, be
permitted to choose his own steps; or shall Christ rare worse, or the truth have
harder entertainment, because it is dispensed by one you love not, or by one
you know not? shall want of affection to the dispencer alienate your hearts
from the dispensation? This is not ingenuous.

3. Others say, they fear, being made black and contemptible, if they should
fit under the light of this great Prophet; for we se the Negroes, the
Aetheopians are made black, and are deformed by sitting under the sun; as to
this, I confess the Evangelick soul, that inhabits the land of light, where
the sun is vigorous, and where they lie under the beams of the warm influence
of the sun, they are much altered, both in nature, constitution, and
complexion; alia vita, alia diaeta, all things are changed, and become new, but
that they are deformed, that I deny: in deed the world thinks a Negro deformed,
but they cannot be judged so by us, in reason, except we knew our shapes to be
the paterns of beauty, which they are not; so the world thinks true Gospel
worshipers to be a strange, ugly inshapen people, though it is a real ornament,
and their real Glory to be so; for therein they come nearest the true pattern
who is Christ; true worshipers are made like the infallible image of
comeliness, which is only in a resemblence to Jesus Christ.

4. Others will not come to the Prophet, because he tells them of their faults:
not to the light, because it detects their errors; they hate the light for
discovering, and the Prophet for telling the truth; they will not come to the
light, for fear their deeds be reproved; O in my aprehension, this is a great
impediment, for none love to be told of their misdemeinors; many therefore hate
the light, because they fear it: oderint quem metuunt, and searching ministers
are rendered odious, because they represent sinners as they are; now how
irrational is this, shall fear of being told of his faults make the child go to
bed without his father blessing? ought jealousy of condemnation to make the
malefactor hate the judge? this was the reason why the evil spirits could not
abide Christ, because he came to condemn them before their time; therefore did
Joseph's brethren hate him, because he was to be their overseer, Genesis 43. 18.
poor soul, is this the reason why thou will not come to the Touchstone, for
fear of being discovered! then it is an argument thou art not current: dare
thou not come and lie in the light, and let the Gospel, the Prophet come and
pass sentence on the color of thy sins! then they may be suspected to be of a
scarlet dye; Oh how sad is it to lie in this state! sure it is nothing but
darkeness that makes men love darkness: and if men love darkness rather then
light, then it is a sign their deeds are evil; consider how sad it is to lie
in darkness, and you will the sooner be drawn to the light; is not darkness
a state wherein one may easily err? the poor soul wonders, it does not
travail, which is in darkness, though it go never so fast; may not thy soul
easily be taken prisoner, easily robbed, soon be slain, when thou art in
darkness? nothing but mistakes; every bird looks like a Vulture, and every
beast like a beast of prey; every sin looks like the sin against the holy
Chost: and every spark of grace, like the grace of salvation, when you pass
sentence in the dark. Darkness is a forelorne state, thus the work of
compunction is expressed, where the poor soul imagins Christ to have forsaken it,
and to have taken his leave, (...), they were pricked at the heart, that is,
they were benighted in dark as to their search of eternal life, in mists, and
nights, and clouds, as to the hope of their salvation, which state of
compunction is a hell, a torment to the soul: and indeed, hell has this very
Periphrasis, it is darkness, extreme darkness: extremae tenebrae; Math. 8.
12. utter darkness: thus the Ancients used to set out that place of torments,
tartarus obscurus, tartara nigra, nox atra tenebris; chaos, and nox, erebusque
niger, and tartarus amplus, supplicij carcer opacus. Alas, poor soul wilst thou
not come and desire to sit in the light, but choose darkness! then thou art an
evil doer, or thou art blind, and can not see; these be the main reasons why
ignorant souls will not come into the light, they are not learned, they are of
a different judgment, they shall be jeered, or their evil deeds will be
discovered, poor excuses.

6. Is Christ a great Prophet and a light, then, Oh then walk while you have
the light; you know not how soon the darkness may overtake you. Oh then your
journey will be dangerous! take heed of being benighted in your way, and take
heed of a spiritual frenzey, turbine raptus ingenij, of being rapt up with the
light of a deluding fancy: alas how miserable a time is it, when men either sit
still till the Sun be set, and the night overtake them, or to run at every
twinkling of a star! Nunc opus est tanta est insannia transeat omnis Mundus
in Antyceras, gramen in Helleborum; the grass of 1000. hills were it turned
into Hellebore, would scarce purge some frenzifull apprehensions; and the
severest rods were they laid upon somemens backs, would not make them stir
before darkness comes upon them, Oh therefore, Christians, observe what Christ
says, Joh. 12. 35. Yet a little while is the light with you; yet a while and
you shall leave off this Prophet, and the voice of the Prophet; Walk while you
have the light, lest darkness come upon you, for he that walks in darkness
knows not whither he goes; but if you refuse, I shall only mourn for you, I
can not help you; and shall shut up what I say of this second office of Christ
in the Prophets words, Jer. 13. 15, 16, 17. Hear ye, and give ear, be not
proud: for the Lord has spoken. Give glory to the Lord your God before he
cause darkness, and before you feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and while
ye look for light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross
darkness. But if you will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret places for
your pride, and mine eye shall weep sore, and run down with tears because the
Lords flock is carried away captive.

3. Consider Christ as your High Priest that came to take a way the sin of the
world, as shall be shown hereafter, that Christ executed the office of the
Priest; I need not speak to those who have read the Epistle to the Hebrews;
only let me speak something to these particulars, which I hope may add some
light to the explaining of Christ design in the Gospel.

1. The Resemblance that is between Christ and the High Priest of the Jews. 2.
How Christ did not only resemble, but transcend any, nay all that went before
him in that office. 3. Give a few directions how we ought to walk under such a
consideration.
1. The resemblance between the High Priest and Christ.

1. The high Priest of the Jews was to be the firstborn, therefore we read
that every firstborn was to be sanctified from the womb: there was a holiness
that did distinguish them from the vulgar, thence called Profanum vulgus,
because not reputed so holy as the first born; therefore we read that Esau is
called a profane person for selling his birthright, Heb. 12. 16. That is, he
lost the right of being Priest (for that was the right of the firstborn) and
he became one of the common people. That the firstborn was thus separated, we
sind, Exodus 13. 2. Sanctify unto me all the first born; whatsoever opens the
womb, both of man and of beast, it is mine. The first born of beasts to be the
sacrifice: of man, to be the sacrificer: and if they were not set a part for
the Lord, then they were to be redeemed for five pieces of silver, Exodus 24.
20. Which sum amounted to the price that Christ was sold for; therefore the
first born was in a peculiar manner given to the Lord; thus it was an unwonted
thing, very remarkable, that one first borne should not be chief, 1 Chronicles. 26.
10. Since the chief of the sons of Hosah, and it is added in a parenthesis,
(although he was not the first borne, yet his father had made him the chief) as
though it crossed the custom used amongst them.

Thus Christ is High Priest, the first borne, the chief of the family of God
(redeemed shall I say) indeed the Jews paid the price of his redemption, thirty
pieces of silver to Judas, though it was not their intention he should thereby
be redeemed, for they sacrificed him when they had done; that he is the first
borne, See Luke 2. 7. And she, meaning Mary, brought forth her firstborn son,
and wraped him in swaddling clothes. etc. Thus Romans 8. 29. To be the firstborn
among many brethren: is thus to be conformable to the image of his Son. And Col
1. 15. 18. it is very clear, by him we have redemption, the forgiveness of sin,
who is the image of the invisible God, (as sons are of their fathers) the first
born of every creature; and he is before all things, and he is the head of the
body, the Chirch, who is (...), the beginning, the firstborn from the dead,
that in all things he might have the pre-eminence.

2. The High Priest was to marry a virgin, Lev. 21. 13, 14, 15. He shall take a
wife in her virginity; a widow, or a divorced woman, or profane, or an harlot,
these shall he not take: but he shall take a virgin of his own people to wife.
Neither shall he profane his seed among his people; for I the Lord do
sanctify him.

Thus Christ is High Priest; one who desires your pure love; his Spouse must be
bethrothed singly in the virginity or purity of the heart (for virginity is
purities emblem) and he will either marry and bethroth His clean, unspotted,
and undefiled, or he will make them so: But though Christ did not fulfill this
particular in the literal sense, yet he does in a mystical and spiritual: and
though Christ did not marry a virgin, for he lived a caelibate life, yet he was
a high Priest in a more eminent manner; He was born of a virgin, when they were
not so; the high Priests sons who succeeded in that office, were to be born of
her who was a virgin immediately before. She was wife to their father; for they
were the first that came off her body after virginity. Now Christ had the
pre-eminence here, his mother was a virgin after his birth, as well as at her
Espousals.

3. The High Priest was to be one of the sons of the pople of humane stock; for
this was a Statute both for Kings and Priests among the children of God. For
Kings, Deuteronomy. 17. 15. Thou shall in any wise set him King over thee, whom the
Lord thy Ged shall choose; one from among thy brethren shall thou set King over
thee: thou may not set a stranger over thee which is not thy brother.

2. For Priests, they also should be such as were descended from the Patriarck
Levi. Lev. 22. 24, 25. You shall not offer unto the Lord that which is bruised,
or crushed, or broken, or cut, neither shall ye make any offering thereof in
your land: that was the qualification of the sacrifice, and it follows in the
25 verse, Neither form a strangers hand shall thou offer the bread of your God,
because corruption is in them, and blemishes in them: this was the
qualification of the Priest.

Thus Christ was born of a woman, and became like unto us, sin only accepted.
Heb. 2. 14, 16, 17. Forasmuch as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood,
he also himself took part of the same; for verily he took not on him the nature
of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham.

4. The High Priest was to look that the ways to the Cities of Refuge were so
levelled, that the Malefactor might escape the hand of the Avenget of blood.

Thus Christ had his Harbinger before him uttering his voice: Mat. 3. 3.
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight; removing the stumbling
blocks, that Christians might not be hindered in running the way of salvation:
and as that practice was an intimation of the mercy that should be in the High
Priest, we find it fully apparent in Christ. Heb. 2. 17. That he might be a
merciful and a faithful High Priest, in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people; for in that he himself has
suffered, being tempted, he is also able to succor those that are tempted.

5. The High Priest was born to this dignity, he was not chosen, neither did he
make himself by power or policy. Heb. 5. 4. No man takes this honor to
himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.

Thus Christ is High Priest born, the only begotten Son of God, not taking this
dignity to himself, but it was given. Heb. 5. 5. So Christ also glorified not
himself to be made an High Priest; but he that said to him, Thou art my Son, to
day have I begotten thee.

6. The High Priest was to have to do with things which belonged to God. Heb.
5. 1. For every High Priest taken from among men, is ordained for men in things
pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins.

Thus Christ is High Priest, who has to do with the things of God, or divine
service, in that forementioned place. Heb. 2. 17. A faithful and merciful in
things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people:
and the higher Christ ascended, the more divine was his service. He who is in
heaven, is not now so much employed in raising the dead, in feeding the hungry,
in letting out vineyards, in curing the deaf, blind, lame, lunatic, leprosy,
etc. but in more divine services, in heavenly works, divine gifts, inward
impulses, secret whisperings, in declaring the hidden Mannah of the Kingdom,
the Mysteries and the Oracles of God, broken hearts, melted souls, holy
tempers, quiet spirits, submissive frames, inward relishes of divine joy; such
things as have a tendency to purify the conscience, Heb. 9. 9.

7. High Priests were to intercede for the people. Thus Christ is high Priest
at the Fathers right hand, interceding for the sins of the people: This was
prophesied of him: Isa. 53. 12. It is fulfilled in the Gospel: Romans 8. 27. and
8. 34. It is Christ that dyed, nay rather, that is risen, and makes
intercession for us. And Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able to save to the
uttermost all that come unto him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession
for us; But of this before.

8. The High Priest was to regulate the worship, and had the management of the
Covenant, and had power to agitate affairs between God and man. Numb. 25. 11,
12, 13. Phineas the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the Priest, has turned my
wrath away from the children of Israel, while he was zealous for my sake among
them, that I consumed not the Children of Israel in my jealousy, wherefore
behold, I give unto him ^y Covenant of peace, and he shall have it, and his
seed after him, even the Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood, because he was
zealous for his God, and made an atonement for the Children of Israel.

Thus Christ is high Priest for ever, and has the Covenant writ on the tables
of his breast, who is the infallible word of truth, and who alone is able to
direct how the Father will be worshipped. John 4. 21, 22, 23, 24. Jesus says,
Believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at
Jerusalem worship the Father; the hour comes, and now is, when the true
Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth; for the Father
seeks such to worship him. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must
worship him in Spirit and in Truth; And the woman could immediately confess
that the Messiah would come, and show them this, and all things else, not
knowing it to be Christ who spoke to her.

9. The High Priest was the Chief in that great Council in their Sanhedrim. The
chief Priests and Elders were the men that were so often called, and gathered
together to determine concerning Christ. Mat. 2. 4. and 21. 15. and 26. 3. Then
assembled the chief Priests, and the Scribes, and the Elders of the people into
the palace of the high Priest, and consulted, that they might by subtilty take
Jesus and kill him; So when they had apprehended Christ, they led him away to
Caiaphas the high Priest. Mat. 26. 57. The high Priest had authority of
approving of the Prophets, or disapproving. Deuteronomy. 18. The High Priest and the
Council had power to save or to destroy; the power was radicated in them;
therefore Christ upbraids Jerusalem for the death of the Prophets, for there
the great Council or Sanhedrim sit in Christ's time. Luke 13. 33. For it cannot
be that a Prophet perish out of Jerusalem. And when Jesus foretold his death,
he tells it must be in Jerusalem. Mat. 16. 21. Nevertheless I must go to
Jerusalem and suffer many things of the Elders and chief Priests, and be
killed, etc. for they had power to take away life; and though they tell Pilate
when he bad them judge him according to their Law, that it was not lawful for
them to put any man to death; yet this must be understood, that they would not
crucify any man; and thence it follows, verse 32. That the saying of Jesus
might be fulfilled, signifying what death he should die; as though the Jews
could not put to death any other way, but by crucifixion; but I rather think,
that it was ou^ fear of the people, that they would not, they durst not kill
him; for we ^^nd that all the people held him as a Prophet, and therefore they
durst not lay hands on him, much less kill him. Luke 20. 19. and 2. 2. Thus
when the Apostles were imprisoned, they were brought out without violence, for
the Captains feared the people, lest they should have been stoned. Iniquity was
got to that height, that though the Synhedrim had power and authority to put to
death, yet they durst not, because the people should then lose their liberty of
transgressing.

Thus Christ is high Priest, who has all judgment given into his hand; and
whomsoever he will, he saves; and whomsoever he will, he destroys. John 5.
22. For the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son.
And verse 25, 26, 27. For as the Father has life in himself, so has he given
to the Son to have life in himself, and has given him authority to execute
judgment also, because he is the Son of man; Nay, he has not only power to
kill, or to save the body, but after that, has power to cast both body and
soul into hell fire; whom to disown and reject, is condemnation; and whom to
know, is life eternal.

10. The High Priest cleansed the Lepers; by which disease was typified the
grand mystery of the Gospel, to wit, Christ's coming into the world to take away
sin: And here I shall a little more enlarge my self, that the meanest capacity
may understand how his soul may be cured. And what was the end why Christ was
manifested to the world? It was to cleanse and purify to himself a peculiar
people, etc. typified by the high Priests, clensing of the Leper: where I shall
first speak something concerning the Priests taking away this disease.

2. Concerning Christ's taking away sin.

1. Concerning the taking away the Leprosy, we may consider these three things.

1. The defilement. 2. The manner of Clensing. 3. The qualification of those
that were to be cleansed.
1. The defilement; here consider these things, which all are not without their
signification.

1. All Leprosies were of a defiling nature; they rendered the party that had
them unclean: and more unclean then the touching of any unclean thing.
Whosoever touched a Worm, a Weasel, a Tortise, a Camelion, a Lyzard, a Snail,
or a Mole, he should be unclean, but then these things might be dead. Numb. 11.
31. But the Leprosy was of a defiling nature, and the Leper defiled all that
touched him, though he was alive. Lev. 13. 44. He is a leprous man, he is
unclean: the Priest shall pronunce him utterly unclean.

2. Ordinary things defiled but for a day, They that touched a dead carcass,
etc. were to be unclean until the evening; yet we meet, That whosoever touched
the dead carcass of a man, was to be unclean for a week; yet never did any
thing but a Leprosy make man unclean for ever, (...) as long as he lived.

3. A Leprous man's person was not only defiled, but whatsoever he touched was
unclean. Numb. 19. 22. Whatsoever the unclean person touches shall be unclean:
Thus sin defiles not only our person, but there is a defilement goes along
with all our performances and duties, etc. all our abomination.

4. Such was the defilement of the Leprosy, that the Leper was excluded from
the Congregation. Numb. 5. 2. Command the Children of Israel that they put out
of the Camp every Leper, and every one that has an issue, and whosoever is
defiled by the dead: Thus sin, that deep Leprosy, excludes either out of the
Congregation, or out of heaven, or out of both. Oh, it is dangerous to admit
the profane to the participation of holy things! they are to be pronounced as
against unclean, Lev. 13. 3.

2. Consider the nature of the clensing. 1. It was to be done by the touch of
the high Priest: it was the Priest only that could pronounce clean, Levit. 13,
13. 37, 59. and Chap. 15. 48. Both house and person must be cleansed by the
Priest.

Thus Christ must be he that cleanses sinners: there is no name under heaven
given, by which we can be saved, but by the name of Jesus Christ. 2. It was not
ordinary that the Leprous were healed of their sores, but those abode as long
as they lived; therefore when Christ did not only cleanse the Leper but heal
him, the Jews looked upon it as a Miracle, Luke 5. 13. There was not only a
making clean, but a making whole; see it expressly set down. The leprosy
departed from them whom Christ cleansed; but not so with those that the High
Priest of the Jews cleansed. 3. Notwithstanding the scars and sores remained;
yet after the High Priest had pronounced them clean, they were all admitted
again into the Congregation. Thus Gehazi was condemned to a perpetual leprosy,
a leprosy for ever; yet we find that after this denouncing the leprosy and
uncleaness upon him, he had converse with the King. 2 King. 8. 4. 5. When he
was pronounced clean, then he might come into the Congregation, though he was
never healed from his sores. Thus Christ may by justification pronounce, That
the guilt shall not be imputed, though the filth be not wholly taken away by
sanctification as long as a man lives. 3. Consider the qualification of the
persons that were to be cleansed, and that was, they should be all over sores,
wholly defiled, and then should they be pronounced clean. Lev. 13. 12, 13. And
if a Leprosy break out abroad in the skin, and cover all the skin of him that
has the plague, from the head even to the foot, wheresoever the Priest
looks, then the Priest shall consider, and behold, if the Leprosy have
covered all his flesh, he shall pronounce him clean that has the plague; it is
turned white, he is clean. A strange Law, then to be pronounced clean, when the
defilement has wholly overspread the flesh.

Thus Christ, those whom he leaves, must acknowledge their case desperate; those
whom he heals, must confess themselves to be very sick; the sinner must
acknowledge himself sinful, before he look after a Savior, or before Christ
will come down to save him.

2. Something concerning Christ's being High Priest in this regard, who came to
take away sin: he was in this respect a High Priest; and for this end was he
manifested, that he might take away the sins of the world; to raise the dead,
to cleanse the defiled, to heal the Lepers, to give sight to the blind, etc.
Here I shall show:

I. That Christ the High Priest takes away Sin.
II. What it is in sin that he takes away; and how.
I. That Christ came to take away sin, Ephesians. 5. 2, Walk in love, as Christ also
has loved us, and has given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to
God, for a sweet smelling savor. Thus Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from
the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us. This is proved also, 2 Cor. 5.
21. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him. This John testifies at the first sight of
Christ; John 1. 29. Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world. It would be no hard task for me to multiply Texts of Scripture to prove
this: but I shall wave that, and lay down only these two relations of Christ
which he came in; both which witness in their own natural acceptance that this
was his end in descending from the Father.

1. In as much as he became our surety: which Office is apparent to evety
considerate eye, that its tendency is to quit and set free the party bound and
under obligation. Heb. 7. 20, 21, 22. And in as much as not without an oath he
was made a Priest; others were made or consecrated Priests without an oath; but
of him the Lord swore, and would not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after
the order of Melchisedeck; by so much was Jesus made a surety of a better
Testament: and upon this account was it that he had a body prepared, namely
that he might pay the debt which the sinners could not do; and upon this
account was it that he was made under the Law; for men that are Sureties,
before they enter into bond, are free from Law; but after, have the debt of the
Debtor laid to their charge: Thus Christ, Gal. 4. 5. But when the fullness of
time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the Law, to
redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.

2. In as much as he became our Advocate: which Office also denotes taking away
of guilt. Advocate* are in order, and exercised about the justification of
their Clients: and Christ is thus our Advocate, who pleads for us; as our
Surety he offered Estate for Estate, body for body, goods for goods, life for
life: so a^ Advocate he pleads our cause before the Throne of Justice; and two
ways he does this.

1. Justitiam and Meritum apud Deum comparando; He pleads the Law to be
fulfilled, the debt to be paid; he pleads that he has paid the price in his
own person; and then what can further be laid to our charge? Heb. 9. 24, 25,
26. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are
the figures of the true, but into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence
of God for us: nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the High Priest
enters into the holy place every year with the blood of others; for then must
he often have suffered since the foundation of the world; but now once in the
end of the world has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself:
What can be more clear? Thus it follows, Heb. 7. 25. Having such a Priesthood,
he is able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him; seeing he
ever lives to make intercession, to plead, or to advocate for us.

2. Preces nostras ut acceptae reddantur, Deo offerendo: if that will not
prevail, though there is no doubt to be made of it, then he presents our
prayers and petitions to the Father, and so they become acceptable: this is the
office of Advocates, not only to plead satisfaction, but to present the
Prisoners Petition; this does Christ; Rev. 8. 3, 4. And another Angel came, and
stood at the Altar, having a golden Censer; and there was given unto him much
incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of the Saints upon the golden
Altar which was before the Throne: and the smoke of the incense which came with
the prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God out of the Angels hand.

2. Now in the second place let us consider, What it is in sin that Christ
takes away, and how he does it: and here consider these things which Christ
takes away, and then he leaves but little behind.

1. The guilt of sin. 2. The filth or stain. 3. The power and dominion. 4. The
sad and undoing consequences of sin: all which Christ the High Priest takes
away in believers.

1. The guilt of sin is taken away by Christ, which does comprehend these
things in it, which I shall speak to in particular.

1. Imputation. 2. Debt. 3. Obnoxiousness. 4. Mortality; which four things when
I have shown that Christ takes away, there will remain nothing in the nature of
guilt, but it will be removed.

1 To the making up of guilt, there is required imputation; and until this,
there can be no sense of the guilt of sin, until sin be laid to the charge of
the soul; and until the spirit convinces us, and makes conscience point at us,
and say, we are the men, and women, there wiil be no sense of sin; the soul is
not apprehensive of offending, until the offense be imputed, and particularly
applied. Thus we find as soon as the sense of Saul's carriage was charged home
upon his conscience, and he found a witness in himself, telling him that David
had not done so with him, then he lift up his voice, and wept, 1 Samuel 24. 17.
18. Thus when the sinner can say, Lord, I am the man, I am the Traitor, the
Rebel, then guilt begins to appear, and that is terrible; this voice when it
imputes sin, it makes the stout heart to tremble, as the Law did, and the
thunders and lightnings that were heard then; Exodus 19. 16. For I may say by
this is the knowledge of sin, as well as by the Law; so we find as soon as the
sense of sin was imputed to the Jailer in his own breast, then he called for a
light, and sprang in, and trembled, and fell down before Paul and Silas; Oh
then men and brethren what must we do to be saved! Acts 16. 29. This is the
first thing that is employed in guilt, an imputation of the offense, or an
application of it to the soul.

Now Christ the high Priest he takes away this imputation of sin, by taking the
fault to himself, and so laying our iniquities on his own shoulders, and
bearing our transgressions in his own person; he discharges the soul of it, and
takes their accounts on his score, and says, Let your sins be at my peril: and
thus he is (...), The Minister of reconciliation, having quit us from
Imputation, and applied the offense to himself; and that this is enough for the
removal of imputation, you may learn from the first sin Every one in Paradise
did but desire this, that they might remove the imputation from themselves, and
lay it on another, and that they thought would quit them; so Adam laid it on
Eve the woman, and Eve laid it on the Serpent the Tempter. Now though the
conscience do charge sin home, and bring into fear and thraldom, and represent
the Executioner, the sentence and condemnation; yet the soul is really free,
where sin is not imputed to us, but to another. And this Christ takes upon him;
Heb. 9. 28. Chirst was offered to bear the sins of many, and to them that look
for him he shall appear without sin. Thus it is clear, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 21.
All things are of God who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and
has given to us the Ministry of reconciliation; to wit, that God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses to them: for he
has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him.

2. In Guilt, or to the essence of guilt there is required debt, and this
follows upon imputation; for until imputation, debt is not acknowledged; till
debt be acknowledged, the sinner justifies himself, and thinks that he is clear
from the blood of every man, and no man can lay a farthing to his charge; so
that he is like the Pharisee, no debtor to the Law, but he has done all things
contained therein, paid every man his own, fasted twice a week, is no
Extortioner, no Murderer, etc. Luke 18. 11, 12. But you may see in the
Publican, as soon as he had imputed his sin to him, he does not stand to
justify himself, but to plead a Debtor, and beg mercy; he durst not so much as
lift up his eyes to heaven, but smote upon his breast, and said, Lord be
merciful to me a sinner: therefore in that implicit confession in the Lords
Prayer, Christ when he teaches us to ask forgiveness, he at the same time
teaches us to call sins debts; knowing that none can really desire to be
forgiven, where they think they owe nothing. Mat. 6. 22. And forgivt us our
debts, etc.

Now Christ our High Priest removes this debt, Obligando se pro debitis
nostris, binding his person for our trespasses and engagements, by becoming
our Surety for us, and entering into bond on the behalf of our souls; being
made sin, that we might be made righteous; being the sacrifice, upon whom the
Debt of the Sacrificer was laid; and thus he rescues us. This therefore was
called Grace, as indeed it was; for he paid our debts, though he was under no
previous obligation to us; nay, though Christ knew our poverty, and that we
were never able to pay the score of sin, or to repay him, should he lay down
his life for us: and though he knew, in case of our insufficiency, the price
would be required of him who was become our Surety; yet he would bind himself
on our behalfes; Oh this was free grace, to undertake to pay our debts for us,
when he was in no debt to us: therefore the Apostle magnifies Grace, which
bound Christ on our behalfes, when we were strangers, nay, enemies to him by
wicked works. Romans 5. 8.

3. There is considerable in guilt, Obnoxiousness, which follows upon the
imputation of the debt: for as soon as debt is laid to the charge of the soul,
and imputed to it, Oh then there is an ingenuous confession of guiltiness,
which carries with it the sense of the breach of the Law, and obnoxiousnesse to
the Law, or a being liable to the penalty of the Law; and then the sinner sees
himself under threatenings, curses, condemnation: and if he be not stupefied
then under the sense of his obnoxiousnesse, must either openly resist, and bid
defiance to the Lotd of hosts, or else he must fall down, and cry for mercy,
and pardon for the Lords Christ's sake. Whilst a hard heart can evade debt and
imputation, he will; but when sin is laid to his charge, then he becomes a
Debtor, and obnoxious, agreeable to the evidence in his own conscience; and
when this is demonstrated to his face, then he must either did defiance to God,
or fall down, and implore his grace: thus the brethren of Joseph evaded, being
obnoxious as long as they could; but when he came with evidence upon them, and
told them, that he could certainly divine, then they stood out no more, but
cried, What shall we say to my Lord, what shall we speak, or how shall we clear
our selves? God has found out the iniquity of his servants; behold we are my
Lords servants, both we, and he also with whom the cup is found, Genesis 44. 15,
16.

Now Christ our High Priest takes away obnoxiousness, Personam suam nostro loco
offerendo, by putting his person into our place: for the Law would not be
satisfied without blood, for without blood there is no remission; and God
having us under engagement, (to speak after the manner of men) sues his bond;
and being we were unable, the Surety is found liable to the same debt: and thus
the iniquity fell upon him, who knew no sin, because he was engaged with us;
here was grace, free grace; and it appeared the more, in as much as the strait
was greater into which poor souls were brought: thus Christ interposed as high
Priest, and not only so, but as a sacrifice; the clean fot the unclean, the
just for the unjust, the righteous for the sinner, the Creator for the
Creature, Cstrist for man, nay for his enemies. Romans 5. 6, 7, 8. When we were
yet without strength, Christ dyed for the ungodly, and herein was Love
commended,

Christ Decus Coeli.

Christ the glory of heaven, to become a sinner for us.
Qui dat Sceptra, gerit de sentibus ecce coronam;
He that gives Scepters, was crowned with Thorns.

Quique refrigerium, ipse est solaminis expers. He that refreshes others,
wanting comfort himself.

Et vitae Dominus mortuus ipse jacet. And that the Lord of life should undergo
death: Oh what love is this! Thus Christ entered into the holy place, not by
the blood of Goats, etc. Heb. 9. 12, 13. And that he could not do this without
blood, you may see, Heb. 9. 22. And almost all things are by the Law purged
with blood; and without blood there is no remission: Thus the sinner stands
rectus in curia, clothed in righteousness, having his debt paid by another:
which was such a piece of folly to the heathens, Per mortem alterius stultum
est sperasse salutem: They counted it folly to expect salvation by another
death: And why might they not count it well folly, to expect the cancelling of
the bond, when the Surety had paid the debt?

4. In guilt there is mortality, being dead in Law: Guilt taking occasion by
imputation and obnoxiousness, becomes exceeding sinful; and so sin revives,
and the soul dies. Romans 7. 13. and 7. 9. For I was alive without the
Commandment once; but when the Law came, sin revived, and I dyed: And so sin,
that it might appear sin, wrought death in him, by that which was good, to wit,
the Law, and so he became exceeding sinful. Thus when sin is imputed, and the
debt, and obnoxiousness acknowledged, then there is nothing but Plurima mortis
imago. the image of death in every corner; Death, Hell, Condemnation, Horror
ubique tr^mor, timor undique, and undique terror, The soul all aghast, an angry
God, a broken law, a guilty and condemning conscience, heaven shut, a sentence
read, punishment determined, the day appointed, the Executioner ready! and what
can there be then but fear and trembling, anguish, pain, complaints, fighs,
tears, groans, lamentation and woe! this is the state of guilt, and the state
of being dead in Law, which follows upon imputation of sin.

Now Christ our High Priest takes away this mortality, or the sense of being
dead in Law, Meritum and justitiam animabus nostris applicando, by applying his
life to us and his righteousness to us, which is done conjunctively with his
not imputing sin: thus as he was made sin, that we might be made righteousness;
so he dyed, that we should live: thus the Jews when they killed their
sacrifice, used to lay their hand on the head of the sacrifice, and to say, Sis
tu propitiatio pro me, be thou my ransom or atonement; neither was the Romans
custom much unlike it in their sacrifice; which when they had brought to the
Altar, they poured wine on its head, and pulled the hair off, and threw it into
the fire, which they called Prima Libamina, the first taste or the foretaste of
the offering; and thus John was to Christ; which when they had done, they took
hold of the sacrifices head with one hand, and on the horns of the Altar with
the other hand, and prayed that the gods would accept that for their sin, and
be pacified; Talibus orantem dictis, aramque tenentem. and the party whose
sacrifice it was, as though it was he that should have dyed, had not the
sacrifie interposed:

Ille bovem caesurus erat qui proximus arae. Thus did Christ; Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6.
He has born our griefs, etc. He was wounded for our transgressions, and the
Chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed; all
we have gone astray, etc. And the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all.
Thus Christ takes away guilt.

2. Christ our high Priest, takes away the filth or stain of sin: in which
stain these three things may be considered. 1. Defilement. 2. Deformity. 3.
Defect; all which Christ takes away.

1. There is defilement, pollution, uncleanness, like as in the leprosy, Lev.
13. the person unclean, the garments, the whole man, the performances, all
unclean; nay whatsoever he touches is unclean; thence a sinners faith is
corrupt, practices corrupt, duties abominations; when the scabies peccati, the
boil of sin once appears, then may we pronounce the person unclean: for this
see Haggai. 2. 13, 14. If one bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and
with his skirt do touch bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat, shall
it be holy? and the priests answered and said, No. Then said Haggai, If one
that is unclean by a dead body, touch any of these, shall it be unclean? and
the priesh answered and said, It shall be unclean. Then answered Haggai, and
said, So is this people, and so is this nation before me, says the Lord, and
so is every work of their hands, and that which they offer there is unclean.
Therefore the duties of sinners is but filthyness, vomit, pollution, wallowing
in the mire, etc.

Now Christ the high priest takes away this uncleanness, this defilement, by
washing the soul and the duties of the soul in his blood: thus as in
sacrifices, there was the merit of the blood for Justification, so there was
the sprinkling of the blood, and cleansing virtue of it for sanctification;
Lev. 14. 6, 7. and that was the manner of purification, to dip the Hysop, etc.
in the blood, and besprinkle him that was to be cleansed of the leprosy: Heb. 9.
12. 13, 14, 19, 20, 21, 22. read the verses at your leisure, 1 John 1. 7. And
the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, and Titus 2. 14. Who gave
himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify ((...),
to cleanse, the word that is used for purification, under the Law,) to himself
a peculiar people zealous of good works.

2. There is also a deformity in this uncleanness; sinners are deformed as
well as unclean; all parts unshapen, eyes, hands, tongue, feet, heart, head:
and look into the soul, and you shall find it like the inside of a grave, full
of crawling worms, if not serpents and vipers: as in the body, you would count
him a monster where you see the foot and head counterchanged, or were the eye
upon the forehead, or the ear on the breast, we should wonder; It is thus with
sinners souls, and with the powers and facultyes thereof; they are all
misplaced; the understanding where ignorance should be; the memory, where
forgetfullnesse should be; hope in the place of fear, and joy where we should
show sorrow; desire set on, that object where loathing and disdain should be,
love where we should express most hatred, and vise versa: this being contrary
to the true pattern of beauty, voluntas Dei, the will of God, it must
necessarily follow that men are very deformed, uncaeque manus, faedssima
ventris illuvies, pallidus ira, O curvae in terris animae, crooked souls that
are thus misshapen and monsterous: like the Chimaera, (...): part of a dragon
and part of a swine.

Now Christ our high priest takes away this deformity, by causing us to pass
through a second birth: as the potter when his clay does not bear the image he
intended it, he new molds it and casts it over again: thus those who are thus
deformed, they must be born over again, according to his most glorious image,
in knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness: in his own likeness, whose image
is the pattern of comeliness; for he is the gteat example, according to which
every man ought to be framed: thus the more we resemble Christ, the more
amiable, and the less deformed; rectum est mensura sui and obliqui: by a
straight line we may pass sentence on an arrow or on the bow: one whereof is
straight, the other crooked; by Christ's life we may either find a Saint or
sinner: and this transforming is the (...) the east, the sunrising, the first
resurrection: this is a raising one from death to life, an educing an holy life
and a straight conversation e potentia materiae, out of these materials that
were in themselves crooked, yet were capable of being made straight: thus Jesus
Christ the High priest when he designs to make any one straight, he must take
them in pieces: and this was it that seemed so difficult to Nicodemus, Joh. 3.
as difficult as entering again into the mothers womb: so that conversion or
regeneration is called a new birth: and the thing made by conversion, is called
a new creature; and we may consider all the accidents of birth are applicable
to this work.

1. In the first birth there is a father, so in the second, James 1. 17. 18.
The father of light who of his own will begat us, that we should be a kind of
first fruits of his creatures. That is the principal father, God: then there a
is subordinate father, and that is the minister of the word: 1 Cor. 4. 15. For
though you have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many
fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel.

2. In birth there is a mother; thus in the second birth: and this the Apostle
calls Jerusalem which is above, (...): Jerusulem which is above, is free, which
is the mother of us all, Gal. 4. 26.

3. In births there is the seed out of which the faetus or the infant is
formed; according to its variegation, so appears the form of the creature; so
of the seed of a Lion comes a Lion, of the seed of man a man, etc. Thus there
is an immortal seed, the word of God, which as it is sown, so according to the
operation, and retention of the facultyes, forms the soul into its own shape;
and this is called a being transformed by the renewing of our minds.

4. There is in the first birth (...), not only the natural tendency of the
matter to such a shape, but there is an active principle, molding the parts
according to that shape, which they will most freely and naturally receive:
thus in the second birth there is the energy of the spirit of grace, going
along with the seed of the word: and by this it is that the transformation is
made.

5. In the first birth there are pangs and throws; thus in the second, as all
those can experience who have undergone the second birth, and have been
struggling for deliverance, out of the womb of sin and bondage, into the liberty
of children, the state of grace, the Kingdom of heaven: thus does Christ take
away deformity by new forming us.

3. There is an other thing in this stain or uncleanness, and that is defect:
and this is but a kind of deformity; for defects or redundancyes, either makes
deformed; but that there is this defect, we need no more to prove then the very
nature of the thing; for sin is absentia rectitudinis or sanctitatis debitae,
an absence of what ought to be there, and that is defect: and may we not say of
them, as the spirit said of the Laodicean Church, they are miserable, poor,
blind, and naked! and is it not Gods complaint of sinners that they have eyes
but see not; ears but hear not; hearts, but they do not understand: here is
defects enough; I may say of the proudest pharisaicall, self righteous sinner,
as Christ himself says, Luke 18. 22. (...) there is one thing' yet which thou
lackest.

Now Christ our high Priest, he takes away these defects by supplying us out of
his own treasure, his own fulness, that (...), that universal plenitude which
the father has treasured up in him: of that fulness do the children of God
receive grace for grace; Joh. 1. 16. For it has pleased the father, that in
him should all fulness dwell, Col. 1. 19. thus the empty and defective Church
of Laodicea, Christ counsels her to buy of him Eyesalve, and raiment, and
food; thus God shall supply all your need, according to his riches in glory by
Jesus Christ; Thus Christ takes away the stain of sin.

3. There is a power, and a dominion in sin which Christ takes away: which
dominion comprehends these three things; Authority, Interest, and Subjection;
all which Christ our High Priest takes away.

1. There is Authority in the dominion of sin; not only a potentia, but a
potest as; not only power in sins commands, but also authority; sin coming
into the world now pleads custom; it is not in us only as a tyrant usurping
authority, but it is in the sinner as King, as lawful magistrate, in whose
commands the soul does acquiesce; thus sin has a right over us because we were
borne under this government, heirs of wrath, under the power of those parents
who were under this government, and therefore we are under it; and seeing this
right and supremacy of sin is derived to it by our birth, it is unquestionable;
but if this be scrupled, there is another ground, and that is because we have
yielded our selves sins voluntary servants; and this bequeathing of our selves
to the service of sin, the Apostle calls a being sold under sin: Romans 7. 24.
now where there is a sale, the right is conveyed to another; quod venditur,
transit in potestatem alterius; we are now sins which has bought us, or we are
sins servants and slaves, because we have yielded our selves; for know ye not,
that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are whom ye
obey, whether of sin unto death, or of righteousness unto eternal life? thus
death has a right to all sinners, and sin has a right to all natural men.

2. From the sale of our selves, there follows an interest that sin has to us
and in us: for as I said, quicquid venditur, etc. That which is sold, becomes
another: and we have sold our selves, for a mess of pottage shall I say! nay
for hunger and nakedness, for sorrow and misery.

3. From this right, authority, and interest, follows subjection, and
obedience; for being sold we are to obey, and sin having an interest we are
under sins commands, so that in this natural state, sin is uncontrold,
unresisted; when it bids go, we go; when come, we come, etc. Therefore it is
ordinary to see, alium libi^ini, alium ambitioni, alium voluptati, alium spei,
omnes timori servientes; To see one a slave to to the world with Demas, another
to his gold and silver with Ananias, another to his oxen and Land, with the man
in the gospel that refused to come at Christ's command; and the reason was, he
was under another master: all are thus naturally become servants, some to the
pleasure, others to the profits of life, some to the world, others to the body
or flesh; Agar is in bondage with her children till this day, Gal. 4. 25. and
this Christ tells the Jews when they denied that they were in bondage, he tells
them plainly; Whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin, Ioh. 8. 33, 34.
and therefore Satan is called a ruler, Ephesians. 6. 12. A Prince that works in the
hearts of the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. and sins power is called
dominion; and sin a Lord Rom, 6. 14.

Now Christ our High Priest takes away sin in these respects.
1. He takes away the Authority, right and claim which sin makes to us, in as
much as he has intervened by purchasing us of the Father, so that his right (I
mean as to the newborn and regenerate) supersedes sins right; For though sin
was man's lord, in respect of man himself who had offered voluntary obedience;
yet in respect of God, sin was but man's Jalour; and God has not lost his right
in us, though we had made defection ftom him, and cast off obedience to him;
and Satan made forfeiture of his right, in as much as he went beyond his
limits, and laid claim to Christ, in whom he found nothing of his, so he lost
right to man; but though there had not been such a purchase, yet the Father
gave Christ many souls when he came into the world, and those he rescued, and
redeemed, and over those he has a right, Ioh. 17. 6. and Act. 8. 28. it is
clear that Christ has bought or purchased the Church of God with his own
blood, so that this purchase being of latter date then Satan's, and being of him
that had right to sell, the right goes out which sin can claim, and it
devolves into Christ, whose we now are, bought with a price.

2. From the purchase and gift, follows an interest, which Christ has in his;
thus it is with Christians under the Gospel, those whom the Father has given
to the Son, as it was with the Jews under the Law; they were to be holy to the
Lord; for he had severed them from among other people, that they should be his,
Lev. 20. 26. And in this respect Christ may say of his whom he has justified,
and cleansed, and washed, etc. as God speaks of the Israelites, Ezekiel. 16. 8,
9, 10. etc. When I passed by thee, and looked on thee, behold thy time was a
time of love, and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness; yea I
swear unto thee, and entered into a Covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine;
He has an interest in his, seeing he has done these things for them; and this
interest further engages his mercy to them; for it follows, verse 9, 10. etc.
After there was this interest, Then I washed thee with water, and thoroughly
washed away thy blood from thee, and anointed thee with oil: I clothed thee
with broidered work, and decked thee with ornaments, and put bracelets on thy
neck, and a Crown on thy head; thus wast thou decked, and did eat sine
flower, and honey, and oil, and wast exceeding beautiful, and did prosper
into a Kingdom.

3. From this right and interest which Christ has in man, man becomes subject
to Christ, that high Priest: so that here you may see sins dominion falls to
the ground; for if the soul be subject to Christ, it cannot be subject to
Satan; for their Laws are contrary one to another: one cannot obey God and
Mammon. But here is one thing more that Christ does to the overthrowing of the
kingdom of sin: for rhough he have now a right and interest, and the sinner in
his mind and inward man become subject to Christ; yet Satan he keeps
possession, and will abide a wrestle, a combat, a duel before he relinquish.
The strong man has the hold; and until a stronger then he come, though his
title be bad, yet he will not give up his place, so that Christ comes by strong
hand, and casts him out. Heb. 2. 14, 15. For as much then as Children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the same, that
through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, and so deliver
them that were under bondage: Therefore as death and sin have had their reign,
their authority and power, so Christ will have his: and this you may see, Romans
5. 14, 17, 21. As by disobedience of one many were made sinners, and sin passed
upon all, and reigned over all, as to condemnation; so by the obedience of one,
and righteousness of Christ, shall many be made righteous, etc. By the
obedience of one, that is, by our conforming to the manner of his obedience, as
well as having his obedience imputed to us: and thus we are loosed from the
slavish obedience to sin; and this is the translating into the liberty and
freedom of the children of God: for the service of Christ is perfect freedom;
and this is the state of grace, not to be under the Law, whose commands are
mortal and deadly, as sins Laws are; not under Laws, the obedience to which
procures death and condemnation; but under Laws, the obedience to which
procures eternal life; and though Christ have not wholly taken away this Law of
sin in the members, ye he has enslaved it, and brought it under subject it on:
so that sin in the Children of God is not as Pharaoh to the Israelites, a chief
Master-Controler, as it is in the wicked; nor one in obedience to whose Laws
they take any delight; but as the Gibeonites were hewers of wood and drawers of
water: sin serves for good and blessed purposes, that grace may be the more
visible; and though it be in the soul, yet it has not predominancy. Romans 6. 9,
13, 14, 17, 18 Death shall have no more dominion over them; and yield not your
Members instruments of unrighteousness, etc. For sin shall have no more
dominion over you; for you are not under the Law, but under Grace. For you have
obeyed from the heart that form of Doctrine which was delivered to you; for
being made free from sin, ye became the servants of righteousness.

4. Christ our high Priest takes away the sad and undoing effects or
consequences of sin; and this is that which makes sin so dreadful: hell would
not be terrible, but that it torments us; fire would not be dreadful, but that
it burns and consumes: now there are sad dangerous consequences of sin that
makes it so formidable; Tremebundus aggredior: I cannot but sigh to think, much
more to speak of them: but I shall but name them.

1. There is the curse of the Law, or the condemnation for breach of the Law,
which takes place from Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Cursed be he that confirms not all tht
words of the Law to do them, and all the people shall say Amen. Now this Law
knows no respect of persons, no mercy; it cannot be mitigated, so that the
Murderer dare not appeal to the sentence of the Law: the Malefactor dare not
appeal to the command to be tried by that, but by God and his Country; for
mercy is a superadded thing to the command extrinsecal, and of a later date;
the command knows nothing but obey and live; Rebel and dye; if the Law could he
moved to compassion, it were not just.

Now Christ our high Priest takes away this curse, by being made a curse for
us: it is so plain, that I need not speak more to it, then only mention it.
Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us; as it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree:
(...), a curse, or execration. which was a name that they gave to their
trespasse-offerings, because they had the curse and punishment on them, which
was due to the person offering.

2. Another consequence of sin, is, being under the power of death, and being
in slavery to the fear of death. Romans 5. 12. As by one man sin entered into the
world; so death by sin; and thus death passed upon all men, in as much as all
have sinned: thus poor transgressors that look on their offense, must needs
also see the curse approaching, and death ready to overtake them. They dare not
die, and yet they know they cannot live: and this is a sad aggravation to their
misery. A thought of the grave is a hell: Sinners under the sense of their sin
and guilt, dare no more go before the righteous Judge of heaven and earth, then
the murderer or rebel dare go before the King.

Vita cum gemitu fugit. They dye unwillingly, and yet they are under a Law,
under compulsion, in as much as they have sinned: and this was it that made
Saul swoon when he heard this message. 1 Samuel 28. 19, 20. To morrow shall thou
and thy sons be with me; then Saul straightway fell on the earth, for he was
sore afraid; Oh in aeternum valedicere, to bid far well for ever; this is
dreadful! (...), the King of terrors; and it appears pale and wan to a guilty
soul; it will arrest as sure as the soul is guilty: for it is the wages of sin,
which must be paid to the sinner. And as there is a necessary connection between
work and wages, so there is between sin and death: and as those who have
conceived, must bring forth or miscarry, which is worse; so those that sin,
shall surely die. James 1. 15. Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth
sin; and when sin is finished, it brings forth death.

Now Christ our high Priest takes away this power of death, and the fear of
death: having abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light
through the gospel. Indeed death did reign before Christ, but he has brought
it under subjection, and has made sins conception abortive; 1 Cor. 15, 53, 54,
55, 56, 57. Christ has let us see, that we may so carry our selves in
conformity to him, that corruption shall put on incorruption, and mortality put
on immortality; and then death shall be swallowed up in victory; for where the
body is immortal, as after the resurrection it shall be, there will be no place
for death; and therefore the Apostle triumphs, O death, where is thy sting!
etc. Thanks be to God which gives us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ:
And well may the soul triumph, when death has lost its sting, and the Law its
sentence, and sin its power, and the body its mortality. Thus we see Hebrews 2.
14, 15. That Christ delivers us who through fear of death are all our life time
subject to bondage.

Another consequence of sin, is, the Fathers wrath; and this is a burden that
no ingenuous child can be under, and be at rest: And this we find to be the sad
accent of the aggravation of the Prodigals sorrow, Luke 15. 18. I have sinned
against heaven; but that was not all; he had sinned against his Father, and
provoked his father, and forfeited his sonne-ship; Oh this wounded him, I have
sinned against thee, O Father, and am not worthy to be called thy son! To
this purpose I have met with a passage of a learned Rabbi Jochanan, who is
supposed to be that John, Acts. 4 6. When he began to be sick, and felt himself
languish, and grow near his death, his Disciples or his Scholars came to him:
whom as soon as he saw, he began to weep; they looking upon him as an holy man,
began to comfort him in these words; O Lucerna Israelis! O columna Domini, unde
istae lachrymae? O thou Light of Israel! O thou Pillar of the house of God!
whence are these tears, and wherefore? to whom he answered; Si me adducturi
essent coram Rege carnis and sanguinis; if they were about to carry me before
the Kings of the earth, the Kings that are but flesh and blood, who to day are,
and to morrow in the grave; though he should be angry with me, Ira ejus non est
aeterna, his anger is not eternal; though he should cast me into prison,
Vincula ejus non sunt aeterna, his bondage is not eternal; and if he should
sentence me to death, and kill me, yet his death is not eternal; and possibly I
might pacify his wrath with good words or gifts: But they are about to carry
me before the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, that is from everlasting to
everlasting; and if he be angry with me, Ira ejus est aeterna, vincula aeterna,
occisio aeterna; his anger will be eternal; if he cast me into prison, his
bonds are eternal; if he kill me, his death is eternal; whom I can pacify
Neque prece, neque precio, neither with prayer and entreaty, nor with Bribe or
Present: and furthermore there are two ways before me; one to Paradise, the
other to hell; and I know not whither of them they will lead me; Nonne igitur
flerem? shall I then refrain mine eyes from tears? This was the sense that
those of old had of the wrath of God; and indeed if it be once kindled, who can
abide it? The Concomitants of which wrath you may see, Ezekiel. 21. 31, 32. I will
pour out my indignation upon thee, I will blow against thee in the fire of my
wrath, and deliver thee into the hand of the brutish men, and skillful to
destroy; thou shall be for fuel to the fire; thy blood shall be in the midst of
the land, thou shall be no more remembered, for I the Lord have spoken it; thus
is the wrath of God a consequent of sin.

Now Christ our high Priest takes away this; he pacifies the Fathers wrath by
interposing and becoming our Peace Offering. So that though our sins be upon
Christ, yet we see the testimony of the Father is, That Christ is his beloved
Son, in whom he is well pleased, Mat. 3. And thus the Apostle infers our
acceptance; Ephesians. 1. 5, 6, 7. Our acceptance is in the beloved, in whom we
have redemption through his blood. The Roman Catholics have a ceremony that
does illustrate this, and make it very plain, to wit, their Agni Dei; Certain
Wafers of wax in the form of a lamb, mixed with holy water, which they give unto
the people; and amongst other things, that these Wafers are useful for, they
are good for this; Quod a fulgore and tempestate fideles and credentes
defendunt propter virtutem benedictionis and consecrationis, that they defend
the faithful and believer from Tempests, Thunders and Lightnings (which are
Emblems of Gods wrath in Scripture) by the vettue of their sanctity given to
them at their consecration; and if Consecraters add virtue, Christ was
consecrated for evermore, Heb. 7. 28. And that this wrath is taken away, see
Romans 5. 8, 9. For if Christ dyed when we were yet sinners; much more being
justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. So 1 These. 1.
10. Even Jesus which delivered us from the wrath to come.

4. Another consequence of sin, is, an aptitude and proness to sin, which comes
from the commission of sin; Peccando discas peccare; frequent repetitions make
an action facile and easy, and so grow into an habit; and this is the method
that Satan uses in tempting; A minori ad majus; first creep, and then go;
Leviora solent esse haeresium, leviora facinorum initia; first Peter only
denies, then he proceeds to back it with an oath, to curse and swear, that he
knows not Christ: First dispositions, then habits; thus sin grows from the bud
into the stalk, then to the blossom, then the fruit: so that sin grows natural
to the flesh; so that the soul may doubt as David did of Saul, I shall one day
dye by the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 20. 31. First sin appears modest; but after
familiarity, it grows impudent, and then it clasms authority and right, and so
sets up an interest, or a kingdom crossing the kingdom of grace, and at length
comes to be a Law.

Now this Christ our high Priest takes away by working us to a conformity by
degrees, and setting up another Law in the mind that resists the Law in the
members: for as Nemo repent fit turpissimus, no man is desperately wicked at
the first motion; so no man gets to the top of piety at the first step, but by
degrees. Romans 7. 21, 22. When the Apostle had complained of his body of death,
he presently thanks God through Christ, as taking away that proness and
propensity in the flesh by the minds conquest over it. Now as the disposition
to sin by frequent reiterating grows into a habit; so does grace; the way which
was tedious, and in which the feet of the soul were not used to tread, by often
walking becomes delightsome; and the yoke by often drawing in it, becomes
easy, and the burden light.

5. There is another consequent in sin, and that is bondage, slavery,
thraldom; in which bondage these things are considerable.

1. In bondage there is a subjection; that Agar the mother of bondslaves, and
the type of her posterity, was a servant under command, Gal. 4. 22. (...), a
bondwoman.

2. These in bondage have no title to the privileges of sons.

1. They have no title to the privileges of the fathers house; therefore says
Sarah, Cast out the bondwoman and her son, Ger. 21. 10. and Gal. 4. 30. (...),
cast out the servant and her son.

2. Those in bondage have not right to the inheritance, as sons have; so it
follows with Sarah, Cast out the bondwomman and her son, for she shall not
inherit with my son, Gal. 4. 30. and Genesis 21. 10.

3. In bondage there is this considerable, to wit a handwriting, or some
Indenture as in binding Apprentices or, booking them, as the custom is at
statutes in hireing servants; (...), the articles in writing.

Now Christ our High Priest takes away all these; when the High Priest dyed, it
was a year of libery to all captives and bondmen; and so it is in Christ's
death; for by this we are both made free from sin, and become the servants of
righteousness, Romans 6. 18. and the Apostle. 1 Cor. 7. 22. tells us plainly,
that the Lords servants are all freemen: and as to the right of sons, this
Christ intitles us in, Ephesians. 1. 10. 11. That all might be gathered together in
one in Christ. In whom we have obtained the inheritance of sons; Those that
were bondmen, not having any thing to do, no not so much as to take his name
into their mouths, now made sons, and adopted, and obtaining the privileges of
sons; thus 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. Blessed be the God and father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which according to his abundant mercy has begotton us again unto a
lively hope, by the resurrection of Christ from the dead; To an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled, reserved for us in the heavens. That inheritance
to which we could claim no right by our first birth, he has begot us again,
and of bondmen made us free, of bastards sons, and so the inheritance is ours;
and as for the handwriting which tied us to this bondage, that he also takes
away; Col. 2. 13, 14. and being dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of the
flesh, he has quickened you together with him, having forgiven you all
trespasses, blotting out the handwriting of ordinances which was against us,
which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross;
here are the phrases that do witness the cancelling of this bond, (...)
blotting it out; (...), he took it from amongst us, (...), he fastened it to his
cross, in public view; thus we may find at large the manner of the seting
the malefactor at liberty which will give great light to the way and manner how
Christ sets sinners at liberty from this bondage, and slavery and fear; when
any one had done any evil that should cause the avenger of blood to follow him,
he would flee to a City of refuge, and the congregation should judge between
the slayer and avenger of blood, and they should restore him to the City of
refuge whether he fled, until the death of the High Priest; but if the slayer
should at any time, between his offense and the death of the High Priest, come
out of the City into the borders, he should be liable to death (Christ is the
alone rock, out of whom there is no safety) but at the death of the High
Priest, the malefactor should be restored to his possessions again, Numb. 35.
25, 26, 27, 28. thus we find until Christ's death sin reigned in the world, but
he has now put it under his feet; and while men are under the law of works,
though they can sometimes fly to their integrity to save them, yet every small
sin is as a coming out of the City into the borders, and then they are liable
again to the avenger of blood; but it is not so with those that come to Christ;
sin does not make them dismayed: if we sin we have an advocate with the father;
every sin does not enslave; thus you see the resemblance between the High
Priest and Christ, which was the first thing I propounded, in this office.

2. Let us also consider the transcendency of the office of Christ, and the
person of Christ, to this Jewish High Priest, and so we may be more fully
convinced of his power and efficacy in taking away sin, which was the great
errand why Christ came into the world, as atonment was the special employment
of the High Priest; we are but too apt to judge things according to their
outward appearance; and thence it is that many think so lowly of Christ; they
thought him smitten of God, and that there was no comeliness in him, Isaiah 53.
2. and indeed none can pass other sentence, if they look only at the shell,
the flesh; but look at his Archangelicall soul, and you shall find that his
nature is according to his works all mysterious, and his worth according to his
birth, all glorious within; the glory of the High Priest under the law, was in
externalls, in garments and diverss washings, etc. Exodus 28. The coat of
linen, the embroydered girdle, the robes of blew which his 72. bells and
pomegranats, the Ephod of Gold, the purple and scarlet, the breast plate of the
same, the Vrim and Thummim, the twelve petious stones, with the names of the 12
tribes, and these were the High Priests (...) golden vestments; but we are not
to look for these in Christ, they must be spiritualized, and then Christ puts
them on; for his excellency was inward and spiritual; so he is said to be more
excellent, being after the order of Melchisedeck, a High Priest for ever.

1. Christ our High Priest is more excellent, or transcends the High Priests of
the Law, in his unction or anointing; Aarons annoynting oil was but made of
principal spices at the best, Mirrh, sweet Cinnamon, sweet Calamus, Cassia, and
Oil Olive; those were the ingredients; but when the Lord comes to anoint his
son, he does it more solemnly and with majesty. Psalm. 89. 19, 20. I have
exalted one from among the people, and have laid help on one that mighty, and
with holy oil have I anointed him; which otherwhere is called the oil of
gladness; and what this is, you may see, Act: 10. 38. (...), with the holy
Ghost and with power, who came doing good, and delivering all those that were
under the power of satan, because God was with him; thus he transcends in his
unction.

2. The Priest after the order of Aaron was but anointed ordinarily to one
office; but Christ was anointed to all the three offices of King, Prophet, and
Priest. Aaron was anointed Priest, Saul anointed King, Elisha anointed prophet,
Melchisedeck King and Priest, Moses Priest and Prophet, David King and Prophet,
but Christ was King, Priest and Prophet, and he is said to be after the order
of Melchisedeck, but he was the perfectest of that order; he exceeded
Melchisedeck himself; not only King of righteousness, the but prophet and
light of the world, and the Priest of the most high God.

3. The garments of the High Priest were of corruptible materials; they were
earthly and after the fashion of this world, such as moths could corrupt, or
thieves break through and steal, but Christ was not so arrayed, but he was
clothed with majesty, with beauty; with Glory as with a garment; nay see,
Psalm. 132. 16. He was clothed with salvation, a garment that never was worn
by man before; He was clothed in a vesture dipped in blood (or in red apparel,
Isa. 63. 2.) and his name was called the word of God, Rev. 19. 13.

4. The High Priest was to be without bodily blemish, which you may see clearly
set forth, Lev. 21. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Whatsoever man he be that has
a blemish, he shall not approach to offer the food or the bread of God; he who
is blind or lame, or has a flat nose, or any thing superfluous or
broken-footed, or broken-handed, or crooke-backt, or a dwarf, or has a blemish
in his eye, or the scurvie, etc. He shall not come nigh to offer the offering
made by fire, he shall not go into the veil, nor approach the altar, because
he has a blemish, that he profane not my sanctuary; for I the Lord do
sanctify them; now Christ he was not only without bodily blemish, but without
soul blemish; and so ought those to be who are employed in the same work
(scandalous Priests profane the holy thing they teach.) That he was so holy,
see Heb. 7. 26. For such an High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, made higher then the heavens. Who need not
offer for his own sins first, and then for the sins of the people. So 1 Pet. 1.
18, 19. For they are not redeemed with silver and gold, corruptible things: But
with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without spot or without blemish.

5. The High Priest in his atonement, used to take two goats, one whereof was
sacrificed, the other was to escape, and carry the sins of the people into the
wilderness, to be forgotten; now Christ he excelled here, in taking two
natures, corporeal and spiritual, body and soul; the first was sacrificed, the
other not mortal, neither corruptible.

6. The sacrifices of the Jewish High Priests were but the blood of bulls and
goats, and the ashes of an heifer; but Christ transcended here and made use of
his own blood, his own life; neither by the blood of bulls and goats, and
calves but by his own blood he entered once into the holy place, having
obtained eternal redemption for us, Hebrews 9. 12.

7. Their High Priest when he went to make attonment, was glad first to offer
for himself, for whilst he was compassed about with infirmities, he could not
have compassion; Heb. 9. 7. not without blood which he offered for himself and
the sins of the people; but Christ as I said before, he was so holy, etc.
without blemish, that he needed not offer daily for his own sins first, and
then for the sins of the people, Heb. 7. 27. for though the law made them High
Priests which had infirmityes (to wit of soul) and so they needed to offer for
those infirmityes, yet the word of the oath which was since the the Law, makes
the son, who is consecrated for evermore, Heb. 7. 28. and thus Christ might
more easily pay a sinners debt, when he himself was not engaged.

8. The office of the High Priest was not to one particular man, but to the
whole race; and here seemed to be an imperfection; for they, Heb. 7. 23, 24.
were many priests, for they were not suffered to continue, by reason of death;
but this man because he continues for ever, has an unchangable priesthood,
(...) aconsecration or sacred function that passes not from one to another,
(then by the way I would feign know how the Pope comes to be Christ's successor)
so that it follows he is therefore able to save them to the utmost, that come
to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

9. The atonement of the Legal High Priest was but from year to year, and so
was often reiterated, which showed that the people once cleansed might return
to their vomit, and to their wallowing in the mire, or that there were failings
in their atonement; but it was not so with Christ; Heb. 9. 25, 26. Nor yet that
he should offer himself often, as the High Priest went into the holy place; but
now once in the end of the world, has he apeared to put away sin, by the
sacrifice of himself, and thus Heb. 10. 10. by the which will we are sanctified
through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all; he did not his
work of redemption so imperfectly, that it should need a second edition; and
Heb. 10. 11, 12, 13, 14. For the High Priest of the Law stands daily
ministering, offering the same offering oftentimes, which can never take away
sins. But this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat
down at the right hand of God, etc. For by one offering he has perfected for
ever them that are sanctified.

10. The High Priest went once a year into the holy of holyes, and there
atoned, and this was their highest perfection; but this holy of holyes was but
a place made with hands, it was a meterial temple; but Chrst our evangelical
High Priest being come an High Priest of good things to come, by a greater and
more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this
building; not by the blood, of bulls, and goats but by his own blood he entered
in once into the holy place, and there he sits at the right hand of God,
expecting when his enemies shall be made his footstool.

11. The sacrifices of the High Priests under the Law, were but to the purifyng
of the flesh, but Christ went further, even to the purifying of the heart; so
the Jews did interpret the Law, to have respect only to outward actions, so
that their sacrifices cleansed but the outward man; and this you may see Christ
reproves them for, when he came to put the right gloss and interpretation on
the word of the Lord and the letter of the Law; they wash the outside of the
cup and the platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess; Math.
23. 25. and thus in tithing their mint and anise and cummin, but neglecting the
more weighty things of the Law; So that he respects the purification of the
heart; That was the thing he came to sanctify, that was the vessel he would
have kept clean; see to this purpose Heb. 9. 13, 14. For if the blood of bulls
and goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinckling the unclean, sanctifies to
the purifying of the flesh how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through
the eternal spirit offered himself without spot of God, purge your consciences
from dead works to serve the living God! and for this cause he is the mediator
of the new testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the
transgressions, that were under the first covenant, they which are called,
might receive the promise of the eternal inheritance; thus we may see Christ
transcending the Jewish High Priest.

3. I now come to give a few Directions, how to behave our selves under this
relation, or office that Christ stands in as to us.

If Christ be our High Priest, then this may encourage us at the throne, it may
imbolden us in our addresses to the Father; and this the Apostle draws from
this very consideration, Heb. 4. 15, 16. For we have not an High Priest which
cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities: but was in all points
tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of
need. Christian thou have a mediator that will not desert thy cause, if thou will not desert his Kingdom; thou have an advocate, who is more tender of thy
souls salvation, then he was of his own precious blood.

2. Is Christ our High Priest? then let us accept of his way of salvation;
there is no other name under heaven by which a man can be saved; he only has
the souls Panax, the souls All-heale; and there is a virtue in his merits to
cure thy wounds and the bleeding of thy conscience; therefore be Christ's
Patient, and come to him for cure; behold the High Priest viewing the
defilements of thy soul, and he comes with the blood of sprinkling to cleanse
thee withal; he comes to apply that remedy which he has purchased at so dear a
rate, and he compassionates thee in thy sin and forlorn state; he comes
weeping over stubborn hearts; and do thou say, I am resolved to live and dye
in this state of rebellion, and if I perish I perish: will thou refuse to
entertain the High Priest under thy roof when he comes with the Candle of a
scarching-gospel-truth, to purge out the Leven of malice, or of profaness out
of thy heart? do thou refuse to be gathered, or do thou kill the Priest
that is sent to thee? then thy condition is like Jerusalems, Thou art left
desolate, and thy sin will find thee out. Sinner, perhaps the day is almost
done, and the night approaching; perhaps thy jolly life is almost at a period;
and perhaps thy wound is growing into an Ulcer or a Gangreen, and it comes near
the heart, and will thou not have the remedy applied? See the Law of redeeming
that house or land that had been sold to another. Lev. 25. The possession
should return to the Owner, but then he must redeem it in due time. Verse 30.
If a man sell an house, etc. he may redeem it within a whole year after it is
sold; but if it be not redeemed within the space of a full year, then the house
shall be established for ever to him that bought it throughout his generations,
it shall not go out in the Jubilee. I tremble to think that any should have
loitered the day, the last day wherein their souls can be redeemed from the
power of sin and Satan! Oh that any poor wreteh should shut his eyes until
salvation be passed by, and hidden from him! what can such a poor soul plead?
Does not thy Christ stand daily knocking? does he not send word of his
approach? Does he not say, If thou will come, I will receive? does he not tell
thee, He has deserved more at thy hands, then thou art able to give him? O
sinner! why, then will thou not come unto him, that thou may live? or why
do thou deal so perversely with Christ, who came to do thy soul good? Would
thou deal so with thy friend? I dare say thou would be ashamed to do it; let
him then be accepted by thee, who is so willing to accept of thee; Or thy blood
shall be required at thine own hands. What, has Christ stretched out his arms
all the day long, and will thou be still disobedient? and will thou yet
gainsay? there are many in the world that count it not only a duty, but an
honor to be truly Christians; and do thou desire only to appear so, but
shame to be so indeed? They had a degree of Knighthood at Mantua, the Members
of which were called Milites sanguinis domini nostri Jesu Christi, Knights of
the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose device was, on a Collar two Angels in
white, carrying three drops of blood, with this Motto, Nihil isto triste
recepto. Nothing comes amiss, if Christ come with it; and shall we count it
honorable to wear the Garter or George, and Ignominious to wear the Gospel or
Cross? then it is a sign that Christianity has not its due esteem, nor Christ
his deserved respect: If any Knights service be, then I am sure that this
Knights service to Christ is (...), reasonable service.

3. If Christ be high Priest, then we may learn to bear sufferings for him; he
was a man of sorrows; and can we expect better entertainment in the world then
he had, and be carried patiently and submissively under the very gall and
bitterness of affliction? as the Lamb of God he opened not his mouth, when he
was led to be our sacrifice; in this was the perfection of our Mediator
completed; Heb. 2. 10. He was made perfect through suffering; this he did to
set us an example; as the great Prophet, he taught us to suffer; so as the High
Priest, he set us an example. I persuade my self that the joy and inward
delight of heart, is not greater in fellowship with the life of Christ, then in
fellowship with his sufferings; that is, a child of God has as much pleasure
in death, if he be convinced that it is for the sake of Christ, as he has in
communion with God in the performance of spiritual duties: For this see 2 Cor.
1. 5, 6, 7. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation
also abounds in Christ. And 1 Pet. 4. 13. Think not strange concerning the
fiery Trial, etc. but rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's
sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed, ye also may be glad with
exceeding joy; If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye, etc.
And see what encouragement the Apostle gives from the consideration of Christ's
Priestly Office; Heb. 2. 17, 18. A faithful high Priest in things pertaining
to God, etc. For in that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to
succor them that are tempted; but this is a harsh cord, so that I shall not
touch it any more; only consider the present benefit that David found in his
sufferings; Psalm 119. 67. (...) Priusquam humiliarer ego errans; before he was
humbled or afflicted, he was in an error; and may be he was in an error about
the judging of afflictions; perhaps he thought them to be more bitter then he
found them to be when he tasted of them. And see 1 Pet. 2. 19. It is
thanks-worthy to endure grief for conscience toward Godreversed? to suffer
when we do well is acceptable to God. And the very example of Christ is a Call
to submit: Verse. 21. For even hereunto were ye called, because Christ also
suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should walk in his steps.

4. If Christ be our high Priest, then Christians should suffer Christ to
regulate their worship: The High Priest under the Law had the keeping of the
Covenant, and the Tables of stone, and the power or right of interpreting them.
Surely we ought to give Christ leave to direct us, if we own him as our Guide,
our Prophet: and we will give Christ leave to institute for us, if we own him
as our Pontifex, our Oracle; we will give Christ leave to tell us how the
Father will be worshipped, if we look upon him as our high Priest. The chief
Priest was to give order himself about the things of God, the affairs of the
Congregation, and the sense of the Law; and about Controversals, he was always
the Chair man, or Moderator, the Speaker of the great Council or the Sanhedrim:
and thus is Christ, in order to the managing the affairs of the sanctuary; so
that they determine without truth, and without proof, who have Christ's negative
voice; and they worship they know not what, and they know not how, who worship
any other way then he has directed in his Gospel; and you may see how that is,
John 4. In Spirit and in truth. If the Jewish Pedagogy was then to be
demolished, surely by this time there ought not so much as the ruins of the
walls, or the rubbish to appear: It is a character of the earthly man, and the
fleshly man, and carnal heart (who is immerst in the body, and has his soul
transformed according to the sluggish nature of the body) that would only give
God the bodily service, and not the service of the mind and soul; They fall
short of the righteousness of the Gospel, and come below the pattern of Christ,
who only tithe Mint and Cummin, when the more weighty things of the Law are
neglected: They are Gluttons that would have all the service of God consist in
meats and drinks, and painted Sepulchers; who had rather be rotten within, then
neglect their diverse washings; not heeding the lavour of Regeneration, a
conscience purified from dead works to serve the Lord withal. Christ would
rather have his worship naked, that its innocence might be seen, then have a
private weapon carried under some holy garment to wound him with all, when the
pretense is only to kiss him: in this respect it may be said of some men's
worship, as it was said of a Tragedy by Philo, It was a very good one, if one
could have seen it for words. Some men's worship would be more pretty, if it
were not so gaudy; and it will be easy to mistake the Bastard for the Heir, if
Apparel be all the distinction. The Jewish service was but to last until the
time of reformation, or restitution of all things; their meats, and drinks, and
washings, and carnal Ordinances which were imposed, were but to abide till the
time of reformation, and that was until Christ. Heb. 9. 10, 11. But afterward
it should be in the hidden Manna of the heart. I confess there may be a
wonderful decency and majesty too in apparel, which is the handmaid of the
heart; but that she should take place of her Mistress, is but an impudent
trick. It is very unseemly for Kings Children either to be naked or in rags, so
it is for them to have on a pied-coloured coat. Good workmen use to take
measure of men's persons, before they cut out their work; for their own persons
cannot be a Standard for all sizes; so should they do that shape garments and
fashions for consciences; or else instead of making decent, they will make many
slovens. Neither will the father ever correct his child, because he cannot put
on the coat that pinches him: Methinks the way is more rational, that
consciences should be the measures of those robes which they themselves must
wear, then that the conscience should be peiced or clipped according to the
fashion of that garment which a Master-workman has cut out, except he had his
pattern from Christ. Were I to worship for my life, I would worship as Christ
the high Priest has taught me: for in goodness as well as in truth, Christ's
Yea is yea, and his Nay is nay; and whatsoever is more comes of evil: yet my
Palate should not be the measure, nor the carver of another man's diet; for then
instead of feeding him, I might choke him: and in cutting that which I my self
love, I might cut that which he loathes: what though my stomach will not take
flesh, shall I deny it to another? what though I go plain, yet my fashion is no
more obligatory to him that loves trimming, then his trimming is obligatory to
me; all look upon circumstances as indifferents: why then in an indifferent
thing is my conscience judged of another man? When it is plain by all the
Philosophy that ever I read, that the notion of (...), Indifferent, is that
which has neither the consideration of moral good nor evil in it; and though
the action being circumstantiaed' becomes either good or evil: yet the
difficulty will be the same; why shall man circumstantiate that action, which
Christ has left indifferent? and why shall I be looked upon, and dealt with as
an evil doer, when the action is not capable of having a moral evil in it? and
though it is but fit that all things should be done decently; yet I wonder who
can tell, what shape Ecclesiastical garments should have, seeing all the
patterns were lost (I am sure they were to be lost) when the Temple was burnt!
or are not strait as well as wide, or short as well as long, to be accounted
decent fashions? except you judge decency according to humane custom, or
humane Traditions; and that this is obligatory to me under pain of punishment,
let any tender and merciful Christian judge: read over the 14. to the Romans,
and there we may find the nature of Indifferents; where neither he that eats,
nor he that eats not; neither he that keeps a day, nor he that keeps it
not, should despise, or judge one another; then I suppose they ought not to
punish one another: And there is something more, verse. 4. All Christians are
Christ's servants, and only to render their accounts to him, (and this is the
Gospel liberty that he has purchased for them) therefore who aot thon that
judge another man's servant, as pertaining to conscience? who made thee a
Judge? to his own Master he stands or falls: Mistake me not; this liberty
is but to be given in indifferents; not in necessaries, or those which have the
consideration of moral good or evil in them, as these; I am to be judged, nay
punished, should I take away my Neighbors Landmark; should I take way my
friends life, I am to be judged: should I make that the object of worship which
is not, as Saints and Angels; should I convert the food to my own use, or deny
it to my Neighbor, which his Lord has sent for him, as the Cup in the
Eucharist; should I lay another foundation then that which Christ has laid, or
build contrary to his rule which he has given, then I am punishable by the
Magistrate, because these actions have apparent evil in them; they are evil
works: and it is only about such actions that his power is to be exercised.
Good and evil are the Objects of the Magistrates power and terror: will you not
be afraid of the power? then do that which is good: For Rulers are terrors to
evil work. Romans 13. 2, 3, 4. Do that which is good, and thou shall have praise;
but if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; as for indifferents, thou have
thy liberty, and consider you who are Christians. The same Author who said 1
Cor. 14. 40. Let all things be done in decency and in order, (...). reverently,
or aftet the best pattern; one thing before another in their proper rank; he
said also, If a man be overtaken in a fault, you that are spiritual restore
such an one, (...), in the Spirit of mildness, Gal 6. 1. And he judged it
becoming a Christians Calling to walk in all lowliness and meekness, with
long-suffering, forbearing one another in Love; Ephesians. 4. 2. (...). And
consider, that God bore with stubborn sinners forty years; and cannot we bear
half so long with tender consciences? therefore Christians sheath not your
swords in one another bowels; you have a troop of subtle enemies who will
dull the edge fast enough.

5. Is Christ our High Priest? then we shoud not be irreverent in our behavior
to him; surely those who carry themselves itreverently before Christ in his
worship, or in their common behavior, they know not what they do, nor before
whom they are; it is Christ your High Priest with whom you have to do; revile
not his person, nor the purity of his life by thy profaness or indirect
conversation. Paul pleads ignorance in this very particular for his excuse,
when he was brought before Ananias, and was smitten contrary to Law: He said,
God shall smite thee thou whited wall, etc. And they said unto him, Revilest
thou the Lords High Priest? and see his Apology for himself: Acts 23. 5. I
wist not brethren that it was the high Priest; for it is written, Thou shall
not speak evil of the ruler of thy people. Oh but what will carnal men plead at
the great day for reviling the Children of God, the Saints of God, the Son of
God, the high Priest of God in his most holy and just commands and
institutions? Surely, poor sinners dare not say, they wist not that it was the
Lords High Priest, and the servants of the high Priest that they made sport at:
See Zech. 6. 11, 12. John 18. 22.

6. Is Christ the high Priest? Then I might (if I durst take the boldness)
direct a word to the right reverend fathers and brethren who are of this
Evangelical Priesthood, or Gospel-Levitical Tribe, that they would by all
means labor for a conformity to this high Priest. Regis ad exemplum (provided
that Kings can do no wrong, as the saying is) is a rule for the Obedientia
civilis; so Pontificis ad Normam is a rule for obedientia spiritualis; to
conform to the action or command of the King is to be regal and loyal in
Civils; so to conform to the image of the high Priest, and the rule of the high
Priest is to be upright in spirituals: Oh, is it not sad, and should it not be
for a lamentation, when those that should make atonement and intercede for
others, stand most need that some should atone and intercede for them? when
those that should compassionate others, are objects of pity and compassion
themselves! they that should gently lead those that are out of the way, should
be most out of the way themselves! I am sorry that the Church of England, that
has had so many burning and shining lights, should now be under a cloud, and
obscure in the esteem of other Churches, when formerly she has been their
envy, and her own glory. When she at whose light others might have had
guidance, now stands need to borrow light from othets to direct her self by; It
is a matter of mourning to consider that there are many crept into tfiis
dignity; at what back door I know not; who for the time they should have been
guides and teachers, stand need to be taught the very first principles of the
kingdom of Heaven, the Rudiments of the Oracles of God; certainly the darkness
is great when the blind leads the blind, and the danger is great too, both fall
into the ditch; Difficile est Satyram non scribere, it would make a dumb Atys
speak when his father is in such danger; a very pretender will speak, to see
such holy things cast to dogs; when the meanest of the people are made Priests,
and the profane are most promoted; this was Jeroboams sin, (who had the ten
Tribes revolted for his heavy yoke he put on them, as I have mentioned before)
and there was a sad Judgment waited on it: 1 Kin. 13. 33, 34. After this thing
Jeroboam returned not from his evil way, but made again of the lowest people
Priests of the high places; whosoever would, he consecrated him, and he became
one of the Priests of the high places; and this thing became sin unto the house
of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy it from the face of the earth;
and this was the Prop and Pillar of Jeroboams Idolatry, that he could worship
before the One, the Sun, (which they looked on as the Godhead in unity) when
they were the Priests that were the most blind, and knew not what they did. 1
King. 12. 30, 31. Surely brethren, it is a shame for us, who say that a man
ought not to disgrace his Christian profession by an unholy Conversation, if we
should be found profaning the holy Order. Let me allude to the second to the
Romans, Let us know there is a day coming, when God shall judge the secrets of
men by Jesus Christ the High Priest; and we are called Christians, Ministers,
Ambassadors, Angels, Messengers; and we rest in our profession, and make our
boast of God, and of our infallible Gospel; and we know his will, (or at least
ought to do) and approve the things that are more excellent, being instructed
out of the Law; and are confident of our selves, that we are guides to the
blind, and lights to them that are in darkness, and instructers of the foolish,
and teachers of babes, which have the form or scheme of knowledge, and of the
truth in the Gospel; we therefore which teach others, teach we not our selves?
We that preach a man should not steal, do we steal? We that say a man shall not
commit adultery, do we commit adultery? We that abhor Idols, do we commit
sacrilege? We that make our boast of the Law, through breaking of the Law do
we dishonor God? for the name of God is blasphemed through us Ministers; for
he is not a Christian who is one in the flesh; nor a Minister who is only one
in his clothes; but that is to be a Christian Priest when one so in the spirit,
and not in the letter, whose praise is of God, no^ of men. We must all be
brought before the High Priest, who has power to depose and exalt; for he had
Judicature over the Levites, and was able to discern de spiritu Prophetiae,
concerning the qualifications of a Prophet; reflect a while then, and shall we
who are made the lights of the world, put darkness for light, and light for
darkness? Have we, who are the Reprovers of sin, seen the wicked, and consented
with him? Have we who are set Watchmen, hidden our lights under a bushel? or
have we fallen asleep, and not told the people their sin? then if the sword come,
and take any from among us, they are taken away in their iniquity, but their
blood shall be required at our hands, Ezekiel. 33. 6. Will not the Church of
Christ, the Church of England soon corrupt, if they should have lost its
savor? Have we who should have been Veritatis athletae, Truths Champions, held
the truth in unrighteousness? Oh, if the eye of the body be dark, how great is
that darkness! It is treacherous light that is turned into the nature of the
Object: He is an unworthy and wicked shepherd, who seeing the wolf coming
amongst the Lambs of Christ, instead of laying down his life for them, turns
again and helps the wolf to devour. A hypocrite, or a Cheat that ptofesseth
himself to be of Christ's order of Priesthood, and yet in works denies him;
that prohibites poison to his flock and swalloweth it himself; who instead of
being the Ray or Medium wherein the light of the Sun is conveyed to the soul,
either makes a false representation, or else eclipses the light, or keeps them
under the shadow. If Christ be a Father, where is his honor? and if he be a
Master, where is his fear? O Priests, that despise his name! Mal. 1. 6. And if
ye ask wherein his name is despised; it is in offering polluted Bread, in
making the Table of the Lord contemptible, in offering the blind for sacrifice;
this is evil. Oh should not these things be laid to heart, lest the Lord curse
our blessings, and corrupt our seed! The Law of Truth should be found in our
mouths, and we should walk in the way of peace and equity, and turn many from
iniquity, and the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and the people should
seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of God; Mal. 2. 3, 6, 7. But
to depart out of the way, to cause many to stumble, to corrupt the Covenant,
Oh, this is that which has made them contemptible and base before the people!
and when men say, Every one that does evil, is good in the sight of the Lord,
and that he deligheth in them; this is dangerous, because it is a profaning the
Covenant, and being partial in the Law, Mal. 2. 17. May not the condition of
England be compared to the Church of God in Zedekiahs time, who were carried
captive, and yet were delivered after a while? and if the cause be the same in
both, yet I could wish, that the same caution might be observed after the
restoration as was with them.

1. See the calamity they were under; they were carried Captives into Babylon,
the Church destroyed, the Temple sacked, the young men slain by the sword in
the house of the sanctuary; they had no compassion, but took away the treasures
of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the sanctuary, and the treasures
of the King and Princes, anb burnt down the house of God, and brake down the
w^ll of Jerusalem, and burnt all the Palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed
all the vessels thereof; and they that escaped of the sword, were carried to
Babylon servants and slaves.

2. See the Cause of all this misery; was it not for the iniquity of their holy
men* and had not the chief of their Priests a chief hand in it? 2 Chronicles. 36.
14, 15, 16. There was Zedekias that did evil in the sight of the Lord, and
humbled not himself before Jeremiah the Prophet, but stiffned his neck, and
hardened his heart, and turned not unto the Lord. But that was not all, For
moreover all the chief of the Priests, and the people transgressed very much
after all the abominations of the heathen, and polluted the house of the Lord
which he had sanctified; and God sent to them by his Messengers, etc. because
he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place; but they mocked bis
Messengers, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath
of the Lord came, that there wus no remedy, and therefore he brought upon them
the King of the Chaldees, etc. It was time to block up the way, when Guides
erred; time to bring the besome off destruction, when the Clenser defiled.

But 3. Look upon their caution in this very particular, When they return; Oh
that England would parallel it! when the Lord stirred up the heart of Cyrus to
proclaim deliverance, and bid them return to their own land, there was a
generation amongst them crept in that could not show their title to the dignity
of the Priesthood; and consider how they were dealt withal; they were not to
be approved, until they had consulted the Highpriests Urim and Thummin, (the
manner how, I have shown before) Ezra 2, 61, 62, 63. Many were in the
Priesthood that could not show their genealogy; therefore as polluted, they
were put from the Priesthood, and the Tirshatha or Governor said unto them,
that they should not eat of the holy things, until there stood up a Priest
with Urim and Thummin. Should there be the same diligence in the Church of
Englands Return from Captivity, it would show that the Transgressors were
become more cautious, and it would probably prevent the like desolation again;
but I fear, should we either go to the High Priests Urim or Thummin, to the
qualifications required by Christ) or to the Register of Gods word, we should
find many crept in again who had taken wives of the daughters of Barzilli, and
are become called after their names: many who instead of deriving their
genealogy after the pattern of Christ, or from the second birth by his Spirit,
are yet of the profane Vulgus, an unholy generation, a sacris arcendi, rather
to be driven away, then admitted to the Ministration of holy things; who
instead of being a holy, harmless, and undefiled people, separate from sin, are
yet in the gall of bitterness and bonds of iniquity; and these must come to
justle out the more spiritual, and the more gracious, the more able, and the
more learned: I doubt this pollutes the Priesthood, as well by admitting the
profane Clergy, as well as the blameless Laity to be the Dispensers of divine
mysteries; and those are they who instead of representing, do besmear and
defile the immaculate Lamb of God; and instead of engraving the Image of Christ
upon others hearts, have blotted it, if not razed it out from their own; Alas!
should none be employed but those that are sent by Christ, I fear many might
spare their pains, (though indeed they are not guilty of too much) I fear when
Christ comes to view the vineyard, he will find workmen that have eaten the
grapes, but neither planted nor watered; many who have been Overseers, but not
workers; and will he not say to such friends, How came you hither? or upon
whose errand are you come? and as not many years since, if God had not been
gracious to us, Troja nostra in segetem, alma Matter in umbram vel novercam
transiisset: Our pleasant habitations had become a Wilderness, and our
Nurseries had been laid waste, and become des^late: So on the other hand at
present, if it be not prevented by a conformity to Christ the High Priest, then
the ignorant, scandalous, and profane, foedissimo luctu nostram Theologiam
conspurcabunt totam, will wholly defile the vessels of the Sanctuary with their
unwashen hands, and render the service and worship of God polluted, abominable,
loathsome, and unclean. Read Josh. 22. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. See who they are
that were rewarded by the High Priest, 2 King. 12. 10, 11, 12. not loiterers,
and those that looked on but the Kings Secretary and the High Priest laid out
the money upon them that did the work, upon carpenters, and builders, masons,
and hewers of stone and timber, and those that wrought in the house of the
Lord; and so, 1 King. 22. 4, 5.

7. If Christ be our High Priest, then we need not be danted at the sight of
our sins, if we belong to Christ; If you have him by you who can cleanse, you
need not fear what sin can do unto you; you shall be conquerers; and though sin
make many desperate assaults, yet it shall be vanquished and triumphed over;
thence the Apostle when he had considered Christ's resurrection, and exaltation,
and intercession as High Priest, Oh how does he Glory in his own mind! O
death, O grave, O sin, O Law, thanks be to God which gives us victory through
Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15 Thus when he had weighed the High Priests death, he
presently proclaims a jubilee to all holy souls, Romans 8. Is it not Christ that
is dead, nay rather that is risen, and makes intercession for us? Who shall
separate us from the Love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or nakedness, or famine, or peril, or sword? Nay I am persuaded
that neither life, nor death nor angels, nor Principalities nor Power, nor
things present, nor things to come, Nor height, nor dephth, nor any other
creature shall separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Remember whatsoever your infirmityes are, you have a High Priest that can heal
them; and he is not so heard-hearted but he has compassion on those that are
under distemper of soul, as he had when he was on the earth, to those that were
under the infirmities of body; therefore have boldness, and be not danted, at
the sight of sins; Heb. 4. 14, 15, 16. Seting then that we have a great High
Priest that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast
our profession. For we have not a High Priest tha^ cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities: but was in all things tempted like unto us, yet
without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace and help in time of need. Faith and prayer are
poison for sin, but cordials for the soul; and when these two are mixed with
experience, Oh what difficulties may they attempt and prevail against! Thus
Sampson, Judge. 15. 18, 19. So David, 1 Samuel 17. 34, 35, 36. The deliverence out
of the paw of the Lion and of the Bear were fresh in David's memory; then what
was an uncircumcised Philistine! has Christ satisfied for thy alienation! then
what are thy lapses, and turnings aside! he cleansed thee in thy blood; then
what is thy infirmity! has he changed thy nature? then he will sure straighten
it; has he slain the body of death? then the scouts are nothing; has he
purged the whole lump of leven? then what are the relics and crumbs! be
encouraged and faint not, you have a High Priest that heales your infirmties as
well as your mortal wounds; if we sin, we have an advocate. The Poets story
that Achilles the son of Peleus and Thetis, after his mother had dipped him in
the Stygian water, he was invulnerable; only that part of his foot by which she
held him when she dipped him, was not, and therefore he was mortal; it may be
more truly said of the souls of the children of God, which become invulnerable
indeed, when they have been dipped in the blood of Christ; and though their
sins seem to catch hold on them as the viper did Paul's hand, yet they may shake
them off as he did, and feel no harm; to this purpose see Zech. 3. 1, 2.
Josuah, The High Priest standing before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan
standing at his right hand to res^ct him, to be his adversary. And thus he does
still; But see what the Lord says, the Lord rebuke thee, O Satan; even the
Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee: is not this a brand plucked out
of the fire! Fear not, though your souls be defiled, yet he can cleanse them,
and cloth them in garments as white as snow; thus we find the Triumphants,
Rev. 7. 9. not only with Palms in their hand, but in white robes: which hints
these three things to us, as learned Dr, Arrowsmith.

1. Dignity; thence the Roman senators had a garment on vincens non tactas
nives, exceeding the snow in witness; thence the Nobles and rulers we called
(...), thence the Greek (...), an Hero or Noble, one in white; thus when we
find that Pharaoh made Joseph a ruler and one of his Nobles, it is thus
expressed, he put his own Gold ring on his finger, and clothed him in fine
linen, and put a chain about his neck; so Mordecai when he went out from the
King, he went in white; and a Crown of Gold on his head, Esther. 8. 15.

2. Purity; thence the Lambs wife was arrayed in fine linen, (...), is the the
righteousness of the Saints; thus those who were admitted as Probationers,
were called Candidates, as being such who were to manifest their purity.

3. Joy and chearfullnesse; therefore those in feasts used to have their
wedding garments of white; therefore it is the wise man's council, Eccles. 9.
7, 8. Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry
heart, for God accepts thy works; let thy head lack no ointment, and let thy
garments be always white.

Thus Saints, they shall be clothed in white, they shall be dignified, they
shall be purified, and they shall be admitted into great joy, being Christ the
High Priest ever lives to make intercession for them; Sancti shall be sanguine
tincti; the Saints are dipped in blood, and they are made both clean and strong;
therefore rejoice and be strong in thy confidence of the merits of Christ; for
this take that place, Rev. 1. 5, 6. Jesus Christ who is the first begotten, the
faithful and true Witness, the firstborn from the dead, and the Prince of the
Kings of the earth: unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sin in his
own blood (there is purity) and has made us Kings and Priests unto God, and
his Father (there is dignity) to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever.
Amen.

8. If Christ be High Priest, then deny your own righteousness: If any one
could have released themselves, or cleansed or justified themselves, why did
God ordain Priests under the Law? they, though they had done all, yet without
the touch of the High Priest, must needs say Unclean; so you, when you have
done all, must say unprofitable servants; think not the humility of the Gospel
contemptible; he can as well cure spiritual infirmities by those means which
thou think contemptible, as he could cure blind eyes by clay, which in the
vulgar esteem, would be thought rather to put them out, then to make them see;
Naaman did thus with the High Priest; he despised the waters of Jordan, having
Abana and Pharphar in Damascus nearer ar hand; and when the High Priest bid him
go, and wash there, he was wroth, and went away sorrowful; he despised Jordan,
in respect of the waters of his own Country. Oh, do thou despise thy own
righteousness in comparison of Christ's! who is the High Priest; if thy
righteousness come by the Law, then thou art no debtor, thou need not pray;
thou excludest the most glorious of the attributes of God, his free grace, and
his unmerited love, his Philanthropy, his love to mankind: Can thou say, that
thou made thy self to differ? Are there not two generations that deny Christ
in works? not only the profane who do no works at all, but such as deny his
Kingly office; but the legal-righteous, the self-justitiaries who deny Christ's
Priestly Office, and put their works in his stead; who set up their personal
righteousness, and sacrifice to their own nots, and burn incense to their own
endeavors; and therefore it is that these, Pharisee-like, when Christ the High
Priest comes, they say, they are everywhit whole, and need no Physician, need
no curing, no clensing; sure you know not your own hearts; or they are better
then ever I read of any in the Gospel, if thou dare appeal to the Law, and the
upright and exact performance of the Law for justification. Poor souls thus
eclipse the righteousness of Christ by their illegitimate and base-born worth:
They eclipse the merits of the High Priest by their own, and darken the light
of the Prophet by their own glimmerings and dawnings. Poor soul! do thou
think that in thy own nature thou art rich, and stand in need of nothing? I
tell thee, Nay, thou art poor and miserable, and blind, and naked: Do thou
think that thou have done all that the Law requires, and kept it from thy
youth upward? I tell thee, Nay; but thou must go away sorrowful; Do thou
make thy boast of the Law? thou art no Extortioner, no profane person, no
swearer, etc. and think to be justified hereby? then the Heathen and
Publican that prostrates himself in the sense of his sin, shall be sooner
justified then thee: Surely you make grace void, needless, of none effect, if
you go about to plead selfrighteousness, and so establish the Law.

9. Is Christ high Priest? then the Saints intercession is but a fancy: if they
have power or worth to prevail with God for the reconciliation or acceptance of
the Believer, then Christ is dead in vain. Angelorum and Sanctorum Patrocinium,
the mediation of Saints and Angels, is but an invention of those that know no
Christ; was any one, save the High Priest to intercede? was any any one but the
High Priest to make atonement? then sure none but Christ can expiate sin; how
vain therefore are they that pray to Peter as the Potter of heaven; to Rochus,
to defend them against the plague; to Raphael, to cure their sore eyes; to
Apollonia, to cure their aching teeth; to Michael, to defend them in War; to
Gregory, St. Christopher, and St. Catharine, to preserve them in affliction?
much like the fooleries of the Thebanes, they must have Hercules Canop^ns to
keep them from fleas, Apollo Parnopeius to keep the mice from their cheeses.
Thus the Romans, Dii terrarum, Dii montium, Dii populorum; as many gods as men;
as many creators as creatures; thence they pray to St. Romain for the
possessed; to St. Gosmas and Damian for biles: to St. Clare for sore eyes; to
St. Agatha for sore breasts: and as though Christ had not the prerogative of
making presentation of our prayers, the Virgin Mary must be employed; thence
they say, Evae inobendientiae nodus solutionem accepit per Mariae obedientiam,
and ipsa conterret caput tuum; mortem quam faemina intulit, faemina contrivit:
so Costerus writ a controversy, and in the front or title page impressed the
Virgin Mary treading upon the serpent, with this inscription, Ipsa conteret
caput tuum, she shall bruise thy head; thus Gazeus sports himself, Lac matris
miscere volo cum sanguine nati: he would mingle Christ's blood with Maryes
breast-milk, to make an antidote against sin; if Christ have copartners in
Mediatory work, if Saints and Angels must be joint purchasers of everlasting
glory, if the Virgin must go sharer in satisfaction, then what means Heb. 1. 3.
Who being the brightness of his fathers glory, when he had by himself purged
our sins, sat down at the Fathers right hand, at the right hand of the majesty
on high; and if we must in our way to the throne go by the Virgin Mary as they
do, Sancta virgo intercede pro me, holy Virgin intercede for me, what means
^oh. 16. 26. Verily I say unto you, at that day you shall ask in my name, and
I will pray the Father for you? And if the Saints or the Virgin stand between
us and divine wrath, what means, 1 Timothy 2. 6. (...), There is one mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus: the way to heaven by the Saints, is
far about.

10. If Christ be High Priest, then let us not set up that which Christ the
High Priest came to demolish: let not us establish that which he came to
abrogate, and that is the throne of sin; Do thou delight to make Christ's work
of none effect? take heed; if you resist long, he can move you out of the way;
if in the building of his Kingdom you will let and hinder, he will take the
sword in the one hand, and take his working instrument in the other, as they
did in the erection of the temple; Oh take heed of wallowing in filth, when
Christ the High Priest came to cleanse; that would be swinish; and they are
dogs, unclean beasts (a creature odious to the Jews as well as swine; 2 King.
8. 13. Job. 30. 1. and the Jews were not to keep either swinherds or swine,)
which return to their vomit when the good Physician has caused them to
disgorge, Prove. 26. 11. 2 Pet. 2. 22. How often have you laid aside your sins,
when you have pretended to celebrate the memorial of Christ's death your High
Priest, like Abraham's leaving his servants behind him, when he went to
sacrifice and offer up his son Isaac! but have you not with him returned to
them again? have you not promised never to transgress more, when you have seen
at a sacrament how dear sin cost Christ? and yet when you have turned your
backs, have you not been as notorious as ever? have you not made his body and
blood rather the pattern of licentiousne, then the motive to new obedience?
alas, how unworthy dealing is this, and what unkindnesse does the sinner show
here! Oh what pleasure can any have in that sin for which Christ dyed, when he
coms to be a dying man? or will the remembrance of sin in hell, abate the
torments? consider what sin is: dare you touch the serpent whose sting is
mortal? will you swallow the Toad whose poison is incurable? well sinner, thou
may think thou have an antidote in the body and blood of Christ the High
Priest; but know, if you often eat poison so that it becomes natural, the
antidote will not operate; if that which was thy infirmity, become thy
constitution, Christ's blood will have no virtue; the sun will whiten a cloth
that has contracted filth if it be but wett: but it will not do so by a
complexion: one may wash of the spots off dirt in an Ermin, but not the spots
in a Leopard; it is possible to make a dark complexion fair, but impossible to
change an Ethiopian. Cum vitium transit in naturam, When vice becoms natural,
then the soul is incapable of Physic; well said Seneca, Desinit esse remedio
locus, ubi quae fuerant vitia, mores sunt; that soul is past cure, when the
wound is become habitual; when Christ's blood is trodden on, then it loses its
clensing virtue; a wilful sinning after the receiving the knowledge of the
truth, excluds sacrifices and offerings, which is the work of the High Priest,
Heb. 10. 36. Oh sinner, take heed, admit no inlodgers: they will be cutting up
the roots of grace, and replanting those roots of biternesse which Christ came
to pluck up; and they will be erecting the walls and laying the foundation for
that Kingdom which Christ came to destroy and demolish; though they be but
little sins, yet they are able to do great mischief: the sting of a Be has
its smart as well as a sword; a little fire kindles a great matter; a little
leaven leavens the whole lump. Pompey had this policy that the Prince of the
power of the air does not want: when he would show his treachery, he would
send some few soldiers into his enemies Country, who should feign themselves
lame, and should only desire to pass through the Country; but as soon as they
had got possession, they would do as much mischief as if they had been whole
and sound; thus does Satan, he pleads This is a little one, and thy soul shall
live: or Surely the Lord has not said Thou may not cate of the fruit of the
tree; or if he have, obedience to it is but slavish, and a denial of thy
lawful pleasurs; but take heed, a minore ad majus est methodus diaboli: ad
nequitiae culmen ut plurimum itur gradatim; if you ascend to the height of
Satan's temple, you must go step by step. Oh consider, you that are professors,
never erect that which Christ came to throw down: do not cherish sin which he
suffered his blood to be shed for: there is a triple woe depends on these
gross evil doers: vae nascenti, vae nato, vae morienti: sin offers souls
holocausts to Satan; it pollutes, divides, shakes, unsettels the very
foundation of the Kingdom of Christ: it quenches his spirit, defaceth his
image, and that is unsufferable; should any come to give you a changling for
your son, it would grieve you: when Christ has taken pains and been at cost
too to change us, 2 Cor. 3. 18. that we should change his image into birds, and
beasts and terrestrial natures, and deface it, and blot it out! Romans 1. 23. Sin
wounds the soul that Christ came to heal, Psalm. 31. 12. Job. 16. 12. it
hastens the hour of death, it aggravates the pains of hell, it never forgives,
Mat. 18. 31. Is the High Priest dead? then sin no more, least thou be
brought again into captivity. I have read, that a goats blood if a diamond be
steeped in it, though no hammer will break it before, yet it will become so
soft that it will be no difficult matter to cut it into what fashion you
please. Oh Christian, shall the blood of goats operate on an Adamant? and shall
not Christ's blood work on thy hard heart? Quam ferreum, saxeum and plus quam
adamantinum cor, quod sanguis Christi non emollit? Take that counsel along
with you, which Christ gives to the woman that he had set at liberty, Go thy
way and sin no more; Is Christ the High Priest dead, and become a propitiation
for sin? then sin no more; and by this you shall know whether you are passed
from the wilderness of nature, into the Canaan of grace, if you have no
correspondency, no confederacy with the inhabitants of the land: for this see
that very remarkable passage, and spiritualize it, and it may give some light
and knowledge of thy own condition and state, Deuteronomy. 7. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
According as you have familiarity with the inclinations of the flesh or spirit,
so may you judge of your condition to be carnal or spiritual.

These Directions being thus finished, I have no more to do but beseech the
Reader to embrace them without fear: for there is not one of them that I know,
that intentionally misguids; and if eventually it do, impute it to the Readers
misinterpretation, not to the Authors intention.

BUT because Examples are more potent then Rules, and men are more ready to act
by Imitation then Direction; because a Guide along with one, or before one,
makes the way more cheerful; I would set before you a Pattern, whose practice
if you imitate, will lead you to the place which I have pointed at; whose steps
if you tread in, you need no other Guide; for she is newly gone to heaven
before you: And now that I come to describe her steps, I would not guide my pen
by interest or affection, but by truth; and that will be the reason I make her
jorney but short, because she was but a while in my sight; and I would not say
any thing on her which I was ignorant of. I dare not positively affirm, that
she walked in this or that way, because it is of a Gospel Track, except I my
self had been a Spectator: but this liberty I may take, to think that she
seldom missed her way, because she was so skilled in holy walking. I know there
is a Physical Possibility, that I may speak the same things of the most
undeserving person in the world, mutato tantum nomine, only exchanging the
name; but moral necessity interdicts me. I know it is easy to put the apparel
of chastity upon a harlots back; but this would reflect upon the Tirewoman,
that she should fit her garments so ill; and this would be no more venial, then
coining brass, and guilding it over with silver, and yet put the Kings
superscription upon it. My design and ambition in this attempt is only this,
that I might write her life as Suetonius did the Emperors, Ea liberate qua
vixerunt, with the same liberty that she lived in; and that I may measure her
steps by the same line which she walked by. Could I write her deeds with the
same life that she lived them, and relate her holiness in as pure a strain, and
could I measure her parts and graces by a suitable and a proportional
narration, you would sooner want faith to credit, then I should want matter to
write. Alexander had his Apelles to draw his picture, and rhat Artist Lysippus
to cut his Statue in brass: were it so with her, you might think that her
defects, if there were any, might be concealed by the abundance of skill; but
when one (vix idoneus tanto operi, scarce worthy to know, much less to relate
her worth) so unskilful, takes the pen in hand, to transcribe such a Copy, no
wonder if there be not more blots in the imitation, then flourishes in the
example. They had need be able to speak well, that go about to translate high
languages, lest the Translation differ from the Original. My only fear is, that
I shall cloud her countenance by my Pencil, and make her graces disdained by my
unskilful representing of them. He had need be an Apelles that limns Venus, or
a Clarenceaux that blazons the Kings Coat Armor. In that which I speak
concerning her, I shall not so much insist on the Posture and Condition, upon
the Endowments and Qualifications of her body, as of her soul; though the
variety of conditions that she has been in, since she entered into the prison
and shell of the body, and the wilderness of the world would afford matter of
astonistment to your ears as they have done to mine: but these things came not
under my knowledge; therefore they cannot be by me particularly related. She
found the earth slippery. Oh how often did she pitch her Tent, and how short
warning had she oftentimes for a removal! How she was fed with the bread of
affliction, and yet was well likeing! How often has she been in a dry and
thirsty land, and yet fainted not! How bitter her cup has been made, and yet
she would drink it with praises! How God has smitten the rock, and rebuked the
waves for her! How has he fed her from heaven, and commanded prison doors to
be opened! I shall not speak to those things; I have only heard them; I was not
a Spectator, so that I cannot declare upon personal knowledge. I need not tell
you how through many tribulations and afflictions she entered into heaven: You
know Gods dearest children have not always the kindest entertainment amongst
strangers. In brief this;

She was born daughter to the Right honorable Lord Viscount Wimbledon; and at
her fathers decease, was left Coheir with three other sisters. She was married
to the right honorable Francis Lord Willough by Baron of Parham; with whom she
lived about thirty years in that State of Wedlock; and such was their love to
each other, they were loath to part then. They had promised each other as those
in Ovid:

-- Non commutemur in aevum,
Quin tibi sim juvenis, tuque puella mihi.
Such was the true Love knot that was tied betwixt them, that nothing but death
could loose it, or cut it asunder. She bore many pleasant Children to her Lord,
two only whereof are to be seen, the rest are asleep. The elder is Lady
Frances, married to William Brereton Esquire, and eldest son of John Lord
Brereton of Brereton in Cheshire: the younger is Lady Elizabeth; both of them
ornaments to their sex: Lis est cum forma magna pudicitiae; modesty and beauty
in the same cheeks; both of them adorned with inwatd grace, which makes them as
precious to Christ, as their persons are amiable to their Fellow Creatures: Of
whom, I cannot in modesty, speak the naked truth, because I know their temper
to be such, that they will blush to see, as I have known them blush to hear
their deserved commendations. Their lives are extant, I need not publish their
worth; they are upon the stage; their actions will command a Plaudite, and
their behavior will commend them: so that though you should not believe, if I
should speak it, yet you would believe, because you have seen it, that in them
nature and grace strived for preheminency;

Fortes creantur fortibus and bonis,
Nec nobilis pavidam generat aquila columbam.
No timorous dove is from an Eagle born,
Fig Trees no thistles bear, nor yet Vines Thorn.
Patrum in natas obeunt cum semine mores. Their Fathers nature, and their
Mothers grace are both theirs by propagation; and as the Diamond sparkles more
when set in gold then in silver, and the Apricock is more pleasant when grafted
or inoculated in a plumb then in a thorn; so the plant of grace shines best
when the stock is beautiful, according to the Poet, Clarior est pulchro
veniens ^ corpore virtus. But it is very needless to speak on Pallas's behalf
when she is on the stage; she can act her own part to admiration; or to commend
Venus when above our Horizon, her own brightness will discover her. These only
has the Lord in mercy preserved to comfort their tender Father, that he may
not repine at Gods taking away, but rejoice at his gifts, that the sight of his
surviving daughters may cause him to acknowledge the Fathers love; as the fight
of his deceased son and wife may cause him ^o complain of the Fathers anger.
But to proceed, she brought forth a son, which indeed did bear his fathers
image: he was his fathers Benjamin, the son of his right hand; but he was his
mothers Benoni, the son of her sorrows, not only in his bitth, as it was with
Rachel, but in his death also; he was her darling, and therefore his death wont
so near her heart. I may say of him, that he promised to be very fruitful when
grown up, he thrived so well when young: he won the affections of most that
knew him, having derived affability from his father: but the world was it seems
unworthy of him, or he was weary of the world, which made him go to the Father,
where he may preserve his honor, and keep his integrity too; where he may be in
esteem, and not liable to temptations, which can scarce be attained to here. He
had been viewing the kingdoms of the earth, and seeing the rarities beyond the
seas; yet I cannot say, that ever I discerned any great delight he took in
them: He had seen Rome, though he was not ar all tainted with her errors: he
btought over many of the rarities of other Nations, but none of their sins; And
after he had visited what here was below, he stayed not long until he took
another journey, to go see what they do above; he might say as the Travailor
coming from Rome, so could he say of the world, Vale, vidi, satis est vidisse,
revertor. Now that I have seen thee, Farewell, I desire no more, I must home.

He begun to be sick March the third, 1660. who after he had laid 10 days
languishing on a burning Fever, he departed, which was March the 13. 1660. The
loss of whom caused many a dropping eye: Publicus gemitus, publica suspiria, a
general loss, made a general lamentation. For many discerned that their gardens
would become wildernesses, when such a sweet flower was cut up: he was so
officious and dutiful to his mother, that he would go before to usher her into
heaven, to give her possession, seeing she had been so instrumental in
procuring his title; whose absence she could not bear; he had left her on
earth, but she followed him to heaven: yet there was the company of her
spiritual Father, as well as her natural child, that she so much longed for in
the New Jerusalem; for she would seldom mention her son on her deathbed, but
she would mention Christ also. On the 11 of March she being by her sons
deathbed side, (as indeed she was very seldom from him) she discerned, as she
told us, the image of death in his face, which moved her so much, that she went
from the sight of her languishing child to weep; where she seeemd to write
after David's Copy, who being moved, went up to the Chamber over the gate, and
as he went, said, O my son Absolon, my son, my son Absolon, would God I had
dyed for thee, O Absolon, my son, my son, 2 Samuel 18. 33. Or like Jacob for
Joseph, Genesis 37. 34, 35. He rent his cloths, and puts on Sack cloth many days:
and all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him, but he refused
to be comforted, and he said, I will go down unto the grave to my son mourning:
thus she wept for him; it was so with her; which grief, and the afflicting of
her own body, during the time of her sons sickness, brought such a disease as
is nor ordinarily found in the Physicians Calender. Thus death wounded her
through the side of her son; Oh sharp sting that destroys two at one stroke!
she lay languishing from the 11. until the 25. of March, who then after a long
breathing desire after her rest was translated: She strugled in the prison many
days, and then at last got free; She had undergone the burden of her body many
days, but on the 25th. in the morning corpore levata est, was let loose; whom
I cannot imagine to be long out of her fathers bosom, seeing she longed so
much for it when on earth; and now that you have heard the manner of her death;
I desire you would also hear the manner of her life; you have had a brief
narrative of her dissolution: let me now make a narrative of het conversation;
where in one labor I shall show what she was, and what you ought to be: and
what she did, and what you ought to do; you may guess at her entertainment when
you have heard her behavior: what I shall say, I will digest into this Method,
as she was under a double capacity.

1. A member of the nation: I shall show her deportment as in that relation. 2.
As she was a member of Christ: I shall show her deportment as in that relation.
Or in brief. 1. Her carriage to man.

2. Her carrtage to God.

1. As to her civil capacity two things will come under consideration.

1. Her personal qualifications. 2. The performance of her relational duties.
1. Her personal qualifications; and because these will appear when you see how
she performed her respective duties, I shall be but brief. I might not be
silent as to her profound understanding, quick expression, ingenious invention.
I might tell you of her abstract and Metaphysical contemplation, her Logical
and rational argumentation: but these were the instruments of her practice and
will shine bright; but if you come but to see how she wrought, only these two
or three things.

1. She was of a lowly and humble behavior, though honorable. She shone the
brighter, the lower she stooped; her humble gesture was winning, like dumb
Rhetoric, caused a consent though she had not spoken. Yet she so carried her
self, not as to prostitute her worth whereby she might become despised. She
knew how to hide her face that she might be inquired after, and to unvaile her
face that she should be admired; it is true her degree was such, that it was
courtesy not debt for her to submit her self to associate with those she did:
but such was her skill that her honor was in its proper hight, though her
behavior was lower by many degrees: she had an act to make honor legible in a
new edition and a small print: of whom I may truly say as Plin. of Epaminondas,
honores ita gessi ti ut ornamentum non accipere sed dare dignitati videretur;
Honor was beholden to her for getting it a good name: how commendable was it
to see her (...) as Antoninus, vilifying her self, and stooping to the capacity
of those not wotthy to be her servants; It is an excellent posture in the Lion
to be couchant regardant: her design placere vivens though not mortua laudari;
To give every one more then their due while she lived, though not to desire her
due honor when dead; she was not (...) cujus pagina turgeseit; not a bubble
that soon rises and is soon purt out; non pictos tantum majorum vultus, sed
cordi insculptam imaginem Dei gestare solebat. She did not so much prize the
honor she derived by propagation as that by adoption; not value her ancestors
worth which was impressed on her body, as the image of Christ engraven on her
heart.

2. She was of a courteous and a tender disposition. She had lain long under
the warm influence of the sun, and therefore she had a melting heart. Her
tenderness like the wool deadned many a dart, when a rigid and austere
countenance would never have done it; usually when detracters would be casting
their venom, (for Morsu virus habent, et fatum deute minantur, they have a
venomous tooth: poison of asps is under their tongues*) yet I have heard them
make this conclusion, Yet she was a very sweet and courteous Lady; which seems
to blot out all they could speak against her, as Nero's, but he was a
persecuter, blotted out his other deserved commendations. She had indeed her
natural passion (as he or she who are without, let them cast the first stone
at her:) that (...), as Plotinus calls it, the serpent of the mind; for as the
soul has a breathing after its kingdom and native place, so the body has its
debasing quality and would endeavor to drown the sparks of life in the fogg
of the flesh: hence Scipio Africanus caused to be writ on his tomb, Moxima
cunctarum victoria victa voluptas.

The greatest conquest is to conquer self; and this is the same with the
Apostle calls (...) the the fleshly will or inclination, (...) Romans 7. 23. the
law in the members; and (...), the Law of sin; yet she brought them mightliy
into subjection, to the dictates of the superior will, and the more divine
life. She had considered: the love of Christ to her, and that made her loving
to others; The tenderness of her Savior assimulated her: me thinks that was a
cormorants expression of Charles the 9th of France wherein he testified his
inhumanity.

Suaviter olet cadaver inimici. The very dead carcass of his adversary; had a
sweet sent; She was not of such a frame, but rather like Caesar, Non sibi
placuit vindicta, sed victoria. She did not so much desire to revenge, as to
overcome. Surely if God will not learn at Christians, yet he may justly be
provoked by Christians; to be hard hearted to them, they are so hard hearted one
to another. Thus Quia nobis sunt far a pectora, reddit
Coelum etiam nobis durius aere Deus.
It is for our brazen hearts sake, if God turn the heaven inro brass, and the
firmament into iron: she had learnt not only the part of a man, to render good
for good: the very heathen and Publicans do the same: but she had learnt the
duty of a Christian to render good for evil; which is the highest stretch that
nature can reach unto, the utmost that a Christian is capable of. Elisha-like
she could entertain her persecutors, 2 Kin. 6. 23. or like Titus Vespasian,
she professed her self Peritura potius quam perditura, Rather dye then be
cruel; and by this sweet accustoming her self to forgive; she had obtained, Non
actuale modo sed habituale patrocinium. Indulgence was natural, converted into
her constitution; how to the life did she imitate Francis the first of France,
who could pardon as freely as her enemies could offend! nay she had advanced
this Christian duty to a higher strain: for she could pray for them, as well as
pardon them; this was Cyprians practice for the adversaties of the Church,
which was hers for the adversaryes of her person.

Misit preces et lacrymas cordis legatos. He sent ambassadors to negotiate for
a reconciliation with God, when he had made them at peace with himself; and how
would it trouble her very heart to think of the sinners portion, when they had
received many incomes here! She would often seem to be rroubled for their
accounts; knowing that where God sowes plentifully, he expects increase; and
knowing that Deus tarditatem supplicii gravitate compensat: the longer God is
fetching his stroke, the more does it smart when it comes; She had an ear open
therefore to any complaints that might stir up her bowels of compassion; here
she was slow to speak and swift to hear, that she might understand the Emphasis
of a petitioners misery, that so she need not want motives to mercy. It was
said of the Emperor Adrian, that when a poor subject would have presented a
petition to him, he told him he had not leisure to hear him, to whom the
petitioner retorted: Then you ought not to have leisure to be Emperor. She had
been in straits of that nature her self, and that made her sympathize, and have
a fellow-feeling with those in misery.

3. She much used to deny her self and make resignation of her worth, that
Christ might be all in all: She had a heart above her enjoyments and her
seize.

1. She denied her Riches, her estate, and was maintained with a possession
like the saints food which every one does not know of. God had made her a Sarah
in this, increased her with wealth, flocks and herds which was not of her own
taking but of her fathers giving: neither was her riches as many ones have
been, a Coal snatched from the Altar, which will in time fire the nest; but
hers was not so, it was Divino more datum, not Sacrilego more raptum. She drunk
not with Belshazzar in bowls of the sanctuary, neither did she enrich her self
with the spoils of the Temple: She built no houses with Churches ruins: the
foundation of her dwelling place was not laid on a Cathedral; she clothed not
her self with the curtains of the Altar. But res hominesque semel Deo
consecratas timide attractavit, counted it robbery to enrich her self with
things dedicated to God, as well as with things given to man by last will and
testament of the donour. She would often rejoice that she had not taken that
liberty which others had done, to make such laws as Church land might become
forfeit, and so confiscated to their own use; it was purely her persuasion,
Sacrum, sacroque commodatum qui rapit, parricida esto; he who borrows of the
Church and pays not again, let him be cut off from the congregation; he that
steals a Deodand, wrongs his neighbor as well as dishonours God: but God had
given her a large portion which was her inheritance, therefore she would not
sue for other men's annuities; instead of plundering she enriched the
Ambassadors of Christ with her wealth; She lay out her wealth and riches upon
the Knights Hospitallors of Christ, and maintained his beadsmen with the
morsel she should have put in her own mouth; had she not then heart to deny
her estate? She looked not to lay up great things on earth, nor make any
purchase of Lands but in Canaan.

2. She denied her parts: not as many do that will pretend to sacrifice them,
but it is to let the people see they have them; indeed hers were elevated to no
ordinary pitch; yet in all her knowledge she was not satisfied, save in the
knowledge of the eternal God, and his son Christ whom he has sent: and though
she would not set her light on the hill top, nor fire beacons with it, for she
was of a more peaceable spirit; Yet Eo plura novit, quo pauciora loqueretur.
The less she spoke, the more she knew: the river runs the deepest when it
makes the least noise. I have indeed so metimes wondered, out of what fountain
she drew her knowledge: but after I had considered that it was all spiritual, I
thought it to be given of God: she would judge of controverted Doctrine by her
practice; that way wherein she could run fastest to heaven was the way she
owned: and as to her expression and election, they that knew her have heard her
speak for her self, so that I need not; only let me say as Zanchy said of
Vtrets sermons, Singularem eloqxentiam, et in commovendis affectibus
efflicacitatem admirabar. Such was her quick and powerful discourse when she
had been in company like her self, that I have oftener stood to admire then
studied how to imitate: maluit se sapientem esse quam haberi; she had rather
be, then be esteemed wise.

3. She denied her graces: she would go to Christ with a present of that plenty
which she had received from him: the mercyes of God to her were not like the
wind, which drives one from the coast it comes from, but like the beams of the
sun which draw the eye to the fountain of light: the more she had lain under
influences, and the warmer she grew, the nearer would she creep to the fire:
and when she was filled with the drops of heaven, she would empty herself into
the Ocean: Oh how far was she from Nebuchadnezzers frame! Dan. 4. 30. that
could not do a good work but he must make proclamation of it: Is not this
great Babylon that I have built, for the house of my Kingdom, by the might of
my power, for the honor of my majesty! The King did all this by himself, and
for himself, and he himself would have the honor; which kind of practice
punctually walks antipodes to Romans 11. 36. It cuts in a Right angle, and is
down right Idolatry, if that scripture be true. (...): For of him, and to him,
and through him, are all things, to whom be glory for ever. Amen.

2. The performance of her relationall duties, which according to the variety
of the object was various; some whereof I shall a while insist on, that you may
see how she had her conversation with men; as hereafter I shall show how she
had her conversation with God.

1. As to his Lordship, her dear husband, she was full of tenderness, full of
duty and of affection: She counted him opes suas, thesaurum suum, her riches,
her treasure, Centrum and circumferentiam deliciarum; and this she then
manifested, when she exposed her self rather then he should perish: when she
counted his person her freedom, might she but have his presence: Which was not
long before she dyed. For his Lordship was hunted for his life from place to
place, by the hand of the craftye: he was put into prison too, by him whose
jealousy made him severe, I need not name him: the nature of the action shows
what an one he was that would do it: only let me say as one said concerning
Phocas when he had slain the Emperor Mauritius, or rather murdered him, being
asked why God set him on the throne in his stead, and why would he so abett
such an action, he answered eum Imperatorem Deus constituit quia non invenit
pejorem: so this was one that God had permitted to tame a rebellious people,
because he could not find a worse; now after that the Chair was got, it was
needful to set it fast; and after he had the crown on, it was wisdom to curb
all those that thought it misplaced; therefore many of the Nobility that would
not patronize so foul a fact, must lie at his mercy, and for fear that they
should endeavor to pull him down, he would tie their hands: he thought if the
bonds of their love to him, would not hold them, (for it was but small) yet the
tower would; and here it was that those stars of the Land that would not own
him as sun, should lie under a cloud: amongst whom, was his Lordship, ut
insignis fidelitatis ordinis miles esset, That he might give a testimony of his
Loyalty, and to signify that he was an adversary to usurpation; Even at this
time his Lady drawn by the cords of love, counted her own house a prison rather
then the Tower, if she could but enjoy her Lords company there; concerning
which confinement she expressed her self not much unlike Penelope to Ulysses,
Ipsa comes veniam, nec me salebrosa movebunt Saxa; nothing could draw her from
him, which could not break the bonds of love; here she was a Sarah to Abraham,
1 Pet. 3. 6. obeyed him and called him Lord. A Livia to Augustus, a Pl^cilla to
Theodosius. She was not only a ring, but a crown to her husband, Pro. 12. 4. of
whom he might use the Athenians Proverb, when they were hapily matched, (...),
they had found a mercy in the superlative degree; of whom it might be said as
of Basil and Nazianzen, corporibus geminis spiritus unus erat: they were two
bodies, and yet informed by one soul.

They were so justly one that none could say
Which of them ruled, and whether did obey.
He ruled, because she would obey; yet she
In so obeying, ruled as well as he.
The Egyptians, in their Heroglyphicks resembled this mutual love to a chain
locked at both ends; hence Seneca calls a wife compedem auream; and Horrace a
beautiful woman compedem gratam; They were thus both chained together in their
affections, as Theod. (...). They strove which of them should be forwardest in
love; neither can I justlye say whether came behind.

2. As to her Children: she was very tender and careful over them; She looked
upon them as Abig^ils, their parents joy and therefore she prized them; If it
may be spoken of any, it may of her, that liberos genuit gratiae plenos, ad
imaginem dei viventis fabricatos, That she begot children in the image of
Christ as well as of their parents; they were such for whom she prayed and
wept, as Monica did for Austine, and thence we might conclude of them as
Ambrose did of him, impossible est ut filius tantarum lachrymarum periret^, it
is impossible but her children should be accepted when they have such a
solicitor at the throne improving her interest for them: how careful was she
in their education, that it should be spiritual! she would by no means but
they learn to know God, what ever they were ignorant of besides; she showed
much diligence about their souls ornaments and concernments; she loved not to
see mentem aegrotam in corpore sano, mentem aridam in corpore florescente: not
that their souls should starve when their bodies thrive, not that there should
be a fresh body and a withered soul; she knew well that a teneris insuescere
multum est, it is of concernment to train up a child in his youth in the way
that he should go, and he will not depart from it when he is old. Oh how she
was brought to her knees for their delivery from sin into the state of grace,
as well as for their delivery from the womb into the world! She travailed again
with hers, that Christ might be formed in them; She abode pangs and throws,
sent up sighs and groans, to heaven that hers might not only be partakers of
the first but of the second birth; thus she was with her only son, upon his
death bed, very earnest; though she would not discourage him with denying
signs of temporal life, yet she stirred him up to show testimonies of a
spiritual. And when she began to doubt that he would not live to be possessor
of his earthly and temporal inheritance, Oh how she breathed that he might be
partaker of a heavenly and eternal one; often would she pray, that as hers bore
the image of their earthly, so they might bear the image of their heavenly
father, and that he would beautify and adorn their souls with grace, as he
had their body* with features, which was not modo and mensura; when she had
seen the tender branches of her body, it would not content her, until she saw
them translated into Christ, and become living members of that vine. She would
(oh that all Parents of Children would improve so great a mercy in the like
kind!) sooner correct them for neglecting their duty to God, then for
disobedience to her self; and this made them more cautious, in as much as they
apprehended every fault in that kind to be double, not only against their
spiritual, but their natural parents: her Childrens behavior and their
sanctified lives will put a Probatum est to this particular, so that I may be
silent; therefore she needed not complain (neither indeed had she any cause) as
Augustus did, who had a rebellious and an ungracious son, Utinam aut coelebs
vixissem, aut orbus periissem, Would God (said he) that I had never married, or
that I had never had a child. She in their infancy and minority made choice for
them; but when they were at riper years, she would let them choose for
themselves; knowing that it is not so easy to love where one is forced, as it
is to be forced where one loves: she would not choose Yoke-fellows for her
Children, not knowing so well whither they would draw both one way, as they
themselves knew: hence she urged not any that went against the stomach, lest
she should cause surfeit or vomit: she judged it rigorous to impose a husband or
wife on her child, except they should take them as Physic, only to have them
stay with them for a day, and no more. It seems a hard question to resolve,
Whither the Parent that forces is more cruel, or the child that denies more
disobedient?

Crudelis matter magis an puer improbus ille. If one consent to both in the
positive, it is not amiss.

Improbus ille puer, crudelis tu quoque matter. Whether is more to be condemned,
who tells,
A self-wil'd child, or parent that compels
His child to loathed bed and board! I wis,
The child's too blame, but parent cruel is.
Where love lives not, the marriage yoke, and choice
That such should join, I give my negative voice.
Thus she carried her self to her children, first teaching them to seek the
kingdom of heaven; knowing then that all things else would be added to them.

3. To the Saints; she showed much love, especially in their misery: she looked
upon the Children of God as her own kindred, so that she could not but have
affection; the spirit of love which knit both them and her to the head, did
also knit both them and her together in the same body as members one of
another: How could it be otherwise, but those eminent in grace should have her
esteem, because they were like her self! and she who had the seed abiding in
her; could not but grow up in the likeness of him that begat her of his own
will; it was ordinary to see her and the Children of Christ Columbatim labris
inserentes labra; she was indeed a Dove for harmlesness, and a Dove for
meekness and affection; thence the Greeks derive (...), from the transcendency
of their loves; thence it was Veneri dicata, dedicated to Venus, and her
Chariot was drawn by them. Oh what a free access could the meanest of the Lords
Children have unto her, when those that were the darlings of the world might
stand without! Her bosom was as open to those begot of the Spirit of life, as
to those begot of her own body. Christ's meanest servant was in equal respect
with the worlds greatest master: when any was made known to her by the
characters of faith and praise, there was a note of remembrance put upon such,
and of all others she loved to keep reconciled to, and avoided contracting
enmity with those whom the Lord loved. It was storied of Frederick the Elector
of Saxony, that upon some affront he intended to wage war with the Bishop of
Magd^burge; but before he would make an assault upon his enemies, he sent out
his spies to see what posture and preparedness they were in, and how he could
with the greatest probability expect to give them an overthrow; so when the
Spies returned, they informed the Elector, that all the enemies Army was upon
their knees at prayer; which when he heard, he threw down his sword, and said,
Let them fight that will: for I am not so mad as to engage in war against him
that implores God for his preservation and deliverance: Thus she would never
offer to hate those that God loved, nor to oppose, or be in enmity with them to
whom God was reconciled; wherever she saw the Characters of a Gospel
Conversation, there she would also make impresions of her affection.

She gave much honor and due respect to the Ministers of the Gospel; this was
one of the tallest branches of her affection; these were the men that found
favor in her sight, because as Ambassadors of Christ, they always brought her
tidings from above: But as for those Ministers clothing, but whose lives rather
supported the Kingdom of sin, then the interest of Christ, she suffered them
not to have an equal share with the rest. She would always judge a sin in a
Minister most unbecomming. A Laymans conversation under a Clergy-mans apparel,
profaness under a gown, was an unseemly sight to her; worldly stuff is not to
be treasured up in Ministers hearts; she would say, that it made many think
more undervaluingly of heaven, when those that went to spy out the land, had
their hearts so much on earth. She saw that it made the price disesteemed, when
the guide would not lay aside his weights and burdens, that he might run with
more speed: this made Austine so much complain of spiritual men, when they had
their hearts on earthly things. Amor rerum terrenarum, est viscus spiritualium
pennarum, Love to the food of the body, is as birdlime to the wings of the
soul, it intangles them. And again, Negotiatorem Clericum quasi quandam pestem
fuge, the Pestilence is not more infectious, then a worldly minded Minister is
to his people. It was an Expression of one of our modern Writers, who is now
with the Lord [Dr. ARROWSMITH.] Minister in foro est aeque ac mercator in
Templo, praecipue si assidue sit, uterque Christo flagellandus, The Preacher of
the Gospel should have the same pennyworth in the Market (especially if he be
constantly there) that the Merchants had in the Temple; they are to be
scourged, if they have their due. The Gospel and the Messengers of the Gospel
were both as Jewels to her, and she delighted much to wear them. Nunquam
requievit nisi in Evangelio aut claustro; she slept safest when she had heard
some spiritual discourse last at a night for her to dream on; and thought her
self most secure when some godly Minister lodged in her house: she was one,
that though she did give them entertainment, yet she would have them work; and
though she lodged them, she would seldom let them rest; few could have the
honor of a visit under a Sermon: She would ordinarily be rubbing them for fear
they should rust; she would not by any means that a dispencer of the Oracles of
God should be idle. Stars should keep in their own sphere, but there they
should be in perpetual motion: their motion should not be Planet like
excentrical, nor in Perig. as many ones are, who will follow the Moon in her
full, though she should go beyond the line; this she judged to be derogatoty
from a star when it is only in Sublunarium Dominium: when they are rather to
affect sublunary bodies with a malign influence, then to reflect light. Oh what
an Eclipse must the earth suffer, when not only the mutable Moon, but stars
also interpose between the eye and the sun? what sorrow must that poor soul
undergo where the Shepherds rod corrects, but instructs not? (...) carried more
terror with her then (...): to be excommunicated from the congregation, was
judged by her to be of as terrible a consideration, as to be cut off from the
land of the living; and this she thought to be the main, if not the sole wound
that ought to be given by him that weildeth the sword of the Spirit: she
desired that such only should be exercised in the Ministry, who shone not only
in their conversations, but in their Intellectuals, judging Learning and
Philosophy, with the knowledge of Tongues, to be a main, though not the only
ingredient in a Ministers qualification. She would have these to be highly
esteemed, but that they should sit bare to the illumination of the mind with
saving grace. She would have learning subordinate to Grace; as Clemens Alex.
submittat se ut Hagar Sarae, patiatur se admoneri and corrigi; sin minus
pareat, ejice ancillam; it should be a servant and no Commandress, as Agar was
to Sarah under subjection, which if she refused obedience, was to be cast out,
and disinherited. She would be much troubled to see many run, and that in haste
with the for most, and yet had never learnt their errand: she pittyed such poor
Creatures that were led by guides who were either malicious or blind; it was
not likely but their motion should be irregular: this was it which caused
Jerome to complain in his time, Heri Catechumeni, hodie sunt Episcopi; heri
Philosophi, hodie cum vix ex Aristotelis sinu prolapsi sunt, ad Episcopatus
dignitatem evehuntur. A sad complaint when those that should teach others,
stand in need that some teach them what are the first principles of the Oracles
of God: when those that should be Fathers to instruct, are scarce worthy of
being Children to have the honor to learn. Yesterday at the feet of Aristotle,
to morrow at the head of a Congregation. Yesterday sucking the breast of his
mother, and perhaps before night thinks himself at man's estate: Prius
Imperatorum magistri, quam doctorum Discipuli, who undertake to teach before
they ever were taught themselves: such she found about her where she lived: who
Per fas and nefas currebant ad Cathedram pastoralem, would be Shepherds, though
they knew better how to butcher then to feed their sheep: Who would undertake
to be guides, before their eyes we open by the illumination of the Spirit.
Charitable souls, as Bernard calls them, Qui loqui qam audire paratiores, and
promptiores dicere quod non didicerint, that would be Prolocutors, before ever
they were Auditors, and undertake to show others the way, when they had never
any light within themselves. Such she knew in the land, which was a sad grief
to her spirit, that those should pretend to be Apostles of holy Doctrine, who
like Judas, betrayed a holy conversation: they are the more dangerous, because
they do not only molest and disgrace the peace and purity of the Gospel, if
they grow, but will also do mischief, if pulled up; like those flies in Italy
called Punies, which if you let them live, they sting; if you kill them, their
stink will almost poison you: She would complain of too sad experience, as
Cambden does in his Britannia, that it was the idleness and ignorance of the
Ministers that was the occasion. of the peoples wickedness and profaneness: It
would often grieve her to think how poor souls would be betrayed to Satan, when
it should once become disgraceful to direct them into the true way and
footsteps of Christ. She was one that thought it heterogenous for a Travailour
to prompt an experienced guide; desiring that those who had been judged fit to
lead others, should do it in the way they knew best, not in that which was
trodden most; for the way of experience may be nearer then the common road: and
the Travailor may come to have better entertainment at his journeys end. Such
who shone as lights in a dark place, they were the men that her tender eye was
upon: they were the men whom she loved; and indeed her love was great: Oh how
nobly would she entertain them, and how welcome were they to her prefence, if
they had but brought any gospel tidings, any message of peace, any news from
heaven to her soul! a persecuted Paul as well as a pompous Herod, Peter in
chains as well as Julian in his Chollar of Gold (...) was as precious to her,
if his grace abounded, ^s (...). James 2. 2. If she had the faith with respect
of persons, it was where she saw grace making a difference, and such should be
called up, but others sit at her footstool. Cloth of gold, and a goldring were
but rags when on a Leopards back; and plain Leather was not despised, when the
person was undefiled within. I dare boldly say of her in this particular, as
one said of Origin, Nemo fere supervivit aequalis, she has scarce left her
fellow in the land. She would usually after they were gone from the house, go
in her own person to visit their lodging, that she might known whither it was
as she desired. I have heard her say frequently, that a powerful Minister of
the Gospel of Christ should have as honorable treatment, and be as nobly
entertained by her as any Lord in the Land. Oh Si plures essent, and diutius
durarent, that we had but more such, and that they would stay longer! And
indeed, for ought I know, they brought and left many a blessing at her family.
I am sure they left their prayers on the Throne on its behalf; and I persuade
my self when others at the great and dreadful day of accounts, when
Jerusalemians shall be arraigned for the blood of the Prophets, from Righteous
Abel unto Zacharias, that then she because she entertained a Prophet in the
name of a Prophet, shall have a Prophets reward. I sigh to think that it is
true of her, as of Leo the tenth of Rom, Cum eo communis salus, publica
hilaritas, in eodem sepulcra coquebantur, the common joy of the Ministry in
those parts is dead and buried with her in the same grave. Where ever her name
shall be named, let this be spoken for a memorial of her, that of all the
Creation, the Gospel Professor; of all Profossors, the holy Liver; of all the
holy, the Gospel-Preacher had the greatest share in her affection. Oh that all
the Nobility of the Land shone with this honor!

5. To the poor: she was exemplary in her bounty, charitable to a Proverb. Oh
the wet cheeks, the dropping eyes, the sighs and groans that many have made to
my self on her behalf! How many poor have told me they never prized her until
she was lost! Now they hang their harps on the willows, and sit down by the
brook-side to remember their approaching captivity: methinks I see them write
in tears, that her life was their aurea aetas; and se mortua ferream patiuntur;
while she was alive, they thought (I may allude to that expression) they were
increased with goods, and were rich, and stood in need of norhing; but now that
she is dead, they find they are wretched, poor, miserable, blind and naked.
They stand like the wood in Autumn, when all the leaves tremble, and drop off
at the declining of the Sun. There was more Mourners then we saw. Her fall has
weakened many a shrub, even as the great trees are blown up by a storm: Many
had built their Nests in this Olive, and placed their Tabernacles on this
mountain; but at the removal, their very foundations shoke, and are removed out
of place. The poor lament their loss, Seu frondibus ingens
Sylva dolet lapsis.
Oh what astonishment appeared in their countenances, and how ghastly and pale
did many of them look at the doleful news of her death! many could not
satisfy their heavey hearts in her loss, until her Lord (who has the same
tender bowels of compassion, and a nature more inclining him to pity and
commiseration then others does to revenge) had promised to take care of them.
The weak child would willingly, if he might, be led by both hands, and if one
be taken away, he fears falling. It was said of Jews his dearh the 12. of
France, that there was Tam subita mutatio, ut illi qui coelum attingere
videbantur, sideratos esse diceres humi procumbentes: They that thought they
were lifted up to heaven, in point of privileges, they were left a naked and a
destitute people: Thus it was at her departure; those that had fair complexion,
and looked fresh, are now grown pale, and like so many Niobes with sorrow, even
turned into stone; How many hungry bellies did she fill, and naked backs did
she cloth! she scattered her bounty as she went, which made so many follow
her. She very seldom, or never went to Lectures to have fellowship with God, to
hear of her fathers good pleasure, but she would commiserate the poor; and in
the same bountiful manner that God had bestowed Spirituals upon her, in the
same measure did she enlarge hers to the poor; and many upon this account came
to lie at the Receipt of Custom, because they expected her to pass by; and
some did not lose their labor, but like the Samaritan woman, though she
expected but temporal, yet Christ came, and gave her water out of the
everlasting fountain. She knew what it was to wait for blessings at the gates
of heaven; therefore she would always have those at her gates go full away:
And now, poor souls, they have to time to mourn, O flebiles dies! O amaras
mortes! their day is turned into night. Cisterns will supply no more: Their
cruse of oil is run out, Pallentes rosae, and lilia nigra videntur,
Nullus nec myrtus, nec laurus spirat odores.
A pleasant garden become a wilderness, a fair flower withered: who, especially
those that lived by her influence, can but mourn!

Many times when I have had occasions to move her Ladyiship to contribute
toward Losses by Fire, Water, or the misfortunes of any that feared God, and
considering the nature and quality of the loss, whither it was public or
private, her bounty would be such, that I have thought it beyond her capacity;
yet I have satisfied my self in this, though it was too much for rhem to
receive, it was not too much for her to give; and I do not know but that her
presents to the poor, procured favor and acceptance with God, the free donor
of all things. Melancthon reports of a certain Bishop of Millaine travailing
with his servant; he was met with some poor, who begged of him something; he
commanded his servant to give them all that little money he had, which was
three crowns; the servant gave them two, rhinking to preserve the single crown
to bear their charges at night, not known to the Bishop: When he was come to
his Inn, certain Nobles thereabout, who had heard of his wonted bounty, came,
and brought him two hundred crowns, being willing themselves to support him who
supported others: the Bishop being a little put into a muse, turns to his
servant, and said, O quanta injuria me affecisti! si enim tres dedisses,
tercentas accipisses, Oh covetous Fellow, how have thou wronged me! had thou
given all the three crowns, thou would have received three hundred, whereas
now thou have but two. To this kind of providence that place of Scripture seems
to speak; Eccles. 11. 1. Cast thy bread upon the waters, and thou shall find in
many days; give a portion to the seventh, and also to the eighth; for thou
know not what evils may be upon the earth. This was her constant practice,
to give so liberally, as though she had expected thereby to merit; and yet as
little loved to hear of her gifts, as though she had thought them scarce worthy
of thanks. It was the judgment of the Rabbis; ob Quadrantem unum pauperi
datum, particeps fit homo beatificae visionis, that for one farthing given to a
poor Israelite (that was so indeed) a man should be reconciled and admitted
into the presence of God: O then what Glory ere this has she arrived at! God
has raised her up an Instrument in dear years to supply the poor, who
otherwise might have perished in all probability; Corn, Victuals, Garments, she
then took her opportunity to bestow most freely, when all other helps sailed:
thus Speed repors in his Chronicle of Suffolk, that one dear year between
Oxford and Aldburge in the year 1555 there grew a crop of Pease, where there
never grew grass before, without tillage; where it is three yards deep in a
rock, many hundreds of quarters, whereby the poor were fed, and many kept from
finding other unlawful means for a livelihood; thus did she; when they could
buy no more, she would give; when like the sick woman, who had the issue of
blood twelve years, Luke 8. 43. and had spent all she had on Physicians; if
they had but come to her, they should not have gone empty away; it was with
her, as with King Monobares, who was of a generous spirit, and would give
bountifully to all that asked him, by which means he hindered himself from
growing rich; but when this was objected to him, that he did not as others in
the world, who if they had more then they could spend, used to lay up something
for future accidents: to whom he gives this short answer, Vicini and patres mei
opes suas in terris, ego meas in coelis repono; my good neighbors lay up
treasures, so do I; but they lay up theirs on earth, and I lay up mine in
heaven: thus did she treasure up there, where she is now made Inhabitant.

6. The next relational duty I shall show, is, how she behaved her self as to
the public interest of the Kingdom: she did not set to much love on the parts
in particular; but she was one that made her self concerned in the public
joys and sorrows of the land; she looked upon her self as a Member, therefore
she had desires of the Welfare of the whole: Patriam amavit, non quia pulchram,
sed quia suam; the interest of the plurality was not in the uppermost seat,
(its true) but yet it was not cast out of doors; what she did, it was much like
the Romans planting of trees; Posteris and diis immortalibus; for others, not
for her self: like Virgils sheep, or be, or bird:

Sic vos non vobis nidificatis aves:
Sic vos non vobis vellera fertis oves.
Sic vos non vobis mellificatis apes.
Bees, Birds and Sheep endeavor what they can,
Not for themselves, but for the use of man.
She would often pity poor souls that swim down the stream of corruption,
without any striving, either to save life, or to get to shore; she would pity
them as she would do a mad man, or a peevish child who will tear off his
clothes, and trample on his food, though it be that without which he cannot
live: she would seem inwardly to grieve, to think what a demur there would be,
as to many men's titles to glory, who yet thought they were full and wanted
nothing.

7. The last relational duty which I shall mention, is, how she carried her
self in her family: she ordered it like to her garden, (where she was very
curious and exact) as in that no weeds might be seen; so in her house she
suffered not a sin to grow: she knew how soon such noxious trees would not only
bring a curse upon themselves, but even upon the ground they stood on;
therefore as she planted no such; yet if they grew up such, and changed their
nature, she would soon pull them up. She would require in all those that waited
upon her, to keep the inside of the cup clean, (I mean the heart) as well as
the outside; as she would not endure to eat her meat in unclean vessels, nor
be attended on by those of unwashen hands; so she would expect their hearts
should also be cleansed that came to live under her roof: Her servants who
frequented her presence, were to have their bodies free from dirt, and their
souls washed from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, or else they were not
entertained: this I was fully convinced of, that no quality in her servant,
gained so much respect and love from her, as grace in the heart; though
sometime she has weighed the little service which she could expect from some,
yet that would not move her to part with them, but she would keep them, because
gracious: and when she has been told of the insufficiency of some, she would
make answer, But they are honest. She considered, that those who were gracious,
had a blessing attended them, though they could do little: and though they
could not work much, yet if they prayed, the work would be well done, though
but little. She would often say, how can any serve me faithfully, and perform
their duty as they ought, when they make no conscience of serving God? at the
best they will but be (...), Men-pleasers, and their work be it never so much,
it will be but (...), Eyeservice, which the Apostle willed not, Ephesians. 6. 6. Oh
what an example did she set! How fair a Copy, and how true letters did many
write after her! I durst speak it with boldness, (were it proper for me that am
a member of the family my self to say so) that in her house she had
proportionally as many servants, who set their faces toward Sion, and loved
the Lord Jesus in sincerity and in truth, as was in any noble family in the
land! How rare was it to hear a profane word, or see a profane gesture! From
the time of my coming to dwell with her Ladyship, until her death, I cannot
say that ever I heard an oath, neither see man drunk in the house, save one. It
was an house where grace was smiled upon, and where sin lay under a reproach.
Oh what striving was there which should get to heaven first, which did much
improve both our graces and our duties! the ways of God were not there evil
spoken of; if her Ladyship had known it, she would have soon stopped their
mouths. She manured the soil with Gospel instructions; for which purpose she
generally entertained an able Divine in her house; though I cannot say so by
experience since I dwelt with her; neither would I, thought I might; yet for
the most part she endeavored to have both the learned and gracious, whom she
did not keep to be idle; neither did she employ them without abundantly
rewarding them. She always thought a Minister in her house, though costly, yet
to be great riches; and would say, maintaining a godly Chaplain, makes no man
poor. Holiness was promoted so by her encouragement, and by the Chaplains
industry, that it was ordinary in the servants to be ambitious which should be
best, not which should be greatest. She was exact in keeping a due order, that
her family might know when to serve her, and when to serve God. As she
discerned any noxious weeds to grow up, she would so influence them with her
frowns, that their natures were often changed; but if that would not do, she
would root them out. The weeds that she would labor to pull out, were such as
were either useless or infectious, or both: though she could not eradicate sin
where it was out of her reach, yet she would disquiet it where she had any
thing to do; a little to show what qualifications her servants were to have,
and what sins she disesteemed in them.

1. She entertained no profane; always fearing, that they like pitch or a
leprosy defile all they touch, or blast all they go about to do: She as much
feared to entertain a man or woman dead in trespasses or sin, as the Jews
feared to touch a dead body, because of their uncleanness: and though I cannot
tell how she would have carried to such in her own family, (for there was none
that durst be so, and so known to her) yet by her dislike of that oversight and
indulgence in others, she showed that a profane man should not have gone
without his reward: it is true, to be deboist, is a merry life, if there were
to be no account hereafter, when we come to dye: or if the most Atheistical
should be the most deifyed hereafter, it would be the best work to do nothing
at all: and the only time would be to redeem no time; but there is a dreadful
sentence, Go ye cursed; and that will need no Emphasis; it is heavy enough in
this, to be separated from God: whom to enjoy is life eternal.

2. She would not at all encourage formality or superstition; she would not
permit that any should perform their service to God after a dead manner, no
more then perform their duty to her sleepingly: As for the superstition, she
counted it a Criticism; in worship, a complement: such a flection, that they
who can suit themselves in every posture, had need be better Grammarians then
Divines: she would not have hers so clownish and formal, as to keep their seat,
though it was in the presence of the King of Kings; nor so complemental, as to
cringe and congee to every butterflye: but because these are sins might easily
be removed in their cause, she looked well to that; and that was,

3. She labored, as that hers should not be wholly blinded by profaness; so
that they should not be hood-winked with ignorance; knowing it is as easy for
Satan to cause an ignorant soul to worship a stone, and idolize a word, as it
was for the boy that lead venerable Beda, to make him preach to a heap of
stones, telling him, that they were men. It was not comfortable to her that any
of her family should walk blind-folded, dashing their feet upon stones, or
splitting upon rocks, and making shipwreck of faith. She did not train them up
Andabatorum more, tenebris and dubitaudi caligine palpitantes; therefore was it
that she had a light always in the house that should guide them the way to
heaven.

4. She would not abide that adrunkard should come in her sight, though it was
not so apparent in my time, because there was not occasion for her to testify
her distate as in her own: yet by what I have heard from her as relating to
others, I can affirm, that they were a very loathsome crew to her; With what an
Emphasis would she pronounce the word Breast, when she had reproved any that
had been guilty of that sin! And indeed that sin seems to be strangely
unnatural, because it takes away for the present, that whereby man is
distinguished from bruit beasts; to wit, the more lively exercise of his
rational faculties. It would trouble her to see it in others, (though she
prevented it in her own) that lived like Bonosus, as though they were born ut
biberent, non ut viverent: of whom is was said, and that according to his
desert, when he had hanged himself, There hangs a Tankard, not a man. I have
read, when Aeschines in a discourse with Demosthenes, was commending Philip of
Macedon for a brave man, who would drink much: Demosthenes replies, that, that
was a good quality in a sponge, but not in a man: This is the door at which
many other evils enter. How often would she say, to that effect, with Bernard,
Ad universa, vel crudelitatis, vel turpitudinis facinora perpetranda facilis
invenitur via, cui nulla sobria meant is ratio, sed ebrietas dominatur: How soon
is the course of nature inflamed, and all on a fire, when there is most drink
in the brain!

Quid enim Venus ebria curat! And as she hated this sin in all, so especially
in Ministers: a Drunken Clergy man was like great wits set upon wrong Objects,
most pernicious: The Monks, that abstemous generation, call the best wine,
Vinum Theologicum, Divine wine, and best befitting themselves to drink; but in
them this sin would be peccatum diabolicum, sensual devilish: when corrupted,
it makes the tartest vinegar; so the corrupted Clergy make the most profane.

5. She was cautious of entertaining any Romanists into her house, lest any
that were legitimate and true born children of the Church of England, should
lose their birth-righ, by becoming brats of the harlot: against whose
principles she was not, because they were theirs, but because they varied from
Christ's rule; and the rather, because they might easily misguide those
belonging to her, when they had wrought in them an implicit faith, that their
agents must be believed upon their own report; as easily as one may be misled
when their eyes are put out: the soul is soon ravished of truth when locked up
in darkness, and cast on the bed of licentiousness. Two things she would much
dislike, (though she would not persecute for their sober judgments, but punish
for their gross sins)

1. Their training up the vulgar in ignorance, as though none can be led to
heaven with their eyes open, but they must all wink. Their denying them their
service in a known language; there is small proficiency like to be made, when
none must know whereto he has attained; and people can scarce assure
themselves of the way, when all their testimony is the word of a fallible, if
not a false Guide; for they allow them not the rule of truth to be made
intelligible: this is an Engine whereby they gain so many Prosilytes: Surely
the land or person is in an uncomfortable condition where knowledge has quit
possession. It is reported that at the Assembly of States in Germany, one
Albertus a Bishop, by chance lighting on a Bible, as he was reading, one of the
States asked him what he had got, what book that was? he answered, he did not
know what it was; but wherever he read in it, he found it to be against their
Religion.

2. Their licentious conversations: their hatred of the power of godliness; as
it is well expressed in that Distick:

Vivere qui sancte cupitis, discedite Roma.
Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse pium.
And if all their Popes must be believed, as not capable of speaking false, why
may not Pius the fifth, when he says, Cum essem religiosus, sperabam been de
salute animae meae: Cardinalis factus extimui; Pontifex creatus, pene despero:
When I was in my low condition, and addicted my self to the service of God, I
hoped well of my salvation; being made Cardinal, I began to doubt and fear; but
being created Pope, I am altogether in despair. It would be well, if they did
not prefer their Utile before their Honestum; their gain before godliness;
witness their privileged sins: A sad State where is a toleration to be wicked,
and not to be true: to do unjustly, but not to speak truly. Fac me Pontificem,
and ero Christianus; make me a Pope, and I will be a Christian; was an
argument, that that man who said it, was a follower of Christ rather for what
he had, then for what he was; for loaves, then for his person.

6. She would not permit an oath to be pronounced twice: and as for a lie, she
would be very inquisitive, where she had a suspicion; knowing that Tenue est
mendatium pellucet, si diligenter inspexeris; lies blush, and betray
themselves, if they be looked on; so she would search to the very bottom of a
frivolous excuse, and let out the very dregs, to see if the cask was not
tainted.

7. She loved not that any under her should esteem themselves according to the
quality of whom they served, or the place which they were in; but according to
what they were in themselves: She would say as Severus said of the Empire, The
management of any of her servants place and trust consisted not in bravery, but
in virtue: and here she did not only enjoin, but gave an example: though she
had an Apology of honor and wealth to speak on her behalf; yet she needed no
excuse, who could not be accused as guilty of pride: and though she was so
great, as Nemo major, nisi quae justier; none excels, that falls short of her
grace; yet Gratius fuit nomen pietatis, quam potestatis; holiness took the
place of honor, and greatness was made stoop to Godlinesse's feet: And though
she had much to boast of, yet she looked not upon any thing as her own, but as
borrowed; and when she was any way tempted to pride her self in her
seize, she would then still the temptation, by thinking of paying them
again with interest for the use of them. It was said of Mr. John Fox, that his
grace did him more harm then his sins, because he was apt to be puffed up: but
it was not so with her, who was hindered from magnifying her self, by making
experiments of her own emptiness; and this example did she set to her servants;
and many were imitators thereof: As she was clothed her self, so she desired
that hers should be in the same fashion; not gaudy, but comely; not costly, but
useful; not light, but neat. She was arrayed, and so she desired hers to be,
Sirico pietatis, bessino sanctitatis, and purpura pudicitiae; with holiness and
modesty: and many she had about her that wore this Livery. She loved a humble
heart; and would usually make them sit lowest, who had the highest looks: she
always had a favorable aspect for a modest countenance; but a majestic frown
on those Quos pudit non esse impudentes, who were most ashamed when they were
not impudent.

8. She would not permit any private quarrel and contests, but keep peace one
with another: She was displeased with the contests which she saw in other
houses; but she forbad it in her own: she endeavored to bring Ishmael under
the power of Isaac; though she could not change his nature, she would tie his
hands: and they in her house who were of the seed of the woman, were not
trampled on by the Serpents seed; neither were the Lords Freemen brought into
bondage by the worlds flaves, or sins vassals. She did so moderate their
enmity, and so tame the rage of the Lion, that he would let the Lamb lie down,
and not devour it: though she could not keep the godly under her command from
reproaches, yet she would wonderfully keep them from harms; which brought such
an esteem of holiness, that made her servants strive which should be most pure,
because such had the greatest show of her love: And thus I have given you her
behavior in her relational duties.

II. I come to the second place, to show her carriage to God; or how she
behaved her self in her spiritual capacity.

1. SHE kept a strict watch over her own heart: Oh what snares of Satan did she
discover! and how timorous many times was she to walk, even in beaten paths,
for fear of snares! Oh how afraid was she to wash in pure and known streams,
for fear of baits! She had such a circumspection over her ways and affections,
as one that had experienced, how easy it is to be deluded, and how difficult a
thing not to go astray! She was like one of those in the Revelations, Rev. 4.
8. (...), which had six wings encircling her about, not taking rest day nor
night, but saying, Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and
is to come: And in these it is said, (...), they were full of eyes within: Thus
was she, she had an eye to the (...), to the deceitfulness of her own heart. An
eye to that (...): to that son of perdition, who comes (...); 2 These. 2. 9, 10.
According to the operation of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying
wonders; and with all deceitfulness of unrighteousness, or all unrighteous
deceits. She had an eye to that (...), to that wind of Doctrine counjured up by
the slight of men, and cunning craftiness, according to the very methods of
deceit: She was full of eyes within; whereof, like Argus his Binae quietem,
they were all awake but two. With the Spouse, though she slept, yet her heart
was awake, to hear the whisperings of her beloved. The Herbalists tells us,
that Absinthium or Wormwood as it strengthens the heart, so it hinders sleep;
it was so with her, that the potion wherewith she was physicked, was so bitter
many times, that she was kept from rest; and the more she saw the power of her
adversary, the more she would watch. She saw how easy it was for hell to break
loose into the soul when it was secure; therefore her sleep was Somnus
leporinus, like the Hare, because so many Dogs, Wolvs, Foxes, and beasts of
pray pursued daily. Thus Macarias in his 33. Hom. makes it a testimo-of the
inhabiting of God in the soul where the eye is open; (...). The soul that is
made divine, and enlievened with the presence of God, or taken up into
fellowship with him, is all light, all eye. When she saw with holy Bernard
Nusquam securitas; that the Angels could be betrayed in heaven, Adam in
Paradise, Judas in the school of Christ! Oh how circumspect was she, lest she
should go wrong, or be surprised in the way! nay, the Intimacy she had with the
corruption of her nature, which Epictetus observed to be (...), an adversary
and a traitor to herself; when she sees that wise Solomon, strong Sampson, and
holy David might be circumvented, this kept her on her watch.

2. She would not swerve from her uprightness; it might be said of her, as of
Fabritius, Difficilius ab honestate, quam sol a cursu suo averti possit; it was
more difficult to obsttuct the sun beams, then to make her warp: She had not
such a respect to persons, as to make her neglect her integrity: She had on the
helmet of righteousness, the breast plate which made her undanted by the face
of man: She was so sheilded with that Murus ahaeneus, that bulwark of
Integrity, that is such a (...), a heartsease, that she could answer as Luther,
when he was condemned by the Senators at Norimburg: aliter Norimbergo, aliter
coelo conclusum est, though you condemn me in Norimberg, yet if God approve me
in heaven, I value not: or as Cyprian, when the Proconsul had sentenced him to
death; Aliud est cella terrena, aliud est tribunal coelorum; ab inferiore
accipio sententiam, a superiore Coronam; I value it not, my Tribunal will repay
for this earthly cell, my Crown will recompense for my condemnation here. It
was not relation or acquaintance that could cast the balance, or throw in an
unjust weight: but she was ad quadram formata, so cubical, that her foundation
was coincident with a plain superficies. She measured her ground to stand on by
the rectitude in her own nature; there was that (...), that secret and
invisible participation of the divine life; that to be evil, was to be
irregular, and to swerve from her own natural inclination. Themistocles being
Praetor of Athens, Simonides the Poet became his Petitioner; and when
Themistocles had considered, that the thing he asked was unjust; he turns unto
him with this answer, Neque tu bonus Poeta esses, si praeter leges carminis
caneres; neque ego civilis Praetor essem, si preter quod est justum tibi
gratificarer; it would be no commendation of thy Poety to say, thou made
Verses without Laws or Rules; no more would it be to me to gratify thee in a
thing so unjust: This was her resolution with Calvin, Fiat justitia, ruat
coelum. She would be upright, though she smarted for it; she would keep her
integrity unwarped, because it preserved her undaunted.

3. She carried like a Christian under afflictions, wherein she was much
exercised; and it was often going into the furnace that made her graces so
bright. And indeed they that expect to be godly in the world, and not meet with
tribulations, Persecution and Affliction, surely take Christ to be in jest,
John 16. 33. or think St. Paul complements, 2 Timothy 3. 12. Yet though she
labored in the yoke, she is taken up to rest; though she had her share of that
bitter tree, yet she found the fruit to be sweet. In her deepest outward
distresses, Divinas Martyrum consolationes se sensisse profitebatur; She had a
gentle stream ran privately to her heart that kept her from fainting. A drop of
the fountain was cordial and restaurative. She was never in such a Dungeon in
the earth, but she could look out to heaven; never under such a cloud, since I
knew her, but she could feel the warm Sunbeams darting through it, and
refreshing her soul; though she sometimes had mean entertainment, yet she would
look upon it as a Saints portion, a child's allowance, and take it, and be
thakfull; Though she was sometimes fed with bread and water of affliction, nay
with husks among the swine; yet she comforted her self, that in her Fathers
house there was delicious fare, Atticae dapes; (...), glory and pleasure lie at
the gates: Of whom I may say, as the Apostle says of the Worthies of old, who
were sawn asunder, stripped, reproached, wandering ahout in skins, and lodging
in caverns and dens of the earth, that (...). She had a faith that has
witnessed her to be Conqueror. When she had heard of the hard usage of the
Christians at Piedmont, how they were miserably persecuted, she would grieve
within her self, and pray, that England might not bring forth such
Executioners; that such weeds might not grow in so pleasant a garden. Oh what
tenderness would she then have expressed, had she been acquaited with the
Siculae vesperae, the Lamena Parisiensis, the Spanish Inquisition, or Massacre
at Paris! but these however were thought by her to be any thing but (...),
sufferings of the present time in their season, not worthy to be compared with
the future glory that is to be revealed. She had a submission to the Fathers
will; and like Jephthas daughter, would freely resign to her father; my father,
let it be done to me according to what has proceeded out of thy mouth: Oh rare
spirit, in bearing disappointments! not like the Chinees, who whip their gods,
if they do not supply them; but with Eusebius Pamphilus, she would gratias
agere Deo benefaciente, repugnante vero non accusare: She would rejoice and
praise the Lord for smiling on her; but if be corrected, she would not reply.
She followed not God only when he lifted her up, but when she was on her knees;
and she could kiss the hand both when it gave, and when it came to take away.
She was not of that wicked frame, Piae in fortuna secunda,
but
Impia in adversa:
not only hang a flag to Neptune when she had a prosperous voyage, but when she
had suffered shipwreck. She would take all in good part from God, who could
direct all to a good end: She would say, she expected not to fare better in the
world then Christ did.

Alme Deus, te odit sine causa mundus; amabas
Tu sine causa illum; quam bonus ultor eras!
Without a cause the world does hate, and Christ does love:
This kind of sweet revenge discendeth from above.
It has bin the child's portion to be hunted after for his life sometimes by
the god of the world. sometimes by the men of the world; and she sufficiently
experienced it. We have had testimonies of the cruelties of an adulterous
generation; witness Ireland, which contrary to the nature of the soil, has
bred many Vipers and Serpents, that have stung, and mortally wounded so many of
Gods Children. Flagrat adhuc in memoriis Nostratium vivicomburia Mariana, the
slaughters in Mary's days cannot be forgot, for they were writ in blood. She
desired to undergo what was laid upon her with patience, that she might neither
disquiet her self, and make her burden heavier, nor provoke God to cause him to
let it lie on the longer.

4. She had appretiating thoughts of Christ: She had meditated on his love and
tenderness: and this affected her. She was like iron touched with the
Lodestone; no sooner touched then drawn: There was an ardency in her heart to
him who had influenced her by his own love; and it was of an assimilating
nature that produced the same effects in her, that Christ's did in him. Sitting
by the fire made her tender to others; she would not wound, because Christ came
to heal; not destroy, when he came to save; not hate, seeing he came to
reeoncile. Oh what a correspondency did that love produce in her nature with
the nature of Christ! such was her heat, that it even dried her up.

Amor est hilare tormentum. To dye of love is a sweet death. When she had such
an object, she could not exceed in honoring or embracing. She was very
fervent, and it cannot be otherwise, because her heart had been touched with a
spark from Christ's flaming breast. She warmed others by that fire kindled for
her own use: neither could you wonder that she fell in love with Christ, being
she had seen him so often in his glory, and found him to be so suitable a
Savior to her, when she lay under the sentence of condemnation in her own
conscience. Oh how comfortable was it to lie warming ones self by so great a
heat!

Ardet amans, traxitque per ossa furorem.
Or as it is said of Atrides;
Uritur Atrides, and caeco ca^pitur igne.
The fire came secretly and unawares into her bosom, and there it kindled and
melted her heart: It was with her as with the spouse; she could not conceal her
love to Christ, but in his ahsence -- Tota incensa per urbem
Debacchatur.
She ran not wantonly, but in the heat of her zeal, enquiring of every one she
met, if they saw her beloved: and such a posture would carry its Apology with
it, if they would consider, she was sick of love. Oh sweet soul, how have I
seen her at ordinances and duties! Lacrymantem and multa volentem, and ter
conata collo dare brachia circum! How full has her heart been, which could not
utter it self but in sighs and tears! how was her soul ravished, when she heard
Christ's voice! and surely he who spoke as never man spoke, who was the fairest
of ten thousand, personally the sweetest complexion that ever was upon earth,
as Origin thinks, deserves love of all that know him. A tempting world, nor a
gaudy pleasure had ever any influence to disintangle her: She would tread on
other things, that she might reach the higher toward God. When I consider what
a heavenborn-soul hers was, I cannot but conclude, as Philip of Macedon did,
when he saw his son Alexander leaping on Bucephalus his great horse, he wept
upon him, and kissed him, and told him, he might seek another kingdom;
Macedonia was too little for him. So it was with her; the greatness of her mind
was not commensurate to present Objects: her faculties had a tendency to the
preservation of the head. She grudged not that Christ the head, which contained
the power of seeing and understanding, should have dominion over the other
members. She grudged not that the fountain should be exalted above the Cistern,
lest influences should not be conveyed. She loved her Jesus with B^rnerd,
Plus quam sua, suos, se; more then any thing besides; naymore then her dear
self; for she has to my knowledge sacrificed, not only part of her Estate, but
part of her reputation on his behalf. When she went to duty, it was in
obedience to Christ; When she went to Church, it was to meet Christ; When into
her Closet, it was to embrace her Christ: When she read or meditated, it was
that Christ might be more fully discovered unto her. I may boldly say of her,
as one said of Cicero Hortentius, That every book was rejected by her, wherein
she found not the name of Jesus; and this love made her very active; made her a
Volunteer in Theological War: such a bond it was, that neither the storms of a
cloudy day could rot, nor the heat of a fiery furnace could burn, nor the sword
of a Tyrannical persecutor could cut, nor the flutterings of a glazing world
could entice asundet: It was not the damnations of the profane, nor the Hail
Madam of the hypocrite that could separate her from her Beloved.

. 5 She had a high esteem of the everlasting Gospel: like Budaeus his wife, Non
tractavit negligentius libros quam liberos: she was as tender of the Gospel of
Christ, as of the person of her child: as she delighted to see his person, so
did she to hear his voice: what ever charge she gave, in her shield she bore
the gospel in chief, over which, A heart surmounted proper: it was there that
she found food for her soul, and direction on her way. She would say to the
same purpose that Cheraea did, Haec ego non facerem quae Jupiter fecit? what
shall Christ set me an example, and shall not I imitate? Shall he go before,
and I stay behind? She delighted in the same manner that Robert King of Cicily
did in the book of God; who once acquainting Petrarcha with his affections to
the Word, and Interest of Christ, said, juro tibi Petrarcha, multo chariores
esse literas quam Regnum; and si alterutro carendum sit, aequanimius me
Diademate quam Literis cariturum; I prize the Gospel more then my Crown; and if
one must be left, I profess I had rather lose my Kingdom then the Scriptures.
Oh she often felt a secret wound that she received from the word of Truth,
which came with pleasure, not with smart: Evangelii verba leviter volant, sed
graviter vulnerant, the Gospel is but a Word, but it makes an impression; it
cuts deep, though the wounds are more delightful then painful: How often
would she go to this glass to dress her self by! and thence was it that she was
so comely: she did not only look in the glass for her own face, but she thereby
got a fight of the Fathers Throne, as by the light of the Sun she got a sight
of his footstool. She loved to sit under the beams of the Sun; and though it
did make her black, (for she thereby lay under the disdain of the more
degenerate part of the world) yet she was comely; nither would she put a vail
over her face, when she went to behold the Sun, but would labor to view him
without eclipsing any of his brightness, by the shadows of Types, or the vails
of Tradition. She loved to see light immediately from the fountain, not by
reflection orderivation; for then the heat and vigor was something abated. God
made two great Lights, the light of the Sun to rule the day, and the light of
the Moon to rule the night; of which things, I may say as Paul of Agar, and
Sarah of Isaac and Ishmael: Gal. 4 (...), which things are an Allegory; they
are the two great discoveries that God made of himself to the world; the two
Ministrations or Covenants, Law and Gospel, Moses and Christ; Do this and live,
Believe, and be saved. The light of the Moon only a dark representation and
reflection, a derived stream, full of Mountains, Mists, Types, Shadows,
Ceremonies, carnal Ordinances imposed, only till the time of reformation, till
the Sun should arise: (...), The great light which is the true, clean and
infallible declaration of the sun Christ in the Gospel, which dispels all
mists, and shadows, and additional rites, whereby the holy of holies is
discernable by the rending of the vail in twain; this was the Luminare magnum.
Heb. 1. 1. God at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in times past to
the Fathers by the Prophets; but in these last days has spoken to us by his
Son, whom he has appoitned Heir of all things, by whom he made the worlds,
etc. This was the Object of her eye; Oh she loved to sit in this light, where
nothing should cloud or eclipse the brightness of his glory, nor the image of
his person.

6. She was not only a Prizer and an Incourager, but a constant frequenter of
public Ordinances and preaching. She was often taking her souls food; and that
was the reason that she was so well-liking. She would be often at the sincere
milk of the word, that (...), that undeceitfull food, and therefore she was a
thriving Christian: for besides those embraces in her own Closet, and the
interviews in her Chapel, which were very frequent, yet she desired to see the
face of her beloved in the Assembly of the Saints. She was of David's heart,
Psalm 42. As the heart pants after the water brooks, so panted her soul after
her God; she thirsted for God, the living God: and such was her earnestness,
that she counted a day in the Lords Courts better then a thousand else where.
One thing (that I may allude to David's words) she desired of the Lord, and that
she sought for, that she might dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of
her life, and inquire in his Temple. David got intelligence in the sanctuary,
Psalm 73, 16, 17. So did she, she went to enquire of God, to seek his face, to
pray to him, to praise him in the sanctuary. She could speak in his language,
Psalm 63. 1, 2. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee; my soul
thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee in a dry and thirsty land where
no water is, to see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the
sanctuary. How did she draw to the public, and what a train followed her!
there were many more guests at Gospel feasts, because she was there; She was
the great Pillar of public worship in the corner of the land where she lived;
many others (I will not say all) were but the vacuum or space between; an
empty-nothing. I may say of her decease, as one said of Augustus his death,
That Rome feared ruinam orbis; so those amongst whom she lived, now that she is
fallen, may fear Ruinam Evangelii: Sermons, and Exercises, and Lectures look
pale, when she is taken away; Zeal, and Holiness, and Christian fellowship may
give up the Ghost, now that she is not there to encourage them with her
presence: her worship was constant; and yet such a worship as God enquires
after, (...), in spirit and in truth: she loved not to have her service so
over-trimmed, that God could not know it, nor so carelessly dressed as though it
did not expect or regard acceptance. She would allow ceremonious gestures in
strangers that had not been at all acquainted with God; but she could not think
it becoming sons to be superfluous in Congees before his father: being the
Father is content with the heart, though she would not commend a clownish garb
and a rustic behavior in Gods house, yet she would not have men antic. She
was not a Nonconformist in her worship to the Gospel rule; but when Christ bid
go, she would go: and when he said Do this, she would do it. The more spiritual
the food was, she judged it more sweet; mixture took away the innate relish of
the sincere word from her palate. She loved to have her worship liberal, but
not prodigal, but not gaudy; well trimmed, but not light. She loved that the
Ministers labor should Ol^re lucernam, savor of sweat: that they should so
cook the milk of the word that it should neither be mixed with floating
ingredients, nor beaten into a bubble, nor taste of the impure vessels, nor set
to the bottom; all which either makes it very untoothsome, or very unwholesome:
and she did not only hear attentively, but would carry away with her, either in
her memory, or in her Notes; and that she sed on, until the next banquet: she
would practice over the Sermons which she heard, and so imprint them in her
memory, that, as to her, they needed no other publication. She did not think
that to be Vera Religio quae in Templo relinquitur, not that to be true worship
which is left at the Church; therefore when she had no witness to stir her up,
then would she ruminate on what she had formerly taken, but not well digested;
therefore she would usually compare her heart to what she had heard; and what
she heard to the word of truth, and hereby strictly examine her self, with
Sixtius, Quod malum hodie sanasti, cui vitio obstetisti, qua part meli^r^es?
What sin she had conquered, where she was more illuminated, and where her
graces wanted most repair.

2. As to Prayer as well as Preaching, she was both powerful and constant. She
ecchoed to the Lords command, Seek my face; her addresses were frequent, and
her importunity was great, like the woman of Canaan, Mat, 15. 22, 25, 26, 27.
(...). She cried, saying, Commiserate me, O thou Son of Duvid. And verse 25.
(...); She worshipped, and cried, Lord, Be helpful to me; and when she had a
rebuke, and was told there was nothing for her; or that what there was, was too
good, then rather then nothing, she would have the crumbs under his Table: Or
like the importunate widow, that would weary the Magistrate, if he would not
right her. Thus she with Gorgonia Nazianzeus sister had her knees even cleaving
to the ground; though she had others to p^ay for her, yet she would not neglect
it her self: After family duty at nights performed by her Chaplain, she would
redeem time for retirements: Communion with Christ is the sweetest; and there
is the greatest ravishments of heart when alone: most intimate expressions of
love when no body is by; neither might any interrupt her, Cum rem divinam
fecit, when she was at her devotion. She was purely Vestal in this; she never
let the fire of her affections go out: earnest for what she stood in need of,
and grateful for what she had received. Many a day did she set apart to
implore deliverances from eminent dangers; and many a day to return praise and
make acknowledgements for eminent deliverances; It is reported that the
Bernates, a people in Switzerland, cause the day of their reformation to be
engraven in letters of gold on Pillars of stone: So at Geneva on the Towns
house on a Marble Table is writ this, that shows they were not negligent of
praise, when God had exercised his power.

Post Tenebras Lux.
QUam anno 1535. profligata Romana Antichristi Tyrannide, abrogatisque ejus
superstitionibus, sacrosancta Christi Religio hic in suam puritatem, Ecclesia
in meliorem ordinem singulari Dei beneficio reposita, fugatisque hostibus, urbs
ipsa in suam libertatem, non sine insigni miraculo restituta fuerit; Senatus,
populusque Genevensis monumentum hoc, perpetuae memoriae causa fieri, atque hoc
loco erigi curavit, quo suam erga Deum gratitudinem ad posteros testatam
fecerit.

Which I mention for this, that you may see reformation is on record, and such
great mercy deserves a Memorandum; and that it was with her; the last
thanksgiving day which she kept, was for the safe reduction of her only son of
hapy memory, from beyond the seas, that he might come and bow once more to his
parents in the land of his nativity; and that they might make each others
hearts glad in beholding one another faces in peace; and this was a memorial
of her gratitude, namely her remarkable bounty to the poor of her neighboring
towns, which Alms I cannot believe will be blotted out while some live, who
were partakers therein: but to the thing in hand; Oh! how ought their eyes to
be lifted to the sun that are not blind! and with what real love should they
return the cup of thanksgiving when God has caused it to overflow! how would
she cry out in the consideration of the glorious purchase made by the precious
blood of Christ and in consideration of her adoption and covenant interrest
(...), from how great darkness to what marvailous light, from what bondage to
what a freedom, from what a prison to what a throne! Oculos ad sidera laeta
Extulit, and duplices tendens ad sydnra palmas
Talia voce refert. --
her eye fixed on the Tribunal, her hand upon her heart; Oh what expressions
would she utter; such as none could indite, but by the help of the Spirit; and
such sighs as are (...), such as I cannot express; and surely they could not
but be heard, Quia (ut glossa) a spiritu Dei in se habitante proficiscuntur,
because they were composed by the spirit dwelling in her soul: what! her prayer
was Clavis diei, and sera noctis, the key in the morning, and the lock at
night; first after she rose, and the last before she went to bed: this Hesiod
could admonish us to be our duty, (...), She would seldom conclude any work but
it should be done by praise; seldom but the work should begin with prayer;
shaming those Professors that rather then pray for success, will put all to the
venture, or not begin at all; who will be absent from dinner rather then crave
a blessing: it is a wonder if such have not their bread turned into stones, like
their hearts, who lay out nothing of praise for large incomes of privileges.
She looked upon her prayer as a weapon, and a defense from assaults, and the
refore would not forget it because she knew not what enemies she should meet
with; So Macarius, (...). The Devil dreads prayer, as the burnt Child dreads
the fire; thence the Jews have this proverb, Quicunque aexpedit negotia sua
antequam oraverit, perinde est ac si aedificaret excelsum: he that begins a
work, and never prays for the success, lays but the foundation in the sand, or
builds Castles in the ait. Thus the Poets, A Jove Principium.
Hesiod, (...). Ovid. Dii coeptis aspirate meis. Theogn. (...). Achilles, (...).


So Demosthenes, (...).

So Turnus, Multa Deos orans, oneravitque aethera votis. He made the air ring
with his audible voice: Oh how many arguments had she to move her to this! but
none so free from being contradicted and opposed, as the sense of her
dependence, and of her own wants; and who can think there is no need to ask,
when they consider how useful it is to have! Look on Peter in his retirement,
Jeremiah in the ditch, Daniel in the Lions Den, Job on the Dunghill, Ezekiel on
his bed, the three children in the furnace, Jonas in the Whales belly, Paul and
Silas in prison, Christ in the garden, and then tell me if you need not prayer:
Which of you gave a beggar ever any hing, were he never so poor, if he was too
stout to ask? and which of you would ever give him more, if he was too proud to
thank you?

Orate Jovem qui donat and aufert,
Dat vitam dat opes.
Is not Life and Preservation worth thanks? Is not everlasting glory worth
asking? She used to pray as though she would take no denial; and to praise as
though she expected never to be denied more; her prayers was (...), in spirit,
of the Spirit indicting, and for spiritual things: She concluded with St.
Austines Epistle, 105. Sine spiritu* orationis nemo salubriter est oraturus,
that no man can pray as he ought, without the Spirit of prayer; and this she
was very diligent in, that her heart and understanding went along with her
words; For Quod in religione cor non facit, non sit; that is no Christian duty
where the heart is idle; therefore Exodus 37. Aaron was never to burn incense
but when the lamps were lighted: noting to us that nunquam debet effundi oration
nisi cum ardet lampas in intell^ctu; Prayer is like the Apostles preaching; one
word with understanding is more acceptable then a thousand muttered by rote;
therefore she altered her prayer according to the alteration of her wants; when
she was a child, she prayed for childrens mercies that she might take root,
that she might grow; when grown, she prayed tha^ she might be fruitful; when
the fruit was ripe, she prayed for a fair harvest; the husband man changes his
desires according to the season; for should he be always confined to the same
expressions, he would ask things either hurtful or useless; In which
petitions she would go with that fervency, yet with resignation, and because
she knew with Chrysostom (...); It is God that gives both what and when he
pleases; and because her prayer was frequent, and so fervent, it was therefore
more probable to be effectual.

7. She excercised her self in things which had an affinity with heaven: seeing
she aimed to go and live there, she accustomed her self to the language of the
country, and conformed her garb to the deportment of that society, amongst whom
she expected to be a fellow-Citizen. Truth, Holiness, and Zeal.

1. Truth or a rectified judgment, was her inquiry: yet so, as it were mixed
with tenderness to all that were of a different persuasion. Amicus Plato,
Amicus Aristoteles, sed magis amica veritas. She loved the preservation of her
honor, the continuance of her reputation, the increase of her interest, but
she loved truth more; She honored Episcopal, honored Presbyterial,
Independents; But she did not think that Christ was divided, that any of them
was crucified for her: therefore she would not be distinguished from others by
that characteristical mark, to which of these persuasions she did belong: But
she looked upon the Divine life, and that was the note of distinction in her
from others; for as for all other grounds of disuniting, upon which there
attends strife and envy, she looked upon them as (...), carnal and walking
after the manner of men: whosoever made a party and laid not the foundation in
conformity and similitude to Christ, she looked upon it as carnal, and humane
at the best; Surely no principle but disobedience to the divine law and life,
is sufficient warrant to disunite men's affections one from another: If ever any
men were worthy to baptize a party into their own names, sure Paul and Apollos
and Cephas were; There were but two parties with her, and she soon resolved
which to be on: God and the Devil: Christ and Belial; and if any of the
forementioned Sects would walk with her to heaven (for that is the place where
all pretend to be going to) she would entertain them kindly: but if they could
not go her ^ace, or were persuaded that they knew a better ^ay, if it was not
so suitable to her judgment, ^he would friendly take her leave of them, and
^ish them a good journey, expecting to meet again at their journyes end; If any
was commended to her for charitable purposes, She would not inquire whether he
was Prelatical or Presbyterial, etc. but whether he was a Puritan or a profane
person, holy or hypocritical. She did not measure other men's complexions and
opinions by the astrolabe of her own fancy, but by the infallible word of
truth: Oh this was it which she stood to promote; And yet with great
tenderness; she would not put out other men's eyes, because they received not
objects under the same representation that hers did; she did not like
Procrustes with them that lay in his bed, if they were too long for it, cut of
their heads: or too short, stretch them out: It is true, error is multiplex:
truth Simplex, truth single, but one; error double, nay, manifold; But she
counted it hard measure to be compelled to another judgment, be he what he
would, except he could assure her that he judged righteous judgment, or (which
is all one with the Pope) that he was infallible. She counted it a rack to an
understanding soul to be compelled to follow one that can err, and to be bound
to follow a guide whithersoever he went; What a hoodwincking it would be no^ to
be allowed to stop when one is convince^ that they are led wrong; She saw no
reason why one might not as well make a standar^ for persons as for
apprehensions, except a^ souls were equal, and all their vehicles of the same
activity: Otherwise one may with pretense of reason, slaughter the ox because
he will not run as fast as the gray hound, or burn the Gamut because it cannot
be stretched to the hight of an Ela, and knowing that one eye differed from
another in carrying ideas to the intellect, she would never make a standard but
in him who is (...), all soul, all eye, all understanding; and though she
granted that there was an error, if it was in the understanding, and not in the
peremptory will, she would not have it destroyed but informed, because the sick
palate does not give a right crisis, a true discovery of the relish of meats of
wholesome food; she would not send for an executioner, but a physician: She
counted it strong Logik, an argument fetched from a Roman Topic, to be beaten
because her body would not fit another coat; it would be more rational to
let out or take in the coat, according to the body; For in her esteem it was
better an 1000. coats be rent then one body perish; She looked upon essentials
as unalterable, but she would have circumstances fitted to souls, and not
souls to circumstances: and when she could not crowd into another man's
apparel, she desired to be permitted to wear her own; provided it was neither
chargeable nor infectious; and me thinks there is something akin to to this
frame, mystically couched in the scepter Royal, which is born in pale, a field
Jupiter, ensigned with an eye Sol: the eye is not there only to espy gangreens
which are to be cut off, but lesset sores that are capable of a cure. Truth was
the card that she steered by, yet tenderness was the sail that carried her to
the haven: there was indeed an Antipathy between her active soul and the muddy
ignorant; and as they say of the Wing of a Batt laid to the hole of the
laborious Emmet, it will hinder it from coming out; So she (not for differences
in judgment, but practice) would seldom come where the cloud of darkness
overshadowed the place, or where there was only a hollow voice not intelligible
to the hearers: non talpas and vespertiliones a^oravit; She loved not to
worship hoodwinked: She thought it not probable that those who have darkened
their brightness in theit conversation, should have much light in their
apprehension; therefore she would sooner take a holy man's judgment, then a
profane man's, in things which were controverted: she thought it not likely
that those who sit in the shadow, should see more clearly then those that walk
in the light of the sun: As for those whom the world calls Phanatiques, though
many have not the name undeservedly; yet those of them who sincerely fear the
Lord, and are free from self designs, she neither thought them mad men nor
fools: it was her desire, as it was St. Basils; When he was solicited to turn
Arrian, and refused, one called him Phanaticus Phanatique, to whom he answered,
if this be madness, Opto me in aeternum sic delirare: I desire I may be mad
for ever; It is pity that gospel purity should be madness, and folly: and
profaneness and lewdness wisdom and discretion; O tempora, O mores! The
ignorant multitude, who measure all seize by the hight of their cubit,
think all Giants a monstrous and a dangerous people that exceed them; thus they
did with Christ, he was a Phanatique in their esteem, Ioh. 10. 20. thou have a
devil and art mad: so Rhoda, when she affirmed a thing which seeemed but
unprobable to the congregation, she was a phanatique, Act. 12. 15. and they
said unto her thou art mad: So Paul, because he had attained to a higher pitch
of knowledge then the rest, he was looked upon as a Phanatique, Act. 26. 24.
Paul, thou art beside thy self; much learning has made thee mad; But see the
rather who the Apostle calls phanatiques, and they are so in deed, 1 Corinthians..
14. 22, 23. But as all are not to be condemned for the guilt, so all are not to
be justified for the innocence of some; The most of those which go under that
name, who are indeed skeptical and phanatical, she judged the Quakers to be;
And yet in some of these she would say to the same effect that Bucholtzer said
of Swinchfold, non deest cor bonum, sed caput regulatum; they wanted not a
sound heart but a solid head; not good aims, but more faithful guides; They
have often attempted to draw her into their mettings, but in vain; I have heard
her at their solicitations to make a solemn invitation of them to come to her
chapel: and if they would not leave her suspicious of their designs, they
should come first to her, because they first made the breach; they would
usually present her with books which contrary to their intentions, let her see
their errors more clearly, and made a fuller discovery of their grand
delusions: One once was very importunate with his friend, an Athenian, to go to
hear the nightingale counterfeited to the life; to whom he answered, that would
be frivilous, I have heard the nightingale her self: Thus it was but a piece of
their indiscretion, to think that she who had tasted of the milk of the word
immediately from the breasts of consolation, could be allured to taste of that
which they had beaten into froth; and though they had made it seem as white as
snow, yet she concluded it to be as empty as a buble, and as light as vanity:
It was no easy matter to bring her out of acquaintance of Christ who is the
life, and out of the search of him who is the truth: She looked upon it as a
Christians liberty to be true and righteous, as Plato (...): It is a Christians
privililedg, as well as duty, to walk in the truth as it is in Jesus: And as
she sought this pearl her self, so she rejoiced that any of hers had made a
purchase of it, like St. Joh. 3 John 4. (...). She had no greater joy then
this, to see her children walk in the truth; and what was made known to her,
she would publicly own and profess; nihil veritas erubescit nisi abscondi,
knowing that truth is not ashamed of the light, it creeps not into corners, it
blushes at nothing but darkness: though she lived in a dangerous time, when
facta erat fides temporis potius quam evangeliorum, and cum alter alteri
anathema esse coepit, prope nemo erat Christi: when men set the bias of their
faith to salute the time, and not to conform to the Gospel; when men became
salvages one to another: Yet she kept unwarped, unbiassed, but walked both
within the bounds, and kept an even length to the gospel rule; She loved to
hear the truth though it made against her, not like the unregenerate as Austine
complains, amant veritatem lucentem, odio habent redarguentem, love truth when
it commends, but hate it when it reproves; prize the word that will let them
sleep, but reproach it when it peirceth to the heart; She thought that to be
holy and good, was the way to be rightly informed, knowing, that ut Pholosophi
quaerunt veritatem, Theologi inveniunt, religiosi fiunt possessores, as
Philosophers beat the air, and Divines make some discovery, yet the truly
godly and religious, are truths tabernacle and habitation. So Austine, Surgunt
indocti, rapiuntque coelum, and nos cum doctrina nostra deijcimur in infernum.
God infatuates the wisdom of the flesh, the terrestrial and carnal
pullutations of fleshly knowledge: but the pure in heart they shall see God:
and the wisdom which is not only light but clean, that shall be justified of
her hearers.

2. Holiness was her daily exercise; her eye was upon her soul, that it should
be kept clean and undefiled; Retorsum spectavit, and anteactum vitae cursum
laeta contemplata est. She looked upon the mire and filth with a thankful
heart, when she had escaped its difilement; She was not at all ashamed who
marked her steps, because she walked so uprightly; she was like Livius Drusius,
who being to build a house at Rome, the chief workman told him he would make it
(if he pleased) that he should overlook all, and none should see what was done
in his rooms: to whom he replied, Quin tu potius, siquid in te artis est, ita
compone domum meam, ut quicquid agam ab omnibus inspici possit: Nay quoth he,
but rather set it so in view that my actions may be seen of all: thus did she;
she never feared who looked on her, because her soul was always dressed; She
took Seneca's wholesome direction, Sic vixit cum hominibus tanquam Deus videret:
and sic loquuta est Deo tanquam homines audirent; She so lived with men as in
the sight of of God: and so spoke to God, as in the hearing of men; Her
conversation was real, much troubled that sin crept in, though it seldom
lodged in her mortal body; She counted it, with Theodosius, a far greater
honor to be a member of Christ, then the head of an Empire; She seemed to hide
her luster rather then proclaim it; non magna eloquebatur, sed vixit: She did
not speak but live according to the Gospel; and though holiness, and strictness
had a reproach attending it, yet she loved not Christ the worse, Proptor hoc
quod paupertatem praedicaret, and eligeret quos mundus contempserat: because
his followers were poor and such as the world despised; And this luster of
holiness stopped malicious mouths, and preserved her honor entire among men:
for it is not likely that principality should be lost where religion is
preserved, Council. Trident. those who were not of so weak constitutions as she,
yet were not able to endure such hardship as she would for the Gospel; Those
that saw her stretch forward in a duty, and what large steps she took in her
care, except they were such as had drowned their intellectuals in the sink of a
corporeal life, and body-pleasing conversation, could not but confess that she
was grown of a tall stature in grace; She was so exemplary, that I may say ipsa
est quae possit virtutem discere virtus; One might measure many rules by her,
she was so straight. Oh how heavily did she bear it when she heard any one
reviling the holy ways of God, or casting dirt on a spottless behavior! She
seemed to be inwardly wounded when Christ's ways were evil spoken of; She
thought their mirth tragical, and their melody profaneness, who could not make
sport but by deriding the Children of God. (...), says Chrysostom, take heed
that when you laugh, God be not angry: She thought the state sad to live in,
when nothing should be accounted wit but what is profane, and no men to be
wise but those that dare be wicked: when he is tripidum optimus qui est bipedum
nequissimus, as Learned Dr. Arrowsmith, when he jests best, that dammes his own
soul; It was said of Mr. Perkins that his writings were such, that si tollas
sancta, tollis omnia, if you take out what is holy, you take out all: So may it
be said of her life, take away those days which she spent in conforming her
self to Christ's rule, and you leave her none; She so expressed the soul of
Christianity in her walking, that any one might easily see she had a principle
within her which set her on motion, which was not merely humane; and while she
was living, she shone with that luster, that though some of the deboister sort
thought it a disgrace to her to own the name and title of a Saint, and of a
Puritain and Child of God; yet as Maccovius did of Persius, they I belive,
would wish their souls only in the condition of this honorable Lady, might
they be put to their choice; Oh with what delight and cheerfullnesse did she
follow after Christ, and how amiable were the paths of righteousness to her
soul! She would seldom be alone without the bible or some other book by her
side; She took no pleasure in light Romances, nor debanched Comedies, but in
the Law of God was her delight: She would often be tacitly showing her dislike
of those books, where people might with as much liberty and with more profit be
conversant in the the word of truth; Thus Plutarch writes of Caesar, that
coming into Rome, he found the Roman dames cherishing their dogs on their
lapps, and carrying them about in their arms: He presently turns to one of his
companions, and said: What, have the Roman women no children? Alas, we may
complain in like manner even in this our day, To see frivolous tales, Idle
sonnets, obscene plays, debauched odes, jeering Epitaphs so cried up, and
hugged in every ones bosom; may not one put the Question, What means this?
Have English men and women no bibles? Is their nothing writ in this language
that is of soul concernment, or serves to edification! Oh what a purity was in
her heart, which we could never discover all! for she would not proclaim her
worth on the house top; but would then be best when she was alone, like the
images of Cassius and Brutus, eo ipso praefulgebant, quod non visebantur; They
therefore shon the more because they were concealed.

3. Zeal was her motive; and integrity her stay; There was an earnestness went
along with her regulated judgment; Her belief was (...): Out of a pure heart, a
good conscience and unfeigned faith; Her love was (...): Not in word and in
speech only, but in deed and in truth: her conversation was (...); In
simplicity, and sincerity, not in the wisdom of the flesh; Her employment was
(...): That she might try or approve things that were excellent, that she might
be sincere and without offense till the day of Christ: not like those that say
da justum sanctumque videri, Noctem peccatis and fraudibus obijce nubem, who
had rather appear Christians then be so indeed; who run with the best all the
day, especially if the sun shine upon them, but at night are as expert in works
of darkness as the worst; She would be cautious in the doctrine she
entertained, not like the Athenians, whatever Demetrius commands, must needs be
just: but she first weighed them in the balance and scales of the sanctuary:
but what she did entertain, she was very real in the practice: she would not
offer any counterfeite oblations, nor halt nor blind in sacrifice, when she had
a male in the flock; Knowing that simulata sanctitas est duplex iniquitas: to
betray Christ when one pretends to kiss Christ, makes one twice more the
children of the devil; Oh how ardently was she set for piety and how she would
persecute profaneness, as Zuinglius, in alijs mansueta, in blasphemijs contra
Christum non ita: In other things she was as meek as a lamb, but in dethroning
sin, the lion could not be more violent; It troubled her to see that any
shoulst destroy themselves in thinking to do God a discourtesie: It grieved her
that so many had got on sheeps clothing, but had wolves natures, and were
decked in scarlet and fine linen, but were all sores and boiles underneath;
that would pretend to be of the Church of God, when indeed they were of the
synagogue of Satan. So it troubled her to hear some men's zeal quenched because
others were only so in pretense; to hear all condemned that labored to be
sincere, because some did so to be seen of men: to have Paul's strictness evil
spoken of, because Demas had forsaken him, and chose the present world, who had
been a high professor: This is all one to bring all the Apostles under the
mark of hypocites because Judas one of them proved so; to say that all women
dissemble when they say they are with child, because some do miscarry. She
shuned a painted sepulcher as much as an open grave; though there are a
generation of men, shall I call them, or only apparitions, in whom holiness is
even as colors are in the rainbow, (...), not according to truth but
imagination, not in reality but appearance; yet it was not so with her; She
came too much into view to be only guilt or painted; such Batts come seldom
into sight, and that at twilight too, that they may not so easily be discovered
whether they be beasts or birds; It was not so with her; for (...), she
mattered not if the whole world were an eye to discover any flaw in her
conversation; and as she was sincere and upright, so she was very zealous and
ardent; She could not be allured from the ways of the Gospel, neque prece
neque pretio, neither could she be lured nor forced from the profession of the
Gospel; She was orta ex quercu non ex salice, in point of Evangelicall truth;
so earnest was her love set on heaven, that though she had pleasures of this
life in abundance, yet protestata est se nolle sic a Deo satiari, she would not
be put of so; in her pursuit of the prize she was both speedy and sure; and if
any thing stood in her way, she would either remove or tread upon it, that she
should not be interrupted in her progress: Contempsit and mundanum furorem and
favorem; Neither the calm nor storm could hinder from lanching into the main
ocean: She was as it is said of Ignatius, magnae fidei; magni Zeli, of a strong
faith and hot zeal: every opportunity was a price and a pearl that was strowed
in her way, and she would freely stoop to take them up: nothing stuck so near
her heart as the glory of the gospel and interest of Christ; which she made
appear in her discourse; for wheresoever it began, it would end there; She
entered not into fellowship but with such as would tell her of Christ; and this
was a sign she loved much; levesque in nocte susurri, she had night visitations
which we knew not of: when all were in bed, then could she step aside to meet
her beloved, and there fix is ardens obtutibus haeret, she was transported with
the sight; She was carried to heaven in Eliah's chariot, in the flame of her
zeal; how did she love to behold Christ at the fathers right hand! many a time
we could easily have guessed at her very thoughts: her very eye be wrayed her
heart; History tells us that most great achievements owe their original to
Love, as the voyage for the Golden fleet, the Grecians ten years war with
Troy, the honorable order of the Garter, etc. Nobilitas sub amore jacet,
honor is beholden to love: and nobility to kindness of nature; so I may say
of her glorious and immortal name which she now is named withal, sub amore
jecit, it was derived from her love; Such heat was in her heart, that her very
presence had an influence; and I have known many come warm away when they have
been cold when they went into the place where she was: she was so illuminated,
like Euryale and Sthenyo by Perseus, that she slew Medusa, the corporeal
nature, which if it be listened unto turns us into stone. Take the story;
probably there may be something of mystery couched in it: The Egyptians by the
Gorgones, Sthenyo, Euryale and Medusa, understand the three souls, or rather
the three tendences or centres in the soul; The first is called Nephesh by the
Hebrews, Vivens or vitalis; vitality or an appetence of life, to wit corporeal
life: and this they say is Medusa, who only of the 3 sisters was mortal, and
so they will have that place understood, My soul is sorrowful unto death; his
Nephesh or appetence of corporal life was unwilling to part with the body; he
that finds his soul shall lose, and he that loses his soul shall find it, Mat.
10. 39. the word (...) soul, it is there translated life; for it is that
inclination of the soul to life: the second is Ruach spiritus, qui rationis
particeps fit, that soul or that faculty whereby the soul is capable of
deliberating; the third is Nessamah, human, light; which Pythagoras calls
divinitatis partem, And Plato mentem; The inclination to obey the divine voice:
which two egged on by Perseus, qui divinum spiritum melioremque genium
significat, which intimates the influence of the divine life, they show Medusa
the corporeal life or soul, which else would have endeavored to have brought
her sisters to the same sensuality, and to hearken to the whispers of the
serpent; for Medusa was all over beset with serpents, and her head was full
thereof. But lastly,

8. She persevered unto the end. She was constant and immovable; as she did
abound daily in the work of the Lord, knowing her labor would not be in vain,
so she was (...), stable and firm, (...) though (...), immobilis though
pastoritia, (...), steadfast and unchangable, according to the Apostle, 1 Cor.
15. 58. She stood in in the greatest blasts of wind, as indeed there arose many
about her: and being rooted in love, no storm was able to blow her from her own
steadfastness; She was not only a fruitful, but a well-rooted tree: It is an
ordinary comparison;

Homo est arbor inversa. A man is a tree with the root upwards; for they
counted the hair the root, wherein is the establishment of the branches,
strength of the body; as in Sampson, his strength lay in his hair; so neither
Nisus, nor Dido, nor Alcestes could be overthrown until Mercury, Iris, and
Minos had cut their hair. She was a tree: only differed in this: arbor radices
interra, homo in caelo posuit; her root was fastened in heaven as a tree is in
the earth: they carry it further, and say good men are Palmae date trees, --
Depressa resurgit. the more weight it has it, either grows higher or takes
root deeper: these were the branches which the people strewed before Christ,
when they cried Hosanna, (...), the boughs of date trees, Rami palmorum: it
has a brain orpith, halilab with the Hebrews, Cheder by the Arabians; the
berryes are called (...), and there is in them a near resemblance to a man's
finger, thence (...) digitus, a finger: It is always green; thus she is a tree
rooted and grounded in love, a nourishing soil, always immovable, not
various: always green when most burdened, she either grew the higher for it, or
took root deeper; and that I may use the Apostles words, Heb. 10. having a true
heart, in full assurance of faith, her heart sprinkled from an evil conscience,
and her body washed with pure water, considering that he was faithful who had
promised, (...): She held fast the profession of her faith without wavering.

1. She could not be unsettled by the worlds allurements: she had experienced
their misery who had their portion in this life; therefore she had rather not
gain the world then lose her own soul: she did not esteem Artibasius his cup
of gold so highly as she did Chrysanthus his kiss: she had considred the
Preachers Epitaph of the world, All is vanity and vexation of spirit, and hence
was it that she was so much out of love with the world, because it knew not the
father; when she was on her deathbed, she bid us not pray for her and beg her
life; for she desired to be dissolved and to be with Christ: the taste of
Spiritual food, and the dantyes of heaven were so fresh on her palate, that the
things of the world had but a bad savor: she did not relish the worlds trash,
that had fed so plenteously on the Manna of heaven: she could not be allured
with puddle water, that had such soul-satisfying draughts of the pure fountain
above: nothing would quench her thirst but rock water, which rock was Christ.

2. Nor by wicked men's reproaches; she durst venture to trust all with God,
though sinners did dishearten her; she believed that God would never leave her
except she left him first; it was a saying of Cardinal Wollseyes, when he grew
in disgrace under Henry 8. which she could witness to be true; quoth he (when
one was pitying him that was so contemptible, who had been so remarkable) Had I
been as careful to serve my God of heaven, as I have been to serve my King on
the earth, he would not have left me in my gray hairs; Indeed some have
endeavored to cast aspersions on her, (as they had need be very bad that have
the worlds commendations or good report) but she was not so, but carried such a
brightness in her behavior that would darken all manner of disparagement; and
notwithstanding aspersions, yet would make ber reputation legible: She would
not love her self, nor pride her self the more, because wicked men spoke well
of her, but would rather examine what evil she had done, when she was extolled
by carnal and profane men. She did live amongst such Leeches, who suck the
corrupt blood, if there be any; or I may call them Cupping-glasses, which draw
the worst humors: but I have examined some of their reports, and have found as
much truth in them as the Doctor at Sorbon found for the justification of the
Mass, from the Postscript of Paul's Epistles, where he found in the Latin, Missa
est, though in the Original, in all the Postscripts it is (...), was written:
so as it was with him, I found it in their reports, both falfe translation, and
false construction: Regium est male audire cum benefeceris; she would think her
work the better, or her person more honorable for being reviled for being or
doing good: like Titus Vespatian, Cum nihil fecit dignum propter quod
contumelia afficiatur, mendacia nil curavit, when she had done nothing whereof
she needed be ashamed, she would not be ashamed at any thing which evil men or
women could report: her heart was many times so well employed, that she had
neither time to hear, nor opportunity to requite what bad men said on her:

Haesit lac inter meditans interque cruorem:
Inter delicias uberis and lateris.
She often stood to contemplate the Virgins purity, and the sons innocence,
(...), she would rather abound in works then wealth; and if a spotless
conversation, as well as a gorgeous garment would not oblige sinners to give
their good words, she thought them not worth enquiring after, nor worth thanks
when obtained. She did not think that the foundation of her eternal contentment
was laid on the breath of a few external Eulogiums and commendations; therefore
she would not Adorare vulgus, jacere oscula, and serviliter agere pro imperio:
she would not be irregular for their approbation, nor do evil though they would
deifie her for it.

3. Nor by Satan's temptations: as the flower could not allure, nor bad report
shame her, so neither could the fiery dart affright her from her resolution.
She was compassed about with snares (as every Christian is, who is not in a
byway) yet she escaped; and when the number was so great that they seemed to
cloud the sight of heaven from her, yet she could fight under the shadow of
Christ's wing: often was she surrounded so with enemies, that she seemed to be
in the same posture with the Prince of Orange his Army; when they had the
Spaniard before them, and the Sea behind them: who were told they must either
eat up that Army, or drink up that sea, or there was no way to escape; so she,
there was the Ocean of Gods wrath behind, and an host of sins before, which
made her fight stoutly, and resist steadfastly, rather then fall into either of
the dangers: many times there lay a Serpent in the way, which must either be
slain, or it would make her stop her course, or turn out of the path; either of
which she was unwilling to do. And in as much as the best Christians are Satan's
greatest enemies, therefore they shall be most assaulted. Satan needs not tempt
his own, no more then one needs make an exhortatory oration to a dead body to
keep in the grave, or a prisoner in the Goal not to ramble abroad: so Satan
himself answered an Exocist, who going to conjure an evil spirit out of a Maids
body, the spirit would not stir, but after many proffers to the spirit which
was all refused, the Exorcist having a great desire to free the Damsel, desired
the spirit to come into his body, if it would but leave hers, imagining that
the evil spirit would prefer a room in him before the Damsels; to whom the
spirit answered, Quid opus est eum tentare, quem novissimo die, jure optimo
possessurus sum? What need is there that I should remove my habitation to come
into thee, when I have possession already? These were Bella Theologica, holy
religious Wars: Quae tardius deflagrant, and citius exureseunt, which are long
in kindling, yet soon consume all: these were Satanae profunditates, Satan's
depths; yet she could wade through them when the wind and storms were at
heighest.

She kept her Christian courage until death, with the sense of her
reconciliation: the eye of her faith was such, that it discovered the arm of
God, and strength in his right hand; With Scipio Spem posuit, (...), she placed
her comfort in the merits of Christ, not in her own: She could hope when the
vessel leeked: and she could believe where she did not see: For Faith is the
evidence of things not seen. Fides Christiana non habet meritum, ubi ratio
humana quaerit experimentum: Greg. It is not true and genuine, but a spurious
and adulterous faith that looks for a sign: She was not of them who in times of
encouragement profess they will dye with Christ; but when danger comes, deny
him: not of the multitude, that when the high Priests are inclinable to own
him, call him a great Prophet; but when they seek to put him to death, call him
the Prince the of Devils. Not of them who in his triumph cry Hosannah: but in
his disgrace, cry, Crucify him, crucify him: but having appeared in the
person of Agamemnon, would not act Thersites: having on the shield of faith,
would not retreat: and having anchored on the rock, would not hoise sail with
the stream: having begun in the Spirit, she would not end in the flesh: and
being engrafted into the Mystical body of Christ the Church, that living vine,
she would not be transplanted or inoculated into the wild Olive. She resolved
with her self that she would dye standing; Ut oportet Ministrum coucionantem,
sic oportet Christianum stantem mori: as it becomes a Minister to dye
preaching, so it becomes a Christian to dye practicing: if he must dye giving
out encouragements, a Christian must die with resolution. She had toward the
conclusion of her Warfare betaken her self to the shield of faith, and under
that she shelterred her self: and when she had the last enemy to grapple with,
she feared not, but rather desired his approach: Non sic vixit, ut mori
timeret; she did not live so filthily or dishonestly, that she should be
ashamed or afraid to die. She did not shrink at all at the face of death, but
freely drunk of that cup which Christ had brewed for her, and drank the dregs
too; she went boldly to the Serpents nest, when Christ had taken the sting out;
as Cyprian comforted himself, in like manner did she; Minatur Antichristus?
Christus tuetur: Mors infertur? immortalitas sequitur? Mundus eripitur? sed
Paradisus exhibetur. Vita temporalis extinguitur? sed aeterna reparatur. Mors
Christiano ludus est: Does Antichrist condemn? Christ justifies. Does death
look pale? Immortality is lovely and fresh: Is the wilderness a thirsty place?
yet Paradise overflows: Does the seed rot? yet it brings forth sixty, or an
hundred fold. She was not ashamed to live, because she had made such progress:
she was not afraid to dye, because she was so well prepared. Indeed when the
grim looks of death made their first approach, she not being well composed,
found Satan endeavoring to captivate her to death, as he has endeavored to
captivate her by sin before; and then her spirits were surprised with sudden
apprehensions of her dissolution: who the second day after her sickness sent
for me, and uttered her self in these very words, Oh Mr Firth, I am afraid to
die in this condition, my heart has deceived me! Good Sir, Pray for the light
of Christ's countenance upon me, and that my interest may be made clear before I
depart: which I did; and about three or four hours after she sent for me again,
and told me with rejoicing, That she was satisfied, and willing that God should
do with her according to his pleasure: only she desired, that I would repeat
two or three particulars of a discourse which I had a few days before
delivered in her presence at the burial of one who had in former times belonged
to that family. The subject was Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are they that dye in the
Lord, etc. Her enquiry was only as to that particular, What it was to dye in
the Lord? which I had formerly delivered, and then repeated to her.

I shall but mention them:

1. To die conformed to the Lord; to have sin mortified, and other enemies
conquered, able to triumph victoriously, as Paul, 1 Cor. 15, etc. That was to
die in the Lord, (...), in Domino, in Christo.

2. To die reconciled to the Lord under a pardoning Covenant and dispensation;
then death cannot arrest, at lest cannot imprison, Romans 8. 38, 39. Death does
not then separate.

3. To die interested in the Lord, in his life, in his death, in his
resurrection; these that die thus, may be said to be Blessed: This was it that
the Apostle labored for; Phil. 3. 9, 10. Thar he might gain Christ, that is,
that he might be found in him; not having his own righteousness, which is of
the Law, but that which is through faith in Christ: that he might know him, and
the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made
conformable to his death: These things she desired to make familiar to her
before she went hence; which I hoped gave her such a discovery of the art of
dying, that Satan did but assault in vain: indeed he usually gives a sore
charge before he fall; so he did here; he then rages, when he sees he is past
hopes: he struggles hard, when he sees he must quit claim and usurpation of
title, as he does in the first breathing of regenerating work, when he sees he
must quit possession. Thus she came off Conqueror; had a refreshing stream of
inward consolation, whereby her thirsty soul was well satisfied. The Egyptians
represented the death of the righteous by Dianas coming down to kiss Endymion,
when he was asleep: hereby showing that Death is both a sweet rest, and a kind
salutation: so it is said of Moses, Deuteronomy. 34. 5. (...) He dyed at the mouth of
the Lord; which made good their opinion, of Gods sucking the righteous man's
soul into himself: Oh sweet death, accompanied with such an expression of Love!

And now should any say, that I have said too much of this Right honorable and
truly religious Lady: I answer, if I have, it is more then I know. If I have
said any thing which she did not practice; yet nothing is said which is not thy
duty: thou oughest to practice all I have said; and if any should desire to
hear as much evil of her, they must enquire of those that hated her, or that
can lie. For my part, I can say, as Theotimus to Epiphanius, when he hid
calumniate and revile Origin after his death, O Epiphani (says he) Nec eum qui
jam ^lim been obd^rmuit, contumelia ^fficere volo; nec rem blasphemam aggredi
ausim, ut eum reprobem, quem majores nostri non reprobarunt: O Epiphanius, I
dare not disquiet him that is fallen asleep in the Lord; neither dare I so
blaspheme, as to accuse him whom God has approved; or condemn him who is
justified in the presence of the Judge. Her great example was Christ; O how
close did she follow him! If she went not hand in hand, she trod in his steps;
though he went before, yet she was seldom out of his sight: she was so fearful
of losing him, that she would travail in the night, when she fell short in the
day, rather then lodge without Christ in her arms. And to conclude, if I may
not say, as Spanhemius says of Anna Maria Van Sharva, that she was Ultimus
naturae in hoc sexu conatus; the perfection of female kine: though I cannot
say, Like unto her there never will be more;
Yet, she excelled most that went before.
I shall conclude, though I am full of the sense of her real worth, with that
which Eusebius speaks of that Christian Emperor Constantine, Sola Deum omnium
regem excellenti pietate honoravit; sola Doctrinam Christi confitenter omnibus
praedicavit; sola Ecclesiam ejus ut nemo alius a seculo unquam glorificavit;
sola talibus bonis est cumulata, quod nemo talis ad nostra usque tempora ex
omni seculo fuisse memoretur; so adorned with outward gifts, hut especially
with inward graces, that as she was the glory of the present, she will be the
wonder of the future generation.

FINIS.

