THE GOLDEN AGE: Or, the REIGN of SATURN REVIEWED.

Tending to set forth a True and Natural Way, to prepare and fix common Mercury
into Silver and Gold.

Intermixed With a Discourse Vindicating and Explaining, that famous Universal
Medicine of the Ancients, vulgarly called, the PHILOSOPHERS STONE, Built upon
four Natural Principles.

An Essay.

Written by HORTOLANUS Junr.

Preserved and Published by R. G.

M. Sendivog. de Sulph. page 195. -- Cum satis soripsisse putemus, donec
aliquis alius veniat, qui totam Receptam, sicut ex lacte conficere caseum,
conscribat.

London, Printed by J. Mayos, for Rich. Harrison, at New-Inn, without
Temple Bar, School.

TEH PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THIS following Treatise, a Grandchild of Hermes (the Offspring and Orphan of
a near and dear Relation) coming to my Hands as his next of Kin, might well (as
it did) claim from me a Guardianship and Preservation; which once (consulting
withal my own Interest) I was wholly resolved on with an Intention to have kept
it Curiously, Privately and Tenderly, as the sole Heir to some goodly
Inheritance: But, at length, considering that so to do would be to contradict
the public Spirit, and well Meaning of its Parent (who intended nothing less
(as appears by his Dedication, Epistle, and indeed by both beginning, middle
and ending of the Book) than that his Son should be thus privately and nicely
Cloistered up at Home; but rather that he Travel, be enured to Labor and
Hardship, and pass through Fire and Water, that thereby, in time, he may be
Qualified to do his Country Service). I have therefore, abandoning (as Reason
should) such tender Indulgence, and self-conceited Interest, exposed him to the
capricious Humors of this inconstant World to take his Fortune; supposing that
hereafter his Clothes will sit never the worse on his Back. But I have, I must
confess, committed a Fault in not sending him first (as was intended) for his
Credentials, and am afraid it will fare the worse with him on that account; I
beg therefore Pardon, and heartily desire he may not be too hardly Censured for
my Neglect. As for his own Faults I need not, I presume, be so importunate; for
he is a prity toward Lad, will prattle to you of Gold and Silver, and the
Philosophers Stone, he will tell you the Iron Age is passing off the Stage of
the World, and that a Golden one succeeds in Order; and (as I am told) can talk
Natural Philosophy, surpassing many of his tender Years. It may be, some Men,
besides the Publisher, will not be able to thoroughly to understand him; yet he
speaks plain English, as well as ordinary Latin; and can call the Planets by
their Names; for all his Ancestors (excepting my self) were learned Men;
therefore I entertain a good Hope of my Kinsman, for he has told me he will
make it his Business to find out those Honorable Persons, to whose Service his
Father had devoted him; (and beg their Pardon in my stead) as also his learned
Relations of the Ancient Family of famed Trismigistus, -- Studiers of
Hermetical Secrets: These (he says) though unknown to me, will easily read in
his Face his Descent and Pedigree, and therefore allow him a noble Reception.

I wish it prove true; and hope, Courterous Reader, you may be one of that
Profession; but whether you are or no, I desire you will Encourage the Youth a
little, in his Pilgrimage, and give him a good Heartning: Yet if he pretend to
tell you Lies in Matter of Fact, pray correct him; but have a Care, for his
Name is Mercury, and he will be apt to give you the slip; if you do him any
good Office, he may, perhaps, live to requite you Tenfold: However, in the mean
time, you may be assured of the hearty Thanks and Service of him, who presumes
to subcribe himself,

June the 8th. School. Yours, etc. R. G.

THE AUTHOR'S INTENDED DEDICATION.
To the Right Honorable the President, and Fellows of The Honorable ROYAL
SOCIETY.
Right Honorable,
IT is the Saying of a professed Adeptist, That he who Operates for the
Philosophers Stone, attempts the highest Piece of Philosophy that is in Nature
Rip. Rev. page 159.
: This Essay tending to that purpose, so as to vindicate the Art of it, and to
make the^ whole more Conspicuous; it is therefore necessary that things, which
are said to stand so high in NATVRE, should be submitted to the Censure of your
most Learned Society, best able to judge whether or no they are Built on a good
and sure Foundation. Such part of it therefore as is orderly gathered from the
Sayings of Grave and Sober Philosophers, I humbly Dedicate to your Honors; but
that which is Frivolous, and of less Account, I preserve to my Self, as being
my own proper Talent. Neither shall I presume to beg your Honors Protection
for any part thereof, further than the same may appear to be grounded on Nature
and Philosophy, and tending to the Benefit of all ingenuous Men; for I have
persuaded my self, that it will prove one of the plainest of Treatises,
(especially for Description and Order of Principles) that have hitherto (on
this Subject) appeared to open View; and that, indeed, is the chiefest Reason
why it is intended to be made Public; an Inducement quite contrary to what
has been formerly practiced on this Account: And I must, seriously confess, I
see not any great Reason for that profound Silence Authors have heretofore
imposed upon their Readers, when, at the same time, they exposed their Books to
the sight (if not for the use) of all Men: Yet I acknowledge a Moderation may
be good in this Matter. Neither do I go about to prostitute the Secrets of this
Kind, but so Plainly and Orderly (as I may) to represent them in a
Philosophical Glass and Habit; that thereby they may be distinguished from the
vulgar Crowd, and not hereafter be Misrepresented by any Subtle Impostours:
Besides, I have considered that proper Saying of Sendivogius, in the Conclusion
of his Book; viz. That this Art is always Acquired by the same kind of Wits and
Dispositions, So that if each Principle were openly named, yet none but they
who are of the same Inclinations: with the Adepti, will be able to prepare,
much less to perfect so Great a Work; which Thing also is well known unto to
your Honors.

I could not (Right Honorable) at first Writing, presume so high a Dedication;
and therefore observed not that Gravity and Decorum, in the Composition, which
your Honors may justly expect; but Writ it with a Natural and Careless
Freedom; by which, I hope, the Truth will not be less Edifying to the
Searchers, or Convictive to the Gainsayers; tho, I must grant, it is somewhat
Unmannerly thus to approach your Royal Society: For this therefore I beg your
Pardon, as also for that I have (from the Authors) mentioned the Names of some
Heathens, as Gods (by which nevertheless is only meant, some one Principle or
other) and which I could not altogether avoid. There may also be several other
Mistakes, and particularly in not directly Spelling according to the English
Hermetick Poetry; which Failures and Mistakes, if they shall be Excused by your
Honors, will be taken as a high Favor to him, whose utmost Ambition is to
subscribe himself,

Your Honors very humble, and ready Servant, Hortolanus Junr.

THE AUTHOR'S EPISLE TO THE READER.
Judicious Reader,
THERE being many Volumes Extant, which Treat of this Noble Art; there must
also, doubtless, be many Men who apply themselves to the Study and Prastice
thereof: Wherefore it is no small Happiness to be directed by such Rules, as
have their Foundation in Nature; many Books (if strictly Examined) endeavoring
to Overshadow and cast a Veil upon the Truth; others being Diametrically
opposite to it; and the generality of them tending to Confusion and Perplexity;
for which Cause there goes an ill Report of the most precious Things in Art and
Nature: Honest minded Men are generally deluded, who following Seducers, lose
both their Labor and Estate. But forasmuch as this Science, from the Writings
of several free and generous Authors, does (to me) clearly appear to be founded
in Nature, and that on Principles not difficult to be obtained; I have for the
sake of all ingenuous and well-disposed Persons, adventured to put them down
(according to my Apprehension) in a plain and orderly Method; and also (out of
Zeal) for the Honor of this most Noble Art, and its Professors (who are by
many, but too ungratefully Censured) to make Public what I had from them, with
no small pains Collected, and set apart for my own private Use, seeing no
other Hand does at this time undertake the same; also hoping that many hereby
may reap such Advantage, as may, perhaps, (for several Impediments) never fall
to my Lot: And therefore I have Studied to overcome that Envy, which sometimes
has attended those, who reasonably knew themselves to have attained any true
Knowledge in this Art. And though I have not contrived to present you with a
spacious Composure of mere Words and Flourish, that so, at length, I might
skulk away under their Coverture; yet, Reader, the Matter requires a serious
Consideration: And if my plain Dealing please not they overcurious, or offended
Pallet, be pleased to consider, Quod non omnibus scribo, huic scribo and non
tibi: Or otherwise give me leave to conclude,

Si quid novisti rectius istis candide imperti, si non his utere mecum.
Yours, etc. Hortolanus Junr.

RIch is the Man, that may attain this Art,
Hard is the way that leads unto Fame:
Guard well your Minds, and this Book will impart,
The Inner Conducts leading to the same,
And show you Light, out Of old Sayings dark,
Which I have here preserved in my New-Ark.
R. G.

Great need he has to be a Clerk, Theat. Chem. Britt. page 53.

That would perceive this subtle Work;
He must know his first Philosophy,
If he trust to come by Alkimye:
And first Ye shall well understonde,
All that take this Work in hand
When your Materials by Preparation
Be made well apt for Generation,
Then they must be departed a Twinn,
Into four Elements if ye would winn:
Which thing to do, if ye ne can,
Go and learn it of Hortolan.
And truly wythowten any nay, page 280.

If you will listen to my lay:
Some thing thereby you may find,
That well may content your Mind,
I will not swear to make you give Credence
For a Philosopher will find here in Evidence,
Of the Truth, and to Men that be Lay,
I skill not greatly what they say.
SATURN in all, to this Art has page 313.
most respect,
Of whom we draw a Quintessence most Excellent,
Unto our Magistery himself he does connect,
United in Quallitie, and also made equipolent
In Strength and Virtue, who lists to be diligent,
Shall find that we seek an heavenly Tresure,
And a precious Jewel that ever shall endure.
Hort. Junr.

THE GOLDEN AGE: OR, The Reign of Saturn REVIEWED.
NOT to trouble our Reader with the Names or Writings of those many Ancient and
Excellent Philosophers, who first Treated of this most Noble Art (seeing they
writ very obscurely; and those Obscurities, by Collection, are swelled into
very large Volumes.) I will descend to such of them as are accounted Modern,
and particularly to those, who have made Explication, for the sake and
instruction of the Ingenious: And of those, none I presume more Learned,
especially more Generous, than they of the English Nation, how carelessly
soever, their Works are looked upon in this our Iron age: If any Man will
contend for it, he has the liberty to produce his Proofs; but before I bring
you to plain matter of Sense, give me leave to touch a little upon the
accidents of Chancemedley, and the down right Nonsense of conceited Ignorance;
I mean such Authors as either by chance have picked up some Sentences proper
enough in themselves, but yet disorderly applied, and therefore lead to
confusion, or else such as are not only Improper, but also Unnatural, and
therefore are grossly Ridiculous.

Of the first sort are many of the Collections in the six Volumes of Theatrum
Chemicum, by Lazarus Zetznerus, Fasciculus Chemicus, Cheiragogia Heliana,
Zeroasters Cave, or an Intellectual Echo, and the like.

The second sort are they, who only gather up the glimmering Recipes and
Decipes, which are here and there Scattered on purpose, by the Jocose, to catch
the unwary in their own Imaginations, throwing to them the Shells, but
reserving the Kernels for their Friends, the cautious and diligent Inquirers.
Andyet these mistaken ones, fondly supposing themselves true Adeptists,
immediately thereupon cry out, Sirs, We will show you Diana Naked, for we have
caught her in our Volumes; When alas! She is slipped from their fingers, having
first Metamorphosed such daring Sophisters, not as she did Acteon into a swift
sooted Beast with large Horn's, but into another sort as oppositly dull and
slow with long Ears: and yet forsooth they cease not to cry out, Here are the
Menstruums of Diana, here is Circulatum Majus and Minus, here are the Secrets
of the more Secret Chemy. A Catologue of Menstruums, in four Books, under four
and twenty Heads, and of four and twenty Kinds, all collected form the Writings
of the Adepts; These my Friends (say they) are the Menstruums of Diana, for
Diana has superfluity of Menstruums, she has Simple, Vegetable Menstruums,
made of Philosophical Wine only, others of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine,
and the hottest Vegetables, Herbs, Flowers, Roots, etc. being Oily.

Also, Simple Mineral Menstruums made of the matter of Philosophical Wine only,
others of that and acid Spirits, as Aqua Fortis, Spirit of Nitre etc.

Also, Mineral Menstruums Compounded of Vegetable, and Mineral Menstruums mixed
together; Cum multis aliis quae nunc perscribere longum est.

If Men will be seduced by such Slippslop-Sawse-makers, no wonder if at last
they say, All is Vanity and Vexation of Chemists: But let us look upon them,
and their fond followers no otherwise than mere Foolosophers, caught in a
Mouse-trap.

This by way of removing the Rubbish, next we proceed to lay a sure Foundation
for the Ingenious to Build on.

This Art, I say, and doubt not to The Foundation of this Art.
make clearly appear, consists in the true knowledge of a Metalline Sulphur and
Mercury, which are to be Compounded of four Metalline Principles or Elements,
viz. Metalline Fire, Air, Earth and Water; all to be reduced into a quick,
running, clear, and splendid Mercury; In which Mercury is contained the Grand
Secret of the Philosophers, viz. their Sol and Luna, for then they say, Est in
Mercurio quicquid quaerunt Sapientes; All is in Mercury that the Wise men seek:
Because this prepared Mercury may easily be digested into Silver and Gold; and
then also, and not till then, is this saying verified, Esttamen unum, etc. That
there is in the Metalick Kingdom one thing of a miraculous Original, in which
our Sol is nearer, than in Common Sol and Luna, if you seek it in the hour of
its Nativity, etc. Introit apert. page 51. Which will melt in our Mercury, as
will Ice in warm Water; and yet it has resemblance with Gold. The same thing
may be found by digestion in our Mercury for the spaee of an hundred and fifty
days, etc. See Secrets Revealed, page 75. For this Mercury so digested into Sol
and Luna, will again easily be dissolved in that Mercury from whence it was
formed: Whereas to dissolve Common Gold by prepared Mercury, is a Work of great
difficulty, and ought not to be attempted by any, unless he be an experienced
Master in this Art, and yet he that so operates, shall labor for the worst and
not the better, unless he knows how to carry on both works a part, and
afterward in a due measure to Reconjoyn them.

This I say, is the Scope and Intention of all the Philosophers, and now it
remains, that I clear my Position.

The Composition of these four Principles or Elements is perfected by three
Three Works.
Works or Operations.

1. The first is the joining of the Fire and Air. 2. The second by adding the
Earth to the other two. 3. The third by joining thereto the Liquor, or Element
of Water.
Which are also by Prince Geber Called Medicines of the first, second, and
third Order

These three Conjunctions are also called, 1. Conjunction Diptative. 2.
Conjunction Triptative. 3. Conjunction Tetraptive.
Of which more hereafter.

The Philosophical Maxims are,

Man from Man, Beast from Beast, and Metal from Metal, etc.

Dastin's Dream, Theat. Chem. Britt. page 259.

A Man of Nature Ingendreth but a Man,
And every Beast Ingendreth his Semblable;
And as Philosophers rehearse well can,
Diana and Venus in Marriage be not able,
A Horse with a Swine joins not in a Stable,
For where is made unlikely Geniture,
What follows but things Abominable?
Which is to say Monstrum in Nature.
Pearce the Black Monk upon the Elixir. Theat. Chem. Britt. page 271.

All Salts and Sulphers far and nere,
I. interdite hem all in Fere,
All corosive Waters, Blood and Hair,
Pyss, Horns, Worms and Saudiver,
Alume, Atriment, also I suspende,
Rasalger and Arsnick I defend,
Calx Vive, and Calx Mort his Brother,
I suspend them both, one and other,
For of all things I will no more,
But Four Elements in general I say so,
Sun and Moon Earth and Water; Four Elements.

And here y's all that Men of clatter.
Nothing is oftener said by the Philosophers than that their Stone is made of
the four Elements. And Ripley in his Epistle to King Edward the IV. Theat.
Chem. Britt. page 111. says thus, viz.

In the said Book the Philosopher speaks also,
Therein if it Please your Highness for to Read,
Of diverse Sulphurs, but especially of two;
And of two Mercuryes joined to them indeed.
Whereby he does true understanders lead,
To the knowledge of the Principles which be true;
Both Red most pure, and White, as I have speed,
Which be nevertheless founden but of right few. etc.
This I know also has another Exposition, of which hereafter.

Theat. Chem. Britt. 152. Numb. 19, Ripleys Compound, Speaks thus,

And be thou wise in chesing of thy Water,
Medyll with no Salt Sulphur nor mean Mineral,
For whatsoever any water to thee do clatter;
Our Sulphur and Mercury be only in Metal,
Which Oylys and Waters some men call.
Fowlys, and Byrds, with other names many one,
Because that Folys should never know our Stone.
Sandivog. page 5. If thou do purpose to make a Metal out of Herbs, thou
shall labor in pain, as also thou shall not bring forth wood out of a Dog, or
any other Beast.

Aeyr. Phil. de Metal. Metamor. page 46. Qui vero ex Herbis and istjusmodi
rebus Mercurium educere tentant sunt Minervae crassissimae atque ingenij
nequissimi.

Aeyr. Phil. in his Ripley revived page 160. 161. etc. Some will say of my Book
that I have writ very Enviously and Misteriously: he calls the matter Gold and
Mercury, but that is but Allusively; but he meant Egg-shells calcined, or
Vitriol, or Man's Blood, or Dew, or Rain Water, or Salt Peter, or Nitre, or
Tartar, or this or that thing (etc.) Gross Sotts, thus to think, that what I
without any Equivocation call Gold and Mercury, they should make to allude to
such trifles.

O Fools and Blind! think you to gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figgs of Thisles.
Page 162.
If Gold and Silver be your intention to produce, in what would you find them?
in Eggs, or Blood, in Salts or such things, what a madness is this? (etc.)

But enough of these Cautions, though much more may be said from many other
Authors. And if any raise an Objection, or put the Question, why this great
Universal Medicine, is only to be prepared from Metalls, they shall find it
answered in another place.

Sandivog. page 79. If thou will imitate Nature, let me persuade thee, to abide
in the Simple way of nature, and thou shall sind all good things.

Simplicitas veritatis sigillum.

The Composition of the four Elements How the Elements are Compounded.
or Principles.

Now to our purpose. Aeyrenaeus Philalethes natu Anglus, Cosmopolita, A true
Adeptist, and the last and best Interpreter of all the Ancient Philosophers, in
his little Book called, Introitus Apertus, etc. Showing that this Work tends
Chap. 1. page 2. 3.
to digest Gold to the highest Purity and subtle Fixity, to which by Nature and
Art it may be brought, says, their Gold is twofold, viz. Ripe Gold and Crude
Gold, Male and Female (Sulphur and Mercury) That the whole Secret consists in
the Mercury, without which the work of Alchimy would be in vain.

And in Chap. 2. Concerning the Principles of which this Mercury is Compounded,
he says, Sciant itaque, aquam Page 4.
nostram componi ex multis, etc. Let the Operators therefore know that our
Water is Compounded of many things, but yet they are but one thing made of
diverse created Substances of one Essence, that is to say,

1. There is requisite in our Water, first of all, Fire. Requisits.


2. Secondly the Liquor of the Vegetable Saturnia.

3. The bond of Mercury. And

4. (Therefore fourthly, by consequence the Liquor of Mercury, and that which
is common, so it be not Adulterated.)

The first (for my intent) is the Element of Metaline Fire, the second of Air,
the third of Earth, the fourth of Water.

This will better appear in the 11th. Chap. page 18. De Inventione perfecti
Magisterij, where he tells you, That the first Inquirers into this Magistery,
sought only how they might exalt imperfect Metals to the nature of Gold, and
perceiving, that all Metallic Bodies were of a Mercurial Original, and that
Mercury was both as to its Weight and Homogeneity most like unto Gold, which is
the perfectest of Metals; They therefore endeavored to digest it to the
maturity of Gold, that in order to this and to purify Mercury, they sought for
1.
and found an active Metalline Sulphur 2.
in the House Aries, which they gave to the Offspring or Child of Saturn
(which 3.
Child abounded with the most Purged Salt of Nature, but had before no
Metalline Sulphur in it) that then they endeavored to purge Mercury with this
prepared Matter or Air, but could not effect it, because they would not mix,
therefore they contemperated this Air by the Doves of Diana, and then the event
was answerable to their desires; 4.
and that this Mercury in its Coagulation yielded them pure Sol and Luna, etc.

Now to make the Planets Retrograde, here is Mercury the last Element, united
by the Doves of Diana, to the Offspring of Saturn, who was purified by a
Metalline Sulphur or Fire; all which amounts to no more than a Composition of
the four Metalline Elements, Water, Earth, Air and Fire. With this agrees the
works of Prince Geber in his Medicines of the first, second, and third Orders.

Also the Intention of Basil Valentine, and Sandivogius, of the Arcanum, or
Grand Secret of Hermetical Philosophy, of Norton, Ripley and many others, (not
to mention the more Ancient) is the same

Vera confectio Lap. Philo. page 121. Scopus istius Medicinae primi ordinis,
est manifestare occultum, and occultare manifestum, quod fit omnia intus and
extra mundando.

The Fire, says my Master (for so I Of the Fire Introit apert. page 5.
will make bold to call that most Learned and Ingenuous Author Aeyrenaeus
Philalethes) is of a Mineral Sulphur, and yet is not properly Mineral nor
Metalline, but a middle betwixt a Mineral and a Metal, and neither of them,
partaking of both, a Chaos or Spirit, because Chaos.
our Fiery Dragon (who overcomes all things) is notwithstanding penetrated by
the Odor of the Vegitable Saturnia; whose Blood concretes or grows together
with the juice of Saturnia, Saturnia.
into one wonderful Body, yet it is not a Body, because it is all Volatile; nor
a Spirit, because in the Fire it resembles a molten Metal; it is therefore in
very deed a Chaos which is related to all Metals as a Mother, etc.

Here with the Fire, he takes occasion
to join the Air, which two makes his Chaos, viz. The Fiery Dragon, and the
Liquor of the Vegetable Saturnia; nevertheless I know that the Fire is sometime
called Earth, and sometimes Water; so also is that of the Air and Earth; but it
is not properly our Air till the two first are Conjoined and Purged.

This Chaos is called, our Arsenick, our Air, our Luna, our Magnett, our Calybs
or Steel, but yet in diverse respects, Page 5.
because our matter undergoes various States before that the Kingly Diadem be
brought, or cast forth out of the Menstruum of our Harlot.

Note, The first is called Fire because it is, hot and dry, it is a flying Sol,
and the Fire of Nature, and has the Operation of Fire, which digesteth the
crude Air and divides the Mine from the Metal.

This is that Fire (says one) which the wise men have taken unspeakable pains
to find out, It is Donum Dei, and they have called this mystery the
Philosophers Stone, the Blessed Holy Stone, for this cause that God has placed
it in an Earthly Stony and contemptable matter, it devideth the good from the
bad, and what is not mature it matureth, and in this mystery, according to the
Similitude, it is called Sol or the Sun; and the other Principle is also called
the Moon, because of her Crudeness and watery Humidity, but both being joined
together, is called our Chaos or Air.

The Fire by Basil is called Gold, also by Sandivog, it is called the same, and
sometimes Chalybs, by Ripley it is called Sol, by Norton it is called Lytharge,
Chalybs.
so Aeyrenaeus calls it, in his Treatise De vera confectione Lapidis
Philosophici, page 21. And of the two first Principles calls it the Body. Quod
ad corpus attinet sufficiat hoc tempore solo Lithargyrij vel corporis nomine
vocare, Corpus autem hoc, ad omnes perferendas miserias est ordinatum, oportet
enim transire per ignem and aquam, and renasci, aliter in requiem aeternam
ingredi non poterit, cujus color Pags 22.
est brunus subrubeus, and non fulgidus, Item opus ejus est dissolvi, exaltari
mori and ad altum ascendere. It is also called Leo, and Servus Rubeus, Corpus
Rubeus, etc.

The second Principle he also calls Water, Aqua, prima, ignis corrodens, ignis
Of the Second principle.
contra naturam, Luna, magnes, matter, materia, etc. Sperma Mercurij
dissolventis, Mercurins, Mercurius crudus, Quinta essentia, Stomachus
Struthionis, vas Philosophorum, and argentum vivum crudum a miner a Simpliciter
extractum, (etc.) Norton calls it, Titanos and Magnesia. Ripley calls it Venus,
and the Green Lion.

We will consider these two, the first, under the name of the Fiery Dragon, or
Introit. apert. peg. 6. and 7.
Chalybs, which he says is the Minera of Gold: The second, he says is Saturnia,
or Magnet, and is the true Miner a of the Chalybs.

Sumantur Draconis nostri ignei, etc. Let there be taken of our Fiery Dragon,
Praxis. page. 12.
which hides the magical Chalybs in his own Belly four parts, of our Magnet
nine parts, mix them together with a strong Fire, in the form of a Mineral
Water, upon which there will swim a Scum, which is to be cast away, remove the
Shell and take the Kernel, Purge it the third time with Fire and Salt, which
will easily be done if Saturn shall behold himself in the Looking-Glass of
Mars: Thence is made the Chamaeleon or our Chaos, in which all Arcanas lies hid
virtually but not actually. This Chaos.
is the Hermaphroditical Infant, (etc.) Hermaphrodite.


Introit. apert. page 6. and 7. de Chalybe and Magnete, Our Chalybs is the true
Key of our Work, without which the Fire of the Lamp could not be by any art
Kindled: It is the Minera of Gold, a Spirit, very pure beyond others; It is an
Infernal Fire, Secret, in its kind very Volatile, the wonder of the World, a
System of the Superior Virtues in the Page 6.
Inferiors, and therefore the Omnipotent has marked it with that notable Sign,
whose Nativity is declared in the East: Cujus Nativitas per Orientem in
Horizonte Hemisphiaerij sui Philosophicum annuntiatur. page 7. Cursum dirigat
per aspectum Astri Septentrionalis, quod Aspect. Astri.
faciet tibi apparere magnes noster, page 21. Quare activum Sulphur ulterius
quaerentes, etc.

Wherefore seeking further for an active Sulphur, the Magi sought most
thoroughly, and at length found it hidden in the House of Aries. This Sulphur
Aries.
is most greedily received by the Offspring of Saturn, which Metallic matter
is most pure, most tender, and most near to the first Metallic ens, void of
all actual Sulphur, but yet in a power to receive a Sulphur, wherefore it does
draw this to it self like a Magnet and swallows it up, and hides it in its own
Belly, and the Omnipotent, that he might highly adorn this Work, has Imprinted
his Royal Seal thereon.

Sendivog. page 36. Recipe ergo marum vivum, etc. Take therefore a Living Male
and a Living Female, join these together, that betwixt them there may be
Conceived a Sperm, for the bringing forth of Fruit after its kind.

Page 44. Propterea unum datur Metallum, etc. Moreover there is granted to us
one Metal, which has a Power to consume the rest, for it is almost as their
Water and Mother; yet there is one thing, and that alone, the radical Moisture,
viz. Of the Sun and Moon that withstands it and is bettered by it, but that I
may discover it to you, it is called Chalybs.

Page 45. Est and alius Chalybs, etc. There is also another Chalybs, which is
like to this, created by it self of Nature, Qui scit ex radiis solis, etc.
Which knows how by a wonderful Power and Virtue, to draw forth from the Beams
of the Sun, that, which so many Men have sought after, and is the beginning of
our Work. Here he singly names them The beginning of our Work.
both Chalybs, yet sometimes both joined together are called Calybs, as before.

Page 47. Naturalis ejusmodi est, etc. The natural Dissolution is this, That
the Pores of the body be opened in our Water, whereby the Seed that is digested
may be sent sorth and put into it is Matrix; but our Water is Heavenly Water,
not wetting the Hands, not vulgar, but almost Rain Water. 48. The Body is Gold
which yields Seed. It is our Luna (not common Silver) which receives the Seed
of the Gold, etc. (This also alludes to the Great Work.)

Page 55. Fa^^igitur, etc. Cause therefore that there be such an operation in
our Earth, that the central heat may change the Water into Air, that it may go
forth into the Plains of the World, and may scatter the residue as I said through
the pores of the Earth, and then on the contrary the Air will be turned into
Water, far more subtle than the Water was, and this is done thus; If thou
wil'st give our old Man Gold and Silver to swallow, that he may consume page: 56.
them, and that he at length dying may be Burnt. [Let his Ashes be scattered
into Water, Boil it until it be enough and thou shall have a Medicine to cure
the Leprosy.]

Pa. 63. Res est vilis and pretiosissima, etc. It is a thing of little account,
yet most precious, which being diverse times described, I do now again repeat:
Take X. parts of Air, of Living Gold or Living Air.
Silver I. part, put all these into thy Vessel, boil this Air first until it be
Water, and then no Water. If thou art Ignorant of this, and know not how to
Boil Air, without all doubt thou shall Err, seeing this is the matter of the
ancient Philosophers; for thou must take that The Water of our dew.
which is, and is not seen, until it be the Artificers pleasure. It is the
Water of our Due, out of which is Extracted the Saltpeter of the Philosophers,
by which Sal petrae. Philoso.
all things Grow and are Nourished, Matrix ejus est centrum solis vel Lunae,
The Matrix of it, is the center of the Sun or Moon, as well Celestial as
Terestial, and that I may tell more plainly, it is our Magnet, which before I
Our Magnet or Chalybs.
said was Chalybs: The Air generates the Magnet, and the Magnet generates or
causes our Air to appear; Sancte tibi veritatem hic manifestavi, etc. This is
the Sal Akali, which the Philosophers have Sal Akali.
named, Salt Armoniack and Vegetable, hid in the Belly of Magnesia. Operatio
ejus Magnesia.
talis est; The operation of it is this, That thou Dissolve the Congealed Air,
in which thou shall Dissolve the tenth part of Gold, Seal this up and work
with our Fire, until the Air be turned into Powders and there appear, the Salt
of the World being had diverse colors, etc. And a little after, page 64.
Propterea satis mihi fuit, etc. It therefore sufficed me to treat only of the
first and second matter, which is done clearly, etc.

In his Eleventh Chapter, concerning the Practice, page 48. he say, Take of our
Earth through xi. degrees xi. grains. of our Gold and not of the vulgar i.
grain, of our Luna and not of the vulgar ii. grains, but be thou well advised
that thou take not common Gold and Silver for these are dead; take ours which
are Living, then put them into our Fire, and let there be made of them a dry
Liquor, first the Earth will be resolved into Water, which is called the
Mercury of Philosophers, and that Water shall resolve those Bodies of Gold and
Silver, and shall consume them, so that there shall remain but Radical moisture.
the tenth part with one part, and this shall be the Metallic radical
moisture, etc. And page 65. Perpende diligenter, weigh diligently what I have
said before, viz. How the four Elements distill into into the center of the
Earth a radical Moisture, and how the central Sun of the Earth by its motion,
brings it forth, and Sublimes it to the Superficies of the Earth, etc. The
same Author in his Philosophical Riddle, tells you, That Neptune showed him two
Mines, the one of Gold the other of Chalybs.

Page 77. That Saturn drew the Water, and put into it of the Tree of the Sun,
wherein it resolved like Ice in warm Water, and this Water is Aqua Vitae. That,
that Water is the best which is drawn by virtue of our Chalybs, which is found
in the Belly of Aries, etc.

In the English Book of Hermetick Secrets, called Arcanum: Or, The Grand
Secret, Numb. 11. you have these words, As for that clear Water, saught for by
many, found out by few, yet obvious and profitable unto all, which is the Base
of the Philosophers Work. A Noble Polonian, not more Famous for his Learning
than Subtilty of Wit (not named) whose name notwithstanding a double Anagram
has betrayed; In his Novum lumen Chymicum, parabola, and Aenigma; as also in
his tract of Sulphur, has spoken freely and largely enough: Yea he has
expressed all things of it so plainly, that nothing can be satisfactory to him
that desires more.

Numb. 19. He says that most Philophers have affirmed that their Kingly work is
wholly composed of the Sun and Moon. Others have thought good to add Mercury to
the Sun: Some have Diverse sayings of the Philosophers.
chosen Sulphur and Mercury, others have attributed no small part in so great a
work to Salt mingled with the other two. The very same Men have professed, That
this clear Stone is made of one thing only, sometimes of two, other whiles of
three, at othertimes of four and of five; and thus, though Writing so variously
upon the same Subject, do nevertheless ag^ree in sense and meaning, etc. He
also adds,

Numb. 20. That he holds that this entire work is perfected by two Bodies only;
to wit, the Sun and the Moon rightly prepared.

Numb. 46. The Philosophers Mercury, has diverse names, sometimes it is called
Earth, sometimes Water in a diverse respect, because it naturally arises from
them both, the Earth is subtle white Sulphurous, in which the Elements are
fixed and the Philosophical Gold is sown, the Water is water of Life Burning
Permanent, most clear, called the Water of Gold and Silver, etc. Last of all,
the most precious substance is Venus, the Ancients Hermaphrodite, glorious in
Venus Hermaphradite.
each Sex.

Numb. 47. Separate therefore the clean from the unclean, the Substance from
the Accidents, and make that which is hid Manifest, by the course of Nature,
otherwise make no further progress, for this is the Foundation of the whole
Work, and Nature.

Numb. 48. That dry and most precious Radical moisture.
Liquor, does constitute the Radical Moisture of Metalls, wherefore of some of
the Ancients it is called Glass, for Glass is extracted out of the Radical
Moisture, closely lurken in Ashes which In Ashes.
will not give place, unless it be to the Hottest Flame, notwithstanding our
inmost or central Mercury, discovers it self by the most gentle and kindly
(though a little more tedious) Fire of Nature.

But to come to our own English Authors.

Ripley in the Preface to his Medulla, tells the Archbishop of York that if he
would

Of Phoebus virtue have knowledging,
Then Saturns Child must Issue bring.
Theat. Chem. Brit. Page 391. Numb. 14.

Bloomfeild in his Blossoms. Numb. 32. advises thus,

Old Ancient Writers believe which are ture. Theat. Chem. Britt. page 312.

And they shall thee learn to pass it to bring,
Beware therefore of too many, and hold thee to one thing.
This one thing is nothing else but the Numb. 33.
Lion Green,
Which some Fools imagine to be Vitriol Roman.
It is not of that thing which Philosophers mean,
For nothing to us any corrosive does pertain,
Understand therefore or else thy hand refrain.
From this hard Science, least thou do work amiss,
For I will tell thee truly, now mark what it is.
Green of color our Lion is not truly,
But Vernant and Green ever-more enduring, 34.

In most bitterness of Death he is Lively:
In the Fire burning he is evermore Springing,
Therefore the Salamander by the Fire living,
Some men do him call, and some na other name,
The Mettaline Menstrual, it is ever the same.
Some call it also a Substance Exuberate,
Some call it Mercury of Metalline Essence, 35.

Some Limus deserti, from his Body Evacuate,
Some the Eagle flying from the North with Violence:
Some call it a Toad for his great Vehemence.
But few or none at all do name it in its kind,
It is a privy Quintesscence, keep it well in mind.
This is not in sight, but rests invisible, 36.

Till it be forced out of Chaos dark,
Where he remains ever Indivisible,
And yet in him is the foundation of our warke,
In our Lead it is, so that thou it mark.
Drive it out of him, so out of all other,
I can tell the no better if thou we'rt my Brother.
Then Imediately after in his second Book, he begins,

Saturn in all, to this Art has most respect page 313. Numb. (1)

Of whom we draw a Quintessence most Excellent, (etc.)
Mars that is Martial in City and Town, (3)

Feirce in Battle full of debate and strife,
A Noble Warrior and famous of Renown,
With Fire and Sword defends his own Life,
He staineth with Blood and slays with a Knife.
All Spirits and Bodies, his Arts be so bold,
The hearts of all others he wyns to him with Gold.
In the Hermet's Tale. The Cyclops having offended Mars, are represented to say,

Let Us find the Angry God and pardon crave,
Lett's give him Venus, our poor selves to save. Theat. Chem. Brit. page 415.

They sought in Heaven, Mars knew his Fact so bad, Page 416.

He came out there, then one began to tell,
Saturn turned from his Throne, a place had
Not far from thence, hard by this Crystal Well.
Thither they wen, and found two Gods alone,
Sitting within a dark, but glittering Throne.
Down fell Old Vulcan on his crooked knee
And said forgive O mighty God of War.
My servants and my self (once God as ye)
Then use thy will with Venus my fair Starr,
Saturn (quoth Mars) and I must not yet part,
Though She for whom tha'rt pard'ned has my Heart.
In the Hunting of the Green Lion, Theat. Chem. Britt. Page 279.

But our Lion wanting Maturity,
Is called green for unripeness trust me,
And yet full quickly can he run,
And soon can overtake the Sun:
And suddain'ly can him devour,
If they be both shutt in one Tower.
And him Eclipse that was so Bright,
And make this read to turn to white,
By virtue of his crudytie,
And unripe humors which in him be;
And yet within he has such heat,
That when he has the Sun upeate.
He brings him to more perfection,
Than ever he had by Natures direction, (etc.)
In the Verses belonging to Sir George Ripleys Scrowl Theat. Chem. Britt. Page
377.

Take thou Phoebus that is so Bright,
That sits so high in Majesty (etc.)
Maynteyner of Life to Crop and root,
And causes Nature for to spring;
With his wife being soote.
And Omogeny is my Name,
And Magnesia is my Dame, (etc.)
Devide thou Phoebus in many a part, (etc.)
This Phoebus has full many a Name,
Which that it is full hard for to know,
And but that thou take the very same.
The Philosophers Stone thou shall not know, (etc.)
Pearce the Black Monk upon the Elixir, Theat. Chem, Britt. Bringing in
Mercury extolling her self, Page 272, 273. has these words, viz.

I am Mercury the Mighty Flower,
I am most worthy of Honor, (etc.)
I am both Sun and Moon,
I am sche that all things must done.
I have a Daughter hight Saturn that is my Darlyng,
The wych is Mother of all werkyng.
For in my Daughter there byne hydd,
Four things commonly I kydd:
A Golden Seed, and a Spearme rych,
And a Silver Seed now him lych;
And a Mercury Seed full bright,
And a Sulphur Seed that is right.
Of my Daughter wythowten dred,
Been made Flyxirs white and redd.
Therefore of her draw a Water cler,
The science if thou list to leare,
This Water reduces every thing,
To tenderness and to fyxing.
It burgeneth growyth and gyveth fryght and light,
Ingression life and lastyng in sight:
All ryghteous works sooth to say,
It helps and brings in a good way:
This is the Water that is most worthy,
Aqua perfectissima and flos mundi:
For all works this Water makyth white
Reducyng and Schyning as Sylver bright.
And of the Oil great marvel there is,
For all things yt brings to rednes.
As Cytrine Gold he is full High,
None is so Redd nor none is so worthy.
Ripley in his Works, in Theat. Chym. and particularly in his Preface speaking
of their three Mercurys, Page 125. says thus,

Bodies with the first we calime Naturally,
Perfyt, but none which be unclene.
Exept one which usually,
Named by Philosophers the Lion Green,
He is the mean the Soon and Moon Between,
Of joining Tinctures with perfytness,
As Geber thereto beryth Wytness. (etc.)
Now we are returned back again to the Works of Geber, of whose writings, I say
my Master Aeyrenaeus is the best Interpreter, and does give the best account of
all the Names which to each of these two first Principles may properly in any
manner be applied, and which are many, as witnesses his Enarratio Methodica
Trium Gebri Medicinarum, Yet because in his Book called Ripley Revived, (which
he says he intends as a key to all his formmer writings) he has explained
these two Principles, without Page 2. Printed 1677. by Will. Cooper at the
Pelican in Little Britain.
any room for Doubt or Exception, we will examine them, to try if they be plain
and easy, and answering or rather confirming what is before recited.

In his Exposition upon Sir George Ripleys Epistle, in page 20. of this Book,
he writes thus,

Take then the most beloved Daughter of Saturn, whose Arms are a Circle
Argent, on it a Sable Cross on a Black Field, which is the Signal note of the
Great World, Espouse her to the most Warlike God, who dwells in the House of
Aries, and thou shall find the Salt of Nature, with this Salt Acuate thy Water,
as thou best know, and thou shall have the Lunary Bath, in which the Sun
will be amended.

And in the same Book in his Exposition upon the Praeface of Sir George Riply,
page 7. He says of the Fire,

That it inhabits, the Fiery Dragon, and it yields its Soul to the true
Saturnia, and is Embraced by it, and both become one together, bearing the
Stamp of the Most High, even the Oriental Lucifer, the Son of the Morning: This
Soul is Chalybs Magical Volatile, and Chalybs
very tender, the true Minera of Sol, out of which Sol Naturally proceeds,
which I my self know to be true, and have spoken of it in my little Latin
Treatise called, Introitus apertus ad occlusum Regis palatium.

This is true Sulphur, which is imbiled True Sulphur.
by the Mercuriallity of Saturnia, and notes it with the Royal Signet, etc.

But to put the matter clear out of doubt, and beyond any cause of Objection,
let us view some of his Philosophical Verses, which he calls, The Learned
Sophies Feast.

Vide. His Exposition upon the Preface of Sir George Ripley, page 49.

Whosoever would lasting and Eternal Fame,
Deserve, learn thou the Lion Green to tame. (etc.) The Lion. Green.

This Horrid Beast, which we our Lion call,
Has many other Names, that noman shall,
The truth perceive, unless that God direct,
And on his darkened mind a Light reflect, (etc.)
But its because of the transcendent force.
It has, and for the rawness of its source, Why so called.

Of which the like is no where to be seen,
That it of them is named the Lion Green, (etc.)
There is a Substance of a Metallin' Race Its Nature

If you the matter view, whoselowring Face
A Sophister would at first sight so scare, (etc.)
And yet O strange! a wonder to relate, Diana naked.

At this same Spring naked Diana sat, (etc.)
Yet further for to answer your desire, (51.)

I say this Subject never felt the Fire,
Of Sulphur Metalline, but is more crude Wants Metalline Sulphur.

Than any Mineral, (etc.)
And its Components are, a Mercury, The dry Sulphur.

Most pure, though tender with a Sulphur dry,
Incarcerate, which does the Flux restrain, (etc.)
And hinders the sweet Communion of Hinders mixture.

This Virgin Lead, and her dear Sister, etc.
Which would otherwise warm a Bath for Sol, (etc.)
Know then the Subject, which the sure base Page 52.

Of all our secrets is, and it un case, (etc,)
It Is, our Stone, it is Saturn's Child, Its Constitution is Cold, it must
therefore Saturns Child.
be mixed with another Sulphur, found in the House of Aries, (etc)

Our Subject it is no ways Malleable
It is Metalline, and its Color Sable, Its color Sable, etc.

With intermixed Argent, which in Veins
The Sable Field with glittering Branches stains. (etc.)
This is sufficient to show the nature of the two first Principles, and the
necessity of their Conjunction.

And this differs not from what Basil Valentine Writes, who teaches to Dissolve
Gold by a deep glittering Mineral, grown in the Mine of Saturn, and is of the
first matter of Metals.

Also in his Treatise of Natural and Supernatural things, he says, Mars and
Venus can perform nothing to attain page 38. Chap. 2.
any thing with wealth without the Lion. And says, their Melioration lies
concealed in their Signet Star or Magnet, out of which all Metals have
themselves received their Gifts.

Then Speaking of the first matter Page 40.
from the Center, he says it is compared to the middle World, he further says,
it is a true water, a Soulish water, the Page 41.
Mother of all Metals; is heated by the Spirits of Sulphur, which by its
digestion makes the Earthly Body Lively, wherein the Salt is evidently found,
which preserves from Putrefaction, etc.

And in the third Chapter of the Spirit of Mercury, page 43. he says, All
visible Tangible things are made of this Spirit: That it is a mere Air flying,
a Page 44.
moving wind, but if it can be caught and made Carporal, it resolves into a
Body, and becomes a pure clear Transparent Water, and the first Mercurial Root
of the Minerals and Metals. That it is that Celestial water whereof very Page
45.
much has been written, for by this Spirit of Mercury all Metals may if need
require, be broken, opened and resolved into their first matter without
Corrosive: That this is the Master Key of his second Key, (etc.)

And page 59. That this Spirit of Mercury is the only true Key, and that
without it, you can never make Corporal Gold potable, nor the Philosophers
Stone.

This also may suffice, to show that all the Philosophers are upon one and the
same Foundation, and do mean one and the same thing, and process.

The Purifying and Joining of these two first Principles is contained in the
gross or foul work, as appears by Norton in his Ordinal. Chap. 4. Theat. Chem.
Britt. page 45. Where he tells us of two kinds in the grounded Matter: Their
Names he says are before, viz. Magnetia and Litharge. Litharge and Magnesia.


These two Principles he also calls two Stones.

In Chap. 3. Page 41. Speaking to Tonsile, he says,

Many things helps to apt our Stone,
But two be materials, yet our Stone is one.
Then he says they are as Mother and Child, as Male and Femal, Sister and
Brother, as in Page 43. And afterward thus in Page 41.

One of these kinds a Stone ye shall find,
For it abides Fire as Stones do by kind:
But it is no Stone in touching ne in sight,
But a subtle Earth, Brown, roddy, and not Bright;
And when it is separate and brought to his appearage,
Then we name it our ground Litharge.
First it is Brown, Roddy, and after some deal White,
And then it is called our chosen Markasite:
One ounce thereof is better then fifty pound;
It is not to be Sold in all Christian Ground;
But he that would have it he shall be feign
To do it make, or take himself the pain:
But one great grace in that labor is saine,
Make it once well and never more again,
Old Fathers called it thing of Vile price,
For it is naught worth by way of Merchandise:
No Man that finds it woll bear it away,
No more then they would an ounce of Claye;
Men will not believe that it is of High Price,
No Man knows it therefore but he be wise.
Here I have disclosed a great Secret Wonder,
Which never was Writ by them which been Earth under.
Another Stone Tonsile you must have withal, Page 42.

Or else you fawte your chief Material;
Which is a Stone Gloriouse Faier and Bright,
In bandling a Stone, and a Stone in sight;
Being of Wonderful Diaphanitie,
The price of an ounce conveniently,
Is Twenty Shillings or well near thereby;
Her name is Magnetia, few people her know,
She is fownde in high places as well as in low;
Plato knew her Property and called her by her name,
And Chaucer rehearses how Titanos is the same,
In the Channons Yeomans Tail, saying what is thus,
But Quid ignotum per Magis ignotius, (etc.)
Now here you may know what is Magnetia,
Res aeris inqua latet scientia divinaque mira.
These two Stones, Tonsile, ye must take
For your Materials, Elixir if you make.
Albeit the first time Materials be no more, First time.

Yet many things helps as I said before.
This Secret was never before this day
So trewly discovered, take it for your pray;
I pray God that this turn not me to Charge,
For I dread sore my Penn goes too large, (etc.)
Here you see how cautious he is of discovering too much, and yet he must be
well read in this Art, that can by his Words know these two Principles; but he
tells us he was taught by a Master, and I suppose received his Secret under an
Oath; for in page 11. he hints as much in these Words, and the Figure there
representing the same.

Secreta Sctoe Alkymiae secret servabo. One says.

Accipe donum Dei sub sigillo secreto. The other says.

In Page 47. He speaks to this effect, That the foulest Work is to clarify our
means Mineral; that Extremities may not well be wrought without many means
wisely sought, and that every Mediums.
mean must be made Pure; that the gross Work is soul and full of Perils, and
that the Clerk as well as Layman may fail in it. And as for Magnetia he says
thus, (viz.)

Nemo primo front reperitur discretus.
And once I heard a wise Man say,
How in Catilonia at this day,
Magnetia with Mineral means all,
Be made to sale if ye for them call,
Whereby the hands of a cleanly Clerk,
Shall not be filed about so foul a Work.
And here you may observe, that as the first is purified by the second, he
calls it Litharge; and as the second is purified by the first he calls it
Magnesia.

The Conjunction of both is called, Rebis and resuna, Aes Philosophorum,
Arsenicum, Air, Chaos, Hermaphrodite, with many other Names, of which hereafter.

This Magnetia, it seems, was to be had ready prepared in Catalonia; and truly
it may be now had ready prepared in England, though the Preparors make it not
for this purpose, and not always after the true Metalline way; it is best the
Artist prepare it himself. Again, the preparing of it is something dangerous to
the Workman. Norton speaking of the Fires to be used in this Work, page 104.
says,

For Magnetia is Fire of Effusion,
Full of Perils and full of Illusion;
Not only peril which to the Warke may fall,
But such also which the Master hurt shall,
Against which once received is no boot,
Ordain therefore to fetch breath from your Foot.
It Is true, the Scent in preparing it is not Pleasing, Smelling Sulphurous,
and like late-made Graves newly opened, like dead Men's Bones, as says Basil
Valentine; yet not so dangerous as represented.

But to return to Chaucer, who calls it Titanos, in his Tale of the Chanons
Teoman, Theat. Chim. Britt. page 254. he writes thus.

Lo thus says Arnolde of the new Town,
As his Rosayre makes mencioune:
He says right thus withouten any lie,
There may no Man Mercury mortify;
But if it be with his Brothers knowledging;
Lo how that he which first said this thing
Of Philosophers Father was, Hermes.
He says how that the Dragon doutlesse
Ne dies not, but if he be stayne
With his Brother: And this is for to said,
By the Dragon Mercurye and none other,
He understood that Brimstone was his Brother.
That out of Sol and Luna were ydrawe,
And therefore said he, take heed to my Saw.
Let no Man besye him this Art for to Seche,
But he that the entention and Speech
Of Philosophers understonde can,
And if he do he is a lewd Man:
For this Science, and this Connyng (quod he) Aeyrenaeus upon Sir. G. Ripley 's
first Gate, page 159. We do seriously profess to any that shall attempt this
Work, that he attempts the highest piece of Philosophy that is in Nature.

Is of the Secre of the Secres Parde.
Also there was a Disciple of Plato,
That on a time said his Master to:
As his Book Senior wool bear Witness,
And this was his demand in Sothfastnesse
Tellme the name of the privy Stone?
And Plato answered unto him anon,
Take the Stone that Tytanos Men name, Of Titan Magnafia take the cler light,
The red Gum that is so bright, (etc.) Theat. Chem. Britt. page 275.

Which is that (quod he?) Magnatia is the same,
Said Plato; ye Sir, and is it thus?
This is ignotum per ignotius:
What is Magnatia good, Sir I you pray?
It is a Water that is made, I say
Of Elements four (quod Plato)
Tell me the Rock good Sir (quod he tho)
Of that Water, if it be your will.
Nay, nay (quod Plato) certain that I nyll.
The Philosophers were y Sworn e^hone,
That they should discover it unto none,
Ne in no Book it write in no mane^e,
For unto Christ it is so lefe and dear,
That he wol not that it discovered be,
But where it likes to his Deite;
Man to enspyre and eke for to desende,
When that him lyketh, to this is his end.
Thus you see how the ancient Philophers were Sworn not to discover their Rock
of clear Water, and that this Work is the highest piece of Philosophy in
Nature. This Water is made of the four Elements said Plato; so is the joining
of the two first Principles said to be the mixing of the four Elements; the one
being Hot and Dry, the other Cold and Moist. This Water is also called Aqua
Divina, Aqua Benedicta, Aqua Coelestis, (etc.) with many other Names.

One Author (that shall be nameless) speaking of the Conjunction of these two
Principles, says it is a Magistery, and calls the first the Divine
Instrument, and the second he calls Mercury, and says that the Addition of the
Instrument, that is Quintessence, goes through the Mercury, and remains with
it; and seeing that Quintessence belongs to Life, it changes the Mercury, so
that now Mercury is nothing else but Life also; and this Operation is done very
quickly, without any elemental Working, for as every Workman adorneth his Work,
and gives it his Mark, by the which the Masterpiece is known, so also God
Marketh this his Creation, and gives it the noblest Sign that is in Heaven.
(etc.)

So, now you have his Words, you may easily find out the Man. He also calls
this Matter (being purged) Luna; so soon (says he) as Mercury perceives the
power of God Sol, it is no longer Mercury but Luna, that this Mercury is wholly
changed and turned about; so that was inward is drawn outward, but no part
separated from another, etc.

But what needs many Words, you have the thing before so sufficiently
described, that I may say, he that cannot thereby easily name it, savoureth
nothing at all of Ingenuity.

This Soul (says my Master) as it is drawn from the Saturnia sollid and dry,
is called our Air, or rather the Chamelion, which is an Airy Body (but indeed
it has a hundred other Names.)

This, says he, is true Sulphur which is imbibed by the Mercuriality of
Saturnia, and Notes it with the Regal Signet; and being united and revived into
a Mineral Water, by the mediation of Dianas Doves, it is the sharp Spirit,
which in the Water, moves the Body to putrefie, etc [Thus is made a Medicine of
the first Order by Calcination.]

Next we will proceed to the third Principle of Earth, after we have observed a
few of the Names of these two Principles: First as they are apart, and
afterward as they are joined; besides such as you have heard before.

First of the Air, Female, or Water of dissolving Mercury.
Aeyrenaes in his Opus Tripartitum, or Vera Confectio Lapidis Philosophici, in
the Division, De principali proprietate Mercurii dissolventis, page 21. amongst
others, sets down these; Acetum, Aqua, aqua prima, aqua artis, aqua simplex,
balneum, Coelum, humiditas, Ignis humidus, ignis contra naturam, liquor
vegetabilis Crudus, Luna, Matter, Materia Lunaria, mercurius crudus, mercurius
dissolvens, Ministerium primum, Quinta Essentia, Spiritus crudus, Spiritus
cocti Sepulchurum, Sperma Mercurii, Stomachus Struthionis, vas Philosophorum,
Visitatio occultorum, and argentum vivum crudum a minera simpliciter extractum.

Page 48. (after some alteration of it) Aqua divina, aqua mundi, aqua venenosa,
aqua auri, aquila, Caput Corvi, fimus equinus, flos aeris, fumus igneus,
humidum igneum, igneum venenum, ignis innaturalis, Leo viridis, Lutum
Magisterii, Magnesia nigra, Nigrum nigrius nigro, nummus, Oleum Saturni,
Plumbum nigrum, pulvis niger, putrefactio, res vilis, Ros coelestis, sigillum
hermetis, Spiritus foetens, sputum Lunae, terr a nigra, Vapor. etc.

In the Book called Palladium Spagyricum, are hundreds of Names, yet I approve
not his Cunning.

Secondly, As to the Male or Fire.
Page 57. Adam, Anima, Aries, anrum vivum, Corpus rubeum, ferrum, forma,
frater, gumma rubea, Ignis Naturae, Lapis rubeus, Lytargyrium rubeum, Lux,
Mane, Mars, Magnesia rubea, Oleum Martis, oleum incombustibile, pater, pars
una, Rex, Rubedo, Sal rubeum, Sericon, Sol, sulphur rubeum, sulphur vivum,
terra rubea, vitriolum rubeum.

De predictorum duorum conjunctione, page 22. Aqua secunda, arcanum, argentum
Aqua nostra.
vivum, Chaos, corpus confusum, Cuprum, Aes nostrum, Aes philosophorum, fumus
aquosus, ignis alienus, Lapis mineralis, Lapis unus, Lapis in Capitulis notus,
Laton, Materia una, massa consusa, minera nostra, Menstruum secundam, Ovum
philosophorum, Radix una, Res una and res vilis, etc.

Page 38. Aes album, argentum vivum animatum, Arsenicum, Aurum, aurum album,
corpus album, Eva, Fundamentum Artis, Gumma alba, Hermophroditus, Lac virginis,
Lapis unus, Luna plena, Magnesia, Materia una metallorum, Mercurius occidens,
Plumbum album, Radix artis, Sal Alchali, sapo sapientum, soror, sperma
metallorum, stannum, sulphur album, Terra fructuosa, Vitrum, Urina puerorum,
Vultur, with many others, and which are sometimes indifferently applied to
either.

Of the Addition of the third Principle, or Earth.
You observed before, that it is said, the former Matter being united and
revived Dianas Doves.
into a Mineral Water, by the mediation of Dianas Doves, is the sharp Spirit,
that in the Water moves the Body to putrefie.

This is the same with what Aeyrenaeus writes in his Introitus Apertus, in
several parts thereof.

Page 5. Disce igitur, etc. Learn therefore who are the Companions of Cadmus,
and what is that Serpent who devoured them, what is that hollow Oak to which
Cadmus fastened the Serpent: Learn what the Doves of Diana Page 9.
are, which overcome the Lion by asswaging him, I say the Green Lion, which
indeed is the Babylonian Dragon, killing all things with his Poison. At length
learn to know the Caducean Rod of Mercury with which he works Wonders, and
what the Nymphs are which he infects by Incantation, if thou desire to enjoy
thy Wish.

In Chap. 6. Concerning their Air, and why so called, and that it has still an
arsenical Malignity, which hinders all manner of Ingress of the extracentrical
Waters, unto the Waters that are in the Center.

Hic Fur, etc. This Thief is Evil, Page 10.
armed with arsenical Malignity, whom the winged Youngster does abhor and fly
from; and although the central Water be his Bride, yet the youngster dares not
utter his most ardent Love toward her, because of the Snares of the Thief,
whose Snares are almost inavoidable: In this let Diana be propitious to thee,
who knows how to tame the wild Beasts, whose two Doves shall temperate the
Malignity of the Air with their Feathers, then the Youth enters easily in, etc.

And page 12. After he has showed how to join and purify the two first
Principles; he says of them, Hic est Infans Hermaphroditus, etc. This is the
Hermaphroditical Infant, which even from his Cradle has been infected by the
biting of the Corascene Mad Dog, whereby he is besotted and distracted with a
perpetual Hydrophobia, a disease which exceedingly fears the Water caused by
the biting of a Mad Dog.
Hydrophoby. Yea though the Water be nearer him than any natural Thing, yet he
abhors it and flies it. O Fates! But yet there are in the Wood of Diana two
Doves which can assuage his Madness, (etc.) The English Book (or Secrets
Revealed) adds page 16. [if applied by the Art of the Nymph Venus, then least
he should again relapse, etc.] And page 17. it runs thus (speaking of these
Doves) supply the Feathers, and the Eagle will fly away, and leave the dead
Doves of Diana; which except they shall be dead at the first receiving, they
cannot be profitable, etc. The Latin Book, or Introitus Apertus, says thus,
page 13. Fulgente Luna in suo plenilunio pennas suppedita, and avolabit Aquila
relictis pone se mortuis Dianoe calumbis, quoe si prima acceptione fuerint
mortuae, prodesse nequeunt: There is a great difference betwixt being dead and
being alive.

And Sendivogius, page 110 Lat. 76 Engl. says, If in any Science or Art it
does much help or hurt to have one word lacking, or added, than much more in
this. As for Example, it is written in one place, Then mix these Waters
together; another adds Not: He indeed added but a little, and notwithstanding
he made the whole Chapter quite contrary, (etc.) But to return to our purpose.

Introit. Apert. page 21. Showing that the Offspring of Saturn has no actual
Sulphur in it, says, It has entered into League with a burning arsenical
Sulphur, and therefore appears not under a mercurial Form, (etc.) But after it
has swallowed the Sulphur of Aries, he says, the Magi tried to purge Mercury
therewith, but the Event did not Answer, because there was yet mixed an
arsenical Malignity in the Sulphur so swallowed; which though now it was but
little, in respect of that abundance which it had in its mineral Nature; yet it
hindered all Ingress. Wherefore they tried to contemperate this malignity of the
Air by the Doves of Diana, and the Event answered their Desires, Tum vitam
vitae commiscuerunt, (etc.)

Introitus Aper. Chap. 14. page 37 says, to this purpose, We have moreover
shown that the preparation of the true philosophical Mercury is difficult:
Tamque difficilis ut opus sit peculiari Dei gratia, si quis ad exactam ejus
notitiam prevenire cupierit. The English Book after the word difficult adds
these words, page 52. [The main knot lying in finding out Dianas Doves which
are folded in the everlasting Arms of Venus, which no Eyes but a true
Philosopher ever saw. This one Skill performs the Mastery of Theory, enables a
Philosopher, and unfolds to the knower of it all our Secrets. This is the
Guordian Knot which will be a Knot for ever to a Tyro in this Art, except the
Finger of God direct.] Yea so difficult, etc.

I know not what to say of this, and several other passages in the English
Book, which was published by W. C. directed to the Honorable the Lord Lucas,
Baron of Shenfeild in Essex, Anno 1669.

After the Author's Preface, there is this Admonition.

READER,
THE true Manuscript Copy, which John Langius, in his Preface, does so much
thirst after, is here published for thy Benefit, in which thou will find
considerable Enlargements and Explanations, wherein the Latin Translation is
deficient, as Witnesses Chap. 15. etc.

But this is plain that Aeyrenaeus refers to the Latin Introitus Apertus, as
appears in his Preface to Ripley Revived, Printed 1678. and there he says, that
he had lately wrote the Introitus, etc. yet that by John Langius (which I have)
was Printed Amsterdam 1667.

I suppose this W. C. is the same that published The Philosophical Epitaph of
W. C. Esquire 1673. Dedicated to the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire for there in his
Preface, before that part, called, A Brief of the Golden Calf, he mentions the
open Entrance to the shut Palace of the King.

Now let us see what he has learned from it; in his Epitaph, page 15. he
declares the preparation of Mercury in these words; viz.

For Mercuries preparation is thus: viz. By a Mineral with Sable Silverveins,
which is the Dragon born in Saturns Den, devouring Cadmus with his earthly Men.

First then this Dragon double strength to Mars, Praxis.

Must be yet pierced by him being God of Wars;
Then both will perish and become a Star,
Where the young King is born who is Solar.
Then wash equal Venus in's Blood, and let
Them join till Vulcan take them in a Net;
Which Mercury gently on his Wings must bear,
Till he steals their Wealth, and Sols Body tare;
Wherein then Sol will freely shed his Seed,
And this is all whereof we stand in need,
Which ordered right you cannot choose but speed, (etc.)
This is very plain (if true) first a Dragon pierced by Mars, then wash equal
Venus in's Blood, which Mercury must gently bear on his Wings, wherein then
Sol, etc.

Here we find his third Principle in the Mercury is Venus, which, I suppose, he
gathered from these words, in the open Entrance; viz. But yet there are in the
Woods of Diana two Doves which can assuage his frantic Madness, if applied by
the Art of the Nymph Venus, (etc.) and from these words. [The main Knot lying
in finding Dianas Doves, which are folded in the everlasting Arms of Venus,
(etc.)] and from these words p. 77.

If then thou work in Sol Vulgar be sure to procure the Marriage of Diana Venus
in the beginning of the Espousals of thy Mercury, then put them into the Nest,
(etc.) The Latin thus, p. 52: Quare si cum Sole vulgi fueris operatus, cave ut
Veneris connubia solicit compares, deinde thoro suo impone, (etc.) I doubt me
whether W. C. Esquire knew the Philosophical Venus and Diana; for they are both
one, as is plain by what follows.

And yet, O strange! a Wonder to relate, The learned Sophies Feast.

At this same Spring naked Diana sat, (etc.)
Aeyrenaeus in his Treatise, called Vade Mecum Philosophicum, annexed to his
Opus Tripartitum, page 218. says, That signum Corpus imperfectum.
Corporis imperfecti praeparati est Candor egregius instar argenti purissimi,
etc.

Page 219. Qua propter opus hoc regium Rex summus signavit, vilis tamen res
est, etiam and pretiosissima, etc.

Mill ei nomina ab Antiquis pariter ac
Modernis Sophis imposita leguntur, etc.
Leo. viridis, medium, aqua maris, acetum acerrimum, ignis secretus,
Saturnia, herba in monte, Luna, solis nxor, femina. Luna.

Beyaque appellatur, Saturni Deastrorum Senioris proles est, unde Venus a Venns.
quibusdam nominatur, etc. Nemus porro sibi dicatum habet ideoque venatricis
Dianae Diana.
nomen accipit, etc.

Page 213. Dico tibi bona fide quod sola nostra Luna, (quae solis uxor est in
opere) nomine mutato nos deludat, etc.

Page 215. Luna nostra quae faemellae vices habet proles est Saturnia, quae cum
bellicoso Deo, affinitatem conjugii contraxit, ideoque Veneris nomine ab
invidis Venus.
vocatur; Arsenicum vero dicitur partim quia uti cuprum ab Arsenico dealbatur,
Arsenicum
ita, etc.

Page 221. Corpus tamen revera Hermaphroditicum, auri respectu argentive
mercurins vivus est, and aqua fugitiva, Mercurii vero mineralis collatione
terra vera apparet, terra tamen Adamica b. e. Chaos sive limbus nominari
meretur, etc. Chaos.


Well then, W.C. knew not the Doves of Diana, nor why so called. Hermetick
Secrets in English, p. 172. And though their Writings abound with ambiguous and
equivocal Words; yet about none do they more contend, than in hiding their
golden Branch.

-- Quem teget omnis Aen. 6.

Lucus; and obscuris claudunt convallibus umbrae.
Which all the Groves with Shadows overcast, and gloomy Valleys hide.

Nor yields it to any Force, but readily and willingly will follow him, who

Maternas agnoscit aves
-- Et geminae cui forte columbae
Ipsa sub ora viri coelo venere volantes,
Knows Dame Venus Birds --
And him to whom of Doves a lucky pair,
Sent from above shall hover 'bout his Ear, etc.
The knowledge of Dianas Doves (otherwise Dame Venus Birds) is the main Knot
then, How shall we do to find them?

There is an ingenious Book, Entitled Disceptatio de Lapide Physico, that in
page 88. endeavoring to expound Aeyrenaeus, has these words. Juvenis alatus
est Mercurius, Chaos seu Infans Hermophroditus est Regulus Stellatus. Canis
Corascenus rabidus, est sulfur Arsenicale, Columbae Dianae sunt salia, Aquila
evolans est Mercurius purissimus, homogenitate unus, substantta Essentiali
duplicatus, propter sulphur secum ascendens animatus, cum quo, etc.

Columbae Dianae sunt salia, etc. Well then the Doves of Diana are Salts it
seems. Salts, says he, What Salts? Nay, who can tell? He might as well have
said nothing of them. What shall we do now then? Why, even go to Aeyrenaeus
himself, and hear what he says of them.

Ripley Revived, page 24. In this our Work our Diana is our Body, when it is
mixed with the Water, for then all is called the Moon; for Laton is whitened,
and the Woman bears Rule: Our Diana has a Wood; for in the first days of the
Stone, our Body, after it is whitened, grows vegetably. In this Wood are at the
last found two Doves; for about the end of three weeks the Soul of the Mercury
ascends with the Soul of the dissolved Gold: These are infolded in the
everlasting Arms of Venus; for in this Season the Confections are all tincted
with a pure green Color: These Doves are circulated seven times, for in seven
is Perfection, and they are left dead, for they then rise and move no more; our
Body is then Black like to a Crows Bill, for in this Operation all is turned to
Powder, blacker than the blackest. (Such passages as these, etc.)

Gentlemen, How do you like this, is it not very plain? I hope you are now
thoroughly Satisfied: but stay, methinks you look soomewhat angerier than
before, all is not well I doubt, let us read on then; page 25. Such passages as
these we do oftentimes use when we speak of the preparation of our Mercury; and
this we do to deceive the Simple; and and it is also for no other end that we
confound our Operations, speaking of one, when we ought to speak of another,
for if this Art were but plainly set down, our Operations would be Contemptable
even to the Foolish, etc.

Ho, ho, my Master, you intend then to deceive us simple ones, do you? But hold
we will not let you go so, because your Work is truly Natural. You therefore
take the Liberty to Page 25.
confound the Philosophers Work, with that which is purely Natures Work, that
so ye might keep the simple in Ignorance concerning your true Vinegar, which
being unknown, our labor is wholly lost, etc. This is very fine indeed: To
what purpose have I (and many more) taken so much pains, and laid out so much
Money to buy your Books, and spent so much time in Reading them, nay moreover
run the hazard of cracking my Brain with thinking upon it, and some say I have
done it already; and if it be so, l'le lay the whole blame upon you, and Master
Sendivogius, etc. Nay I will not excuse Prince Geber himself, that is so
subtle in his Sum of Perfection.

Aeyren. Be not so Angry young Man, nor yet so hasty -- Have you considered
well what the Philosophers write.; are you so fitly qualified as Sendivogius,
and the others direct, and have you duly observed their Directions?


Hort. Sir, I Humbly beg your Pardon, I did not perceive you was so nigh at
hand, I readily acknowledge, that this Art cannot be Fathomed, much less,
enjoyed by all men: I confess my self not to be so Prepared and Qualified, as
the matter requires, and am altogether unworthy of so great a Gift, and
therefore I fear must now bid both it and you, a long farewell, (Good Sir)
Farewell.


Aeyren. But hold, stay a little, Did not you say even now, that I should be
unto you as a Master? Are you not advised to abide in the simple way of Nature,
to persist in the Text, and to wait with patience, etc? I am not willing you
should thus loose your labor, as you call it, though what you have taken therein
amounts not to the tenth part, which some others far more deserving than your
self have done, and yet never made such large Exclamations; If J. be your
Master, Let me hear you now repeat the Principles and Foundation of this Art.


Heart. Sir, I shall do it readily, since you are pleased to require it. This
Art consists in the Metalline Kingdom only, in Metals from Metals, and by
Metals; It is built upon four Metalline Principles or Elements, Fire, Air,
Earth and Water, That the two first joynd are Radix Artis and the true Key:
That enough of them has been said already, that we are now seeking out the
third Principle of Earth, the Doves of Diana, which reconciles the two first to
the last; that therefore they must be of a Metalline Nature, and make the
second Work, which may be called Conjunction Triptative, etc.


Aeyren. Now see if in my Writings, I have not sufficiently touched this
Principle of Earth, or the Doves of Diana.


Heart. Sir, I thank you for your seasonable Advice; and, with your Favor, I
will make a further search. Let me see --

Vera confectio Lapidis Philoso. p. 133. Nunc ad medicianam secundi ordinis
transeamus, Medecina secundi ordinis.
quae habet inspirare, tingere et fermentare primam compositionem, Unde
Calidius Philosophus, nemo potest vel postea poterit tingere terram albam
foliatam nisi cum Auro. Seminate aurum vestrum in terra alba foliata, seminate
hoc est conjungite vel fermentate, aurum id est animam vel virtutem tingentem,
in terra alba foliata, hoc est in terra preparatione debita facta, alba et
munda in qua non sint sordes, nam si it a preparata non sit, non sit idonea ut
possit suam formam vel animam recipere, ut conjunctae fiant immortales, etc.

Page 155. Atque finalis scopus istius medicinae secundi Ordinis est: Reducere
lapidem in terram fixam, spiritualem et tingentem.

Page 142. Accipe sulphur album et ipsum fige Luper corpus suum album fixum et
mundatum, id est supra argentum: Et sulphur rubeum supra corpus suum rubeum
scil. supra aurum, etc.

Page 150. Praeterea ad hanc medicinam secundi Ordinis spectat illud Hermetis.
Scitote (inquit) rumorum inquisitores et sapientiae filii, quod Vultur supra
montem existens in Cacumine voce magna clamat, inquiens, protige me et ego
protegam te; largire mihi jus meum ut te adjuvem. Sol enim meus et radii mei
sunt in me: Luna vero mihi propria est ac lumen meum omne lumen superat et mea
bona omnibus bonis sunt sublimiora. Me igitur, etc.

Fons Chemicae Philosophiae, page 93. Sed ut ad aquam revertamur, in qua creed
mihi totum secretum consistit, quae aqua licet sit una, non tamen est simplex
sed composita, nempe ex Vase et igne Philosophorum, Vinculum.
quibus tertium additur, nempe vinculum. Quum igitur, etc.

Introit. Apert. p. 4. Est nempe in aqua nostra requisitus primo ignis, secundo
liquor Saturniae vegetabilis tertio Mercurii vinculum, etc.

I am not to learn, that sometimes and in some respects the first Principle of
Fire is called Vinculum Mercurii, because it tends to the fixing of it; but the
Water is tied to the Fire, only by the third Principle.

Ripley Revived, page 290.

The second manner is called Triptative,
Which is Conjunction of things Three,
Of Body, Soul and Spirit, that they not strive,
Which Trinity thou must bring to Unity;
For as the Soul to the Spirit the Bond must be;
Right so the Body the Soul to him must knit,
Out of thy Mind let not this Lesson flit.
Page 292. Know that the Soul does not ascend, but it carries with it a
fermental Odor of the Body, by which it does so effectually affect the Spirit,
that it begins to think of taking a new Impression, and becomes daily by little
and little more and more able to suffer Fire, and by consequence draws to the
nature of a Body; observe this, etc.

Page 307. The next is to know our Mercury, which is not Common but Artificial,
drawn from three Heads by the mediation of one thing, which makes the two which
are dry and sulphurous, to unite with one which is moist and mercurial.

Brevis Manuductio ad Rubin: Coelestem, page 69. Causa secunda finalis haec
est, ut contrarias qualitates concilia^emus. Non autem conciliantur qualitates
contrariae nisi per medium. (Page 70.) Medium Medium.
ergo erit utriusque Particeps utrique accommodatum. Vertendo itaque compositum
in terram jam concordant in hoc tertio frigus and calor ut cohabitare possint,
etc. Postea vero in aquam dissolvendo conciliantur, etc.

Also in Rip. Rev you speak to this purpose, viz. For certainly the ferment
Ferment.
which comes between the compound Body and the Water, causes a Death and a
Regeneration, etc.

Also in another part of it, thus: Now in the Composition of these three; first
our common Mercury, and the two Common Mercury.
Principles of our Compound there interceeds the Ferment, etc. Out of which,
though it be a Body, proceeds yet a specificated Odor, etc.

Now, Sir, I thank you for your Encouragement, since I have cause to rejoice.


Aeyren. How come you to lay any stress upon these Words?


Hort. Because, Sir, you have expressly said it more than once or twice, and a
certain honest Author speaks to this purpose, That after the joining of the two
first Principles, the Mercury of the second may then be said to be dead, and
never more to be made living but by Argent vive, which cannot be done without
mixture; but that it will not mingle it self with the common Argent vive,
because of the Sulphur, etc. therefore there must be a medium; that in Medium.
the medium must be a Specific seperative Power to coagulate, etc. for common
Mercury has no Specific; therefore take, etc.

This, Sir, I think, agrees exactly with your own words formerly cited.


Aeyr. It does so. Name your Author therefore, for certainly he is one of the
plainest that ever writ concerning this Principle.


Hor. He is no plainer, Sir, in this than in the rest, but his Book is of small
Account; and I must beg your Pardon, Sir, because in your Preface to Ripley
Revived, after you have told us what light you received from Bernard Trevisan;
you say next to him, or rather before him, in some respects, is an Author whom
you will not name, etc. So, Sir, I follow your Example, and I know you can
easily perceive the words are not of my own invention.


Aeyr. But how then has this your Earth a relation to the Doves of Diana, which
are spoke in the Plural?


Hor. Because of the Quantity, Sir; which is two to one.


Aeyren. Have you seen any Receipt for it?


Hort. Yes, Sir, one of your own; it is as follows.


Arcanum Arsenici Philosophici.
1. Accepi Draconis ignei partem unam et

2. Corporis Magnetici parts duas praeparavi simul per ignem torridum et
quinta praeparatione factae sunt Arsenici very circiter unc. viii.

Arcanum praeparandi Mercurium cum suo arsenico ad faeces amittendas. 3.
Recipiebam Arsenici optimi partem unam, feci cum Dianae Virginis partibus
duabus connubium incorpore uno, minutim trivi et cum hoc praeparavi Mercurium
meum elaborando simul omnia in calido usque dum optime incorporarentur, etc.

Aeyren. Now I find you take Receipts according to the Letter, not considering
you said before, that the Fire and Air joined, is called Diana or Arsnick, etc.
and yet you make your third Principle two parts of the Virgin Diana to one of
Arsnick.

This is idem per idem; besides, How do you know this is my Receipt?


Hort. O, Sir, Expede Herculem, and if you are pleased to word it so, I cannot
help it; I am sure the meaning is otherwise; and I can easily perceive you have
more Sols, more Lunas, more Dianas, and more Mercuries than one.


Aeyren. Have you any other Authorities?


Hort. Yes, Sir, that one that is Nameless; he also directs me to take more of
the Earth than of the Fire and Air, and more of Water than of the other three.


Aeyren. And has he told you how this second Work appears, and the Temperature
of it?


Hort: Yes, Sir, he says it appears a Mass Metalline, of the Color of Lead;
and that it is easily beat to Powder (which I have also experimentally found to
be true).


Aeyren. Have you observed any such words from me?


Hort. Yes, Sir, in the Breviary of Alchymy, Rip. Rev. Page 10. Position the
third, you say,

Three Substances make only two Natures, Earth and Water.


Earth and Water equally proportioned that is best. Here it is Evident (say
you) That three Substances make up but two Natures of Earth and Water: The Man
and Wife are both Bodies, or Earths; the one Fixed and Ripe, the other Volatile
and Unripe, and by mixture make a brittle Black Hermaphroditical Body or Earth,
called the Philosophers Lead, etc. So, Sir, I observed you have more Leads than
one; for you call the Green Lion your Lead; and in its Preparation you speak of
two Substances, and here you speak of three; also you have your Read-Lead
elsewhere named.

Aeyren. Well, this looks something like it indeed, but you know it is spoken
as to another purpose. Now proceed to your Element of Water, and lets hear what
you will make of them at the last.


The joining of the fourth Element.
Horse. I shall, Sir, and first from your Vera confectio Lapidis Philosophici,
page 155. Medicina tertii Ordinis est illa praepa^atio Medicina tertii Ordinis.
Lapidis, quae a Philosophis Maximo in pretio habetur, et vocatur Iteratio sive
Multiplicatio, Unde Philosophus: Totius operis summum arcanum est dissolutio
physica in Mercurium, et in primam materiam reductio.


156. Deinde in aceto nostro coelestino solve, et certe solvetur in aquam
clarissimam et quasi fontanam.

Page 157. Item notabis quod in omni dissolutione physica debes mittere tres
res: Rem quae humectat, quae dividit et quae lavet, etc.

160. Tamen soluta non been operatur nisi prius figatur in suo fermento.

161. Ut hanc Tertii Ordinis Medicinam tibi clarius explicem, sic accipe.
Oportet omnino quod de corpore fiat Mercurius, hoc est, quod fixum fiat
volatile cum volatili, hoc est, cum Mercurio Mundo, etc.

Brevis Manuduc. Page 69. Postea vera in aquam dissolvendo conciliautur, etc.

Next I will show you what Mr. Norton says of the Water or Liquor; and therein
he does clearly hint the third Principle also: In Theat. Chem. Britt.

Consider also the nature of the mean, Page 81.

When it is in the third Degree made clean;
The purer that your means be,
The more Perfection thereof ye shall see.
The means reteyne a great part
Of the Virtues of this Art:
For the Principle may not give influence
To the final End, neither the refluence
Unto his principal, without Succor and Aid
Of means containing the extremities aforesaid, etc.
Liquor is a thing moveable, Page 78.

Of fleeting Substance and Unstable.
All such things follow the Moon,
More then standing kinds done;
And that appears to a Clerk,
In working of the white Work:
Liquors washen and maken clean,
Both Extremities and the Mean, etc.
And page 76, 77, 78. Speaking of their several sorts of Liquors or Waters; as
Aquam ab Aere, Stilla roris madidi, Water of Litharge, and Water of Azot to
make Lac Virginis, Aqua vitae, Quintessence, Aqua Vivificans, etc.

Of another Liquor wise Men tell,
Which is fresher than Water of the Well; Ibid.

Fresher Liquor there is none in taste,
Yet it will never consume ne waste;
Though it be occupied ever more,
It will never be less in Store;
Which Democrit named for his intent,
Lux umbra carens, Water most Orient:
Hermes said no Liquor so necessary,
As was Water of Crude Mercury: Water of crude Mercury.

For he shall stand, said that noble Clerk,
For the Water within our Work.
Now learn ye which for this Science have sought,
By all these Liquors our Stone must be wrought.
Hermetick Secrets, says, That Mercuries Leprosy infesting the Body, is not
of its Root and Substance, but Accidental, and therefore seperable from it.

Fons Chemicae Philoso. page 104. Mercurius enim Vulgi est Aqua, sed deest ei
Spiritus et vis ignea ad urendum: Supple si potes quod deest summo cum
Artisicio, tum non amplius erit Mercurius Vulgi, sed similis nostro, sed si hoc
facere non possis, dimitte istum Mercurium, quia nihil ab ipso praeter damnum
expectare possis. Ecce jam deus est testis, rem totam narravi, quam si prudens
fueris ignorare non possis, etc.

Introit. Apert. page 19: Quare agnoverunt tandem, etc. Wherefore the wise Men
did at length know that the watery Crudities, and the earthly Faeces did hinder
it from being digested, which being fixed in the Roots thereof, cannot
otherwise than by Inversion of the whole Compound be rooted out; they knew, I
say, that Mercury, if it could but put off those things, it would presently
become fixed, etc.

In our Conjunction four Elements be aggregat, Theat. Chem. Brit. page 146.

In dew proportion first which asonder were separat.
Ripley Rev. draws a Conclusion in these words; Our Art therefore is to
compound two Principles (one in which the Salt, and another in which the
Sulphur of Nature does abound) which are not yet perfect, nor totally
imperfect; and by consequence may therefore, by our Art, be exchanged, or
exalted; which that which is totally perfect cannot be; and then by Common
Mercury.
common Mercury to extract not the Pondus, but the Celestial Virtue out of the
Compound; which Virtue being Fermental, begets in the common Mercury an
Offspring more Noble than it self, which is our true Hermaphrodite, which will
congeal it self, and dissolve the Bodies, etc.

Of this Celestial Virtue he also speaks thus.

But beyond the Example or Similitude given of a Grain of Corn, it may be
observed that the hidden and spiritual Virtue of this our Body, does purge and
putrefie its Matrix of Water, Purged.
in which it is sown; that is, it makes it cast forth a great quantity of
filthy Earth, and a great deal of hydropical saline Moisture, etc.

For (says he) this Operation of ours, is made between Male and Female, within
By a Fermental Virtue.
their own kind; between which there is a Ferment, which affects that which
no other thing in the World could do.

For fermental Virtue is the wonder of the World; and it is by it that Water
becomes Herbs, etc.

Then, Sir, you close all in these words; viz.

We conclude then, That all Operations for our Mercury and our Body, according
to our Art, are erroneous,

and will never produce our Mystery, although they be otherwise Mercuries never
so wonderfully made, etc.

Aeyren. What Conjunction do you call this?


Hort. I call this Conjunction Tetraptive; yet I perceive that at the first
Addition it rather goes under the Denomination of Triptative, or Conjunction of
three Substances, by virtue of a Medium, because the Medium remains not
entirely with the other, and that the Terrap^ive Conjunction is not properly
consummate till perfect Digestion: This therefore may be properly called the
making of a Quadrangle; and that of perfect Digestion, a reducing the
Quadrangle to a Circle; as you have it in the Exposition upon Sir G. Ripley's
fourth Gate, page: 292. (though) I also perceive you allude to the same
Conjunctions, and other Operations in the great Work.


You also, Sir, further teach that by virtue of the Medium or Doves of Diana,
all these four Principles, or Elements will join and purge together, which then
must be purified into a bright, clear Water, by several Sublimations or Eagles,
which may be done several ways, as your Writings sufficiently direct: Also that
these several Sublimations are but so many Cohobations of the subliming Mercury
upon the Body of the Composition; yet that there requires a due knowledge of
the true Number which may also be clearly learnt from your Directions; and
therefore, for brevities sake, I shall not hear repeat them.

This is that hidden Moisture or Humidity, wherein Gold will dissolve as Ice
does melt in warm Water, and is a Mother unto Gold, as says Sendivog. Eng.
page 49.

I am also, in the next place, further to show that this purified Mercury or
Water, is not unlike to common The property of Mercury Phils.
Mercury; yet more splendid and clear, but not diaphanous or limped, as many
have supposed: And that upon this prepared Mercury alone is founded the grand
Secret of the Philosophers Stone; alias Gold-making Powder; alias transmuting
Elixir; which with your leave I will prove, as follows.

First that it is not diaphanous or limpid. Tract de Metal. Metamor. page 46.
Quidam Diaphanum hoc n^enstruum volunt limpidumque, etc. et frustra.

Ripley Revived, page 238. The main matter is our Water; which Water, as says
Artephius, is the Vinegar of the Mountains, and it is the only Instrument for
our Work.

This, I say, that it must first be Cohobated in a very wonderful way (for
Cohobation.
it is such a Cohobation, that has not its like in the World) and for several
times, to a determinate Number; and after it may and ought to be Distilled
Distillation.
per se, with out addition again and again, that thou may have the Water
clear from any exotical Mixture.

Page 34. Because some Atoms of the Body may be in it, which were insensibly
left in the Preparation.

Page 241. For this, says the Philosopher, is thy first Work, to make clean
thy Mercury, and then into clean Mercury to put clean Bodies; for who can
expect a pure Generation from that which is uncle an.

The next Property of thy Water, is that it must be thin, even as thin as
Thinness.
any other Mercury; for if the external Proportion be Corrupted, it is an
evident Sign that the inward Nature is Confused.

It must also be of a very bright Color, Brightness.
even like to fine burnished Silver, as says Artephius. Hence, says a certain
Philosopher, To sight it is like to a Celestial Body.

Our Water must not be reduced into Not limpid or diaphanous.
any limpid diaphanous Liquor, as some fondly imagine, and as I my self in my
time of Errors did conceit; but it must keep its Mercurial from pure and
incorrupted. It is also very ponderous; so ponderous that it is somewhat more
weighty than any other Mercury in the World.

By way of Digression, give me leave
to tell you, It is no small matter to be firmly grounded in your Principles. I
have met with a Book published by Dr. Bolnest, 1665. who contends much for this
common Mercury prepared, page 104, 105, etc. and thinks himself no small Master
therein. But page 104. he thinks that mentioned by Count Trevisan was only a
particular, and that the said Doctor drives at another Method, though to the
same purpose. I have (says he) already declared (my Thoughts) that the common
Mercury prepared, and afterward dissolved into a clear, milky, crystalline,
and silvery Liquor, or Water, is the true Menstrual, or Metalline dissolving
Mercury of Philosophers. And page 116. he adds, that we may undoubtedly
conclude, that that most famous and necessary Menstrual, or Metalline
dissolving Mercury of Philosophers (for, says he, I mean not their congealing
Mercury) is to be prepared out of the common Mercury or Quicksilver. And in
page 122. he says, R. Lully directs to another more excellent and philosophical
Menstruum, etc. without which the common or vulgar is not easily to be
prepared, and made philosophic. But soon afterward he runs into the old
Error, that there are several Mercuries, (besides the universal) as Mineral
Vegetable and Animal Mercury, sometimes both joined in one; I mean (says he)
the Mineral and Vegetable which produced that potent Dissolvent, or G.
Vegetable of Raymund Lully, which few yet have well understood or perceived,
etc. But of these last Mercuries (says he) or Menstruums, I intend not at
present to enlarge, they being the Gate into the greatest of Chemical Secrets:
And at this Fountain he leaves the ingenous to draw, and refresh himself with
the healing and physical Waters, etc. Now I should think this Doctor an envious
Adeptist, but that he afterward requests us not to interpret him to speak of
the Great Elixir. And page 126. he would not have any to imagine him to know
more than he has delivered; and so attempt in vain (by subtilty of Discourse)
a farther discovery from him: And concludes thus, Let none therefore expect
that from me, that I own not my self Master of; he that does, and fails of his
Expectations, let him not hereafter blame me, but himself, etc. Thus our
Expectation ends in a hush, and comes to nothing; and thus we see how a
Building may soon fall for want of a true Foundation, and how greatly many have
been deluded by that Subject of common Mercury; sometimes wholly approving,
other times altogether rejecting the same, and sometimes allowing it only in
part.

I have seen a little Book, called Chemical, Medecinal and Chyrurgical
Addresses made to Samuel Hartlib, Esquire 1655. And in it a Treatise, named. A
Caveat for Alchymists, the Table of the Book says, it is Gabriel Platt's
Caveat. This Man sets out some of the Cheats of sophistical Multipliers and
Imposters. And in his first Chap. tells us, that he was shortly to demonstrate
before the High and Honorable Court of Parliament in England, that there is
such a thing seasible as the Philosophers Stone; or to speak more properly, an
Art in the Transmutation of Metals, etc. But in the Discovery of the fourth
Cheat, he makes a Condition; if (says he) I may have a Laboratory, like to that
in the City of Venice, where they are sure of Secrecy, and to be provided for,
etc. And toward the Conclusion he cries out, What should I say more? Oh, if
any Man either in England, or beyond the Seas, shall trouble himself to write
to me, he shall be sure to have an Answer; if he come to me, he shall be sure
to lose his Labor; if he think to win me by Rewards, tho never so Great, he
shall be sure to get nothing but a Jeer, etc. And professes that he had not
only found out the Philosophers Stone, but also a true and infallible way to
make England Happy by it. This Man, I say, for all his great Boasting, and some
true philosophical Caveats, is mistaken in common Mercury; for although he
allows, that without it, this Art could never have been found: He
notwithstanding adds, Not that it can be made the philosophical Dissolvent by
any preparation whatsoever, but without it the first Dissolvent; (for there are
three) cannot be gotten; for it only has the Power to separate this mineral
Spirit from a crude Mineral, taken from the Mine, which the Fire has not
touched; and no other thing under Heaven can do it else, no more than any
Creature besides a Be can extract Honey out of a Flower. -- By this, I easily
perceive, he spoke only by ghuess; and I am afraid England is not one bit the
Happier for all his great Cunning.

But to return to Aeyrenaeus his Mercury, of which he further tells us, that
this is the only Mercury; and there is none in the whole World besides it which
can do our Work: With this (says he) Hermes did moisten his Body, and made it
to rot and putrefie.

By means of this Water the Body shall be brought to have a vegetative Soul;
for it will shoot forth as with Sprigs, and Leaves, and Branches, and after it
will resolve into Powder like Atoms, etc.

And page 240. That it is the Mother of Metals, and therefore has Power to
reduce them, by dividing their Principles of Sulphur and Mercury, he further
adds; but we count it a loss to employ our Mercury to such sordid Uses, for we
spoil the goodness of it thereby; Gold only is drowned in it, etc.

242. This Water is by the Philosophers Mercury called Venom.
called their Venom, and indeed it is a very strong Poison; to wit, to the Body
of Sol, to which it is mixed: But what it is to the Body of Man, I never The
highest of all Medicines in the World.
tried my self, nor gave it to any other, nor do I believe did any of they. But
as concerning the Medicine that is made by it, and out of it, it is certain
that of all Medicines in the World, it is the highest; for it is the true Arbor
Vitae, which does Answer the universal Desires of them who have it in this
kind; for besides it is Virtue Curative, which it has in a wonderful miraculous
way, it can penetrate even to our constitutive Principles, which no other
mineral Medicine can do, etc. [Of which more hereafter.]

I observed before, That this Water is the only Base of the Grand Arcanum of
the Philosophers, because out of it, by digestion, they obtain a Sulphur or
Gold, far more Excellent than any common Gold for their great Work.

In Sendivog. Engl: page 144. Concerning Sulphur, I find these Words; viz. For
the House of Gold is Mercury, and the House of Mercury is Water; but Sulphur is
that which coagulates Mercury, which Sulphur indeed is most difficultly
prepared, but more difficultly found out: For in the Sulphur of the
Philosophers this Secret consists, which also is contained in the inward Rooms
of Mercury; of whose Preparation, without which it is improfitable, we shall
Discourse hereafter in the third Principle of Salt; seeing here we treat of the
Virtue and Original, not Praxis of Sulphur, etc.

I know not what to Answer for this Passage; the Translator says he has done
it faithfully from the Latin into the English-Tongue; but I find nothing to
this purpose in the Latin, Printed Genevae. MDC XXXVIII.

However, in page 161. I find these words, Considerando quod, etc. By
considering that the Mercury of the Philosophers has in it self its own good
Sulphur more or less depurated, and decocted by Nature, thou may perfect all
things out of Mercury; but if thou All out of Mercury.
shall know to add thy Weights to the Weights of Nature, to double Mercury and
triple Sulphur, it will quickly be terminated in good, than in better, until
into best of all, etc.

163. Common Mercury by how much the more it is decocted, the more fluxible it
is; Our Argent Vive by how much more it is decocted, the more it is thickened;
by these Circumstances therefore thou may consider how the common Mercury
differs from the Mercury of the Philosophers. If thou do not yet understand,
do not expect it; no mortal Man will give you clearer things than we have here
spoken of. But now of the Virtues of it: Our Argent Vive is of such Virtue,
Mercury sufficient of self.
that it is of its self sufficient for thee, and for it self, without any
addition of any extraneous thing; it is dissolved and congealed by a natural
Decoction only; but Philosophers, for But, etc.
brevities sake, add to it its own Sulphur well digested and ripened, and so
they work, etc.

But not to build upon the Authority of one Philosopher. In Theat. Chem. Britt.
380. I read thus:

In four Elements is comprehended things three,
Animalls, Vegetabills, Mineralls must be,
Of this our Principle that we make our Stone;
Quality and quantity is unknown to many one, etc.
Out of one Principle four Elements thou shall draw, Page 381.

Thou shall need nothing else that needful is;
Our Principle in quality is so perfectly mixed,
By Virtue of the Son and his quality,
So equally joined, so thoroughly fixed,
As nothing so well mixed may be.
Son. Father, I pray you for Charity, Page 384.
Where shall I this Sulphur find, etc.

Father. In our own Water Son; keep this in mind, etc.

But to come nearer home to Aeyrenaeus; in his Introitus, in the Chapter of the
Invention of the perfect Magistery, he tells us after the joining of the
Elements; That thus came out an Mercury prepaped.
Hermaphroditical Mercury; him therefore they put in the Fire, and they
coagulated him for no long time; and in his Coagulation they found Sol and
Luna, etc.

Chap. 10. Page 16. Prae cunclis, etc. This above all things is a Wonder, that
in our Mercury there is not only an actual, but also an active Sulphur; and yet
notwithstanding it retains all the Proportions and Form of Mercury, etc. By
reason of this Sulphur it is an Hermaphrodite, Our true Hermaphrodite vi. ante.
because it does apparently include at the same time, and by the same degree of
Digestion, as well an active as a passive Principle; for if it be joined with
Sol, it softens, melts and dissolves him by a temperate heat, suitable to the
necessity of the Composition; and does by the same Fire coagulate himself, and
gives in his Coagulation Sol, and that according to the pleasure of the
Operator.

This, perhaps, will seem incredible Page 17. Does coagulate it self, etc.
unto thee, but its true; to wit, That homogeneal Mercury., pure and clean,
being by our artifice Impregnated with an internal Sulphur, does by the
application of a convenient heat only coagulate himself, etc. but if it be
joined to Sol already perfect, it is not so coagulated, but it dissolves the
corporal Gold, etc.

Page 45. Scias, etc. Thou shall know that our Mercury does of it self yield
Gold, etc.

Rip. Rev. Exposit. upon Sir G. R. Preface, page 37. And as the Artist may
govern this Mercury, it will digest the passive Principles either into Sol or
Luna, at the Philosopher's Pleasure.

This is the Stone of which we mean, Page 41.

Whosoever our Writings conceives aright,
It is a Soul and Substance bright, etc.
And verily he that has well studied our Books, shall understand that this
general one, Mercury, which we call Azoth, is indeed our Stone which wants
only digestion, etc. [but this I know is also otherwise Expounded].

Page 41. Our one Image out of which springs White and Red, not bare Sol and
Luna, as will spring out of our Mercury, which we prepare with our Hands; but,
and c,

41, 42. For who could belive that Sol, in which the Virtue is but Unary, I
mean only sufficient for it self, should by the addition of our Mercury (which
in reference to its material Parts) is below the Degree of Sol, and needs
Digestion, and that only to mature it to the height of Sol, etc.

Introit. Apert. Cap. 19. Page 54. Sulphur nostrum, etc. Seek then our Sulphur
withal thy might; which, believe me, thou may find in our Mercury, if Fates
the call, otherwise thou shall prepare it out of Sol Vulgar, etc.

This is sufficient for our Point.

Next we will proceed to the Great Work of the Philosophers, which also has
its Foundation upon Sulphur and Mercury, and alludes to all the Conjunctions,
as aforementioned; wherein it will plainly appear that the whole Art is far
more excellent, and easier to be obtained from this prepared Mercury and the
Sulphur, or Gold proceeding from it, than from such Mercury and common Gold.
And that herein lies the Grand Secret of the Philosophers.

Of the Great Work.
Sendivog. Lat. page 161. Engl. 117. Now we say that this Art is nothing else
but the Virtues of the Elements equally mixed, it is a natural Equality of Hot,
Dry, Cold, Moist; a joining together of Male and Female, which the same Female
begot, i. e. a Conjunction of Fire and the Radical moisttue of Metals, etc.

119. But Philosophers for brevities sake add to it its own Sulphur, and so
they work.

122. We say that Argent vive is the first matter of that Work, and truly
nothing else; whatsoever is added to it arises from it, etc.

Page 136. Speaking of Sulphur: But do not thou despair in finding of him Our
Sulphur, or Sol.
out, I tell the of a truth that he is in Gold and Silver most perfect, but in
Argent vive most easy.

And in page 140. Now we grant that unto the unworthy this Art is nothing, but
to the lovers of Virtue, and the true Searchers and Sons of Wisdom, we do most
highly commend it, and do affirm it not only to be true, but altogether the
truest; which sometimes we have really made good before men worthy of such
sight, I say before Men of high and low Condition: Yet this Medicine was not
made by us, but received from a Friend and yet most true, for the finding out
of which we have sufficiently instructed the Searchers thereof, etc.

But to return to Aeyrenaeus, (second to none in explaining this Art) Introit.
Chap. 18. page 45. Sol proinde noster, etc. Our Gold therefore is commonly
vendable, but not commonly to be bought, because that it may become ours, there
is need of our Art.

Page 46. Thou may find our Gold; in Gold or Silver vulgar, I my self have
sought it in these, and have found it, but it is no easy Labor. The Stone
itself A hard Labor.
may be Easier made, than than that thou may find the next matter in Gold
commonly bought.

Wherefore our Gold is the next matter of our Stone, the common Gold is a near
matter, the rest of the Metlas are remote, and those things which are not
Metallic are most remote, or rather estranged to it.

But if thou seek our Gold in a middle matter between the perfect and
imperfect, seek it, and thou may find it; but otherwise loose the Body of
common Gold, which is called the first preparation, by which the Enchantment
off the body is loosed, without which the work of the Male cannot be performed:
If thou go in the former way, thou Two ways
art bound to proceed with a most benign Fire; but if in the latter, then thou
must implore the help of a torrid Vulcan; such a Fire ought to be Administered
as we use in Multiplication, when to perfect our Elixir, we Ferment with common
Gold or Silver.

This indeed will be a Labyrinth, unless thou know how to get thy self out,
yet in either progress, thou art in need of an equal and continual Heat,
whether thou workest in Common Sol or in ours. And thou Requisite heat.
shall know, that our Sol will perfect the Work two or three Months sooner than
Common Gold, and it will be an Elixir in its first perfection, of a Thousand
Fold, which in the other will scarce be of a Hundred Fold Virtue, etc.

Chap. 19. page 51. Est tamen unum, Est tamen unum, etc
etc. Yet there is in the Metallic Kingdom one thing, of a Wonderful Original,
in which our Sol is nearer than in Common Sol and Luna if thou seek it in the
hour of its Nativity, which melts in our Mercury as Ice in warm Water, and yet,
after a sort, it is like Gold: Thou shall not find this immediately in common
Sol, but from it with our Mercury in governing it, by 150. days thou may find
this true, and the same matter, which is our Gold sought the furthest way
about, nor yet of such virtue, as that which Nature have left to our hands, etc.

Note, The ingenious Author formerly mentioned, however he came short of the
Doves of Diana, is notwithstanding most Excellent in his Exposition upon this
Sentence, Est tamen unum, etc. which is well worth to be here inserted.
Disceptatio de Lapide Physico. Cap. 1. page 9. Est tamen unum in reguo
Metallico originis mirae.

Id est Nucleus Mercurij Metallicus albissimus and purissimus, qui propter
raritatem artis, tam eum specuative inveniendi, quam practice educendi
mirabilem methodum, a Philaletha Originis mirae appellatur.

In quo Sol noster propinquius est, quam in sole and Luna Vulgi.

In quo scilicet Nucleo, ut non plus ultra defaecatissimo, Sol noster, id est
aurum vium Philosophorum, seu Sulfur artis, propinquius est, quam in sole and
Luna Vulgi: Id est facilius per decoctionem ex illo extrahitur, quam ex auro
Vulgi, tam propter puritatem, quia auro and argento purior hic nucleus, illud
homogeneitate antecellit: Nam licet aurum quoad Page 10.
perfectionem Metallicum sit sat purum, and perfect homogeneum, tamen quoad
perfectionem Medicinalem non ita est; Secundum omnium sophorum authoritates,
quas hic annectare supersedeo propter brevitatem, citius enim per se, quam auro
adhuc clauso junctum, in solemn nostrum, idest Philosophorum decoquitur.

Sieum in hora Suae Nativitatis quaeras.

Si eum, id est antedictum solemn nostrum, in hora suae Nativitatis: quando
scilicet ex illo uno in regno Metallico originis mirae, id est Mercurio
homogeneo, per competentem ignis decoctionem natus, educitur: quaeras, id est
accipies,

Qui in Mercurio nostro liquescit.

Qui, scilicet Sol noster ex Mercurio natus, in Mercurio nostro nempe unde
natus, iterum impositus, liquescit, id est resolvitur.

Sicut glacies in aqua tepida.

Quem admodum glacies nil nisi mera aqua concreta est, ideo etiam in pura aqua
tepida, absque rejectione ullius superfluitatis inseperabiliter resolvitur:
pari modo and ille Sol, sicut glacies, ex Mercurio sophico tanquam aqua sui
generis, solo igne concretus, and in hora suae Nativitatis, id est
coagulationis, acceptus, eodem Mercurio reimpositus, suaviter resolvitur,
tanquam in aqua tepida, idest, leni calore ad hibito.

Page 11. Ergo illud unum, etc. So far this Ingenious Gentleman: Now to return
again to our Countryman and Master Aeyrenaeus, concerning the several ways of
Working, in Chap. 19. page 48. of his Introitus.

Parato Mercurio nostro, etc. Having Praxis.
prepared our Mercury and Sol, shut them in our Vessel, and govern them with
our Fire, and within Forty days, thou shall see the whole matter turned into a
Shadow or Atoms, without any visible mover or motion, or without any heat
perceptable to the touch, save only that it is hot.

But if ye be yet ignorant both of our Sun and Mercury, meddle not in this
work, for Expense only will be thy Lot.

But if thou does not yet fully know the Mystery of our Sun, having attained
the knowledge of our Mercury; then take of common Sol, well purged, one part,
and of our Mercury, very clear, three parts, join them as is said before, and
set them to the Fire, giving a heat in which it may boil and sweat, and his
sweat may be circulated, and this Day and Night for ninety Days and Nights, and
thou shall see this Mercury to have separated and again conjoined all the
Elements of the common Sol; boil it afterward for other fifty Days, and thou
shall see the common Sol to be converted by our Mercury into our Sol, which is
a Medicine of the first Order. This therefore is now our Our Salphur by common
Sol.
Sulphur, but does not yet teign; and, believe me, many Philosophers have
wrought this way, and attained the Truth; and yet it is a most tedious way, and
it is for the Grandees of the Earth. When thou have got this Sulphur, don't
think that thou have the Stone, but its true matter, which in an imperfect
thing thou may seek and find it in a Week. This is our rare and easy way,
and this has God reserved for his poor contemned and abject Saints, etc.

Page, 50. Dico ergo, etc. I say then that each way is true; for it is but one
way in the end, but not in the beginning, etc.

Much more from him out of that little Book may be gathered, whereby the Heart
of an honest and ingenous Man would be apt to rejoice; but we must consider he
has told us before that such plain Passages as these the Philosophers do many
times use to deceive the simple; and this he has said in his last Rip. Rev.
page 2.
Book, which he declares he intends as a Key to his former Writings; and
further says all his other Books together are nothing to this, by reason of the
Contradictions which he has woven in them, which in this he has not done in
the least Measure. Let us therefore resort to them, and see if this our fuddain
Rejoicing is built upon a good Foundation, lest we have cause to be sad too
late.

In Rep. Rev. page 23. He has these words; viz. I know many pitiful Sophisters
do dote on many Stones vegetable, animal and mineral; and some to those add the
fiery Angelical Paradaical Stone, which they call a wonder working Essence; and
because the mark they aim at is so great, the ways also by which they would
attain their Scope, they make also agreeable, that is, a double way: One way
they call Via humida, the other they call Via sicca, (to use their Languages)
the latter way is the Labyrinthian Path, which is fit only for the great ones
in the Earth to tread in; the other the Daedalean Path, an easy way of small
cost for the poor of the World to enterprise.

But this I know, and can testify, that there is but one way, and but only one
Regimen, no more Colors than ours; and what we say or write otherwise, is but
to deceive the unwary; for if every thing in the World ought to have its proper
Causes, there cannot be any one end, which is produced from two ways of working
on distinct Principles. -- Therefore we protest, and must again admonish the
Reader, that (in our former Writings) we have concealed much, by reason of the
two ways we have Insinuated, etc.

Page 31. Let none deceive you with telling you, that our Gold is not common,
but Philosophical; for common Gold is dead, which is true; but as we order it,
there is made a quickening of it, as a Grain of Corn in the Earth is quickened.

34. Choose your Gold for this work pure and clean from any mixture, etc. if it
be not so when you buy it, make it so by Purgation, etc.

35. Know now that whatever we say out of Envy, our way is none other, and we
protest, and will protest that neither we, nor any of the Ancients knew any
other way; for it is impossible that our Secret can be wrought by any other
Principles, or any other disposition than this, etc.

Proh dolor! How inconstant are the Philosophers in many of their Sayings? What
is become now of that rare and easy way reserved for the Saints? Is there then
no other way, but this with common Gold? What then is the meaning of all those
solemn Sayings in Introitus Apertus, and particularly this? [Pag. 54. Sin.
minus, etc. but otherwise in Sol vulgar with a due heat and in due time thou
shall prepare it; but it is a way hedged with a thousand Briars, and we have
made a Vow to God and Equity, that we will never in naked Words declare each
Regimen distinctly.] Well, there must be something more in it, Sense, Reason
and Nature, confirming the same; for if our Mercury is crude Gold, and will (if
sufficiently accuated) congeal itself, which is no where denied, What then must
it be? Surely nothing else but our Gold, which is nearer related to our Water
than any common Gold: -- But let me see, what more says my Master in his 19th
Chap. of Introit. [Pag. 53. Ea propter si artem noris, etc. Therefore if thou
know the Art, extract our Sol out of our Mercury, then thou may perfect
the Work from one thing; which, believe me, is more perfect than all worldly
Perfection, according to the Philosopher; if, says he, thou know how to make
the Work out of Mercury alone, thou shall verily be the finder out of a most
precious Work. In this Work there are no superfluities; but the whole, by the
living God, is turned into Purity, because the Action is made only in one
thing].

So this indeed is a very good Reason; and now, my Friends, I begin to be a
little comforted again, and should continue so, were it not for this last Book
of Ripley Revived; I shall therefore never be at rest, till I have turned it
all over. -- Let us see further, perhaps we may find something to fix the
matter.

But first of thine Elements make thou rotation, Page 168.

And into Water thine Earth turn first of all;
Then of thy Water make Air by levigation,
And Air make Fire; then Master I will thee call
Of all our Secrets great and small:
The wheel of Elements then have thou turned about,
Truly conceiving our Writings without doubt.
Take of thy clean Mercury, which is animated according to what I have
faithfully taught in my little Latin Introitus Apertus.
Treatise, and mix it with thy Body as there I told you, without ambiguity; put
it into a Glass, etc.

This now turns me back again to Introitus Apertus. page 53. Atsi, etc. But if
thou shall proceed in the Work of Sol vulgar, then both the Action and Passion
is in a twofold matter, and only the middle Substance of both is taken, the
Faeces being rejected. If thou do but well consider these things which I have
absolved in few words, you have a Key to open all the appearing Contradictions
amongst the Philosophers. Wherefore Ripley in his Chapter of Calcination
teaches to turn the Wheel round thrice, where he expressly speaks of the Sol
vulgar, and is so to be understood. In his Doctrine of Proportions he is very
obscure, because those three Proportions do serve to three Works. One Work is
most Secret, and purely Natural, and is made in our Mercury with our Sol; to
which Work belong all the signs described by the Philosophers, Three ways.
etc.

Page 54. The other Work is in Sol, purged with our Mercury, etc. (in which the
true juice of Lunaria is to be taken, and the Faeces to be rejected,

Thirdly, and Lastly, There is a mixed Work when Gold vulgar is mixed with our
Mercury, etc.

Well, now we find there are three ways or works; but I am altogether for the
way purely Natural. Let us therefore go on.

Rip. Rev. Page 366. Our Principal know that it is but one, and that is in
Metals, even in those Metals which you may buy commonly, to wit, the perfectest
of them; but before you can command it out of them, you must be a Master, and
not a Scholar; namely as it is wisely said in Norton.

To know to destroy their whole Composition,
That some of their Components may help in Conclusion.
But trust me this is not for a Tyro, nor for every one of us, unless he have
the Secret from his own Studies, and not by Tradition from a Master or Guide.
Know then that this fore recited way is true, but involved in a thousand
Broileries.

But our way which is an easy way, and in which no Man may err, our broad way,
our linear way, we have Vowed never to reveal it, but in Metaphors: I being
moved with Pity, will hint it to you. A hint.


Take that which is not yet perfect, nor yet wholly imperfect, but in a way to
Perfection, and out of it make what is most Noble and most Perfect: This you
may conceive to be an easier Receipt, than to take that which is already
perfect, and extract out of it what is imperfect, and then make it perfect, and
after out of that Perfection to draw a plusquam Perfection; and yet this is
true, and we have wrought it. And because it is an immense Labor for any to
undertake, we describe that way; but this last Discovery which I hinted in few
words, is it which no Man ever did so plainly lay open, etc.

Page 369: The reward which this Mastery will bring to the Artist, is indeed
inestimable; for having it, he needs want no worldly Blessing; for Wealth he
need take no care, and from all Frailties of Body he has a most sure Antidote.

Pray then to God that he would be propitious unto your Studies and Labors, in
giving thee the true Knowledge of this Secret Mystery; it is the Gift of GOD, I
have ^^um ^i.
helped thee what I can; but venture not to practice barely upon my Words; for
know that what I have only hinted is far more than what I have discovered.

And what I have declared to thy first apprehension most openly, has yet its
lurking Serpent under the Green Grass; I mean some hidden thing which thou
ought to understand, which thou being Cock-sure at first blush will neglect;
but yet it will bite thee by the Heel when thou approachest to practice, and
make thee begin again, and, it may be, at last throw away all as a Man
desperate: For know that this is an Art very Page 370.
Cabalistical, and we do study Expressions, such as we know will almost suit
with every Man's Fancy, in one place or other: But be sure to take this Maxim
from one who knows best the Sense of what he has written: Where we speak most
plainly, there be most circumspect; for we do not go about to betray the
Secrets of Nature, especially then in those places which seem to give Receipts
so plain as you would desire, suspect either a Metaphor, or else be sure that
something or other is suppressed, which thou will hardly, without Inspiration,
ever find of thy self, which in trial will make all thy confident Knowledge
vanish; yet to a Son of Art we have Written that which never heretofore was by
any revealed.

And to conclude all, take these further Words of my Master Aeyrenaeus.

Now for a close of this most Secret Gate, Rip. Rev. page 371.

Whereat few enter, none but they who are
By God's Grace favored; its not luck ne fate
That in disclosing this can claim a share:
It is a Portion which is very rare,
Bestowed on those whom the most High shall choose,
To such the Truth I freely shall declare,
Nor ought through Envy to them shall refuse,
Nor with unwonted Riddles shall their hopes abuse.
Of uncouth Subjects now shall be my Song,
My mind intends high wonders to reveal,
Which have lain hidden heretofore full long,
Each Artist striving them how to conceal,
Lest wretched Caitiffs should their Treasures steal:
Nor Villains should their Villainies maintain
By this rare Art; which danger they to heal,
In horrid Metaphors veild an Art most plain,
Lest each Fool knowing it, should it when known disdain.
Remember Man how he produced was, Page 372.

How formed from a lump of abject Clay,
From whence created; he each thing does pass,
Which next to Angels ever saw the day:
For God infused in him so bright a Ray
Of his own Image, which the Body join, d
To it, ennobled so that both pourtray
Their Maker, as though Heaven with Earth combined
A little System of the Universe to find.
But yet though he of Soul and Body both
Was made, and of the two the nobler part
The Soul by far, which for the most part does
The Subject nominate; yet that same Art
That made so rare a piece, does from the part
Less noble name the whole, Adam, or Dust,
Wherein a Mystery was couched, whose Heart
Of life the Center, to Earth's bowels must
Return, the Earth it self for Man's sake being cursed.
Right so our Stone contains Natures two, 373.

One hidden, subtle Soul, Heavens progeny,
The other gross, compact, terrene also,
Earth's product must to Earth by destiny;
Which when resolved is made a feculency
To sight, but the Celestial part is still (Though over-clouded) most pure
inwardly,
And shall at last most Pearly drops distill,
Which shall the barren Earth with Fruit in plenty fill.
Thus all our Secrets from the Earth do flow, Our Base.

It Is Earth which for our Base at first we take,
Our Water also unto Earth must go,
And both together must a Limus make,
Which we with respite by our Art must bake,
Till all become a Spirit glorified
Whose firmness wasting time shall never shake;
By perfect union they are so surely tied,
Each Element the other three within it self does hide.
Take then that thing which Gold we please to call, 374.

But it is not Gold, yet Gold it is in truth;
Metalline it is, yet from a Mineral
It flows, which Art by Natures help renew'th,
And to a Fool an uggly Face it shows;
Yet to a Son of Art it lovely seems,
It Is stellar White, and tender in his Youth,
And vile appears in many Men's esteems,
Yea the most part of Men it for a trifle deems.
From it is made a Subject of great price,
Show it the Goldsmith and he will swear it is Gold;
But look you sell it not, if you be wise,
The Basis it is of Secrets manifold, The Secret.

This for their Secret main the Sages hold:
The like is in Gold dug from the Mine,
But to procure it is scarce to be told,
That you may understand, though every line
Were plainly wrote, yet might your practice often decline.
For it is a Labor hardly to be borne,
So many tricks and turnings in it be, 375.

And he that tries it is surely for lorne,
Unless a crafty Master credit me;
For I have tried both, yet could not see
How any in this way can be secure:
I therefore who have vowed Secrecy
Have writ this way, which we can scarce endure Authors Vow.

For knowledge sake to try, its ease will none allure.
Our kingly Road I also hinted have, The hint.

Our way in which a Fool can hardly err,
Our secret way, which much sad toil will save,
Which is so easy, that I may aver,
If thou should see it, thou would it prefer
To any earthly Pleasure; yet beware
That you mistake not, for I do aver,
A mingled Doctrine these lines do declare,
For both ways in this Book of mine doclaim a share.
Learn to distinguish every Sentence well,
And know to what Work it does appertain; 376.

This is great Skill, which few as I can tell
By all their reading yet could ere attain,
And yet of Theory this is the main:
Also to know accordingly to give
Due Heat, which in one way thou must be fain
TO increase tenfold, thou may me well believe,
For what does one decoct, the other away will drive.
Also their Operations different
Appear, the one thou must sublime and boil,
O tedious way! in which much time is spent,
And many errors, which the Work will spoil:
The other silently does make no toil,
Like the still voice which to Eliah came,
About which work thou need not broyl,
Nor want thou fiery Vulcans parching flame;
A far more gentle heat begins and ends this Game.
But if thou can each work perform a part, 377.

And know them afterward to reconcile,
Then art thou Master of a princely Art,
The very Success will thy hopes beguile;
Thou have all Natures Works rankt on a File,
And all her Treasures at command do keep,
On thee the Fates shall never dare but smile,
No Mystery is now for thee too deep,
Thou Art Natures Darling, whether thou do wake or sleep.
Pardon my plainness, if the Art thou know,
'Twas the fruit of my untame desire
To profit many; and without a boast,
No Man above my Candor shall aspire:
My Zeal was kindled with Minerva 's Fire,
And thou who to this Art wilt now apply,
My Book in Natures way shall lead thee higher,
Than ever thou, alone may hope to fly,
If only thou shall favored be by destiny.
Peruse these lines, and being read, review 378.

And read again, and on them meditate,
Each reading shall fresh Mysteries and new
Discover, which are scattered in each Gate;
For they so linked are, that all relate
To each, and we our Words have woven so,
That thou may soon err by misleading Fate,
Unless for to distinguish thou do know;
Remember that' among Briars thick, sweet Roses grow.
The Author to the Reader.
And now, Reader, (I hope) I have made good my Position, and described every
particular Principle, or Element, in order even to the Great Work, and that so
plainly, that none need hereafter be to seek in any of them. I confess all
might have been said in few words, but I have (for a reason particular) chosen
to make the Philosophers themselves discover the true Principles in their own
Language, which also may give great Satisfaction to the diligent Inquirer; and
yet I have not dwelt longer upon them than I thought was convenient.

Next we will view some short Philosopical Tracts relating to the Art; which if
it will not further confirm you in what is gone before, may notwithstanding
serve you for Diversion.

In the third Volume of Theatrum Chemicum, the Author de Magni Lapidis
compositione, tells us that the principle Matter of all Metals in their Mines,
is a dry Water, which they call Aqua viva, or Argentum vivum, and Spiritus
faetens, otherwise called Sulphur, etc. Agens and patiens, pater and matter,
from whence is generated a certain smoaky Substance, and that the Mineral
Virtue coming upon that Matter, congeals and unites it, etc. And from hence it
appears that in Metals there are four Elements naturally, and that they are
homogeneal. In page 5. he says, That in the Operation of this Science, we stand
in need of more things than Nature does, and that in those we want, are also
four Elements, and so our Principles are alike to those of Nature.

Page 8. That there are four Kinds or Species, and not more or less, required
to compound the White Elixir; viz. Argentum vivum, Sulphur citrinum fugiens,
Sulphur viride fixum habens ventrem nigrum intellectu quamvis clarum in visu
videatur, and Sulphur album fixum, etc. and that they are not of great price.

Page, 9. That the Argentum vivum being compounded cum sulphuro vivo citrino,
become one Mass, which they call Terra rubea; and in this respect there needs
not any more than three Species or Kinds in the Art: That because this Terra
rubea is found to be sold ready compounded; therefore he cares not to labor
about its Composition, etc. That the other two Kinds are not compounded, until
they are put into the Work of this Art, etc. Then he proceeds to practice, but
very subtlely and hard to be understood.

Theat. Chem. Britt. page 436. Let the old Man drink Wine till he piss
The means to the blessed Stone is:
And in that menstrous Water drown,
The radiant brightness of the Moon;
Then cast the Sun into her lapp,
That both may perish at a clapp.
So shall you have your full desire,
When you revive them both by Fire.
I asked Philosophy how I should Page 435.

Have of her the thing I would;
She answered me when I was able
To make the Water malliable;
Or else the way if I could find
To measure out a yard of Wind:
Then shall thou have thine own desire,
When thou can weigh an Ounce of Fire.
Unless that thou can do these three,
Content thy self thou get'st not me.
I am she which wise Men seek, Page 356.

Mercury which i^ (...) of might;
Hot and moist, light and weak
Of the Elements I am full right,
Water, Earth, Air, and Fire
Quality, and quantity, you can never have your desire
Without concoction perfectly.
Great Riches in us be,
Who has Grace for us to know,
By virtue of her humidity,
In the Fire our Stone does grow, etc.
Of Titan Magnesia take the cler light, Page 275.

The read Gum that is so bright,
Of Philosofris the Sulfer vife,
I called Gold wythouten strife;
Of hem draw out a Tincture,
And make a Matrymony pure:
Between the Husband and the Wife
Espoused with the Water of life:
And so that none dyvysion
Be there, in the conjunction
Of the Moon and of the Son
After the Marriage is begone.
And that Mercury the Planete,
In loef make hem so to mete,
That eyder with oder be joined even,
As a Stone engendered sent down fro Heven
Of hem make Water clear rennynge,
As any Crystal bright Schynynge, etc.
In Arsenick sublymed there is a way straight Page 272.

With Mercury calcyned nine times his weight,
And grownde together with the Water of might
That bears ingression, life and light,
And anon as they together byne,
All runnyth to Water bright and shene,
Upon this Fire they grow togethyer,
Till they be fast and flee no whyther, etc.
A Man of Nature ingendereth but a Man, Page 259.

And every Beast ingendereth his semblable,
And as Philosophers rehearse well can
Diana and Venus in Marriage be notable, etc.
And to comfort his Brethren that were full dull, Page 265.

The Sun has chosen without War or strife
The bright Moon when she was at the full,
To be his Mother first, and after his wedded Wife;
In time of Ver the Season vegetative,
In Aries when Titan does appear,
Inspired by Grace with the Spirit of life,
This Marriage hallowed at midday Sphere, etc.
I shall add but one or two more, which are most to the purpose, because from a
true Adeptist. Aeyrenaeus in his Vade Mecum Philo. page 208. says, Tres tantum
modo Species, etc. In his Book De vera Confectione lapidis Philosophici, page
25. he says to this purpose, that the Elixir ought to be made from one thing,
Hoc tamen unum quod Argentum vivum dicitur, non est unum in numero sed in
genere; That if any err from this one in the beginning, he labors in vain.

Page 34. He begins with Materia una, from which the superfluities are to be
removed. 36. That after they are removed, he says, it is of a White Color,
called, by Hermes, Album nigri, Citrinum albi, and rubeum Citrini: by
Alphidius, Radix artis, Argentum vivum albi coloris, Mercurius ille tingens,
etc. Rosarius says, Hic est Mercurius noster noblissimus, Deus enim nunquam
creavit rem meliorem sub Coelo, praeter animam rationalem; Plato calls it,
Secretum nostrum; by Maria, it is called, Page 73.
Aqua albificans Indicum La^^^em; by Hermes, Argentum vivum de Cord Saturni;
by Solomon, Unica filia sapientum, Stultis penitus ignota; by Hortulanus,
Mercurius noster verus extractus ex metallis et est been lotus et Digestus: Et
juro per Deum quod nullus alius Mercurius est in via universali nisi jam
declaratus, in quo dependet tota Philosophia nostra, etc.

Page 56. That the greatest part of Gorpus rub^um.
wise Men begin their Discourse, De corpore rubeo, or Sulphur rubeo, which
has many Names, as Adam, Aries, Mars [with many other which I have spoken of
before].

Page 60. Corpora imperfecta dicuntur Media.
media, quae terminum suae perfectionis non habent, etc.

63. Corpora imperfecta medio loco se habent ad Mercurium praeparatum, and
Mercurium corporum perfectorum, sed praeparandi Ars difficillima est, etc.

Corpora imperfecta una cum Luna sunt immatura, et ideo ipsis immaturis
Succurrendum est cum maturo, ut maturentur.

Omne corpus imperfectum ad perfectionem deducitur reductione in Mercurium,
postea decoquendo cum sulphuribus in igne appropriato, etc.

64. Imperfecta reddere perfecta et fixa, absque perfectorum corporum Spiritu
et Sulphur omnino est impossible, unde Arsicamus, Tinctura tribuens
imperfectis perfectionem ex Solis et Lunae font emanat.

Tinge ergo cum corporibus perfectis scilicet cum Auro et Argento, etc.

65. Unde Arnoldus: qui Mercurium cum Sole et Luna tingere novit, ad Arcanum
venit, quod dicitur Elixir completum. Haec prima (Medicinae primi Ordinis)
descriptio, licet brevis sit, multas tamen Philosophorum Sententias, multaque
alia (intellectu difficilia) aperit, et etiam ostendit quid ipsa medicina sit,
a quibus incipit; et ad quem finem tendit, etc. Scias hoc quia est magnum
secretum.

84. Pars Inferior est Terra quae ^^citur nutrix vel fermentum, qu^^ (...)
lapidem nutrit et ferment^^, Et (...) ^perior est aqua, quae dicitur oleum,
ungentum, vel anima quia totum lapidem vivificat et reviviscere facit.

85. Quae fermentatio est ipius Lapidis animatio.

Notetis quod Inhumatio in fimo interposita inter imbibitiones tollit
cumbustionem et perditam restaurat humiditatem, juvat etiam ut ad perfectae
ablutionis signum melius perveniatur: quod quidem signum est splendour et
cristallina Serenitas, absque faecibus nisi forte albis, etc.

Lastly, Vade mecum Philosophicum; Philalethus says to Rhomaeus, page 217. as
follows.

Phil. Rogo saltem ut me breviter exponentem, quomodo, sensum tuum
intellexerim, audire digneris.

Rho. Been mones, perge, paratus tibi adsum.

Phil. Sensum eorum quae dixisti hunc esse concipio, nempe pro operis radice,
corpus perfectum album rubeumve capias, hoc cum corpore imperfecto, (pure tamen
a terrenis superfluitatibus purgato) pondere justo misceatur, cui tum Aquae
purae mineralis (a solis lunaeve montibus defluae) sagax proportio addatur
(arrige aures Lector, nam Sermo hic per difficilis est) calcinetur in operis
primo limine corpus perfectum per imperfecti connubium, sic in Ovum physicum
exquisitissime subministrato ad perfectum usque complementum die nocteque
jugiter decoquantur.

Rho. Exact tenes Rem, etc. Vide ib. page 214, 215.

See Sendivog. his Doctrine of the four Elements, in his Novum Lumen Chemicum.

One word or two concerning the two great Luminaries, or chief Metals; viz. Sol
and Luna, Sun and Moon, Gold and Silver.

Hermetick Secrets tells us, Luna or Silver is a Male as well as Sol or Gold.

Also in the Breviary of Alchimy, Aeyrenaeus teaches, That Luna, the Body,
which is one of the Seven, is a Male and a perfect Body, and fixed, only wants
a little Digestion; and therefore Page 15.
the Red is hid under the visible White, as White is hid under the visible Red
of of Sol. That Artefius in all his Books joins the Sun and Moon, the perfect
Bodies Gold and Silver, for the Work; so does Ripley, and so all Philosophers;
by which, says he, it is evident that either of the perfect Metals, or
Luminaries with our Aqua vitae, will complete the Wotk, as Arnold expressly
says in his Questions and Answers to Boniface; and Jodocus Greverus, in his
Treatise, confirms the same in these words:

If so be (says he) thou be so poor that thou can not take Gold, than take
so much Silver; yet Gold is the better, as being nearer of Kin to our Water and
Mercury, etc. He teaches the same thing in his Introitus Apertus in several
places.

This is chiefly meant by common Luna; that he who can prepare the Mercury
aright, though he know not how to digest it into Silver and Gold, may
notwithstanding with common Silver or Gold, seperately, or with a composition
made of both, perfect the Great Work. But yet it belongs to the difficult and
tedious way, for which there is little Encouragement; therefore it is not Wisdom
to depart from our rare and easy Way.

Aeyrenaeus in his Vade mecum Philo. puts this Question concerning common Luna,
and the Luna of the Philosophers.

Phil. Annon igitur Luna Vulgo not a (quod Lunae nomen apud Philosophos
obtuinit) faemina est, et pro solis uxorehabenda?

Page 216. Rho. Nihil minis, Argentum Vulgi, masculinum est et ut Mas agit,
quare in opere Lapidis solis defectu adhiberi possit opusque perficiet. Illa
vero Luna quae faemina est et pro solis Uxore (in Magisterii productione)
adhibetur non est corpus at Chaos merum speritusque mirabilis, quanquam pro
corpore etiam possit haberi est tamen vivum et vivificans. Qua propter apud
Philosophos media substantia appellatur, aquae quippe respectu corpus dici
potest: Terrae fixae intuitu Spiritus est, etc. Corporum perfectorum destructor
est, Saturni proles, unicum et maximum in art tota secretum, etc.

Page 213. Corpus et duo alia principia fugitiva, etc. 212. Sine mercurio nil
fit in opere, aqua minerablis dicitur, etc.

In the Brev. of Alchimy, it is said Corpus, Anima and Spiritus, the red Man,
his white Wife, and the Spirit of Life.

The red Man is the perfect Body, the white Wife is Chaos, or Saturni proles,
the Spirit of Life is Mercury.

A further Account of the Great Work.
It plainly appears that this Great Work is grounded upon the Mercury and
Sulphur, or Gold of the Philosophers: (and not common Gold, or Sulphur from it,
unless we go far about, or can perfect each Work apart, and know afterward how
to reconjoyn them in a due Proportion:) The Weight or Measure, Regimen and
Colors are sufficiently described by Aeyrenaeus in his Introitus, and Ripley
Revived: None Sie also Secrets revealed.
have done the like before him, and probably none will do so after him. Let it
be said then, in honorable Remembrance of him, that the World is more obliged
to him for Instruction in this Art, than to all his Predecessors.

The Conjunction of these two Principles, in the Glass or Egg, the Philosophers
also call Rebis; and Conjunction Diptative, that is two things (to wit) in
Number; for you may yet separate each from other in its entire Nature. See Rip.
Rev. in the Exposition on the Preface, page 32.

These two being joined, do operate so within the Vessel, till the Compound
become a black Powder, which is then called the Ashes of the Platter.

This Powder relenteth into a black Broth, which is called Elixir, or Water
extracted by elixation, which is reiterate liquefaction.

This Elixir is divided into a more subtle part, which is called Azoth, and
Page 33.
the grosser part is called Leton, which is by Azoth washed and whitened.

In Rebis the Matters are confused, Rebis.

In Elixir they are divided, and Elixir.

In Azoth they are conjoined with an inseparable Union. Azoth.

These are by Ripley called his three Mercuries.

For I will truly now thee excite
To understand well Mercuries three,
The Keys which of this Science be.
Raymund his Menstrues does them call, etc.
The first is to be prepared and joined, as aforesaid, and is the Philosophers
Key; the other two are Natures Keys.

And page 41. This Azoth, he says, is our Stone; for it is inseparately united
not in a Diptative Conjunction, which is barely a mixture of the Sun with our
Mercury, or Triptative, which is a mixture and union of the Body, Soul and
Spirit, which is before Putrefaction; but Tetraptive, which is the Anatization
of Qualities, which is the first degree of the white Stone, which will then
grow higher and higher, till the Moon come up to the full, etc.

So we see the same Conjunctions and Operations are mentioned by the
Philosophers, as well in the Great Work as the Less, and oftentimes confounded
one with the other.

The joining of the two first are also said to be the two Sulphurs, with two
Mercuries joined to them indeed.

Whereby he does true Understanders lead
To the Knowledge of the Principles which be only true,
Both Red most pure, and White, as I have speed,
Which be nevertheless founden but of right few.
See Theat. Chem. Britt. page 111.

Rip. Revived, page 22. says, The fourth Conclusion makes all perfectly plain,
which has been said before; namely that these two Sulphurs are, the one most
pure Red Sulphur of Gold, and the other of most pure clean White Mercury.

These (says he) are our two Sulphurs; the one appears a coagulated Body, and
yet carries its Mercury in its Belly: The other is in all its Proportions true
Mercury, yet very clean, and carries its Sulphur within it self, though hidden
under the form and fluxibility of Mercury.

So Sendivog. tells us Saturn, to make the Philosophers Stone took two
Mercuries of differing Substance, but of one Original, and called them Sulphurs
of Sulphurs; and mixed the fixed with the volatile, etc. Then they made the
Philosophers Stone; because of a true matter a true thing must needs be made;
and this is that Art which he commends so highly.

You may understand that the Philosophers, in their Great Work, observe only
three principle Colors, as Black, Colors.
White and Red; though there be several mean or middle Colors. The Black they
say, with their Sol and Mercury, will happen about the end of forty days, as,
appears in Introit. Chap. 19. The Moon in its full or the white Stone See
Secrets Revealed, Chap. 19.
in five months, and the Red in seven, or nine or ten at the most.

The other way with common Sol you may be a year and a half or two years to the
perfection of Red, which way is also very difficult.

Mr. Norton in his Ordinal page 88. Informs us that his Master told him how
that many by teaching and patience attained the White Stone, but scarce one in
fifteen the Red, which words made Norton sad, his whole desire being for the
Red Medicine; but his Master told him he was too Young to know it: that at last
he obtained his Masters Love and the Doctrine of the Red Stone, which is not to
be sought, till the White is perfected, and he is much afraid to disclose this
Secret,

But my heart quaketh, my hand is trembling, Page 89.

When I write of this most Selcouth thing.
Hermes brought forth a true Sentence and blounte,
When he said, Ignis and Azot tibi sufficient, etc.
Then he tells us, That neither Albertus Magnus the Black Freer, neither Freer
Bacon his Compeer, knew the Multiplication of the Red Stone: Nor had he himself
assayed it, till the time he writ his Book; at last it comes out, That the Red
is hid within the Center of the White (as is also affirmed by Aeyrenaeus and
others.)

Pandulphus in Turba said, Mente secura, Page 90.

Et ejus umbra in vera tinctura.
Maria confirmed it, in fide oculata,
Quod in ipsa albedine est Rubedo occultata.
The Book Laudible Sanctum made by Hermes,
Of the Red Work speaks of this wise:
Candida tune Rubeo jacet Uxor nupta marito,
That is to say, If ye take heed thereto,
Then is the fair white Woman
Married to the ruddy Man.
This Stone he says will be as Red as Perfect Red.
Blood, and that then the Masculine Seed has wone the Victory, and the Stone
complete.

Whom wise Men said that ye should feed
With his own Venom when it is need.
Then ride or go where ye delight,
For all your Costs he woll you quite.
Thus ends the Subtle warke, with all her store,
I need not, I may not, I wool show no more.
He also tells us, page 72. That it is Dangerous to taste of the Stone, till it
be perfect Red, nor much or often of that.

Wherefore it is peril and not good,
Much or often to taste of that Food:
It comfort Metals as we well find,
But it is Perilous for all Mankind,
Till perfect Red thereof be made,
Such as in Fire woll never fade.
A lewd Man that served this Art,
Tasted of our White Stone a part,
Trusting thereby to find relief
Of all Sickness and of all Grief,
Whereby the Wretch was suddenly,
Smitt with a strong Paralisie;
Whom my Master with great Engine,
Cured with Bezoars of the Mine, etc.
And Sir George Ripley in his Preface to the Arch Bishop of York avers the
same. Theat. Chem. Brit. 389. And Its Virtue.
Sendivogus page 183. Lat. 133 Eng. Causes the Vox to answer the Alchymist to
the same purpose (Alch.) Sir, the Universal Medicine being had, how long may a
Man preserve himself from Death? (Vox) Even to the term of Death: but this
Medicine must be taken cautiously, for many wise Men, have been destroyed by it
before their time. (Alch) And what say you Sir, is it Poison? (Vox) Have thou
not heard that a great Flame of Fire destroys a little one? There were many
Philosophers which received the Art from other men's Experience, who did not so
thoroughly search into the Virtue of the Medicine. Yea, by how much the more
powerful, and subtiler the Medicine was, it seemed to them to be the more
wholesome, and if one grain of it can pass through many thousands of Metals,
much more man's Body. (Alch) Sir, how then must it be used? (Vox) It must be so
used, that it may strengthen the Natural heat, but not overcome it.

But the Maxim is, Ex summo veneno, summa Medicina. And Aeyrenaeus says that in
its perfection, it is a So^ereign Medicine, which has not its like in the
whole Universe.

Rip. Rev. page 245. It is not the Triacle of Galen, nor yet of Hippocrates
(which yet if right made are of great efficacy) that can compare to it: For
first, it kills all the Venom of any Disease or Malady; so that those Diseases
which do astonish the beholders are by this overcome, even ad miraculum: For
suppose a Man dying with the Tokens of the Plague, so that he is upon the very
point of departure (and the Decree be not past, for then there is no Recovery)
if he have but a drop of this Elixir, so that he swallow it, he shall
immediately recover, and in short time he will be restored to his former Health.

Page 246. Now that it does immediately reach the Root of Life, I shall
demonstrate. Suppose one with a very languishing Disease be consumed to
nothing, in comparison, and for want of Spirits be just going out of the World;
so the Decree be not past, if he have but strength, even in the agony of death,
but to take a drop of this Elixir, he will recover and revive, and in a few
Days, in comparison, will be doubly stronger than ever he was before. Suppose
one of a very weak Constitution, and sickly, and every Day ill, feeble all
over; if he take of this Elixir, it will in a short time alter his Constitution
fundamentally, so that he shall be far stronger than any other Man ordinarily
is.

Page 247. A Man or Woman, who is born to hereditary Weakness, may be changed
into a more than ordinary Strength, by the use of our Medicine; or a Man who by
Labor, Sickness and Years, is come to the Grave's Mouth, even to drop into it,
may by use hereof be restored, his Hair, his Teeth, his Strength, so that he
shall be of greater Agility than in his Youth, and of greater Strength, and may
live many Years, provided the Period of the Almighty's Decree be not come.

248. For Minerals are, of all sublimary Why this great Medicine is from
Minerals.
Bodies, the most perfect, and the best part of them are Metals, which when
they are perfect defend themselves from all fear of Corruption perpetually. Now
the Spirit of the Metal, when it is exalted to a millenary Perfection, it
tingeth all Metals imperfect to an incorruptible Purity; but then this Spirit
must be made a Body, according to the saying of Hermes, Vis ejus est integra,
si versa fue^ it in terram. -- But this transcendent Tincture may be dissolved
into an Oil, or rather a pure Liquor, which then is not proper for Metals, but
is only Medecinal; for it is of the nature of Light, and Light.
therefore it does as readily concur with our formal vital Principle, as one
flame will enter another.

Thus much, and more, says that learned Adeprist, concerning the Virtue of
this great Medicine; also you may read many things concerning its Virtue in his
Vera Confectio, page 175, 176, etc.

Sendivogius seems to give a good Reason why this Medicine is rather to be
found in Metals, than in any other Subject in the three Kingdoms of Nature.
About page 106. Engl. he speaks of Man's being immortal in Paradise; Of Man's
Creation and Immortality.
for that Paradise was created of true Elements, not elementated, but most,
pure, temperate, equally proportioned in the highest Perfection; that Man was
there created of the same incorrupted Elements; that afterward for the sin of
Disobedience, he was driven out of Paradise into corruptible Elements, and was
forced to receive Nutriment from such corrupt elementated Elements; and thereby
declined by little and little into Corruption, until separation and death of
the whole Compound followed. -- That the Philosophers knowing that Man was
created of such Elements as were sound and pure, and that this was a natural
Creation, they began to search further into it, whether such uncorrupted
Elements could be had, or if they could be joined together, and infused into
any Subject. Now Page 109.
to these the most high God and maker of all Things, revealed that a
Composition of such Elements was in Gold; for in Animals it could not be had,
seeing they must preserve their lives by corrupt Elements; in Vegetables also
it is not, because in them is found an inequality of the Elements. And seeing
all created things are inclined to Multiplication, they made trial of the
possibility of Nature in this mineral Kingdom; which being discovered, they saw
that there was innumerable other Secrets in Nature, of which, as of Divine
Secrets, they have wrote sparingly, etc.

For the Philosophers Gold or Tincture, is nothing else but Gold digested to
the highest Degree; for vulgar Gold is like an Herb without seed, when it is
ripe it brings forth Seed; so Gold when it is ripe yields Seed or Tincture.
Sendivog. Engl. page 28, 29.

Page 37. What Prerogative should all things in this World have before Metals?
Why should we undeservedly exclude these alone, from the universal Benediction
of the Great Creator for Multiplication, by denying them Seed, which holy Writ
affirms was put in and bestowed on all created Things presently after the World
was made? Now if they have Seed, Who is so sottish to think they cannot be
multiplied in their Seed, etc. And page 19. Let this be granted, for a truth,
that nothing grows without Seed; for where there is no Seed, the thing is dead,
etc. He further teaches, that the Generation of the Seed in Metals, is caused
by a ponderous Vapor of Water, called Mercury for its fluxibility, and likened
to Sulphur because of its heat, and by Congelation becomes to be the radical
Moisture. That the Seed is contained in the Sperm; that by the Sperm the
Philosophers mean the second Matter; that the second Matter is such, which, as
soon as it is conceived, cannot be changed into another Form; that the second
Matter is to be taken by the Artist, in which the Seed invisibly lies hid; but
that multiplication is not in the Sperm, but in the Seed.

That from the variety of Places proceeds the variety of Things; and that there
is the same Seed in Saturn as in Gold, the same in Silver as in Iron; the
difference is from the purity of the Place, etc. as you may read in Treatise
the 1st. 2d. 3d. 4th. 5th. and 6th. etc.

Aeyrenaeus sufficiently confirms the same, in his Treatise, De metallorum
Transmutatione, page 12, etc. Inter quae non levis momenti hoc est, quod semen
sit cujusque rei semen habentis perfectio, et quod semen non habet, est de toto
imperfectum.

Page 27. Materia proinde unum est omnium metallorum; nempe Mercurius qui
proprie tend it ad Solemn lunamve procreandum, etc. quod superfluitates non sunt
metallicae, quod faeces sunt per accidens, page 28, 29: quod faeces sunt
seperabiles, suarum seperatio ante coagulationem est metalli perfectio. Verum
si non, tamen adhuc sunt seperabiles, quamvis non per naturam absque alterius
adminiculo, etc. Hinc Alchemiae fundamentum, nempe Agens triumphans.
quod impurius metallum in se possideat idem purum, ex quo aurum, etc. quod
impuram seperari valet per agens triumphans, id es agens digirens. Tale agens
est arcanum nostrum divinum, id est aurum in supremum digestum et fixum.

Page 31. Arcanum nostrum per minima The Adeptists pretend not to create Gold
or Silver.
intrat, etc. Quare non (quod indigni quidam obtractatores objiciunt) aurum
Argentumve creare profitemur, at agens reperire atque efficere, quod supra
imperfecta metalla projectum per minima possit intrare propter suam
homogeneitatem ac spiritualitatem, etc.

Page 54. Nos enim non (quod fals^ non nulli criminatores objiciunt) aurum sive
Argentum creare profitemur, veru^ ex iis solummodo, in quibus haec insunt a
Natura art nostra ducimus, ex metallis minirum, quae sunt ejusdem cum Auro et
Argento materiae, inaequalis vero digestionis, et propter hoc imperfecta
manent, quae projectione Arcani nostri super illa But to digest the crudity of
imperfect Metals by their Medicine.
digerimus et hoc modo perficimus, cum ad ea perficienda nihil aliud praeter
simplicem hanc cruditatis eorum decoctionem requiratur, quod abunde praestare
potest Medicina nostra.

In his fourth Chapter he tells us (to this effect) That Seed is the Perfection
of every thing, and that it is not to be doubted but there is a metalline Seed;
that all things were either created in the first six Days, or otherwise daily
increasing grew together.

That Reason and Experience denies the first; that if the latter be granted,
then there is a metalline Seed, which the Metal does not lose in the
Coagulation, but the Seed is thereby rather enobled.

That all Metals have one and the same Seed with Gold, which in some is nearer,
in others more remote, and tending to Perfection: By the Seed he does not mean
the Mercury that is in Metals, but that Virtue in which, and by which they are
multiplied, etc.

That as the least part of Gold is Gold; therefore its Seed lies in every
Particle, and cannot be discerned from its Body, the Body remaining whole, etc.

That all the Gold, in respect of the The heavenly form or Virtue.
Stone, is matter, when the profundity is manifested, it is all Sperm, and by
Circulation, it becomes all form or a Heavenly Virtue, etc.

That the place in which the Seed next resides is Water, for properly and
exactly speaking the least part of the Metal is Seed, and that Invisible, and
because this invisible is Universally disfused through all the Water of its own
kind, and inhabits it, and exerts its virtue, in it, nor any thing else appears
to sight than water, in so much that it cannot be separated from it, except by
reason only, although reason persuades that there is in it an internal Agent
(which properly Internal Agent.
is Seed) therefore they call the whole water promiscuously Seed, like as the
whole Grain is called Seed, when as the Germinating Life, is only a little part
thereof; though in metals it is inseparably commixt, per minimum corporis
continentis. That this Golden water, or the Seed by the Ancient Philosophers is
called their occultum fermentum, venenum, Occultum Fermentum.
ignis item invisibilis, secreto agens.

That common Mercury is the true matter; but the form or the fiery Virtue of
the Philosophical Mercury is wanting, and must therefore be supplied, that it
receives its Virtues from the form and not the matter.

That the form is a certain unspeakable particle of ligiht, a Heavenly Virtue
which is presently at hand, illuminating the whole dwelling, if so all things
are rightly disposed from without. Vid. ib. page 25. and 48. and is the true
Author of all Transmutation.

This form is that which the Book The form a Heavenly Virtue.
called, Sal lumen and Spiritus mundi Philosophici, or the first and Universal
Spirit of the World, also aims at written originaly in French and now in
English, to which I refer you, only I shall set down one passage he cites out
of Doctor Bacon, page 184. Wise men begin their works from the root, and not
from the branches; choosing, as Doctor Bacon says, to congeal the thing, that
Nature begun her first operation about, by proportionate mixion, and union of a
pure living Mercury, with a like quantity of Sulphur into one Mass: Oh Holy
words! Wherein this good Anglican, or rather Angel clearly depinged that one
and true matter, whereof all Philosophers have writ Volumes under diverse
Figures and Enigmaical Fables; not because they would Maliciously hide it, but
keep the Privilege of this Kingdom for Learned and Pious men, who by continual
Study and Laborious Experience find and adorn it.

Eugenius Philalethes in his Anima Further difinition of the form
magica abscondita (Writing also against the Peripateticks, whose Philosophy he
does not like, because he says it is built on general empty Maxims, that may be
applied to any thing, but conduce to nothing; for that Aristotle tells him,
Nature est Forma, and by Consequence Forma est Natura, which is idem per idem;
but he allows they call it Vis formatrix, which he says is only an Express of
the Office and effect of Forms, but nothing at all to their Substance or
Essence. The same he says of their description of the Soul, showing the
Operations and Faculties which the Soul exercises in the Body; but discover
not her Nature or Original at all. In page 8. he says, That there is in Nature
a certain Spirit which applies himself to the Matter, and actuates in every
Generation: That there is also a passive Intrinsecal, where he is more
immediately resident than in the rest; and by mediation of which he
communicates with the more gross material Parts; for there is, he says, in
Nature a certain Chain or subordinate propinquity of Complexions between
Visibles and Invisibles, etc.

Page 9. That every Body in the World is subject to a certain species of
Motion, as Animals, the Heavens, the Air, the Sea, and finally the Earth with
her Minerals; and all other Creatures are subject to alteration, that is to
Generation and Corruption. Now the Matter of it self being merely passive, The
Matter passive.
and furnished with no motive Faculty at all, we must (says he) of necessity
Page 10.
conclude, that there is some other inward Principle which acts, and regulates
it in every several species of motion.

This Principle (or Form) he says is Anima Mundi, or the univeral Spirit of
Nature, which is retained in the Matter by certain other proportionate Natures;
and missing a vent does Organizare molem, and put her Prison into some good
Order.

That in every Frame there are three leading Principles.

1. The First, Is Anima Mundi.

2. The Second, Spiritus Mundi; and that this Spirit is a Medium per quod anima
infunditur et movet suum corpus.

3. That the Third is a certain Oleous aetherial Water; that is, Menstruum et
Matrix Mundi, for in it all things are Framed and Preserved.

1. Page 11. The Anima, he says, is a Compound ex aura tenuissima et luce
simplici.

2. The passive Spirit is a thin real Substance, the only immediate Vestment
wherein the Anima wraps her self when she descends and applies to Generation.

3. The Radical vital Liquor, is a pure Celestial Nature, answering in
Proportion and Complexion to the superior interstaller Waters.

Then he shows you how they attract one another. And page 12. Here, he says,
lies the Magicians Denarius, his most Secret and Miraculous Pyramid, whose
first Unity or Cone is always in Horizonte Eternitatis; but his Basis or
Quadrate is here below in Horizonte Temporis. -- Then he proceeds to show you
the Chain of Descent and Ascent, with the means and secrets of Nature (as he
understands them).

Page 13. The Anima (he says) is an instrumental Agent, a seed or glance of
Light, simple and without any mixture, descending from the first Father of
Lights.

Page 14. Says, Natures Game here below is such, she cannot play it without
this Tutor; instances the Spiders Mathematical Weaving her Webb, and forcasting
to catch the Flies; and says if she did not know there were Flies for her
Sustenance, she would not watch for them. Also instances the Countermarch of
the Hare, when she doubles her Trace to confound the Scent, etc.

Page 15. Says, the Agent which determinates and figures the Matter, is a
discerning Spirit, and has the Matter before him, as Potters has the Clay, or
the Limner his Colors, etc.

Page 21. He tells us of another Triplicity of Principles, which are the Keys
of all Magic.

1. The First, he says, Is a pure White Virgin, and next to that which is most
pure and simple, and is one in one, etc.

2. The Second was the First; but by ad haesion to the Matter it contracted an
Impurity, etc. and is called Binarius.

3. The Third, by separation from the Second, called Trenarius, a product of
Art, etc. a Compound consisting of inferior and superior Powers.

Page 22. This (says he) is the Magicians Fire, this is Mercurius
Philosophorum, celeberrimus ille Microcosmus and Adam, this is the Labyrinth
and wild of Magic, where a World of Students have lost themselves, etc.

4. That this Ternarius being reduced per quarternarium ascends to the Magical
Decad, which is Monas Unitissima, in which state quicunque vult potest; for it
is united then per aspectum to the first eternal spiritual Unity. But of these
three (says he) hear the Oracle of Magic, the great and solemn Agrippa,
Quatuor itaque quae diximus sunt Elementa, sine quorum notitia perfecta, nullum
in Magia producere possumus effectum, etc.

Then he tells us, page 27. That there is a twofold Binarius Lucis et
Confusionis.

In page 28. He alludes to Moses concerning the Creation of the Heaven and
Earth; that is (says he) Virgin Mercury, and Virgin Sulphur: And then shows
that the feminine Principle is the Wife of the Sun, etc. (To this Chapter of
Moses also alludes the Author of Hermetical Secrets, and Aeyrenaeus in his
Introitus).

Page 30. Trust not (says he) those Impostures then that tell you of a Sulphur
tingens, and I know not what Fables, who pin also that new and narrow Name of
Chemia, on a Science both ancient and infinite. It is the Light only The Light
only truly multiplied.
that can be truly multiplied; for this ascends to, and descends from the first
Fountain of Multiplication and Generation; and that this Light applied to any
Body whatsoever, exalts and perfects it in suo genere.

In page 44. he says, Some Philosophers, who by the special Mercy of God,
attained to the Ternarius, could never notwithstanding obtain the perfect
Medicine, neither did they understand it. -- And much more he says very
mystically (in his way) relating to the Philosophers Stone, which I was willing
to insist upon, that so you may understand that the true Elements or Principles
being known and relied on, no Book is so mystical concerning it which you may
not, in a tolerable measure, be able to explain.

The same Author in his Lumen de Lumine, or a New Magical Light, speaks much of
the Principles, though obscurely. In page 95. he says, The Philosophers did not
use common Gold to make their Stone, as some Scriblers have written; they used
it only to qualify the intensive Power of it when it is made, that they might
more easily find what quantity of base Metal they should Project upon. And page
97. he concludes, Amen in Mercurio, qui pedibus licet carens decurrit, Aqua, et
metallice universaliter operatur.

But to return to Aeyrenaeus Philalethes, page 42. in his Exposition on Sir G.
Rip. Preface, he says, Were it not that this Tincture which in the Mercury is
Sol and Luna, were as a Soul, The Tincture as a Soul, or spiritual Thing.
that is a spiritual Thing, it were impossible that the Tinctures should be
multiplied in a manner infinitely: It is therefore the very Dos saecunditatis
which is in Minerals (which does appear in their solar and lunary Tinctures)
which was put and planted on, and in them in the first Benediction of (Crescite
et Multiplicamini) which increasing, is, in some things, juxta quantitatem; but
this is in quality.

Page 43. So then the Matter of Minerals is a dead passive thing, in which
there is included a Light which is clothed (vitali aeura aetheria) as I may
speak. This Form of Light is it which does actuate and specificate, or
determine the matter; and this Splendour or The Form determins the matter.
Light is in all Metals, Sol or Luna, which are conspicious more eminently in
those two perfect Bodies Gold or Silver, but are in other mineral Bodies more
Clouded, and Eclipsed with an earthly faeculent In erposition between the
Fulgor and the Superfliuties, which is the Imperfection of such Bodies, and is
accompanied with a rawness and inconstancy in the Fire, the Impure carrying
away the Pure.

Page 44. That the matter of Sol and Our work is to advance the Light in the
matter.
Luna is Earthly; but our Work is to advance the Light in the matter to a
millenary Virtue, that it may seem to be swallowed up of the Form.

And page 164. I grant and know that all things Originally owe all their
principle Material unto Water, and all their formal unto Light, etc. So then
the matter resides in Water, the informing in Light, and the determination of
the Form, which is, as I may say, the forms Formality, is in the Will of the
Creator; first impressed or sealed in the word (fiat) and ratified in his
Command (producat unumquodque juxta speciem suam, etc.) That mixture cannot be
made but in the same Genus or Species, and sometime disproportion hinders
mixture.

Page 260. The most noble Fire is To multiply the natural Fire.
Natural, which is that which we seek to have multiplied; and that is the
Sulphur of Gold, or rather its very Tincture: It is that which we seek for; and
we use Mercury for Sol his sake, etc.

Page 264. The Seed of Gold, is a fiery Form of Light, which nothing in the
World wants, and therefore it would be a great Anomalum, if it should be only
definite in Metals, the choice of all sublimary Bodies.

Page 26, 27. Upon the Exposition of Sir G. R. Epistle, speaking of the
internal Fire, he tells us, all our Work then is only to multiply this Fire, so
long until the Virtue of the Sulphur be augmented. Again this Fire is an
invisible Spirit, and that God only governs this way of internal Fire, Man
being ignorant of the Progress thereof, only by Reason beholding its
Operations, etc.

From all which it plainly appears, that this Art tends to the multiplication
of the Fire of Nature, which is a fiery Form of Light, an invisible Spirit,
etc. Now it is granted, on all hands, that this multiplication is made by
reiteration of the Work, whereby both quality and quantity may be greatly
augmented; for the Virtue of it, at the first, is nothing in respect to what it
may be advanced to.

This Art of multiplication, etc. is now taught by many Books, though the ancient
Philosophers would scarcely discover it to a Brother, as it is somewhere said
of Count Trevisan (as I remember) that one who knew both the matter and working
of the Stone, followed him about ten Years to request him to teach him the
manner of multiplying, which he would not grant, because the other had the same
Book as himself had: Yet there are different ways of it, both by Cibation,
Fermentation and Projection, of which Sir George Ripley has treated in his last
six Gates, which the famous Aeyrenaeus also Expounded; and doubtless there was
a great Love and good Will manifested by him, for the sake of the ingenious;
but we are not like to be any better for his good Intent, Malice or
Self-conceitedness having deprived us of them; for there is an Advertisement in
the Book of Ripley Revived, after page: 44. which tells us, that it was
Aeyrenaeus his own Desire to benefit the World by his Labors; and that he gave
his Consent to Mr. Starkey for the Mr. Starkeys Deed.
Printing his Pieces, as appears in his Preface to the Marrow of Alchymy. And
that great pity it was that Mr. Starkey did separate this Author's Commentary
upon Sir George Ripley's Twelve Gates, which he did (says the Book) as I was
informed by one unto whm he gave the very Book; from which he confessed he had
cut the least Six Gates. The Person demanding the Reason whereof he cut them
asunder. He Answered that the World was unworthy of them; which nevertheless he
promised to give that Person a Transcript of, but did not, which is the Reason
that they cannot yet be found; the Loss of which is very much lamented, etc.

Well, since it can no better be, let us see what Mr. Starkey has left the
World, to requite us for this great Loss.

I find George Starkey's Natures Explication, and Helmont's Vindication, etc.
8. Land. 1658.

-- His Marrow of Chemical Physic, Of the Liquor Alkahest.
or making Chemical Medicines, 12. Land: 1661.

-- His Pyrotechny Asserted and Illustrated, lately Reprinted, 1696. It was
Dedicated to Robert Boil, Esquire.

The two first I have not read; the latter I have by me, wherein he would have
us understand he knew the Nature of the Liquor Alchahest, which can divide the
Principles of all things.

In pa. 18. He promises (amongst other) to discover its matter and manner of
making; which (says he) I presume to a Son of Art, will be accounted a rich
Legacy. In Chap. XIII. Page 35. he comes to the matter and manner, (but I think
very few will understand either of them from his words). He tells us that it
takes its Original from a loathsome Subject, from a matter in all the World
most Corruptible, Impure and Mutual; that it is from a Body of two distinct
Natures, and that the means of its Production is by reiterated Solution, and an
intervening Coagulation; and thus is the Subject brought to the most subtle
Atoms, of which in Nature it is capable. This is the sum of his Discovery.

But we have another Book of the Liquor Alchahest, by J. A. Pyrophilus. 1675.
Dedicated to R. Boil, Esquire which, he says, he partly Published in justness to
the Dead, who (he says) was abold Champion of Pyrotechny, but died in 1666. and
that this Tract was Posthume: It thereby also appears to be Mr. Starkey's
Tract; wherein, he says, the matter is vile and costs nothing, every man has
it, the Poor as well as the Rich; that Adam carried it with him out of
Paradise; and about page 20. gives some Receipt of it, and that it is the
product of man's Urine.

This indeed is ingenuous and profitable to the World; for this Liquor
Alchahest (as is said) can reduce all things to its first Principles, and
separate the good from the bad, yet mixing entirely with none, always to be
entirely separated from them in Virtue and Quantity, whereby excellent
Medicines may be prepared. The Knowledge of this Liquor, he says, he gathered
from Helmont and Paracelsus.

Page 2 and 3. The Knowledge and Preparation of it, he says, is the work of
most abstruse Philosophy, the Hope and Crown of the Adepti. And in his
Pyrotechny Asserted, page 26, 27. he says, it is the noblest and most eminent
of all Keys, more universal (in its Operation) than the particular Mercury of
the Philosophers, which is but a particular thing, applicable to its own kind;
and that in reference to a generative multiplication of Species, whereas this
Liquor acts universally, and without limitation on all Subjects in the whole
World, which it destroys as to their Vita ultima, and perfectly reduces their
first Matter, in which their eminent Virtue is found; by which means those
noble Medicines may be prepared, of which both Helmont and Paracelsus Glory,
not without Cause, sithence by them may be cured all the Infirmities incident
to the Body of Man; and so the Life vindicated from the danger of Diseases,
which by any one of those great Arcanas are conquered and cut down, as Hay or
Grass with a Scythe. Thus far he.

Now let us hear what Aeyrenaeus Medicines by Liquor Alkahest not to be
compared to Philophers grand Elixir.
says to this Liquor Alchahest, and the Medicines prepared by means thereof,
and that of the Philosophers Stone by their Mercury:

In his Exposion upon Sir G. R. Preface, page 78. he says, There is but one
Menstruum that has the Power to resolve both Gold, and all other Bodies to
their first matter; which Paracelsus names his Alkahest, Ignis Gehemiae, etc.
The Medicines hereby made he allows to be Excellent, but not so as our great
Medicine, nor can it touch or reach long Life; but the Philosophers Oil, so
Page 80.
called, is the very. Tree of Life, not a Arbor Vitae.
Tincture extracted by Alchahest, but by an universal changing of the sickness
of the metalline Offspring into a true posture of Health, and is the most
incomparable Treasure of the whole World.

Page 208. He says the Liquor Alchahest is an unprofitable way for our work.

Page 243. He does again mention Virtues of the grand Elixir.
this Arbor vitae, and its Virtue of penetrating even to our constitute
Principles, which no other mineral Medicine can do. He further adds, -- Though
Paracelsus Glory much of his Renovantia and Restaurantia (which we have known,
as being Master of his Secret Alchahest, of which, if I live, I will write a
particular Treatise); yet it is not his Haematina, nor yet his Arcana, Vide.
Collectanea Chymica.
nor his Elixiria, nor his Essentiae, nor any of his Secrets (which are surely
noble Medicines) that can reach the Root of Life, which this can and will: For
it performs all, only it cannot prevail against the appointment of God;
otherwise, were it not for that Decree, it could really keep a man immortal;
for it renews Youth, retards Age, and restores to most exquisite and complete
Health, increases Strength wonderfully.

Page 244. Yea it will not only renew Hair, to those whom it is fallen, but it
will change the hoary Head into a youthful Color, which will not grow hoary
again for many Years, nor ever, if the use of it were fully known, and it were
used as it ought to be.

Page 279. He mentions the noble Bruxilian, whose promised Treatise when the
World shall enjoy, I suppose (says he) the profoundest piece of Philosophy that
ever was revealed to the World; which I admire not (continues he) so much for
his Experiments, of none of which I am ignorant, nor Paracelsus to boot, many;
yea most of which are far harder (though sooner wrought) than the Elixir, and
the Alchahest is a hundred times more difficult, etc. Yet he thinks (for many
Reasons and Expressions Vide page 82. 246, 247.
) that this grand Arcanum was not known to either of them, otherwise that one
of them was, without flattery, Natures Privy-Councillor, etc. and says that he
could as heartily desire his Acquaintance as any Man's in the World, and would
endeavor familiarity with him if Fates prevented not, etc.

You may read much more of this Liquor Alchahest in Glauber's Book of Furnaces,
but more effectually in Aeyrenaeus his Dialogue of this Liquor, printed in the
Book called Collectanea Chymica. In page 262, 263. Glauber says, though he
durst never try the Work of the Philosophers Stone, being scared by other Men's
Loss therein, and wanting Time and Place, he was sufficiently convinced of the
Truth of such a Medicine.

But to return to Rip. Revived, page 86. besides what he said of himself
before, he tells us, That by Virtue of this Quintessence, Artephius testifies
that he lived above a thousand Years. Flammell also records of it, that it
triumphs over all the Miseries of the World. Johannes de Laznioro is more
bold, and says that if in the Agony of Death a Man should taste but a Grain of
it, all the mortal Pestilence would depart from him.

In Page 72. He has these words; And in this Mercury thus circulated, is
doubtless the Mystery of the never fading Light, which I have actually seen,
but yet never made.

And page 248. Speaking of the Tincture to be dissolved into an Oil, adds, yea
and beyond this, it may be exalted beyond the Nature of Man, yea and of a
tangible Body, to become a most radiant perpetual Light, which I have seen,
though not my self actually made: All this is done by the Divine Virtue of our
Water, etc.

Also Mr. Ashmole, in his Prolegomena, before Theat. Chem. Britt. tells us,
That he who shall have the Happiness to meet with S. Dunstan's Work, De Occulta
Philosophia, may therein read such Stories, as will make him amazed to think
what stupendous and immense Things, are to be performed by Virtue of the
Philosophers Mercury (of which he there mentions some part).

This shall suffice for the Quality and Virtue of the Philosophers Stone: Next,
we will see something concerning the Truth and Plainness of the Art, also some
of the Philosophers Directions to such as intend to set themselves about this
Great Work.

First concerning the Truth and Nature of this Art.
IN the First Volume of Theat. Chemicum, and in the First Treatise written by
Robertus Vallensis, page 1. He takes notice of some Words or Sentences, from
Esdras, Solomon and David, etc. Page 2. He produces the Testimonies of Hermes,
B. Tho. Aquinas. 3. Gulielus Parisiensis. Jo. Duns Scotus Doctor Subtilis,
Vincentius Monachus, Raymundus Lullius, Chrysogonus Polydorus vel Osiander. 4.
Joann. Andreas jurisperitus, Oldradus jurisperitus. 5. Avicenna, Jo. Dastimus
Theophrastus, Albertus. 6. Aristot. Titelmannus. 8. Panormitanus jurisperitus.
Hippocrates. Abuhali. 10. Rhazes. Haly. Dioscorides, Arnaldus. 11. Bernardus
Comes Treverus, Marsilius. 12. Alexander Imperator. Geber. 13. Virgilius lib.
6. Aeneidos, Suidas, etc.

Page 14. He shows you many that writ of this Art in Arabic, many in Greek,
many in Latin, many in French, etc.

And page 15. He tells us Veteres consueverunt res divinas, altas et sublimes,
sub velo multorum aenigmatum et fabularum poeticarum scribere, which certainly
is very true; for till of late Years little Light therein has been held forth
to the World.

In page 44. of this Volume, De jure Artis Alchemiae; the Lawfulness of the Art
is proved ex Sybilla. 45. From Cardanus. 46. From Thomas Aquinas, from Snidas.
47. From Pliny.

Page 48. Next he proves it from the Answers of several learned Lawyers or
Counselors; viz. Ex Oldrado Consil. Ex Panormit: Ex Joan. Andr. Ex Andr.
Iserninc. Ex Baldo Perusino. Ex D. Fabiano de Monte. Ex Alberico. Ex Alberto
Bruno. Ex Guidone Papa. Ex Joan. de Platea. Ex Hieronymo de Zanetinis. Ex Thom.
Arfoncini, etc.

Next follows a Dialogue, De Jure et Praestantia Chemicorum Medicamentorum.

Next of the Difficulty of the Art, page 129. All which, and much more may be
read in the Six Latin Volumes of Theatrum Cheimcum. There are other Witnesses;
viz. Daniel Sennertus, Cornelius Martinus A^tuerpianus, Conradus, Horneius,
Marcellus Palingenius, etc.

Sendivogius tells us in many places of his Book, That the Art is true, but
that the Workman seldom is true; that the Art of Chemistry has found out such
Subtilties, that scarce greater can be invented, and differ as much from the
Art of the ancient Philosophers, as a Clock-smith does from a Blacksmith; and
that if Hermes, Geber and Lully were alive, they would be accounted by our
Chemists for Scholars rather than Philosophers. He advises often to abide in
the simple way of Nature; and says that simplicity, or plainness is the Seal
of Truth.

In his Preface to the Treatise of Sulphur, he says Nature is most plain and
simple, and delights in nothing so much as Plainness: That whatsoever in Nature
is more Noble, by so much also the more Easy and Plain it is, because all
Truth is Plain and Simple.

Mr. Norton, in his Ordinal, calls this Art the subtle Science of holy Alchimy.

Aeyrenaeus, in his Book De Metallorum Metamophosi, affirms that the Art is
true, etc.

In his Exposition upon Sir G. R's. Preface, page 86. he affirms that the Art
is so plain, that if it were nakedly described it would be contemptible.

Page 87. That he speaks knowingly that the Art is both true and easy; and
that in less than two Years and a half, of a vulgar Ignoramus he became a true
Adept; that in some particular Turnings he erred often; yet so, as in his Errors,
he knew himself a Master, etc.

And in his Metamorphosis, page 8. He affirms himself Fidus Naturae Testis.

In his Brevis Manuductio ad Rubin. Coelestem, page 58. he says, Dicit enim
Philosophus quod sit Lapis et non Lapis: quod perperami intelligunt non nulli,
idque The Art Evil thought of through Ignorance
semper vulgus, interpretatur enim ad literam esse aliquid, quod autem ignorant,
Lapidis formam referens, quodlibet etiam vel ipso tactu in aurum probatum
tingens, sive ligneum suerit, sive lapideum, quod pro falsissimo (idque merito)
reputat: omni itaque arti (excepta Diabolica) impossible judicat, quare audito
vel Chemistae nomine, abhorrescit statim, et abominatur, nec aliter eum, quam
impium, stolidumque suorum bonorum profusorem existimat, falsa hac et confusa
lapidis nostri secretissimi acceptione ad hoc nicitatus: Ideo Rudiores homines
jure Homines Rudiores.
Civili puniendos esse tales homines superstitiose credunt: Sub nomine (...)
number rudiorum non illos tantum (...), qui plebii seu illiterati sunt et indocti,
verum etiam nonnullos imo plurimos viros aliter doctissimos, forsan etiam et
pios, intelligo; quos rudes ideo nomino, tum quia hujus Artis rudes sunt and
ignari, necnon etiam, quod rudibus adeo sunt moribus praediti, ut canino more
quidquid ignotum sit, oblatrent, et de iis maledicant, quae nunquam mente sua
aut conceperunt, aut concipere poterant. Hos pessime habet haec mea
reprehensio, quia quod tam pietati, quam Doctrinae contrarium est, illi et
docti et pii faciunt, talia nimirum judicant, quae nec discernunt; nec
discernere valent: cum enim moneat Doctrina, suadeat pietas, ut ea quae quis
judicat perpendat, et examinet, hi contra illud indubitanter condemnant; quod
tamen postquam damnarunt, adhuc quid sit nesciunt, et ignorant, quod omni
Philosopho est indignissimum.

In his Introitus, page 2: he speaks to this purpose, I could cite all the
Philosophers concerning this matter; but I want not Witnesses, because I my
self am an Adeptist, and write more clearly than any has hitherto done: Let
him believe me that will, disprove me that can; and let him carp who list, he
shall certainly, for his reward, gain a high Ignorance. I confess the subtle
Wits dream of many Chimaeras; but he that is diligent shall find the Truth in
the simple way of Nature.

And Sendivogius in his Twelfth Treatise, says to this effect; If any Man
doubt of the Truth of the Art, let him read the Voluminous Writings of the
Philosophers, verified by Reason and Experience, whom we may deservedly give
Credit to in their own Art: But if any will not give Credit to them, then we
know not how to dispute with 'em, as denying Principles; for deaf and dumb Men
cannot speak, etc. (and it may be added) neither can blind Men judge of Colors.

And in his Epilogue or Conclusion, he cries out, O holy and wonderful Nature,
who do not suffer the Sons of Wisdom to err! etc. Moreover in these Twelve
Treatises I have produced so many natural Reasons, that he which is desirous of
the Art, and fears God, may the more easily understand all things, which
through God's Blessing, with my Eyes I have seen, with my own Hands have made
without any Deceit of Sophistication.

And elsewhere, he says, we could cite the Writings of Philosophers to confirm
what we have said; but because we have wrote clearer things than are in their
Writings, they need not any Confirmation; he shall understand who looks into
other Men's Writings, etc. Know also for certain, that this Art is not placed in
Fortune, or casual Invention, but in real Science; and that there is but this
one matter in the World, by which, and of which the Philosophers Stone is made,
etc:

Elsewhere, he says, It was not my purpose; for some Reasons before mentioned
in the Preface to publish this Book, but a desire to deserve well of those who
are Studiously given to liberal and philosophical Arts, prevailed with me that
I might hold forth to them, that I bear an honest Mind; also that I might
declare my self to them that understand the Art, to be their equal Fellow, and
to have attained their Knowledge, etc.

So Aeyrenaeus avers, that at the time of his writing, he had that great and
wonderful Medicine in his Possession, and before his Eyes. And in his
Exposition of Sir George Ripley's Vision, p. 24. he says, I have been a true
Witness of Nature unto thee, and I know that I write true; and all Sons of Art
shall by my Writings know that I am a Fellow-Heir with them of this Divine
Skill. To the Ignorant, says he, I have written so plain as may be; and more I
had written, if the Creator of all Things had given me larger Commission, etc.

Also in his Introitus, page 33. Ego Sane non exdono, (Nisi Dei mei) non furto
illum possideo, habeo, feci, et quotidie mea sub ditione servo, etc. Page 34.
Et scio quae scribo et novit cordium Scrutator Deus, quod Scribam vera, nec est
quod invidiae me accuses, quoniam interrito Calamo, inaudito Stylo, in honorem
Dei, usum, fructum proximi, mundique et divitiarum contemptum scribo.

He that would be further convinced of the Truth and Reason of this wonderful
working Powder, let him read the Treatise, called, The Way to Bliss; published
by Elias Ashmole, Esquire proving by Philosophy and Reason, the possibility of this
universal Medicine; and that there are many things in Nature far more strange
than this natural Work: Indeed that Book shows but little of the matter or
manner of working it; he says in brief, Dissolve Gold in a Water of its own
kind, I care not how, but best with his beloved for ease in in working.

It also appears, That in late times there have been many Adeptists, who knew,
and practiced this Art, though formerly it was very rare to hear of one.

Norton, in his Ordinal, page 52. tells us, That once three Masters of this
Science lay in one Bed near to Leaden Hall (which he says was a wonderful
Thing, whilst it is hard to find one in millions of Men). One of them, he says,
was of the Dukedom of Lorain; the other two, it seems, were English.

Sendivog. in his Epilogue, has these words; I doubt not but many Men of good
Consciences and Affections, do enjoy this Gift of God secretly.

And Aeyrenaeus, in his Preface to his Introitus, says that he knew many, who
together with himself, enjoyed this Secret, and was persuaded that there would
be many more, with whom he should, in a short time, have daily familiarity.

And toward the end of this thirteenth Chapter, he says, he knew very many who
possessed the Art, and the true knowledge of it, who (as it were) had Vowed a
most secret Silence, and that he writ his Book without the knowledge of any one
of those he daily conversed with: And in so doing he hoped he had improved his
Talent well. He further adds, That he foresaw some Hundreds would happily be
enlightened by his Writing; therefore he consulted not with Flesh and Blood, etc.

Also in the same Chapter he breaks out in these words; Novi, novi, quod haec
mea scripta erunt plurimis instar auri obryzi et aurum Argentumque per haec mea
scripta vilescent instar fimi, credit Juvenes Tyrones, credit Patres, quia
tempus adest ad fores, non ex vano conceptu haec scribo, at in spiritu video,
etc.

And Joannes Langius, in his Preface before this Book, says to this purpose;
viz.

Yea, if those things which Mary Rant (an English Woman) by inward Revelation
promised concerning the making of Gold, (that it would become Vulgar or Common
in the Year 1661) come to pass and hundred Years after; then I doubt not at all
but it has taken some beginning from this.

Neither did these famous and honest minded Philosophers conceal themselves, or
the Art out of Envy or Pride; but for fear of evil disposed Persons, who
continually sought to do them Mischief.

Aeyrenaeus, in his fourteenth Chapter, says we have professed, and do again
profess, that it is not for the Credit we give to other men's Writings that we
have published this; we have seen and known (adds he) those things which we
faithfully declare; we have made do, see, and possess the Stone, the great
Elixir; nor truly do we envy thee the knowledge of it, but wish thou may
learn it from our Writings, etc.

And, in his thirteenth Chapter, he says, I dare affirm that I do possess more
Riches, than the whole known World is worth; but cannot make use thereof,
because of the Snares of Knaves: Also, in his last Chapter, he says, An
Adeptist may so increase the Stone at his Pleasure, both in Weight and Virtue;
so that if a Man would, one Man that is an Adeptist, might transmute into
perfect Gold and Silver all the imperfect Metals that are in the whole World.

But for a further warning of these Dangers and Snares he speaks of, let us
examine his thirteenth Chapter a little closer.

In the beginning of it he tells us, he has delivered many Secrets, which
before were barren enough to the World; because almost all Chemical Books do
abound either with obscure Aenigmas, or sophistical Operations, or with a heap
of pitiful contagious Words; but that he has not so done, resig^ning his Will
in this thing to the Divine Pleasure, who (says he) in this last period of the
World seems to me to be about the opening of these Treasures: Therefore I do
not fear that the Art will be disesteemed; far be it from me, this cannot be;
for true Wisdom will defend it self in eternal Honor. I could wish, says he,
that Gold and Silver, would at length be of as mean in esteem as Dirt; that
great Idol, hitherto adored by the whole World: Then we who know these things,
should not so much contrive to hide our selves, etc.

From this he goes on to make a piteous Complaint, because of the Dangers and
Perils that attend these Artists, through the Wickedness of evil Men, and that
there is scarce an honest Man to be found; that himself was forced to fly by
Night, to shave his Head, and alter his Name; and all this because he (having
done some wonderful Cures by means of the grand Elixir) was laid in wait for by
wicked Men, merely for suspicion only, accompanied with a most greedy thirst
after Gold.

Then he proceeds further to show the Difficulties that Adeptists meet with,
and says, He has known some to have been strangled, through the Suspicion only
of Desperate Men, that these other knew the Art, though they were mere strangers
to it: That some will Tattle of their Counterfeiting Money, others can easily
know this Gold and Silver from common, because it is Finer than any other, and
that a Man runs the hazard of his Head by Allaying or Adulterating it, because
of the strict Laws of all Nations, who have provided, That every Deterioration
of Gold and Silver (although according to Standard) yet if it be not done by a
Professed and Licensed Metalourgist, shall be accounted a Capital Crime. Then
he shows how he and others were forced to leave and lose 600 l. value of
Silver, etc. and concludes in these words, We being taught by these Dangers,
have determined to lie hid, and will communicate the Art to thee, who dreamest
of such things [that is who think these sorts of fears and dangers
ridiculous, and that if thou knew'st these things thou would do otherwise]
that so we may see what Public Good thou will do when adepted, etc. Then he
proceeds to show and explain the Mysteries of the Art, and adds; Versly, as for
my self, I do not possess the Stone by Theft, but by the Gift of my God, etc.

Afterward, he tells us, That Elias the Artist is already born, and now
glorious Things are declared of the City of God; from which he again falls into
his Complaints against evil minded Men, and professes his aversion to Avarice,
in these words. -- I disdain, I loath, and deservedly detest this idolizing of
Gold and Silver, by which the World celebrates her Price, Pomp and Vanities:
Ah, filthy Evil! Ah, vain Nothingness! Believe ye that I conceal these things
out of Envy? No, verily; for I profess I grieve from my Heart, that we are
driven, as it were, like Vagabonds from the Face of the Lord throughout the
whole Earth. But what needs many words, that thing that we have seen, taught
and handled, which we have, possess and know, these we do declare, being moved
with mere Compassion toward the Studious, and with indignation of Gold and
Silver, and of precious Stones, not as they are Creatures of God, far be it
from us; for in that respect we Honor them, and think them worthy Esteem: But
the People of Israel adores them, as well as the World; therefore let it be
ground to Powder like the Brazen Serpent, etc.

Afterward he shows his Hopes and Expectations of this Art, and why; also the
value of his Writings; then he seems to prophecy concerning the future State
of the Adepts, and shows his Zeal for the good of Israel. These things, says
he, I send before in the World, like a Preacher, that I may not be buried
unprofitably in the World; and draws to a conclusion, in these words, page 35.
Esto Liber meus praecursor Eliae qui paret viam Domini regiam, et utinam
quilibet in toto terrarum orb ingeniosus artem hanc calleret, tum copiosissime
abundante auro, argento, gemmisque nullus haec magnifaceret nisi quatenus
scientiam continerent: Tunc tandem virtus nuda ob sui ipsius naturam amabilem
in honor haberetur.

Thus we have heard some of those great Troubles, with which this honest
Hearted Adeptist was surrounded; and which (believe me) are sufficient to deter
any serious Man from appearing public in this Matter, did things remain now in
the same posture in which he left them; but to our great Satisfaction the Scene
is altered, the Palace Gates are laid open, and those that were heretofore shut
out, are once again admitted to kiss the Royal Hand of their Prince.

But if any one should suppose that this hard usage only happened to the
Adepts, in this our Masters time, (though it is probable he is still living) let
him hear what the Noble Sendivogius has to say on this Subject: In the Epilogue
of his Twelve Treatises, he has words, to this purpose; I doubt not (says he)
but many Men of good Consciences and Affections do enjoy this Gift of God
secretly. These being warned by my Example, and Dangers are made more Cautious
and Wise, having that commendable Silence of Harpocrates: For as often as I
would discover my self to great Men, it always turned to my Loss and Danger.

Also, after he has for the sake of the Ingenuous largely described the nature
of the four Elements, and their Actings, he descends unto the three Principles
of Things; in which Treatise Lat. page 166. Engl. 120. he says, Conclusive
dicimus, etc. To conclude therefore, we say, That this Art is the Gift of God
alone; which being known he must also be prayed to, that he would give his
Blessing to the Art; for without this Divine Blessing it would be of no use,
and unprofitable, which we our selves have had Experience of, seeing we have,
by reason of this Art, undergone great Danger; yea we have had more Mischief
and Misfortune by it, than Advantage; but there is a time when Men are wise too
late.

Then he proceeds to show how he was protected by Divine Providence in his
Misfortunes, and how shamefully his Enemies perished: For I have heard (says
he) that my Enemies have fallen into that Snare which they laid for me, they
who would have taken away my Life, have lost their own; and some of them which
would have taken away my Goods, have lost Kingdoms. Moreover, I know many that
would have detracted from my good Name, have perished with Disgrace; so great
Preservation have I always had from the great Creator of all things, etc.

And in the end of his Philosophical Riddle; Believe me (says he) if I were not
a Man of that Rank and Condition as I am, nothing would be more pleasant to me
than a solitary Life, or with Diogenes to lie hid under a Tub; for I see all
things that are, to be but Vanity, and that Deceit and Covetousness are
altogether in use, where all things are to be sold, and that Vice does excel
Virtue, etc.

And in the Preface to his Treatise of Sulphur, he also seems to foretell that
the dawning of the happy Day of the Adepts was at hand. Page 112. Lat. 78.
Engl. He tells us those times are now past, when Fidelity amongst Friends
flourished, and this Art was communicated by word of Mouth; but now it is not
(says he) obtained, but by the Inspiration of the most high God alone, etc.

Page 79. Now those times are coming in which many Secrets of Nature shall be
revealed; now that fourth Monarchy of the North is about to begin; now the
Times are at hand, the Mother of Sciences will come; greater things shall be
discovered than has been done in these three last past Monarchies, etc.

And in the very Preface to his Book begins to this effect; viz.

To all Searchers of the Art of Chemistry; namely the true Sons of Hermes, the
Author wishes all Health, and prays to God for a Blessing.

Thus from him it also appears, that the Adepts have been evilly entreated by
the ungrateful World; nevertheless for the sake of the ingenuous, they have not
ceased to leave sufficient Testimony of the Truth of this Art: What here I
write (says he) by way of Testimony to that undoubted philophical Truth,
comprehended in few Lines, have been taken out of that manual Experience, which
the most High has vouchsafed to me, that they which have laid the principal
and real Foundations in this commendable Art, may by this Encouragement not
forsake the practice of the best Things, and so be secured from that wicked
Swarm of Smoke-sellers, whose delight is to cheat. They are not Dreams, etc. it
is the philosophical Truth it self, etc. And a little afterward adds, Many Men
both of high and low Condition, in these last Years past, have to my knowledge
seen Diana unveiled, etc.

There is yet one sad and lamentable Story behind, and that Acted by our own
Contrymen; yet therein also is a great Providence set forth; it is in Mr.
Norton's Ordinal, page 35. concerning the Misfortune and ill Usage of one
Thomas Daulton (formerly a Clerk to one Deluis, Esquire and Confident to King
Edward) caused by the said Deluis and one Thomas Herbert also Esquire to the
Body of the said King: The Substance of it is this; That Daulton (a true
Adeptist) had by him great store of the Red Medicine; that Herbert forced him
out of an Abbey in Gloucestershire, and brought him before King Edward; hereupon
Deluis swore that Daulton, in a little space, had made him a thousand Pound of
as good Gold as the Royal was. Daulton told Deluis he was Forsworn. Deluis
Answered, not in what he had then said, though he had formerly taken an Oath to
Daulton not to discover him, which Oath he might break for the Weal of the King
and his Land. Daulton Replied, that avoided not his Perjury: However he soberly
told the King, that by reason of having the Medicine, he often had been brought
into great Troubles; and to avoid it for the future, he cast it into a foul and
common Lake in the Abbey where he was taken, etc. The King would have him to
make it again. Daulton said it could not be; for it was given him by a Canon of
Lichfield, whose Work he had attended many Years. The King being sorry for the
Loss, gives Daulton four Marks, and his Liberty; but Herbert deceitfully lay in
wait for him, and brought him to Stepney, and his Servants took away the Money.
Afterward Herbert conveys Daulton to Gloucester-Castle, where he kept him
long; from thence he had him to Troy, and kept him in Prison about four Years,
and afterward brought him out for Execution. Then Daulton Addresses himself to
the Lord in Prayer.

And after he brought him out to dye; Page 37.

Daulton to death obeyed lowly,
And said, Lord Iesue, blessed thou be,
Methinks I have byne too long from thee.
A Science thou gave me with full great charge,
Which I have kept without outrage.
I found no Man yet apt thereto,
To be mine Heyer when I am go:
Wherefore (sweet Lord) now I am feign
To resign this thy Gift to thee again.
Then he submitted to dye, and bids Herbert do his Will. Herbert hereupon
repents, weeps, and dimisses Daulton; but Daulton departed with heavy Heart;
for he had no great mind to live longer.

Herbert (it seems) dyed soon after in his Bed,
And Deluis at Teuxbury lost his Head;
This wise great Pain, as you may see,
Follows this Art in every degree, etc.
Then he concludes that vicious Men may not learn this Art, because of the
Ambition and Violence they would attempt by means of it.

There is some other Pains which Mr. Norton says may happen to them who follow
this Art: As first, To consider how many seek, and how few 1.
find, etc. To be learned in the Secrets of Nature, and that a man though he be
taught it may fail, that have fails; therefore he recommends Providence and
Dread.

For of all Pains the most grievious Pain, Page 29.

Is for one fail to begin all again, etc.
It is great Pain, he says, to be sometimes of one Mind or Opinion, and
sometimes of another [which certainly is very true].

That it will be a Pain to find out a true Master and get his Love, etc. This 2.
indeed is like to prove a very difficult matter; Where shall we seek for such
a Master? For my part I know of none: I had not the Happiness of, or
Acquaintance with any Master, other than my Books; neither dare, or will I
pretend to be an Adeptist; my Business lies not in the least toward Chemistry,
nor have I as yet seen the Thing called a Laboratory. It was my Zeal to revive
the Worthy Memory of this most noble Art, and of its true Professors, which
caused me to make this Essay. There may be others far more able, though not so
willing to lay open this Mystery; for in this I am free, having not preengaged
either my Hand or Heart to Secrecy; yet all things must be taken with a Grain
of Salt. Had not then Mr. Norton (think you) a good foresight to send you to
Hortolan to learn how to prepare, and part the Elements? Ay, but he did not
mean Hortolanus Junr. Did he not, say you? No matter; he is however now most
likely to fulfill his Words.

And will it any longer (think you) be accounted a Mystery to hear of preparing
a Medicine from plain, easy and natural Principles, but four in Number openly
described in order, commonly known, and almost every where to be had, and the
whole Work not a thousand part so Tedious as it is Excellent?

Ay, but you will say it is a difficult Work, Obj. 1.
and requires a man's whole Attendance, etc. Not so neither; but if it were, I
cannot help it. There are many men in England, and elsewhere that know how to
keep a Fire in an equal and continual Heat for twelve Hours together; and if
so, I see no Reason they have to be always peeping in their Glasses. Hear then,
I pray you, what Art and Honesty says of this matter.

Aeyrenaeus, in his Exposition upon Sir G. Ripley's Preface, page 86. Since
then this Knowledge is so wonderful being the very Looking-glass of Nature, the
Antidote against Poverty and Sickness, and consequently the Cutthroat of
Covetousness, Pride, Ambition, and such like sordid Affections; Who would not
bestow a little time in the Inquiry of it? In which let me assure thee, in the
very Words of Trevisan, the Art is so plain, that if it were nakedly described
it would be contemptible; and yet in vulgar Mechanics, How frequent is it for
men to serve seven, eight, yea ten Years Apprentiship to attain them? And in
some that are a little more ingenuous, How frequently are considerable Sums of
Money bestowed to boot; yet in this noble Art, so far excelling all humane
Sciences, as the Sun does a Candle, who will employ himself with Diligence?
Unless it be some Money minded Sots, who seek only for Riches, And yet how soon
are even they weary? So that few or none persist in their Inquiry, save a few
Roguish Sophisters who live by Cozening; by reason of such the Art is
scandalized, and ill spoken of. Yet trust me, for I speak knowingly, the Art is
both true and easy; yea so easy, that if you did see the Experiment, you
would not believe it, etc.

If this Art be so easy (say you) Obj. 2.
why then little Mr. Hortolan are not you an Adeptist? Surely your mouth was
set a watering; and if so, Why would you not then have a taste?

Hort. Truly Sir, were I an Adeptist, It is very probable, you had not heard
from me in this open manner; yet, if you will take my honest word for it, I
will assure you, for satisfaction sake, I did endeavor the Joining and Purging
of the four Elements, according to the Books and Rules before mentioned, and
though I did it by ghuess only, and not by weight or measure, yet in a weeks time
I both Joined them, and Purged, Distilled and Sublimed my Mercury, so that it
answered as much as I could reasonably expect: But I digested it not, for I had
no Athanor or true digesting Furnace: Besides I am allotted to serve others,
and in Publishing this, I hope I shall serve and satisfy all Ingenuous Men,
after which I may endeavor to serve my self; yet remembering that though many are
called, a few only may be chosen: He that shall attain this gift, will take
care enough to keep it Secret. Furthermore you may take Notice that this is
only an Essay, I have told you before, I will not swear to make you give
Credence, neither will I further persuade any man about the Work; Let every man
use his own discretion, Capiat qui capere vult et potest; but to return again
to the pains attending this Art.

But if your mind be verteously set, Mr. Norton, p. 30.

Then the Devil will labor you to let;
And that in three manners, viz. with Haste, Despair and Deceit, against which
he sets down some Remedies.

Afterward he advises to consider the Virtues of the Teacher, and for what
Reasons he Pretends to teach you, etc. I presume he means such who voluntarily
(for reward sake) offer their service to instruct others; and by the way he
shows the Deceits of some of these pretenders, as that of the Deceitful Monk of
Normandy, who proposed to build fifteen Abbeys on Salisbury Plain, and
thereupon applies himself to Norton; Norton examines his Cunning, and rejects
his Proposals; soon after the Monk's Craft was clean overcast, after which
having cheated many, he goes into France, etc.

Another Story he tells of Saunce Peer the Parson, who had a conceit by means
of this Art, to make a Bridge over the Thames, and to deck it with Carbuncles
to shine by Night, but that his Work also came nothing.

Ripley also cautions you against Deluders, and Cheating Multipliers,
pretending to this Art, Page 154. Theat. Chym.

To se their howsys it is a noble sport,
What Fornaces, what Glassys there be of diverse shape;
What Salts, what Powders, what Oils and Waters fort,
How Eloquently, de Materia prima they -- clape.
And yet to find the truth they have no hap;
Of our Mercury they meddle and our Sulphur Vive,
Wherein they dote, and more and more Unthryve.
Then he shows their great boastings, and how they (in those days) haunted
about Westminster-Abby, borrowed Money almost of every one, and for a Penny
promised to pay them a Pound; but Shame and the Prison was their last Portion.

Page 158. He advises to meddle with nothing of great Cost; and lays it down
for a Rule, that like must bring forth like, etc.

And concludes thus, page 159.

Spend not thy Money away in waste,
Geve not to every Speech credence;
But first examyn, grope and taste;
And as thou provyst, so put thy confidence,
And ever beware of great expense:
But if thy Philosopher lyve vertuosely
Trust the better to his Philosophy.
Prove him first and him oppose
Of all the Secretts of our Stone,
Which if he know not thou nedyth not to lose;
Medyll thou not ferther, but let him gone,
Make he never so pytyose a moan.
For then the Fox can fagg and feign
When he would faynest his Prey attain
If he can answer as ought a Clarke,
How behyt he has not provyd indede;
And if thou wylt help him to his Warke,
If he be Vertuose I hold hit mede,
For he will the quyte if ever he Speed:
And thou shall weete by a little anon
If he have knowledge of our Stone.
One thing, One Glass, One Furnace and no mo,
Behold this pryncypyll if he take,
And if he do not, then lat him go;
For he shall never thee rych man make,
Trewly yt is better thou him forsake,
Then after with loss and varyaunce,
And other manner of Dysplesounce, (etc.)
We will next consider some of the chief qualifications, which are altogether
convenient for a Studient and Workman, in this Art, (as they are recommended to
us by the Adepts) and so conclude.

Mr. Norton in the Preface to his Ordinal, tells us, That upon Inquiry, many
People were found to Address themselves to Alchimy only for Lucre sake, and for
Covetousness of Riches, as Popes, Cardinals, Archbishops, Abbots, Priors, with
Friars, Hermets, page 6.
Priests, etc.

And Merchants also, with common Workmen, Goldsmiths, Weavers, page 7.
Free Masons, Tanners, Parish Clerks, Taylers, Glasiers and Tinkers (he says)
have desired and endeavored, for this Noble Craft, and that with great
Presumption; (though he allows that some color there was, for all such Men as
give Tincture to Glass:) but he says it had been better for many Artificers, to
have left often in time, before they wasted their Estates.

It had byne good for them to have left off
In season, for naught they found but a Scoff,
For trewly he that is not a great Clerk
Is nice and lewd to meddle with this warke; (etc.)
For it is most profound Philosophy,
The subtle Science of Holy Alkimy. (etc.)
Then he shows how all Masters of page 8.
this solemn Work writ very darkly, etc. as Hermes, Rasis, Geler, Avicen,
Merlin, Hortolan, Democrit, Morien, Bacon, Raimond and Aristotle.

Anaxagoras, he says, wrote the plainest, and was therefore rebuked by
Aristotle through Envy.

He proceeds to show the Malice of a Monk, who writ a Thousand false Receipts
for despite.

He cautions to avoid Receipts and Deceipts, page 9.
and not to attempt to Work any thing unless you know how and wherefore, for
nothing is wrought but by its proper Cause. -- That truth is to be followed,
Falsehood and Counterfeits to be eschew'd; That Grace is necessary, also Riches
sufficient; and says he had this Art by Grace from Heaven (yet he was taught it
by a Master). Page 11. Advises to read his Book often, and also other Books.

Page 13. He tells us Holy Alchimy is not found out by Labor, nor sold for
Money, but given by Grace; and Answers some Men's Allegations, that this Art is
not Holy.

14. That it was taught only to the Virtuous, etc. by a Master, with an Oath of
Secrecy to teach it to one man that is Virtuous, without any regard to Blood or
Kindred.

For this Science must ever Secret be,
The Cause whereof is this as ye may see;
If one evil Man had hereof all his Will,
All Christian Pease he might hastily spill,
And with his Pride he might pull down,
Rightful Kings and Princes of renown:
Wherefore the Sentence of Peril and Jeopardy
Upon the Teacher rests dreadfully.
Page 15. He again tells us that it is found only by Grace, and is Donum Dei,
not to be unadvisedly cast away; that it is granted only to few; for great
Doctors have not been able to find it, p. 16. who through despair have denied
the Art; but the Wise know it to be true, though it is not for blind Men to
paint, or to pretend to take down St. Paul's Steeple, lest it might hap to
break their Crown, etc.

And page 17. concludes, That true Searchers must know the Principles of
Philosophy, and patiently trust in God.

Page 33. He says the Adepti are next to the Saints.

For it is better then to were a Crown:
Next after his Saints, our Lord does him call;
Which has this Art to honor him withal, etc.
Page 28. He says the true Children make this Confession.

Confiteor, Altissime, nullus ista rapit, Licet et prius didicit, absque te nil
sapit:

Nam tanta stat gratia te Deum semperapud: Perficere sicut capere, nam Finis
es, et Caput.

This Advice is no other than what all the Ancients have formerly taught; but
because it will swell our Treatise beyond its intended Limits, we will satisfy
our selves, at present, with the Doctrine of some few modern Adepts.

Mr. Norton also tells us page 92. That the mind of the Workman ought to agree
with the Work; that he ought to have Servants that be Sober, Wise and Diligent,
True and Watchful, etc. also fitting Instruments and Furnaces, with convenient
Time and Place: And then a little to color the matter, he draws a Scheme, and
says you ought to observe the Signs and Planets, etc. and to fortune your Work,
etc. [which last thing some men have taken literatim, and so become
superstitious].

Sir George Ripley, unto King Edward the Fourth, writes thus in his Epistle:

For like it you to trust that trewlie I Theat. Chem. Britt. page 110.
have found
The perfect way of most sacret Alchimy,
Which I will never trewly for merke ne pound
Make common but to you, and that conditionally,
That to your self ye shall keep it full secretly,
And only it use as may be to God's pleasure,
Else in time coming, of God I should abye
For my discovering of his Secret Treasure.
Then he desires the King will agree to him by an Oath, and to pardon him for
not writing openly; for that he would plainly declare it unto him by Mouth, and
show him the Practice; yet he says in his Writing he will not be so Mystical,
but that the King might by study find the Knowledge of it, etc. [But it appears
he had writ to the King secretly of it before].

He further adds,

And if God grant you by me to win page 111.
this Treasure, serve him devoutly with more laud and thanking, etc. And in his
Prologue to this Work, he advises to good Living and Humility, to fear God, to
seek Wisdom and Prudence; and shows the Punishment of Sin and Reward of good
Living, etc.

Then concludes with a further admonition, to follow Virtue and eschew page 120.
Vice, enjoins Secrecy, and a good Use.

That after thy ending thou may be sure
In hevyn for to rewardyd be,
Which God grant both to thee and me, etc.
Mr. Chaucer, in his Channons Yeoman, after he has shown the Deceipts of false
pretending Multipliers and Impostors, which he says he writ.

To the intent that Men may be ware thereby,
And for no other Cause truly. Theat. Chem. Britt. 233, etc.

Concludes the Philosophers were sworn not to discover it, and that it is Donum
Christi; and where he only likes and advises, that no Man pretend to work it
contrary to his Will; for if he do he shall not thrive, though that he multiply
term of his life, etc.

Thomas Charnock, in his Breviary of Philosophy (out of which, though little or
nothing of either matter or manner is to be learnt; for all his large Promises
in his Preface) informs us he was told this Secret, under an Oath, by a Monk of
Bath, who took a liking to him, and who had lost his Medicine at the
dissolution of Monasteries; and for Grief, etc. afterward growing Blind was
lead about by a Boy.

Will you with me to morrow be content, Th. Chapter Brit. page 299.

Faithfully to receive the blessed Sacrament,
Upon this Oath that I shall here you give,
For ne Gold ne Silver as long as you live,
Neither for love you bear toward your Kin,
Nor yet to no great Man preferment to win:
That you disclose the seacret that I shall you teach
Neither by Writing, nor by no swift Speech;
But only to him which ye be sure
Has ever searched after the Secrets of Nature?
To him you may reveal the Seacrets of this Art,
Under the Covering of Philosophy, before this World ye depart, etc.
Then he having consented, within three or four Words the Monk (he says)
revealed to him the great Mystery of Minerals Prudence; and says, if it had not
been for his Oath, he would have told us more, etc.

Bloomfield, in his Blossoms, first tells us that Time lead him into the Camp
Theat. Chapter Brit. 305, etc.
of Philosophy, bid him have Faith, and gave him a Key of Knowledge to open the
Secrets of this Art; and told him the first Lock being opened, all are opened:
That the first Lock is called Chaos, the Secrets of all Wise Men, etc.

Then going on (he says) Time being his Guide, he met a parcel of lean
Philosophers, as Brook the Priest, and York, Martin Perien, Major and Thomas
De lay Hay, the Vicar of Malden, Richard Record, and little Master Eden, Hugh
Oldcastle, and Sir Robert Green.

Roasting and boiling all things out of kind,
And like Foolosophers left off with loss in the end.
These (he says) had deceived King Henry with their Whites and Reds, etc. Then
Time advises him to Labor and Patience, and leads him to Lady Philosophy,
before whom he humbles himself, and plights his Troth to serve her.

In his Practice, page 319. He makes his last Will and Testament; advises his
Son to be Holy, Sober, Honest, Meek, etc.

Be you Holy therefore, Sober, Honest and Meek,
Love God and your Neighbor, to the Poor be not unkind;
Overcome Satan, God's Glory see you seek,
My Son be gentle to all Men as a Friend;
Fatherles and Widow have always in thy Mind,
Innocente Love as Brothers, the Wicked do eschew,
Let falsehood and flattery go, least thou it rue.
Devoutely serve God, call daily for his Grace,
Worship him in Spirit with Heart contrite and pure,
In no wise let Satan thy Prayers deface:
Look thou be steadfast in Faith, and trust most sure,
Lay up Treasure in Heaven which ever shall endure.
In all Adversity be gentle in thy Heart,
Against thy Foe, so shall thou him convert, etc.
Eugenius Philalethes, in his Anima Magica abscondita, page 51. Now because the
Law of Nature is Infallible, and confirmed to the Creature by God's Royal
Assent, think not therefore there is any necessity upon God; but what he has
enacted in general, he can repeal in any particular, etc. He cursed the Earth
once for Adam's sake; take heed he does not curse it again in thy Work for thy
sake. And again, he says, he must be a good Steward, that shall overlook the
Treasures of God; have therefore a Charitable Seraphick Soul, Charitable at
home, in being not destructive to thy self, as most Men are; Charitable abroad,
in a diffusive Goodness to the Poor, as many are not, etc.

Sendivogius, in his First Treatise Engl. page 3. tells us God is the Original
and Bounds of Nature, and works all things by it, and without Nature is
nothing.

Page 4. That the Searchers of Nature ought to be as Nature her self is, True,
Plain, Patient, Constant, etc. and that which is chiefest of all, Religious,
fearing God, not injurious to their Neighbor; and then shows that every thing
must be exalted in its own kind, etc.

37. That the Art of Alchimy, in its kind, is true; Nature also is true; but
the Artificer is seldom true.

39. He labors in vain, that puts forth his Hands to labor, without the
knowledge of Nature in this Sacred and most True Art, etc.

41. For without the light and knowledge of Nature, it is impossible to attain
to this Art, unless it come to any by God's special Revelation, or some special
Friend does privately show it.

42. If therefore thou do not understand, or believe the Truth, do not blame
me but thy self, and persuade thy self that God was unwilling to reveal this
Secret to thee; be therefore earnest with him by Prayer, etc. Do not wonder
that I have wrote so many Treatises; for I did not make them for my own sake,
seeing I lack not Books, but that I might advertise many that work in fruitless
Things, that they should not spend their Costs in vain.

44. He shows us plainly the whole Art is only an Extraction of our Seawater,
or Metallic radical Moisture, etc.

47. He says many Men, conceited of their Understanding and Wisdom, could not
savor his meaning, though he intimated the Art to them from word to word; but
they could by no means understand him, not believing there was any Water in our
Sea, and yet they would be accounted Philosophers. Since therefore (says he)
they could not understand my Words, which I delivered by word of Mouth, I do
not fear (as other Philosophers were afraid) that any one can easily
understand what I have wrote: It is the Gift I say of God, etc.

But let me give you this Caution, That if you would attain to this Secret,
know that first of all God is to be prayed to, then your Neighbor is to be
loved; 49. and lastly, do not fancy things that are subtle, which Nature knew
nothing of; but abide, I say, abide in the plain way of Nature, etc. I will
(says he) reveal to no mortal Man whilst I live more than I have done in this
public Writing.

76. That the Art did daily decline into obscurity, and as he believed through
the Writings of envious Philosophers; that one Book explains another; that
Geber had need to be read a thousand times over; that were these hard Writers
ignorant of, and to learn the Art out of such hard Books, they would find it
out with greater difficulty than Men in these days who search into the Art.

Page 78. That now the Art is not obtained, but by the Inspiration of the most
high God alone; therefore let not him that searches diligently, and fears God,
despair; if he seeks after it he shall find it, because it is more easily
obtained from God than from Man, etc. Be of good Courage therefore, and he will
also not deny this Favor unto thee; if thou put thy whole Trust in him,
Worship him and call upon him, he will open to thee the Gate of Nature, etc.

79. Cease not to seek, for to him that knocks it shall be opened.

102. That the Philosophers esteemed highly of this Art, not so much out of
Covetousness for Gold and Silver, but for Knowledge sake.

119. He advises to taciturnity, says that though some casually fall upon the
matter of our Argent vive, yet he ends the Work when he should begin, etc.
Says that this Art is the Gift of the most High God; and unless God reveals it
by means of a good Wit, or Friend, it is hardly known. That Lully learnt it of
Arnold, and Arnold received it from a Friend, etc. but says, God scarce ever
conferred upon any mortal Man, so great things as upon himself; and
acknowledges he deserved them not, yet that he always trusted in God.

122. Advises again to trust in God, and to pray to him; for if thou be
sincere he will by one means or other show thee a way, and assist the in it,
that thou shall obtain thy desire; pray, but yet work, says he; and concludes
that a good Understanding and Opportunity are the Gifts of God.

123. That there is but one true Operation, and that it is easier to make the
Elixir than any particular, to abide a natural Examination and Trial,
notwithstanding some Men's Boasting; but the Broth will have its Taste from the
diversity of the Flesh boiled in it. Advises against Receipts of Mountebanks
and all false Sophistications, etc.

141. He advises to essay nothing contrary to Nature, etc.

143. That every searcher ought to know the four Elements and their Original,
[in which indeed he is very Natural and Ingenuous] and to apply all things to
the possibility of Nature, if they do not agree with Nature, they must be let
alone and waved.

147. Then he ends his Book with this conclusion, viz. That this Art is always
acquired by the same kind of Wits and Dispositions; Which Art (says he) we
after this kind of clear Manifestation of it, lay up in the Bosom of God the
most high Creator and our Lord, and commend our selves together with all honest
hearted Readers to his Grace, and Infinite Mercy: To whom be Praise and Glory
for ever and ever.

The Conclusion.
AeYrenaeus in his Preface to the Author in Ripley Revived, has these words:
For my own part I have had experience of misleading Sophistical Writers, and
have made many toilsome laborious Experiments though but young, and therefore
having at length, through the undeserved Mercy of God, arrived at my Haven of
Rest, I shall stretch out my hand to such as are behind, etc. That at length
studying to profit the Sons of Art, he resolved to unfold Ripley, so that the
Tyro might have two Witnesses in one, etc. And concludes thus, These writings
peruse for they are not Fancies, and so with the help of the most High, thou
shall attain thy wish.

Page 19. In his Exposition of Sir G. Rip. Preface, he says, That those who
mistake in their Operations, and blame the Philosophers are most injurious.

Page 18. That if Wit were capable of the attainment of this Art, it would have
been common ever now, and that he does very admiringly adore the Wisdom of God
herein, that an Art so True, so Natural, so Easy, so much desired and sought
after, should yet be so rarely found, that the generality of Men Learned and
Unlearned, do laugh at it as a Fable; It is therefore most certainly the gift
of God, who is and ever will be the Dispenser of it, according to his good
pleasure.

20. That God has a Ruling hand herein, and the Sons of Art have their
Commission given them as to Writing and Teaching, etc. That he Writes only to
the deserving: That his Books are but as Way-marks, and he does what he may to
shut out the unworthy: Yet so plainly (he says) has he Written, that as many
as God has appointed to this Mastery, shall certainly understand, and have
cause to thank him for his Faithfulness, etc.

21. Our Books (says he) are for those who have been or intend to be
conversant about the search of Nature; we hint the way, Prayer to God and
Patience persisting in the use of means, must open these Doors; Let therefore
profound Meditation, accompanied with the Blessing of God, Furnaces, Coals,
Glasses, and Indefatigable Pains, be thy Interpreters, and let them serve for
Commentaries upon our Writings; so I did, so I advise thee, and the Blessiing
of God attend all Studious, Virtuous searchers in this way.

In his Tract. of the Transmutation of Metals, Page 14. He tells us, That even
the most expert in this Art were very Obscure, if not Envious, as Geber, Arnold
and Lully, etc. from hence is the Labyrinth, from hence also that odious name
of the Art, etc. but he advises to a firm resolution, etc.

In Page 15. He says, Iter secretum esse oportet, ut nulli suus labor
inotescat, etc. and gives several good Reasons.

16. He advises the searcher of this Art to be Diligent, Private and Retired
(unless he can have a faithful Companion, one and no more). That he be not
Necessitated or Needy, Licet enim parva quantitas sufficiat, etc. but
especially that he be Honestus, Deum timens, etc. quod legate relegat et
perlegat hominum Doctorum et non Sophistarum libros, etc. Et implorato Numinis
auxilio ne despondeat, licet pluries erret et tamen a Sumptibus magnis caveat,
sic benedicente Deo, voto tandem potietur, etc.

Rip. Rev. page 266. Take then my Counsel, be not so careful of the Fire of the
Athanor as of our Internal Fire; seek it in the House of Aries, and draw it
from the Depths of Saturn; Let Mercury be the Internuncio, and your Signal the
Doves of Drana, etc. with these you may overcome the Lion.

The heat of their Stomachs, says he, is far more Powerful than any Fire in the
World, for in it Gold will be Destroyed, that thou shall not know what is
become of it, which yet loses nothing from it self, though exposed to the
greatest Violence of any Flame.

In his Exposition upon Sr. G. R. Vision, page 24. Now God only is the
dispenser of these Glorious Mysteries: I have been a true Witness of Natue unto
thee, and I know that I write true, and all Sons of Art shall by my Writings
know that I am a Fellow-heir with them of this Divine Skill. To the Ignorant I
have wrote so plain as may be, and more I had written if the Creator of all
things had given me larger Commission. Now to him alone, as is due, be all
Honor, and Power, and Glory, who made all things, and gives Knowledge to whom
he lists of his Servants, and conceals where he pleases: To him be ascribed,
as due is, all Service and Honor. And now Brother, whoever enjoys this rare
Blessing of God, improve all thy strength to do him service with it, who has
Created all things, and for whose sake they were and are Created.

And in the last Chapter of his Introit. Apert. with which the Book called,
Secrets Revealed, or an open Entrance to the Shut Palace of the King, does
agree, (except in some few Sentences) we read thus, viz. He who has once by
the Blessing of God, perfectly attained this Art, I know not what in the world
he can wish, but that he may be free from all snares of wicked men, so as to
serve God without Distraction; but it would be a vain thing, by outward Pomp,
to seek for vulgar applause, such trifles are not esteemed by those who have
this Art, nay rather they despise them; He therefore whom God has blessed with
this Talent, has this Field of content (which far exceeds popular admiration).

First, If he should live a thousand years, and every day provide for a
thousand men, he could not want, for he may increase his Stone at his pleasure,
both in Weight and Virtue, so that if a man would, one man that is an Adeptist,
might Transmute into perfect Gold and Silver all the imperfect Metals that are
in the whole World.

Secondly, He may by this Art make Precious Stones and Gems, such as cannot be
paralelld in Nature for Goodness and Greatness.

Thirdly, and Lastly, He has a Medicine Universal, both for prolonging Life,
and curing all Diseases; so that one true Adeptist can easily cure all the Sick
People in the World (I mean this Medicine is sufficient.)

Now to the King Eternal, Immortal and sole Almighty, be everlasting Praise for
his unspeakable Gifts and unvaluable Treasures.

Whosoever (says he) enjoys this Talent, Let him be sure to employ it to the
Glory of God, and the good of his Neighbors, least he be found ungrateful to
God his Creator, who has blessed him with so great a Talent, and to be in the
last Day found Guilty (of misproving of it) and so be Condemned.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.
ERRATAS.
THE chief mistakes in Printing, which the Reader is desired to correct, are as
follow; viz. Page 3. l. 20. for form r. from p. 19. l. 12. r. the first Water.
p. 35. l. 25. r. corporeat. p. 47. l. 13, 14. 1. Aurum vivum. p. 56. last l. r.
proles est Saturni. p. 75. last Parag. r. we conclude then, That all Operations
for our Mercury, but by common Mercury and our Bo^^ according to our Art, are
erroneous, etc. p. 87. l. 1. for ne r. our. p. 90. l. 13. for the r. thee. p.
144. l. 26. for Kingdom r. Knowledge. p. 153. l. 26. for definite r. defective.
l. 27. for sublimary ^* subluniary. p. 167. l 15. dele i: p. 173. l. 5. r. of
those Adepts. l. 9. for happily r. happily.

Courteous Reader,
YOu may have of me the chief Books herein cited for Authorities; viz. Theatrum
Chem. Britt. Opus Tripartium vera consectio Lapidis Philosophici, Vade Mecum
Philosophicum, Experimenta de praeparatione Mercurii Sophici, Sendivogius,
Secrets Revealed, Ripley Revived, Valentines last Will and Testament, etc.

R. H.


