THE HISTORY OF POLEXANDER: IN FIVE BOOKS.

Done into English by William Brown, Gent.

For the Right Honorable PHILIP, Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, etc.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE


LONDON, Printed by THO: HARPER, for THOMAS WALKLEY, and are to be sold at his
shop at the Golden Pestle and Mortar between York House and Charing Cross.
1647.

The First Part of POLEXANDER.
The first Book.
A Ship which seemed to triumph over a tempest wherewith it had been long
assaulted, cast Anchor in the rode of that happy Isle, which by a perpetual
miracle sees trilling from the leaves of trees the undrainable fountains
whence she has her bedewing. On the poope of that proud vessel presently
appeared a young Turk, who for his beauty might have been taken for one of
those marvells which have made the Isles of the Archipelago so much renowned.
He commanded a Shallop to be unshipped, with an intent to be set on shore, and
those whom he had chosen to attend him, were already with the (...) down, when
a confused voice, and fearful howlings staid him on the very side of his Ship.
He turned his eyes toward the place whence the noise came, and standing so a
while undiscovering any thing, he perceived (at last) that from the point of a
rock high, exstreamly steep, two men, who strictly embraced in the arms of each
other, threw themselves headlong into the Sea. He was much moved with a chance
so strange and pitiful, and those of his followers by a great shreek witnessed
their great resentment: Yea the very Mariners suspending that obdurateness,
which their manner of life makes natural to them, offered to succor those two
so desperate. The fair Turk praised their resolution, and commanded them to
put it in execution. Thereupon some fifteen or twenty cast themselves into the
Shallop, and rowed on with all the earnestness that ought to accompany
charity, and the excess of it was almost the cause of their loss. But the
winds and the waves sensible of so rare an example, suspended their violence;
and to have part in the glory to have saved two so miserable, threw the one
upon a bank of sand, and carried the other aginst the Turks Shallop. Presently
four or five caught hold of him by the hair and drew him up, and strait
hastened to the succor of his companion, whom they found more hard to be
saved: Yet at last their agility linked with their affection, overcame all
obstacles both of sea and land, and drew him out of the sands, where those two
elements seemed to have dig'd his grave. If their joy was great for their good
success, their astonishment was far more when in unclothing one of those
unfortunate creatures, they found about him two chains of gold, to which hung
two boxes covered with diamonds and pearls: It is likely they had so much
curiosity to amuse themselves a little while in the viewing of things of such
value. But the desire they had to please the fair Turk surmounting all other,
they betook them again to their oars, and got again to their Ship with the
same alacrity that they left it. Whilst some were recounting the strange
success of their short voyage, others were striving to bring out of their long
swounding those whom they had recovered from the sea. But perceiving all their
endeavors uneffectuall, they got into their Ship and with those engines us,d to
raise their Canon and Merchandise, drew up the two swounded persons to them.
The fair Turk commanded them to be carried into his Cabin, and seeing no
sign of life, was fearful, that nature alone was not strong enough to give
them back, that which fear and their fall had taken from them. He therefore
sent for a F^nch-man that professed Physic, and conjures him to employ his
best remedies for the so^agement of the two strangers. The Frenchman was ready
to satisfy his just request, and wrought so happily that in less then a
quarter of an hour he restored to either of them* ^oth the use of sight and
understanding. He which had the Jewels opened his eyes first, ^ut being not
able to endure the light, shut them again; and after diverse sighs fell again
into his fainting. The other showing more vigor and courage, fix'dly regarded
all those about him, and then viewing and considering himself, showed by his
looks and admirat^ns, that he had much ado to know or recollect himself. The
fair Turk at first sight c^nceiving a most advantageous opinion of him, and
willing to comfort him in his miseri^s, or at least to cease somewhat his
troubles and agitations. I wish, said he to him, that I were so happy to free
you from that despair which I see graven in your countenance* but I shall
hardly see my desire effected, unless by your pains I may know the cause, and
to teach me the means, which I must make use of for its cessation. The man who
appeared to be an Ethiopian as well by his habit as face, fell into such a
shower of tears that he seemed to power forth by his ^yes that salt water he
had taken in at his mouth. He stopped at last the overflowing of his tears, and
turning his eyes pitifully toward the fair Turk, made him understand by
signs that his tongue was cut out. So unexpected a novelty increased the
astonishment of the fair Turk, and hi^ followers; but as fortune had got
together diverse spectacles to make them pass from one admiration into an
other; behold, the dumb man throws himself to the hanger of a Portugal
which was opposite to him, and having sooner drawn it then the Portugal could
hinder him, cast himself with an extraordinary fury on his companion which was
but newly come to himself, and presented the weapon to his throat. The fair
Turk saved the wretches life the second time, and persuading the furious M^te
to overcome his resentments, promising him that if they were just, they should
not be left without satisfaction. The Mute was stai^ (...) remonstrances and
promises, but staid yet b^ (...) s^ (...) ^ore not to snach off the chains
which his com^nion had about his neck, and after he had often kissed them, and
then thrust them into his ^me, ^eem'd to say by those two actions, that the
other had stolen them from him. The beholders gazed on the accused, and judging
of his life by his ill aspect, no way d^ubled the justness of the accusation.
The fair Turk had been of the same opinion, if he had suffered himself to be
led by his first motives; but unwilling to commit any thing prejudicate which
might be disadvantagious to the pretended robber, he resolved to hear him
before he would condemn him: He therefore (causing first not only the Mute,
but all those to retire whom curiosity had brought into his chamber) came near
him, and having settled and assured him with that sweetness and eloquence,
wherewithal he could both charm the most brutall, and encourage the most
cowardly souls: Fortune (said he) in drawing thee from the depth of the Sea,
has justified herself, and possibly 'twas done for thee to justify thy self
too. Thy companion accuses thee, and if I well understand his language
maintains that thou have robbed him of those chains he took from thee.
Confess the truth; and let not the desire of being rich be more powerful
over thy mind, then that of preserving thy life. Thou art amongst men who make
profession to protect innocence, and to chastise what is criminal; but they
have learned by their own weakness, not to condemn all the infirmities of
humane nature. The wretch not daring to deny a crime whereof his own
conscience, men, and the very elements, found him guilty; and besides seeing
himself so favorably dealt withal, threw himself at the feet of the young
Turk, and embracing his knees: My Lord, said he, it is true, I have committed
that theft whereof the Mute accuses me: The jewels are his, if he can be
c^ll'd the true owner of them, who for their acquisition has violated the
sanctity of the Tombs, and robbed the dead of those riches the living had lef^
them. But for fear you may believe that I will add some imposture to my
theft, be pleased to have the patience to know what I am, and how I became
master of this dumb man's riches: Know that I am born from one of the most
unfortunate and daring families of t^is Island; in giving me life it gave me
both her destinies: from my childe-hood I loved those undertakings where there
was something to be gotten, how hazardous soever they were; and without any
other knowledge then that of the common sense, I thought it better to (...)
young, then to grown old and miserable. I have traveled both by land and by
sea. (...) have borne arms with the Christians and with the Turks. I have
indifferently viol^ed my faith, and all for gain; and yet neither by ways
tolerated nor those forbidden* ^ath it been possible for me to get any thing.
I was not long since with the notable P^at Bajazet. I learnt from one of my
companions, that an unknown Prince caused to ^e built a magnificent Tomb in
the Island which you now see; and not content to m^e use of marble and brass,
he intermingled gold and precious stones in the structure (...) that proud
building. This news came so home to my swaying passion, that insta^tly I took
leave of my Captain and abandoned a profession which in spite of all the
^erills wherewith it is encompassed, may be called the delight of life. I will
not tell y^u the dangers I ran in returning to my Country. It is sufficient
that you know I ^me home but yeasterday, and that Fortune who has always
delighted to feed me wi^ fair shows, presented me presently with all the
treasures which I came to search f^. I entered into a wood of the weeping trees,
which is not above two hundred paces from the Rock whence I fell, and being got
into the middle, I descried the rich Monum^t of the unknown Prince. If my eyes
were dazeled with the luster of so much g^ld an^ gemms, my mind was far more
astonished. I ran to those treasures as to my sove^aigne happiness, and
conceiving designs as ridiculous as high, lost my reason so far as to
believe, that I could take from the great Polexander the Crown of all the
Ca^ies. Whilst my wild imagination was painting these pleasing Chymeras,
certain g^anes and a languishing voice came from the hollownesse of the Tomb,
and by the extreme terror wherewith I was stricken, some while was stopped
the covetous desire of my eyes and hands. But this vain affright lasted not
long. The ancients have expelled this tale, and though there be no misfortune
equal to mine, I did not think my self so unfortunate that the dead must
needs come out of their graves to cross my intentions. I came near to the
entry of the Monument, and through a grate of gold wherewith the ^ore was shut,
I saw so horrible a sight that I cannot keep my self from trembling whilst I
relate it to you. The Mute whom you have saved was shut within the Sepulcher
and without doubt had newly cut (...) of a man which lay stretched at his
feet. The Cymeter wherewith he had done this sad act, reek'd yet with the blood
that it had shed, and he transported with the horror of his murder, seemed as
he were losing his senses after he had lost his humanity. For in lieu of
benefiting himself by his homicide, he betook himself to weeping with most
strange looks and howlings. But it is very hard for a villain to keep long
the good motions which reason gives him. The barbarous Mute passed presently
from one extremity unto another, and be again the same man he was. He made an
end of the extravagant actions on the body of the dead, and though by his sighs
and tears he seemed to be exteamely afflicted, yet forbore he not to take from
him a scarlet robe wherewith he was covered, and by a cruelty without example
cleft open his left side and tore out his heart. I was terrified at an act so
barbarous. He himself that committed it, had such a horror of it, that the
heart and the sword which he held fell out of his hands; but as if he had lost
his sense, or had ^raightwaies repented him of his c^uelty he took up the heart
again, kissed it oftentimes (...) bloody as it was, and after by his tears and
cries he had given it his l^st dues, he shut it (...) one of those boxes which
he took from me: whilst I was thinking on the means to (...) this precious
heart and was measuring my courage and strength with those of the (...), I saw
him rifle the dead again, and take from him a lesser box then the first, but
(as (...) thought) far more fair and more rich. Instantly I resolved to
punish this cruel (...) of the dead, and to get by a just conquest those
treasures which he had purchased ^y ^hominable Sacriledges. For the easier
execution of this resolution, I got me furth^ off from the entry into the
Tomb, and hid me among the trees, the better to surpr^e this Mute, and to
send him to keep company with the other which he had rifled. H^ did not suffer
me to exercise my patience long, but out comes he from the Sepulche, his sword
all boudy in his hand, and so full of grief and rage, that, to have undertake^
^im, a man ought to have been no less desperate then he. He stalked along
fast by ^ee, threatening by his gestures both Heaven and Earth, and his fury
transporting him ^e ran with all his force right to that Rock from whence we
fell headlong together. This unhop'd for flight made me to change my
resolution and to bet^inke me that this business asked more cunningthen force.
I followed him then with that s^iftnes which has gotten me the name of the
best runner of Africa, and getting hold (...) him just as he was about to
throw himself into the Sea, I did that through avaric^ which another would
have done for compassion. When he found himself stayed he ^ell on me with
the fury of a Lion that is opposed in his passage. I told him that his ^paire
was unworthy a man of valor, and how extraordinary soever his misfortun^ were,
(...) ought not free himself from them by a way so base and criminal. My
discour^ having recollected him, he would have told me he had causes enough
why he should hate t^ live, but believing he did not sufficiently express
himself by his signs he took me by the hand, and led me back to the Tomb,
where opening the go^den grate, and making me enter he showed me the body which
I had before seen. At t^is sad object he renewed his plaints and tears, and
was a long time thus celebratin^ the funerals of that dead.

I that had no other thought but to execute my first design, was about fo^re
or five times to rid my self of him, but being, I know not by what fear, as
often hindered, I got him from the Sepulcher and led him toward the Sea side,
the night took us ere we got thither, and was followed with so great a
darkness, that in spite of a^ my care, and all the eyes which hope and fear
could give me, I was separated from the Mute. I gave not over walking all night
long, for fear of losing him: But it was already day when I found him sleeping
at the point of that Rock whence you saw us fall. For fear of wakening him, I
laid my self softly down close by him, and made so good use of the slight
that diverse excellent masters have taught me, that nimbly and insensibly, I got
from him his two chains and the boxes tide to them. I put them presently about
my neck, and to have no more to do with the Mute, resolved to send him to his
eternal sleep. But in the very instant, Fortune, (who had run mad if any
good had betided me) awaked him, and made him take notice not only of what I ^d
done, but of that which I was on the point to execute. He threw himself upon
me with a terrible fury, and in spite of all my resistance lifted me from the
ground grasped me with his arms so strictly that I could scearce breath,
carried me to the point of our fatal Rock, and howling as a beast enraged,
threw me headlong with himself into the Sea.

See Sir the unhappy success of an enterprise whereon my highest hopes were
planted. Suffer me now to complain of you, and instead of asking you pardon
for my faults, to accuse you for the hindering of their punishment. Why have you
drawn me from the bottom of the Sea, and by a cruel pity, given me the
feeling of my miseries and the knowledge of sad fortune? Let the happy Mute
possess in quiet (since I see it your resolution) those so ill gotten riches;
but let him not possess them for ever to my perpetual despair, and at least
grant me the loss of my life, that with it I may lose the thought of so much
treasure as was once assured me. The young Turk that was not ignorant o^
for^es injustices, stood less on the ill inclinations of this soldier, then
on his co^stancy and disgraces: And assuring him that if he would live well he
would make him fortune; made him to reflect on the calumnies which he had
invented against the M^ and to confess in spite of his envy, that that man had
as much innocence as courage. It (added he) let us know the rest of his fortune,
and try to draw from him by sign ^r writing, that which thou can not tell
me. Herewith he caused the Mute to com^, with the rest that followed him out,
and having entreated him to remember no more ^e actions of the Canarian,
besought him to make known what Prince it was w^se heart he carried. The Mute
drew out that beloved heart from his bosom, and after h^ often kissing it,
held it up aloft, as if he would say that it was the heart of a man
in^mparable. After many inarticulate exclamations he presented it to the young
Turkeand showing him with his finger the Island of Iron, invited him to go
there on shot to have a full understanding of those adventures which he could
not recount to him. And when he saw that the young Turk made no more haste to
be gone be feared that ^hey conceived not his meaning, and therefore to make
himself better understood, he ^oke his other box, and with a countenance full
of indignation and sadness delivered ^t to the Turk. He received it, and
curiously regarding it, observed that the diamonds ^erewith it was covered were
not only of an extreme beauty and greatness, but that they were too almost
all graven. Upon some they might see flames which seemed, to give the diamonds
the luster which they owed them. Upon others ciphers of several fashions, of
Scepters mixed with arrows, crowns of palms, and mirtles interlac'd one
within another. After he had well viewed the cover of the box, he opened it
and found with, the Pict^re of a young Marvel, who by the Majesty which the
Painter represented i^ the face, made her condition to be better known then by
the Crown she wore on her head. The delicateness of her feature, the
carnation of her lips, and the beauty of her color would have made her to have
been taken for a child, but that the becoming fulnes^ of her neck and breast,
and the luster of her eyes made them judge her to be about fif^ene or sixteen
years old. Her hair was neither too light nor too brown, and seemed to be
expressly made to accompany a face so perfectly delightful, and highten a
t^cture so wonderful lively. The young Turk having been long fixed on this
Picture restored it to the Mute, and told him he had never seen the original.
The Mute oftenstriking his breast, and receiving the Picture again in choler
made them know by h^s actions that she was the sole cause of the death of the
unknown Prince, The Turk ^eing not yet well satisfied of his doubts, resolved
to land in the ^sland of Iron, and (...) go to that famous Monument to have
some intelligence of the Mutes actions. He c^uld not execute his intention, for
just then a mariner which was at the scuttle of the s^ip witnessing at once his
vigilance and care, cried out, Sails, Sails, Sails of Mo^cco. These few
words brought such a fright and confusion into the ship, that the Marin^s
harkned not to the Pilot nor the Soldiers to the Captain, and some there were
who ^ot daring to attend the death that threatened them, threw them selves into
the Sea to ^revent it. The young Turk who was the only man that stood firm
amongst the fall of ^ll his, opposed an incredible greatness of courage to
their not to be believed astonish^nt. He ran up and down the vessel, his
sword in his hand, and striking some and men^ing others, gave them at least a
just cause of fear; and perceiving that this new terr^ made them forget their
first, and that all had recovered themselves from that extremity whereinto the
voice of a poor Mari^er had thrown them: Well my companions (quoth he) that
has happened to you which has betided the valiant'st Soldiers, and you h^ve
learnt by a violent but short experience, that men, how hardy soever, are not
mast^s of their first apprehensions. Certainly it should be a monstrous
prod^gy that even those men who showed so much courage to obtain their
liberty, should have none wh^ there is question of conserving it? No, no, it
shall never be said that we fell under ^uch a misfortune; with the same courage
we broke our chains in pieces, and in spit^ of all the Moors resistance
opened our prisons, we should endure their brunt and reve^e our selves of their
barbarousnesse. Without all doubt, that all migh^y hand which pr^ects all just
causes, will strengthen ours; and may be that it is it self which brings us ^r
tyrants, that we may make them our slaves by a lawful retribution. But whence
^mes this new terror that I see in your faces? Has the name now of your enemes
more power over your souls then had their fetters, flames and hangmen? I am
decei^d my companions, and am an ill interpreter of the ca^nge of your
countenance. T^a g^nerous anger and an impatient desire of revenge, which heats
your blood and ^ives you these warlike emotions. Conserve your brave fury, and
consider that after we had broke our prisons, slain our guards and got this
vessel, if we should not now h^ve a full resolution to exterminate these
Barbarians, which are desperately mad at our escape, we shall make our
condition far worse then it was before. Hap what may, let the worst come, yet
let us set them a dear rate on our lives, and envelloping them in our own
loss, make them incapable of remembering their victory or that without tears
they may never call it to memory. There was no blood so frozen which this
eloquence heated not, no mariner so fainthearted which wished not already to be
at handy strokes with the enemy. Presently the fair Turk commanded them all
to arms and placed every one in his station. The Pilot receiving what order he
was to keep in a fight so unequal, put off from the Island of Iron, and to
satisfy the generous impatience of his Captain, got before the enemies, and
into the open Sea, and the advantage of the wind. The eight vessels which
with full sails came on him, disposed themselves with so much order for fight
as if they had been the weakest. They separated and cast themselves into the
form of a half moon, and advanced in such so^ that they seemed to enclose
that ship which sailed foremost. This vessel always kept ^e advantage it had
of the other seven, and leaving them a pretty way behind, made (...) Turks
believe that she would first begin the fight. But they were no sooner within
canon shot, when those within her struck sail, and by all fashions used at
Sea, ^timated to the Turks, that they came not to fight with them, but to put
themselves under their protection. The generous Captain deliberated not what
was the most sure to be done in so dangerous a conjecture; straight granted
those suppliants the assistance they desired, and advancing to shelter them,
told them in passing that he would defend ^em against all the world. They
thanked him by long shouts and confused voices an^ got to the backside of the
Isle of Fer; whiist he (ravished that so many rare adventures should present
themselves all at once) took a head piece and a buckler, and turning ^o his
companions; Acknowledge (quoth he) dear consorts in my bonds and liber^, that
fortune comes fairly to reconcile herself to us. We thought, that to witnes^
the contin^ance of her hatred, she would have enforced us to a necessity of our
defense, and behold, (to make her love appear) she invites us to the
protection of others. Let each of us receive as he ought her first favors; and
since she is usually in love wi^ great darings, show in this occasion, that it
is with justice she should now affect us* This said, he put his hand to his
sword, and commanded his gunners not to shoot till ^s enemies had first
discharged. But the strangers in stead of falling all at once on his v^ell,
opened on the right and left, and let them see that they had no other intent
the^ to follow their prey that was escaped them. The fair Turk was not
satisfied with this declaration. He caus^d his ship to be steered foreward, as
he meant to stop the way to ^at of his enemies which was the foremost and
greatest. Before he came close, he sa^ appear on the ^oope a man armed at all
poins, who by his action seemed to be no or^nary person. As Soon as he thought
the Turk might hear him, I have respected the said he, thinking thee one of
the Subjects of Alcidiana; but thy habit shows that I ^s deceiv^d; what art
thou then that being so weak dare undertake the defense of ohers, and do
it without knowing whether thou mai'st do it with justice or no? Th voice of
the afflicted which cries and asks succor (answered the Turk) against the
violence of their persecutors is always accompanied with Justice. But whence i
it (quoth he) that knowing Justice so well thou do practice it no better,
and wilt (...) on the weak, the tyranny which thy force advises? I impute thy
injuries to t^ g^nerosity replied the other, and should be glad, if I had time,
to know who thou art that sh^l be at an other time (quoth he) in the mean
while stay me no longer, if the intend'^t not to expose thy self to those
violences wherewith thou reprochest me. The ^ire (...) touched with those
threatenings, and enflamed with that fire which honor ^ndles in young courages:
No, no, said he, I cannot forsake the miserable, whom ^aven has given me in
protection, since henceforward I am answerable to it for their ^erties and
lives. And think not that I will leave thee, till I see thee leave to pursue
the^. For the rest learn that audacious threatenings never aff^ight those who
know ^ll how to chastise the authors. Thy resolution is fair replied the
other, but if thy act^ons be answerable to the greatness of thy words, use no
other arm then thine own in this glorious correction, and command thy
companions to be only the spectators of o^r combat. I assure thee, that all
those which are with me shall exactly obey the order I shall prescribe them.
The young Turk in lieu of answering him turned to his followers, and to oblige
them to lay down their arms; my companions (said he) you have heard the
enemies proposition, if you love me accept it, and permit me to rob you of
that part of honor which you might have gotten in this combat. The Turks (may
be well contented with this petition) willingly obei'd the command of their
Captain, and he addressing himself toward his Antagonist, why ^inger we
(said he)? See my friends are all as you desired; and in so saying came one to
give the first blow; but he was prevented, and received so weighty a blow on
his headpeece, that he knew by this essay that he had met with an enemy such
as he had often wished for. He would instanly show what his power was, and with
his full strength struck at his enemy, who putting it by, gave the young Turk
a second blow. This Lions-heart considering nothing but victory, threw
himself from his own ship into the others, and revenged himself of the
blows he had received. He puts by, presses on, strikes, joines nimblenesse to
strength, and searches his enemy in every part where he thinks him unarmed.
The other who was glad to find so valiant an adversary, spared him, and let
him not feel the weight of his arm, but in that measure where to the
necessity of overcomming obliged him, yet letting fall a blow on the head of
the fair Turk more heavily then he was aware on, he made him stagger, and
forced him to set one knee on the deck. This fearful stroke being seen by
the spectators, some grew pale, and the others, by an indiscretion of persons
too affectionate cried out that Polexander was always unequalled and ever
victorious. The young Turk no sooner heard the name of Polexander but he threw
away his sword and buckler, and cast himself at the feet of his enemy,
Polexander was astonished at this action but he was more when the young Turk
put off his helmet, yes, said he, Polexander is ever without a Peer and
always victorious; and the rash Iphidamantus too much honored to be vanquished
by an arm that may subdue the whole world. My Lord (said he) you see at your
feet that Iphidamantus who would call himself the most unfortunate of men, if
he had not the happiness to be your brother. Iphidamantus my brother?
Re^epli'd Polexander that cannot be, Iphidamantus is long since dead. One of a
good aspect, hereat stepping in; sir said he to Polexander, after he had well
looked on the young Turk; the Prince Iphidamantus is not dead, as the Queen
your Mother would make you believe. He was given to the Sultan Bajazet for the
ransom of the King your Father. And is this then, cried Polexander that
Iphidamantus whom I have so long bewailed? Ah my dear brother how happy and
welcome to me is this meeting? But (and it please you) we must not let that
vessel escape, whose taking, you hindered. If I loose her you loose Polexander
the same day you found him. She belongs to Alcidiana and the Pilot that
governes her is the only man that knows which way to get to the Island of that
fair Princess. Iphidamantus very sorry to be the cause of Polexanders
displeasure, entreated pardon for his fault, and hearing the Prince who held
him embraced, to sigh. I vow said he never to rest till you have recovered
that which by my indiscression you have lost. Polexander pressing him to his
cheek, my dear brother said he, I will not refuse your assistance, but I am
afraid least it come too late, and in thus saying he commanded his vessels to
steer after that of Alcidiana. They all set sail together, and that of
Iphidamantus with the rest, whilst Polexander taking his brother apart, and he
who first entered conversation with them, understood all the adventures that
this fair Prince had run through in the Court of the Grand Seigneur, and the
occasion that made him forsake an Empire, where he could expect no less place
then that next to the Sovereign. On the sudden the impatience and
displeasure of Polexander breaking out; doubtlessely said he we shall loose the
vessel of Alcidiana. Do one thing, said he to Iphidamantus which may take
effect: Go back into your own ship, and follow Linceus alone. I imagine that
in acknowledgment of the favor you have done him, he will stay for you if you
come in sight of him. I follow him not but for his own good as much as mine; I
think you will find naught amiss in a desire so innocent. Iphidamantus,
yielding to the desire of his brother, went into his own ship, and meeting the
Mute whom he had saved, he made him understand by his signs, that he would
feign go into Polexanders ship. He asked him not his reason, because it had
been so much loss of time, but set him a board and made toward the north side
of the Isle of Fez. Polexander pli'd to the other side, and as he was
commanding his men somewhat he perceived the Mute in action of a man
transported with grief and choler. He asked him the subject of his agitation.
But the Mute turning his head aside disdainfully presented him the lesser of
his two rich boxes, Polexander ^o sooner saw it but he knew it, and taking it
with a great fervency, opened it with as much unquietness. As Soon as he saw
the fair picture therein enclosed; O glorious and only relics of my former
happiness, said he, dear treasure, which I have recovered after so long a
loss; is it to revive my hopes again, that heaven has permitted me this
review? O fair picture me seems thou answer'st me that my felicities are
returned with thee, I do as assuredly believe it, as if Alcidiana had spoken
it from her own mouth, and will consult henceforward with thee as with that
fatal star, by whose direction I hope once to arrive at the inaccessible
Island. After he had long regarded the portraict, he began to rethinke on the
means to gain the original. Giving then many great thanks to the scornesull
Mute, and causing his ships to separate and take diverse courses, he sailing
alone, the third day discried the vessel of Alcidiana. He gave her chase two
days, and mist bording her between the Isle of Teneriffe and the great
Canaries. But the famous Linceus adding by his art a new swiftness to his
ship that was an excellent sailer, had always the best of the more slug vessel
of Polexander, and by favor of the night and wind, got herself at last
clean out of kenne. Polexander almost desperate at this ill success, began to
take on at fortune, the winds, the sea, and sometimes on Iphidamantus
himself. But being all four equally deaf to him, they gave no answer to
either his injuries or prayers. It is true that Iphidamantus employed all his
care and wit to content his brother, he searched all the ports of all the
Canaries, and carried by his affection as violently as by the storm, ran
within sight of the coasts of Morocco, never dreaming what punishments were
there prepared for him and his companions. Whilst he thus forgot himself, and
seemed to disvalue a treasure which was ever to him more dear then his life,
his Marines discri'd off at sea five or six Carvells and assured him that they
were of Morocco. These vessels with full sails came upon him, and put him out
of those thoughts which had taken him up since he parted from Polexander. He
altered his course to content those that were embarked with him; and though
his great heart was not well contented with his providence; yet he chose rather
to submit himself to this secret shame, and inward reproach, then to expose his
companions to the hazard of either the loss of their lives or a second
slavery. For all this, an irrevocable decree had ordained that they should once
again fall into the hands of the Moors, and in effect at day break they
found themselves begirt with their shipping. The Moors came toward them
without shooting, and showed by that, that either they feared to lose them in
the cloudy smoke of the Canon, or rather that they had resolved to take them
alive. Iphidamantus essai'd to hearten his soldiers by a second oration, and
would have persuaded them that this second occasion was no more dangerous to
them then the first: But they seeing themselves closed in on all sides, and
hearing every where resounding the name of Enoramita, and those of Abdelmelec
and Mahomet, hearkened no more to him; nor thought of any thing but how by the
means of a sudden death, they might avoid the long and horrible tortures
which to them seemed inevitable. They therefore thought no way better then to
be killed in the fight, and for this reason only betaking them to their arms,
and by it showing a mind to defend themselves, by a mere despair they
betook them, to what neither the sense of honor nor the eloquence of their
Captain could ever have produced from their astonished hearts, Upon this
resolution, the Pilots presented the Moors two broad sides, and the gunners
made their shot so effectual, that at the first discharge of their Canon, they
sunck a Carvell of the enemies, and another was put out of fighting. Those that
were in the rest, unwilling to stay on their first discretion, so much
disadvantagious to them, gave fire to their Canon, and all to gether came
thundering on the vessel of Iphidamantus. The fight was long and bloody, and
though this young Prince carried death and horror in every place where the
conservation of his companions called him, yet was he enforced to yield to
number, and to see his victorious arms bound, that had broken the fetters of
so many miserable bondslaves. The fair speches of his victors, and the
assurances they gave him of triumphs already prepared for him in Morrocco, no
way appeased the hardy and generous sorrow wherewith he exclaimed on the
inconstancy of fortune, and yet (resolved to suffer the cruellest tortures) he
entreated the Moors with their best alacrity to bring him to the King their
Master. The Moors gave him no answer, for they heard a calling to arms, and
presently descri'd a great vessel, which contemning the number of the enemies,
came proudly to set on them. If any one traveling through Africa has seen a
great and furious Lioness, fly in on the hunters, and having dismembered part
of them snatch from the rest the young Lion they had stolen from her, might
imagine the horror and success of this fight. At the first, two of the four
victor vessels soon changed their fortune. The Canon of the last comers
shattered them in pieces, and the Captain leaping out of his own ship into
one of those the Moors had left, overthrew and klled whosoever durst oppose
him. He heaped the dead on one another, and passed to the vessel of
Iphadamantus, and seeing him bound, and by many guarded, dispersed the company,
slew some, and forced the rest into the sea. Iphidamantus would not owe all
his safety to this new Conqueror, but as soon as he saw himself with guards,
caught up a sword which some had left by him, and though he were so strictly
bound that he could not free his hands, yet he made shift to place some blows
on the Moors. His deliverer unbound him, and showing some impatiency in his
victory, come brother, come said he let us scourge the rashness of these
Barbarians, who seem to be armed for nothing but to oppose our designe^. With
these words, Iphidamantus knowing the voice of Polexander, I follow your good
hap and courage said he, and since I have your protection, I defy all the
malice and power of fortune. And ending thus, he threw himself amongst his
enemies in immitation of Polexander, and not only bea^e them from his ship, but
followed massa^ng them with such a sury within their own, that he left none to
carry news of their defeat to Morocco. After the two brothers had by spe^ches
worthy Christians acknowledged their ^ictory came from heaven; they embraced
oftentimes, and to witness how worthy they were to command, looked after the
number of their dead and wounded* Polexan^er ^ound few of his missing. His
brother had lost far more, but he comforted himself with this warlike
reason, that a victory is not bought but with the (...) of much (...).
Polexander would have asked him, what had betided him, since they separated;
when the Mute presented himself, not with a countenance fu^ious and ^d, as at
first, but ^ling. He showed them two great wounds which he had ^ough the body.
O^ Hero pitied him and grieved to see him in that lamenta^le estate, and
judging by his wounds with what courage he had behaved himself in the fight,
commanded his (...) to take him into his care as i^ were his own person. The
Mute smiled hea^ him say so, and instead of suff^ing them to search his wounds,
he laid at the feet of Polexander a written parchment, on the parchment the
(...) of (...) before sp^ken o^, and in the very in^ant gave up the ghost with
a certain (...) and joyfullnesse, (...) seemed to intimate wha^ an (...),
thing life was to him. Polexander took up the (...) and the parchment, and
(...) with his brother into a (...) as well ^o be off ^om (...) object of the
Mute, as to ^taine and refresh themselves. Being alone, Polexander related to
his brother the (...) success of his vo^age, and by what a visible opposition
of fortune, he could not (...) ^he ve^ll of Lin^. But my deate Iphidam^* said
he, I complain ^esse of this my (...) enemy then I was resolved because in
(...) ^ing from me the most happy place where Alcidiana reigns, she has
brought me (...) others, where I may both see and serve what is most d^re to me
(...) to that fai^e Princess^. Iphidamantus gave an acco^nt (...) of what he
had done in all the ^naries, and told him by wh^t chance he fell into the (...)
of the Subjects of (...) of Morocco. Surely, said he, had you not so happily
(...) for m^ as you d^d, I (...) lost all hope of ever being delivered ou^ of
^he (...) of that (...). I (...) sometime tell you what cause I have given him
for his malice ^o (...); for the present we will think of things more urgent.
It Is thought on w^ll (...) Polexander, let us then (...) to meet with the rest
of my ships whose (...) I have commanded to be (...) Isle of Alcidiana, (I have
so called the Isle of (...) since I conquered it). The (...) incomparable
brothers presently commanded the Pilots to stand for the Island, and (...) a
very favorable g^le had soon (...) sight of the coasts of Africa. Polex^
(...) more then two hours as it were buried in his musings, (...) coming at
let ^o himself* and finding in his hands the heart and writing left by the
Mute: Let us (...), said he ^o Iphidamantus, what that poor dying man le^t us.
He (...) the (...) and (...) what follows.

The Mute Almandarin to the (...) happy (...)*
SInce that death, which I have (...) is shortly to bring (...) rejoyne me with
the best part of my self* I (...) ((...) enemy of Alman^) together with his
heart, leave thee the History of his fortunes and tell thee that one sad blow
has freed thee from that noble and worthy Rival, who, alone, could dispute
with thee, the possession of Alcidiana. Accept of these two presents; and if it
be a verity that the greatness of thy valor, would never triumph over those
it had subdued, use not Almanzor with less humanity then thou have done
others. Be favorable to his Petitions, hearken to the words of his heart,
forget thine own interests, to do an act worthy thy transcendent virtue; and if
ever thy good destiny bring thee to the inaccessible Island, present to the too
fair Alcidiana, this heart which the enamored Almanzor has sacrificed to her,
as the worthiest victime by which he could testify the excess of his zeal,
and passion to serve her. Almanzor, O! Polexander, was extraordinarily, but
surely most justly destinated to succeed the valiant Zabaym, who since forty
years reigned in that fair and delightful country, which in the midst of the
heat of the Torrid Zone, conserves a perpetual spring and continual
fr^ischeur. Zabaym having (almost to the loss of himself) loved the virtuous
Almanzaira, who by an admired miracle, (in all Africa) was borne white on the
banks of Zaira, forsook her for some considerations of love and jealousy,
presently after he married a fair young Lady, who by the powerful luster of
her eyes, and her enchanting wit, was capable to set the crowns of the whole
world on her own head. Of this conjunction came Almanzor, who was bred up on
the banks of Senega, with all the care that the love of the father, and
ambition of the mother were capable to find out for his conservation. He was
but four years old, when Fortune, weary of her long favoring the Queens
designs, overthrew the very foundations on which she had built them: She had a
strange curiosity to know things to come, and to that end imploi'd her credit,
her entreaties and treasure, to draw to her from all parts of Africa those whom
she thought fit to content her desire: amongst a great number of deceiving
Juglers, that were about her, there was a famous Dervis, which she had against
his will enforced from his solitariness on the Mount Atlas, who being urged to
tell her the fortune of her self and son, one day spoke to her thus: Happy
Queen, I see not thy greatness threatened, by any of those accidents, by which
crowns are often thrown from the heads of Kings. Thou shall die in thy
royall-fortune, and even those who now are jealous and envy at thy glory,
shall at last, come and petition thee for thy amity and protection. There is
only one thing, without which, thou should be exempted from the general
condition of mankind; I know how sensible you are in that place where I must
now touch you, but I should be ungrateful for all that you have done for me,
if I should deal with you, as men do usually with Kings; and if fearing to
disquiet you, I should suffer you to run to, and fall down a precipice, which
by you may easily be avoided. Know then, that this son, in whom (as lines in
a center) all your thoughts meet and end, and for whom there is nothing you
would not undertake, will run the hazard to die by the hand of a woman. Hinder
this mishap, and I warrant thee the immutability of thy fortune; so ended this
Diviner, and instantly took leave of the Queen. This Princess aff^ighted with
this prediction, had neither regard to the remonstrances, nor prayers; no not
to the commandments of the King, but from his arms took the young Almanzor,
and the fear of losing him, made her consent to a far absence, and by that
absence to his ruin; she presently sent for me, and telling me, that I was the
only man that could preserve to her her son; gave him me with a charge to get
me far from any town, or commerce with women, and to nourish him in the
Deserts, till the constellation which threatened him were passed over. My
inclination, which from my infancy made me an enemy to a Sex always so cruel,
or at least inconstant, found its proper element in the will of the Queen. I
made me ready for this long exile, and to make it to me as secure as
delightful, I reserved to me of all my slaves, none but my Eunuchs; the
little Almanzor, and my self, forsook the pleasant banks of Senega, and the
stately Palace which Zabaym had built on the declining of that great rock, to
which the Portugals have given the name of Cape Vert: after a journey of some
few days, we came into a Forest, not far from the Sea, where the Queen had
prepared a fit place for her sons retirement: we pleased our selves there,
and liked the place so well, that we did ordinarily talk of the state and
magnificence of the Court, with a kind of contempt; our lodgings were bedewed
round with lively and clear fountains, and every where we found exercise for
our courage, against the Lion, Leopards, or other wild beasts, we abode there
above fifteen years, and during that time, hunting, or fishing were almost our
sole recreations; sometimes meditation and letters took the place of their
enemies; but the stirring and warlike humor of Almanzor, drawing him to labor
and action, rarely would suffer him to enjoy the rest and the sedentary life of
a Student; yet when the violence of his exercise had brought him to his
chamber, he would willingly hear me; and the subtilty of his wit piercing into
things the most abstruce, he learned almost of himself, that which the most
knowing Arabians could not without much labor make me comprehend.

One day, wherein (for our common disaster) I could not follow him a hunting,
he was so earnest at it, that leaving behind him both hounds and hunters, he
lost himself in the Forest, and was there part of the night, I was gotten on
hoseback to go after, when I perceived him afar off coming in very slow pace.
O, what an alteration saw I in him, and how different from what he was wont to
be! instead of that mirthsomenesse which he had usually in his countenance, and
of that fire which sparkled in his eyes, when he had killed some Lion; I saw
his face all clouded with sadness, mingled with anger, and marked how his eyes
were all swollen with tears which he had lately shed, I alighted as soon as he,
and embracing him as I was wont to do, I told him I was glad of his sport; and
yet withal, found fault that he held my requests in no more esteem. My Master,
said he, (for so he called me) I find my self most unfortunate, for the
enjoying of so good a chase; I say, unfortunate, in such a degree, that to free
my self from such an horrible mishap, I am resolved to die. I replied, is it to
renew my disquiets? or to try the love I bear you, that you talk to me in so
sad a language? What dream you on Almanzor? or what prodigious melancholy has
made such a change in you in so short a time? He answered, My Master, I shall
never be so ungrateful to find my diversions in your discontents, nor so
distrustful, as to put your affection to any new trial: I know what I owe
you, and how well you love me; but to persuade me to live after the misfortunes
that are befallen me, were to take pleasure and rejoice at my shame. What
Monster cried I, interrupting him, what herb, or what Enchanter is there in
these Forests whose hidden power has caused so extraordinary an alteration?
Almanzor, my dear child, whither is your reason vanished, which gave you so
clear an insight in all things? Does there remain no more of it then will serve
for our destruction? Will you ruin my hopes, and recompense the pains I have
undergone in your breeding, by a despair, into which your resolutions will
plunge me? Live, my dear Master, (answered he without being moved) live
content, and let that wretch die, who by one only act has made it appear that
he possessed none of those virtues you taught him. You have always advised me to
temperance and humility, and I find my self in the extremity of pride and
ambition: you have often told me, that freedom and generosity, were the first
qualities of an honest man; and I have committed an act, the most poor and
crafty that can be spoken. What should I say to you? I have shamelesly robbed a
man of his treasure, that could not defend himself; and, as if that theft had
made me forget that I come of (...) ^ace, as yet more obscure then the life
which I lead in these Deserts; I have not feared to aspire to crowns, and to
pretend to a thing yet more precious: But, said he, I waste too much talk and
time; hold and mark, see there my booty, and withal, the cause of my
boldness and despair: herewith he delivered me this fatal box, which has
cost already so many lives and so much blood: I took it, considered the
Diamonds, and the engraving, I opened it, and by that it was an easy matter
for me to explicate the meaning of the hidden discourse of my dear Almanzor.
Alas, can I say what I saw without ending my miserable destiny? I saw that
picture so fair, and dangerous, whose original is not less inaccessible then
her place of abode, where, it seems, the gods gave her birth for the
destruction of brave men. You are now, (O Polexander) the lawful possessor of
this portraict; and grant, O Fortune, that it be not so deadly to you, as it
has been to the constant Almanzor. As soon as I knew his grief, I tried to
cure him by contemning it: if you love Diamonds, (said I) I have at my command
far fairer then those you have found; and if this crowned picture make you
affect crowns, I can satisfy your ambition, provided that by your virtue, you
will make your self worthy to wear them. Ah my dear Master, (answered he) if
my soul be covetous, it is neither of gold nor Diamonds; and if it be
ambitious, it is not to possess indifferently all sorts of crowns; I love
them, but it is on the head, or to say better, in the possession of that fair
Princess. What call you a fair Princess (I replied) with a voice that
signified my displeasure. The picture which you see is nothing but the vain
amusement of some idle man, who joining his colors to his proportions, would
expose to our view, I know not what greable and pleasant fantasy, which never
yet had being in nature, do not continue your cunning (said Almanzor) I now
conceive what has been the end of your lessons and retirement. But my dear
Master fortune is more ingenious then you; read this paper and you shall see
that this is not the vain strength of imagination of the painter. I took the
paper and found on it verses, which had this superscription: To the
incomparable Alcidiana Queen of the inaccessible Island. I read the praise of
this Princess, without the consideration of any thing, save the loss of my
pains and time, the ruin of all the preventions of the Queen of Senega, and
the sad, but infallible accomplishment of those predictions which had driven us
into the Forest. I protest that grief and anger, took not only my speech from
me, but with it my discretion; so that I had not enough, left me to conceal my
discontent. Almanzor seeing me so transported. What (said he) is this picture
so dreadful to Philosophers, and made-up-men, as to hunters and children? Can
the ridiculous fancy of a painter, stagger that great soul, which seemed to
have exhausted all the learning of the Doctors of Fez and Thunis? Would to the
Gods, (I answered seriously) O Almanzor that you had looked on this picture,
with the same eyes I di^! You had found there both cause of a version and
neglect, whereas now for the general misfortune, of so many, who expected
their safety, from your wisdom and valor; you have met where withal to make
you a slave to a brutish passion, and may be to languish all your life in
slavery, sloth, and despair. I will prevent (...) shameful brutalities, and
great disasters, replied Almanzor, and I had already taken t^ f^re from you, if
(before my death) I had not desired to make use of your fidelity, for the
restitution of what I have stolen. But my dear Master, if it be a truth that
you (...) Alm^zor, trouble not your self any furth^r, to make him alter his
resolution. He ^st love: and because he is unworthy, prepares ^imselfe for
death. Yes divine Alcidi^a, it shall not be spoken ^at a barbarous fellow,
^orne in the Deserts of Africa, has (unpunished) dared to cast his eyes on
your incomparable beauty. The rash Almanzor shall perish, and his blood shed,
for the expi^tion of hi^ offense, shall serve for an admonishment to oth^s like
^im, that those (...) ^o have (...) enough to avenge the Gods, that have imp^y
sufficient ^o (...) the^. A^ ingrat^ll Fortune! Why giv'st thou m^ thoug^s ^o
(...) my co^ion, so (...) to my apprehension. Since I was borne f^ the Wi^sse
and will ^sts, why have I not low desires, and brutish imaginations? The
agitations and dis^rse of Almanzor, showing me evidently that h^s wounds had
(...) ye^ (...) enough, to apply the first remedy: I intended to let time w^ke,
and to give way to the (...) of a (...) which I could not stop, that I might
not be altogether ^rofitable in desiring to be too rigorous. I therefore began
to ^tter this y^ung Prince, and told him that love was a passion which might be
diverse ways considered: That in some it insp^red the greatness of actions,
and as such she might be justly called the Mother of fame and glory; but in
others, as the Daughter of idleness, she betrayed their birth and courage,
^often their hardiest inclinations, and breeding in the Heroes themselves
desires, weak, and ^ffeminate, making them betake ^mselves to the needle and
the distaffe. My dear Almanzor, (I added) it shall be you^ (...), if you make
not good use of a matter so proper to all kind of forms. Let her have (...)
fairest she is capable of; and do not imitate those cunning but capricious
Artisans, which come off in nothing so well (...) in making Monsters. My Master
(answered Almanzor) my passion is of those that inspires high resolutions, and
swaies the mind to glorious actions; but what boots it me to have these
motions, since I want the power to put them in execu^ion, and possess not
those great Fortunes, without which the fairest virtues lie unexercis'd?
Almanzor, accompanied his discourse with so many sighs and ^eares, that being
no longer able to hide what till then he was ignorant of; comfor^ your self
said I, and hope well i^ the goodness of our Gods. If so be that you will
promise me, banish from your thoughts, (...) wherein your young (...) finde^ so
many pleasures: I will discover to you such secrets as shall make you
acknowledge how infinitely you are obliged to Nature and Fortune. He had scarce
heard me, when throwing himself at my feet, and embracing my knees, my dear
Master said he, I will live, if I may do it without shame; but do not abuse
my credulity to retard my death; you cannot deceive me long, and in doing so,
you will have done nothing but added another death to that I have already
prepared me. Almanzor said I, I will never betray you; know then that you are
borne to be a King, and are the Son of the victorious Sabaym, who by his valor
and conquests has reduced almost into one Monarchy, all the estates which are
watered by the one, and the other Nyle. At this day he reigns, and happily;
and he constrained by the love which he bore you, to hide you in these deserts,
he did me the honor to trust you to my fidelity. The generous Almanzor was not
touched with the least pride to hear himself in an instant so elevated. He
was on his knees when I began this discourse, and remained so after I had ended
it* and though I entreated him often to rise, no, no, my dear Master said he,
let us be still (if you please) the same that we were. Fortune that has been
able to change my condition, shall never alter my nature. You have given me
documents which are not subject to her inconstancy. I will keep them till
death, and if to be royally borne cause any alteration in my mind, it shall be
only such as you will wish for. My despair is ended, and hope succeeds it,
since (without too much boldness) it is permitted me to raise my thoughts, to
contemplate the portraict of Alcidiana: And to put in practice those brave
things that you have taught me. With this, he rose and taking me by the hand,
my Master said he, two new displeasures trouble the peace and quiet which you
give me. The remorse of conscience stings me. I feel, I know not what, that
reprocheth me, the baseness I acted in stealing the Picture of Alcidiana; and
a jealousy that freezeth my heart, tells me that the true owner of this
Portraict is a Monster, which should not be suffered to li^ any longer. I will
therefore instantly go and restore it, and withal submit my self to what he
pleases, for the reparation of the wrong I have done him. But after I ^ave
given him a full satisfaction, I will regaine by a just combat that which I
can neither keep without a just infamy, nor leave forever, without the giving
my self over to my first despair. You (may be) may imagine that my
resolutions come from those impetuous and inconstant flyings-out that usual
accompanies youth; believe it not my dear Master, for I would have you to
esteem me unworthy of your care and instruction; that the hope of ever seeing
Alcidiana be taken from me, if I follow not to the death, the executing of that
I have proposed. The Prince here staying, to let me speak; I told him that in
lieu of imputing the altering his intentions to the imprudency and heat of his
age, I would give him the title of a discreet man, if considering the
greatness of his birth and the duties that were linked to it, he would
sacrifice his love, his pleasures, and the thought of Alcidiana, to the welfare
of so many people, who after the death of Zabaym, expected their happiness and
support from his wisdom and courage. And it is not because I will now condemn
for a vice, that which lately I praised for a virtue; but there meet so many
difficulties in what you undertake, that though I approve of the cause, I
cannot allow of the effects. I believe that Alcidiana may be as fair as this
Picture shows her; nay I will go farther, and on the faith of the Poet, that
has so much praised her, I yield that she had an excellent wit, a conversation
incomparable, and that there is no less sweetness then majesty in her eyes;
let us now see the reverse of this Medall, and without being too indulgent, or
too severe to your passion, let us consider what you would undertake. You aim
at a happiness which none can attain to: You seek for a treasure unknown to
your self, and to all the world besides; and your enterprise seems to me no
less unreasonable, then if you went about to make a way up to Heaven, to fetch
thence one of the Goddesses we suppose there. Here Almanzor interruptingme, my
dear Master I pray (said he) stop there. I conceive what you would say; but
know, that, that which does usually smother the desires of most men, is it,
which increases mine. The difficulty excites my appetite. I would penetrate
further then is permitted to my equals, and have made known my courage by the
impossibility of those things I undertake, if I cannot do it by the felicity
of my success. And now I will tell you by what chance the Picture of Alcidiana
came into my hands, and thereby, make you confess, that there is a fatality in
my adventure. You have heard from my companions the beginning of our chase; I
will only tell you what betided me after I was stragled from them.

The Lioness which we had struck, lead us so quick, and so far, that my
company and my dogs being left behind, I spurred on alone after her, and with
much eagerness, I followed, till her speed was too good for my horse, and so I
lost her; weary then, and ill pleased with the chase, I alighted, and from the
middle of that rock, whose trees ranged one above another, make an admirable
Piramis; I stood long considering the vast extention of the sea, which, by I
know not what horror, full of Majesty, at one time, both astonisheth the
understanding, and ravisheth the sense: I saw in the road a very great Ship,
and afterward a Shallop, which was run on the sand, curiosity, (which is
natural to me) and a desire to know who was landed on our shores, forcing me
to leave the woods and the chase; I tied my horse to a tree, and by diverse
windings on the mountain came down to that little haven where we are wont to
take boat for our fishing; from thence I perceived amongst those trees, which
cover the Lions fountain, something extremely shining: At first I thought it
had been one of those fair serpents which have their scales, as it were gilded;
but the object growing greater, as I drew nearer, I distinctly saw that it was
a man armed at all points; when I was some ten or twelve paces from him, I
perceived he slept, and that he was unawares fallen asleep, because he had
before him the picture of Alcidiana, and held in his hand the paper that I
showed you. I drew nearer to him as softly as I could, and by chance having
cast mine eyes upon that divine face, (which henceforward must make my good or
bad fortune) I stood so surprised, that it was impossible to take me off; the
more I saw it, the more I desired to see it: From the pleasure of seeing, I
passed to the desire of possession, and without thinking on the stealth, I was
about the act, I was enforced by an Imperious and blind motion, to take from
him this fair portaict, with the paper which the Knight had moistened with his
tears. It fell out happily for me, that as I was about to take it from him, if
fell out of his hands, as soon as I had them both, I fled. I was now gotten
far into the Forest, when my reason, got again into the place whence my
transport had thrust her, What do thou (said she) Almanzor? Has the wise and
valiant Almandarin so carefully bred thee up and tutored thee, that thou
should turn thief? consult with, and be advised by thy conscience, and she
will tell thee that she is tormented with a cruel remorse. But thou do but
too well know thy offense, since it compells thee to fly, and makes thee fear,
that this great Forest is neither obscure, nor thick enough to hide thee. I
confess, (my dear Master) this consideration staid me on the sudden, and made
me turn backward: but another thought more proud, absolute, and persuading my
preoccupated imagination represented to me, my theft, as a conquest, and spoke
to me so disadvantagiously of the sleeping Knight, that it made me pass for a
thief that robs in the sight of all the world, that he may possess without
trouble, a treasure whereof he thinks himself unworthy. It continued on thus;
it was for thee only Almanzor, that Love and Fortune ordained it; keep it without
seruple, as the gods gave it thee without condition; and run and search both by
Land and Sea, to find the place where reigns the miracle which this picture
represents. Whilst this strange Counselor advised me thus pleasingly, I
walked a round pace, and got to the place where I had tied my horse, I leapt on
him with haste and fear, that made me sensible enough of my fault, but the
violent and delicious poison, which by the sight of this fair picture had
troubled my judgment, would not suffer me to make any reflection upon mine
offense; it made me take pleasure in it, even then, when I condemned it, and
took from me its hatred, in disguising the foolishness of it; I was gotten
hither before I discovered it; but your discouse has unblinded mine eyes, and
I now see my action with all his blackness and deformities: I likewise make a
solemn vow to be my self the avenger of this crime, and to enjoy neither rest
nor contentment, till I have restored again this picture into the hands of the
Knight from whom I stole it. After he had finished these different discourses,
he commanded one of his slaves to bring him a horse, and without lending an
ear to any of my reasons, or to tarry till day, he parted from me, and
returned to the place where he had found the Knight sleeping. He came thither
at daybreak, but in vain, for the Knight was gone; and after Almanzor had
track'd the footings left in the sand, he knew that the man he searched for,
was again put to Sea: His sorrow was so much in seeing his ill without a remedy
that had it not been hindered by the strength and force of his slaves, he had
then slain himself, and made an end of his miserable destiny. Back he came
more sad, more ashamed, and more deject^ed, then if effect^ually he had been
as guilty as he imagined.

Two days entire he spoke to me of nothing but his pretended theft; and if the
thought of Alcidiana and her Picture, (on which his eyes were almost always
fixed) had not diverted his melancholy imaginations, grief and shame had
infallibly killed him. I knew not what counsel to take neither for himself
nor me, when happily, what say I? When unhappily, for all Africa, I received
letters from Zabaym and the Queen his wife. They sent me word that the
constellation which threatened their Son, had been changed by the death of
Almanzaira, and therefore to satisfy their mutual desire and the requests of
their Subjects, I should return to the Court with Almanzor. I showed him the
letters, and conjured him to suspend his passions and disquiets, that being
recollected to himself when he should present himself to the King his Father,
he might not belly the good opinion, which by my letters I had settled in them,
of his wit and courage,. My dear Master (said he) for your sake, I will strive
to hide all my defects, and make appear the excellency of the Artizan by the
beauty of the work. But keep me not long in this constraint; and since my
love as well as duty calls me whether you lead me, lets thither with the best
haste, and acquit our selves quickly of that which we owe to others, that
without more delay, we may do the like, in those things we owe to our selves.
I admired the strength of this young wit, and breaking off for ever my savage
conversation, took leave of our Cottages, and the Forests. I will not stand to
tell you with what magnificence and joy Almanzor was received of all the Court,
nor the ravishing delights that Zabaym and his Queen tasted at the sight of a
Son, who (without flattery) for the sweetness of his aspect, the grace of
action, and the beauty of his wit, was not outgone, I will not say by any
African, but by the best composed of all Europe. Zabaym held him long in his
embraces, and jealous of so rare a treasure, would not suffer the Queen to take
him from his arms, nor the dear Son to render what he ought to the love, the
tears, and impatiencies of so good a Mother. These first agitations being some
what calmed; Zabaym who long before had prepared all things to settle Almanzor
in possession of his Kingdom, made his will known to his Subjects; and a
little time after himself conducted Almanzor to the famous Temple of Senega,
and in the quality of Archpriest and King, taking the Crown from his own
head, set it on his Sons. After the applaudings, acclamations, and other
pleasing disorders of great Assemblies had given place to silence. Zabaym
addressing himself to his Son, with a high voice made them know his reason for
what he had done. Since (said he) I came to this Throne by extraordinary ways,
and that the chances and adventures of my life are rather recorded among the
miracles of our Gods then with the actions of men; I dare believe that my
experience is of more value then all the debatements of my Officers, and that I
may rank my particular opinions before the Maxims of my predecessors. This
being so, Almanzor, I am resolved to pass ov^r all the distrustful reasons of
my Counselors, and put that in execution which I have long time deliberated.
In the opinion of most men you are yet but an infant, but I know you too well
to give so ill a judgment of you, or to believe that you have not ability
proportionable to the burden I have laid on you. I therefore give you without
fear, that supreme power which my sword and pains have acquired me; and to
open you a way to the conquest of all Africa, I resign to you both my hopes,
and Armies. On then (with so fair omens) beyond the one and the other Nyle,
subdue the obstacles of our Mountains and Deserts, penetrate even into
Ethiopia, and make Africa which is now divided into so many Kingdoms, to be
the inheritance of one sole man. I know you ought to be very fortunate, to
bring to a good effect such great executions: But infallibly you shall be so,
provided, that your wisdom be not too cleersighted, nor your courage too
blind. Fortune yields to whosoever will violate her, and would have that
respect which is borne her to be mixed with boldness. Here Zabaym ended; and
fixing his eyes on his Son, looked for his answer, that he might judge, whether
he were worthy those hopes he had conceived of him. Though Almanzor had
pretentions directly opposite to those of his Father, yet in appearance he
seemed to follow his conceptions, and to witness it, made him this answer: I
know sir, that having the honor to be descended from you, I ought to be of
more value then those who have not that advantage. Yet it is not always an
infallible necessity, that the excellentest things produce their like. But for
fear of offending a judgment which without doubt has in it something of
divine, I renounce all distrust of my self, and go (since it is your
pleasure) to learn from time and occasions, if you be as good a prophet, as
you are (...) Father. Go my Son said Zabaym in embracing him, go, boldly, and
submit thy self to those rigorous trialls; I promise thee henceforward, and if
thou believe thine own courage, be assured, that neither the Nyle nor the red
Sea shall be any more put in the number of the bounds of Africa. Almanzor at
last being freed from these magnificent importunities, thought of nothing more
then of the means to be rid of the Crown which Zabaym had set on his head,
and to meet with the owner of Alcidianaes Picture-Fortune who is but too
favorable where she resolves to do a mischief, offered this young Prince a
fair occasion to execute his design.

Three Portugal Vessels were by a storm forced into the river of Senega, and
that being a Nation so covetous and industrious, that they will even make a
benefit of their own misadventures, four hundred men landed, and made an
extreme spoil in some places not far from the royal Palace. Almanzor,
hastened thither forced them to leave their booty, and to take from them for
ever after the daring to set foot ashore in any of those territories, beat them
home to their shallop^. Some were slain in attending his fearful blows
(whereby the King made known his extraordinary valor in his first combat)
others were drowned in getting to their vessels, and those which got abord,
found there but little more safety; for Almanzor getting the mastry of two
shallops, shipped in them some of his best soldiers, and himself advancing
through the fire and smoke of the Canon, gave them not over till he had either
killed or forced into the Sea, all that were in the greatest Portugal Ship.
His followers borded the other, and after an obstinate fight, gloriously
accomplished their Princes intention. These three vessels thus conquered, and
many Portugalls taken prisoners, Almanzor called me, and asking me what I
thought of this combat, my Master said he, I do not ask you this question, to
the end you should praise me, but to let you see what advantages and
opportunitie^ the defeat of the Portugalls has given me. Know that my vows
are accomplished, since I have where withal to find that Island, which in
spite of its name and situation (...) be ^o me no longer inaccessible. But
first it behooves that by a just title I possess the (...) o^ Alcidiana; and
that I force the Knight from whom I stole it (he blushed in (...) so) not only
to renounce his right, but for ever to abandon all his hopes in the (...). Lets
away then whilst all things are fitting for our departure, and let us not (...)
fearful spirits, who by the protracting of their deliberations, lose the (...)
execution. The conceptions of this Prince had many times already asto^ (...);
but this last added horror to my wonder. His discourse was a clap of thunder
(...)* I was struck down and senseless, yet the present necessity recalling
my spirits: My Lord said I to Almanzor there was a time when it might have been
permitted you to take these resolutions, and you might have committed some
faults without being questioned; but now, when so many souls live not but by
you, and that our Atlas is less^ necessary to the supporting the Heavens, then
you are to the conservation of Africa, you can no more dispose of your self.
You owe both your self and passions to the necessity of your Estate; yet the
only Alcidiana* (who at this time to make search for* through all toiles and
dangers is your esteemed glory) is the felicity of your Subjects. He answered,
my Master if I would make use of that sovereign aucthority to which you would
tie me as a slave, I should take away your liberty of contradicting me, but
that we may still be the same we have been, I give you leave to use your
freedom of speech, provided that I find fault with your instruction, since you
know that love and a Crown are incompatible, why have you advised me to join
them together? Or why would not you have me now to acquit my self of a duty
which has a precedence, and is more ancient in my soul then that of royalty;
no, no, I will never rob me of my self to give me to others; or if I must
needs be a slave, it shall be only to live under the commands of Alcidiana. But
O fair Princess can I give ear to a man that talks to me against your
service (...) Away, all considerations of greatness and vanity: Your chains
are of more value then my Crown, and the dart wherewith my heart is wounded,
more desired of me, then the Scepter they have given me. After this transport,
Almanzor stood a while silent, and on the sudden embracing me, lets on, said
he, lets on my dear Master where those felicities calls us which are not to be
found in a Throne. Thereupon he called for the most part of the Portugal
prisoners and using them as they had been his friends, promised them all both
their lives and liberties, if they would engage themselves to bring him to the
Inaccessible ^sland. One of the Portugalls speaking for the rest: The condition
says he that you propose to us, for the regaining our liberties is an absolute
denial of it. Set us on things possible and we will execute them with the
hazard of our lives. This bold and wise reply, exceedingly pleased the King,
and obliged him to explicate his proposition. I am (said he) far from intending
to engage you or your companions in impossibilities, no not so much as to will
you to the discovery of a Country yet unknown: You know that the Isle whither
I would sail, though it carries the name of Inaccessible, is not so, since it
is discovered; and it must needs be true that a vessel which I saw on these
coasts came thence not long since. The Portugal answered the King, that he
spoke nothing that was not most certain; that the Island mentioned had been
discovered by a Pilot of his Nation, that it was but a hundred leagues from the
Canaries, and that coming from Spain they made it on the North of those
Isles. That diverse had been by tempests cast on it, or by chance arrived there,
and that those which inhabit the Canaries had with all kind of industry and
expenses tried to make themselves masters of it, but their pains and
endeavors had been without any good success. Almanzor entreated the Portugal
to relate to him what he had heard or learnt touching that Island and the
Inhabitans there. The Isle, answered the prisoner, is so fertile, that those
who have seen it, believe, that the ancients in consideration of it only,
styled happy those Islands which now we call the Canaries. The verdure and
flowers are there everlasting, the harvests and the fruits, are above the hope
and desire of the most covetous, and the inhabitants live there in such a
vigor, that at threescore and fourscore years old they may pass for young.
There are many Towns. The Capital is one of the miracles of the World, and is
inhabited by people, in whom, valor, politenesse, and courtesy are
inseparable. The Princes which till this time have governed it, finding all
abundance, all pleasures and peace at home, have confind all their ambition
within the limits of their Island, and have not believed that there was any
thing else in the world worth their envy. It Is said, that now there reigns
there a young Marvel, so full of charms and virtues that she is the desire of
all Princes which have known or have heard speak of her. It Is sufficient, said
Almanzor, interrupting him; I desire nothing but that you will bring me as
near to that Isle as may. If you can land, the better fortune ours: but if it
be impossible, I will have you promise me on your faiths that you will not
forsake me for one whole year. The Portugal who thought not to be quitted on
so easy terms, bound himself and his companions to serve Almanzor for a
year in their vessels as faithfully as they had thitherto served the King
their Master. Almanzor that would have no other surety for their promises then
their faith, set them at liberty, and from thenceforward adventured himself
among them with as much confidence as he would have done amongst his own
natural Subjects. The Portugalls made it appear to him that they were truly
generous, for instead of resenting any shame of their defeat, they lost the
memory of it, and all the time they were with Almanzor, they did interest
themselves in all his designs with as much passion as if he had been their
own King. Before he set sail, he sent me for his Jewels which were of an
inestimable price, and forbad me absolutely the seeing of Zabaym or the Queen.
I did what he commanded me with as much celerity as grief and vexation, and
the same day came back to the ship wherein he was embarked. When he saw me
returned, we want nothing now (said he) but the favor of love and fortune, let
us promise to erect them Temples, that they may not abandon us in so fair an
occasion: this said, he gave leave to those Portugalls which were not useful
for him to depart, and restored to them their liberty, ship, and goods: And
himself presently got out of the river Senega and set sail toward the
Canaries. We had now lost sight of the pleasant mountains of Cape-verd, when a
vessel of greater burden then ours, saluted us a far off, with the discharge
of his Canon, and commanded us to strike sail. Almanzor, instructed by his
mariners what that noise meant: answer him again, says he, that we will not,
and let every one prepare to fight. This boldness no way astonished the
Portugals, but contrarily, judging by this beginning, that the process of
their voyage would be glorious and profitable, set themselves in an order, as
well to take as defend. The greater vessel (as a man of war accustomed to
overcome) showed. I know not what kind of fierceness, in coming nearer to us,
and enough to have terrified some timorous spirits: But the Portugals, who were
now in possession of making themselves every where terrible, contemned the
pride of that enemy, and presenting them a broad side, gave them fifteen
Canon-shot. Their approaches were more fearful then they were mortal,
although the two vessels, the air and the sea seemed all on a flame: After we
had we had fought in some distance, we laid one another aboard, and then there
began a combat between Almanzor and the Captain of the great vessel, which
merits a particular relation. Never strength and address were found so equal
in two combitants, and never did the greatness of courage sustain so long time
two bodies so stricken with weariness, and infeebled with wounds. But why
relate I a combat to thee, that know it better then my self; since it was
with thee, Polexander, that Almanzor contested? As soon as the tempest had made
an end of this duel, and that thy ship was carried one way, and Almanzors
vessel another. This Prince commanded the Portugals to follow thee, if it were
possible; and after this order given, went through all the ship, to see who
were wounded, amongst his own, he found one of thy soldiers, that lay, as it
were, dead; he had a great care of him, and when he saw him in case to speak,
asked him what thou were, and what thou look for in those seas. I wonder,
said the soldier, that thou art ignorant of that which is known to all the
world beside. He whom thou know not, is called Polexander, a Prince descended
from the greatest Kings of Europe, and himself King of all the kingdoms he
will look upon. Many are the causes that make him wander these seas: At this
time he is in search of that famous Captain of the pirates, Bajazet, to force
him to restore a picture which he has stolen from him. Almanzor thought at
first, that he was that pretended pirate, and that by some false intelligence
Polexander had been peswaded that Bajazet had the portraict of Alcidiana; he
therefore drew it out, and showing it to the soldier, mark, (said he to him)
if this be not the picture which Polexander has lost? The other viewing it
well, cried out, see, see the fatal face, that has been the cause of all that
we have endured, and will yet be the subject of all those dangers which we are
yet to run through. O! dear work of my hands, why are not we, or rather, why
is not Polexander in that place where his love gave me the invention to limne
thee, without the knowledge of Alcidiana: Imagine, great Prince, if after this
declaration, Almanzor had care of thy soldier or no, truly he was so chary of
him, that he caused him to be lodged in his own Cabin, and commanding him to be
used as himself, entertained him continually, either in discoursing of
Alcidiana, or of thee. When the soldier recompted to him thy great actions,
you might have seen Almanzor stirred with a thousand agitations: sometime he
blushed, as if he had been ashamed of himself, sometime he sighed, as if he had
envied so brave a life, sometime he grew choleric with his destiny, and then
talking, as if thou had been present; What Polexander (said he) and is all
that is valourous, all that is famous, and all that is happy reserved for thee?
O how well has Alcidiana done, to have chosen so deserving an adorer! But what
say thou, poor and unfortunate Almanzor? know thou not that, that
Polexander is the the fatal Demon which crosses thy intentions; and who
without all doubt, will make all thy hopes vain and frivolous? Get out, get
out, (infamous creature) from this vessel, where unprofitably thou consumest
thy time, and find out this cruel enemy, in what corner soever of land or
sea, that fortune hides him from thee. See, Polexander, the different language
that one same passion made thee poor Almanzor guilty of. He grew well this
while, and love and jealousy giving him suddenly such strength, that in all
likelihood, nature could so soon have brought him, he earnestly besought thy
soldier to show him where he might meet with thee. This Prince, said he, is
continually at sea, and tries all means to recover the good which he has lost:
sometimes he imployes the art and experience of Mariners to attain it,
otherwhile he gives himself over to fortune and the winds, and is absolutely
resolved to perish, if the heavens have doomed that he shall never more see
Alcidiana. Wandering thus on the Sea, think with thy self if it be possible for
me to denote to thee a place where thou may find him. It Is true, since the day
wherein his incomparable valor saved the Canarians from the Portugalls, and
for conserving the liberty which he got them, he accepted the title of their
King, he has sometimes come on shore in the Isle of Teneriffe, and otherwhile
in that which he calls Alcidiana. But his new Subjects have been forced to an
extraordinary care of his person when he has been above a day or two on land.
I have told thee that one occasion that made him wander so far from the
Canaries, was the desire to recover the Picture of Alcidiana. I will relate
another to thee, which to him was not less considerable: He is in quest of a
Pilot of that Queens, who is now at Sea, bound in her name to acquit a vow,
which every year the Princes of the Inaccessible Island are obliged to render
to some unknown Gods. When I was in that Kingdom, I learnt a secret touching
this ceremony, which to you may seem fabulous, yet among the Islanders passes
for a verity which no man must call in question: It Is, that whosoever is chosen
by lot to go in the name of the King of that Isle to celebrate the yearly
Sacrifice, fails not to meet in his return, a bird as white as a swan, by
whose flight steering his ship, he infallibly finds the right course to the
Inaccessible Island. Polexander, who has no other hope then in meeting with
these Pilots, waits for them every spring between the Canaries and the
Gorgades. He was so fortunate the last spring that he discried the vessel of
Alcidiana, but that good hap was but to increase his afflictions, for he lost
sight of her by the violence of the winds; and in spite of all industry was
carried on the coaste of Guine^. After he had run the hazard of a shipwreck
among so many Shelves and bancks of sand which makes those coasts so dangerous,
he found himself in the hands and at the mercy of Pirates, and without that
prodigious valor, that makes all those enemies fall at his feet, which fortune
raises against him, he had been now in the number of those brave slaves of
whom the famous Bajazet composeth the principal part of his magnificence. It Was
in that very place that he thought he had lost the picture of Alcidiana, but
seeing it in thy hands, I begin to believe that Bajazet is innocent of that
theft, whereof we have so often and so injustly accused him. At that word
Almanzor interrupting him, not only told him by what adventure he got the
Protraict, but let him know the reasons which obliged him to follow thee. And
since thou have such a resolution said the soldier; I advise thee to stand for
the Canaries; thou will infallibly find there, what thou searchest, and wilt
give no less contentment to Polexande^ then thou hopest for in the meeting
him. Almanzor followed his advise, and steered thy Islands. If I had undertaken
to write all the brave acts of the King my Master, I should now tell thee that
he fought twice with the valiant Pirat Thalemut, and after he had as often
given him his life and liberty, sent him back to Bajazet with this charge, to
tell him that his great reputation, wrought in him an excessive desire to see
him with his sword in his hand. I pass by the slight skirmish he had with the
Moors, and the massacre he made of them when he heard that by the shot of a
musket bullet I had lost my tongue and that he saw me all pierced with wounds
fall as dead at his feet: I do not speak of the delivery and freeing the
fair blind Indian Lady, and of the bloody fight he gave, to protect her from
the violence of the Spaniards. I conceal that miracle of judgment and
courage, by which he resetled in his Throne the unfortunate King of Zanhaga,
and come to that sad and glorious day, in which leaving to him the title of
conqueror, thou tookest from him that of being invincible. What Heroes have the
fables of the Greeks invented, and what Conquerors has Africa, Asia, or Europe
produced, which are not infinitely below Polexander and Almanzor fighting
together? Thou Sun which were witness of this dreadful duel, is it not true
that all forgoing ages have not had wherewithal to compare them? And to be a
spectator, did thou not stay longer then thou were wont on the pl^ines of
Teneriff? And thou O valiant and courteous Polexander, who that day by one
combat gottest two victories; acknoledge that it was not easy to vanquish
Almanzor, and that it was altogether a thing impossible to force that
indomptable heart to confess himself overcome. How often before he died has
he remembered thy courtesies, and how many times taking thy part against
himself, do not flatter me, said he, I confess Almandarin, that Polexander
gave me my life. And not to lie, thou did give it him, and the gift thou
gave was accompanied with civility, sweetness, and marks of a high esteem.
When Almanzor covered with blood and wounds, fell on the earth, and that he saw
himself in that estate, to lose his life, or to ask it; in lieu of thinking
on his conservation, he thought on Alcidiana; and addressing himself to her,
instead of speaking to thee. Since like the gods, (cryde he) O Alcidiana, thou
reignest absolutely over the minds of those who have never seen thee; I
persuade my self too, that, as they, thou beholdest our actions, and read
our very thoughts. Turn then thine eyes upon Almanzor, and receive as a pledge
of his perpetual fidelity, the life which he leaves without sorrow, since to
thee alone it is sacrificed. I believe, Polexander, that thou have forgotten
what thou did after this so high generousnesse of Almanzor. But I can well
remember that thou disclaimest an assured victory, and giving the honor to thy
enemy, thou art conqueror (said you) since our Duel, having for its ground
the service of Alcidiana, he only must be styled the victor, that has
witnessed most love and constancy; And having said thus much, thou tookst thy
leave of him, and to leave the Spectators incertaine of the victory,
voluntarily forsookst both thy arms and the field. Almanzor wronged not this
courtesy, but confessed his defeat, and all wounded as he was, caused
himself to be carried on shipboard, with an intent to restore thee the picture
of Alcidiana, and to yield himself thy slave. But his ill Fate casting him on
the Isle of Fer, and his wounds much weakening him, he thought of nothing but
to dye, and to dye lingering and slowly, that by his more suffering, he might
the more satisfy his passion. And for this, he forbad his Chyrurgions to
dress him, and to leave to posterity a most magnificent and glorious note of
his love, rather then of his condition. He caused to be built that brave
Monument which thou see in the Island of Fer, if ever the remembrance of that
Prince has made thee bestow any tears on his ashes. I sold all his Jewels to
send into France, Spain and other where, to buy those materials which I was to
employ in the structure of that Tomb. It was not half built, when Almanzor
(who kept himself retired and hid from the sight of any) came forth of his
first abiding, and took possession of his last. The workmen wrought night and
day, and yet in the opinion of the Prince, they did nothing but lose time. His
longings were at last satisfied, for his building was perfected, and his
workmen as well as his Mariners sent home with so great rewards, that they
filled all Europe with the Name and bounty of Almanzor. When he saw us two left
alone, he shut himself up in his Tomb, and after he had conjured me to
conform my self to his conceptions; Almandarin (said he) I can now dispose of
my life, and by a new wound free a soul out of bonds, that grows wilful to
persist in a shameful and cruel servitude. But before I lose the power which
our reciprocal friendship gives me over thy will, I would have thee engage thy
self to me by that faith which thou have never violated, and swear to me,
that after my death, thou will fulfill two things, whereon depend the comfort
and happiness I seek after. It Is, that thou pluck out my heart, and take from
me the picture of Alcidiana, which I cannot leave as long as I have any senses.
Thou shall carry them both to Polexander, and throwing thy self at his feet,
petition him by writing, (since thou can not otherwise) that he love my
memory in regard of my love, and that he will forget my theft, and my
jealousy; and seeing that he is infallably to repossesse the treasure which he
lost, that he would deigne to present the heart which I send him, to that fair
Princess, for whom only it would live, and for whose sake alone it has
wished to dye. Imagine great Monarch, to what extremities I was driven by so
cruel a commandment, and what blasphemies I conceived against Fortune, for
depriving me of the use of speech, in a time when I had so much need of it.
Notwithstanding it behoved me to resolve, there was no remedy, and forced by
the tears, prayers, and furies of Almanzor, I promised him by signs to put
his will in execution. I assure my self (said he) that thou will not fail of
thy promises. Come near then now, and embrace yet once more, that dear Son,
who would ask thee pardon for the upbraidings of thy life, if he knew thee not
too wise to impute those disasters to him, of which Fortune only is guilty.
Farewell my dear Master, live, and by undergoing my death with a true
constancy, practice that fair doctrine which thou have so profitably taught
me, and with these words, he pierced himself to the heart with his sword, and
by so speedy and bold a blow surmounting his hapless fortune, he got that
victory, for which she had so long contested with him. I threw my self on him,
but too late, and stopping his wound with my hand, strove to stop the blood
which gushed out in great bubbles and clots, he thrust away my hand, and
falling on his bed, with a countenance wherein you might behold a mixture of
extraordinary joy and death got together, at least (said he) do thou Almandrian
keep thy pro: He dyed before he could finish the word, and left me with a
powerful example for the contemning of life. I had not heart enought to make
use of it, but my cowardice covering it self with a specious pretext of my
faith, made me believe, that I could not kill my self, without suffering in
hell those tortures which are reserved for the unfaithful. I resolved then to
live till I had fully executed the last will of the King my Master; and though
my despair oftentimes opposed me in it, I am yet so happy, that before my
death I see my promises accomplished. There remains some part of the will of
that Prince not performed, but it is from thy nobleness that Almanzor expects
the execution. Be then sensible of his supplications, of his tears, and blood!
Polexander ended not the flux of his tears with the period of this sad story;
but turning to Iphidamantus, who was no less afflicted then himself, and
wooing him to tears and sorrow. Let us bewail (my dear brother, said he) Let
us weep for the loss of Almanzor, and since it is not in our power to restore
him his life, let us dearly preserve that which remains of him. And in thus
saying, he took the Princes heart, and fixing his eyes on it; As cold as thou
art (said he) poor heart, thou yet retaynest thy first fire, and show by
thy rich prison, that thou will still wear the glorious setters of Alcidians:
be confident, that if I become fortunate thou shall have a share of me, that
thy vows shall be accomplished, and that fair Princess shall know how far
both living and dead thou have religiously adored her. Polexander finished this
promise, just as his trustfull Diceus, (for so they called him of his
domestiques whom he best loved) entered his Cabin, and the excess of his zeal
and joy not permitting him to observe all the duties befitting his condition,
he stepped nimbly to his Master, and, Sir (said he) I am certainly blind, or
just now I have discovered the vessel of Alcidiana. Polexander lost no time in
asking him questions, but coming out of his Cabin, got on the upper deck, and
by that propriety which seems to be fastened to the eyes of all lovers, cast
his sight presently on the vessel of Alcidiana. He knew her, and seeing her
take a course contrary to his: tack about, tack about (cried he to his Pilots)
and at this time let every one testify how much he affects me. His command,
and the execution of it, was one same thing. But the wind that complied not so
well with him as they, changed not, but was the cause why his great ship made
but slow way after that belonging to Alcidiana. He was all the rest of the day
in wrestling against a North-East wind, and raging for being so near his
happiness and not obtaining it. The night changed the wind, and gave it him
so favorable, that he doubted not the taking of Linceus, though the darkness
took from him the sight of his vessel. He might easily have overcome this
difficulty, if a greater and more powerful had not yet once more envyed his
good fortune, in the very instant when he thought himself most assured. For at
break of day, instead of the vessel of Alcidiana, he saw a great fleet of
Turkish Galleys, and Affrican ships: After he had mused a while, he called his
brother, and concealing his resolution from him, we must said he separate, and
by diverse courses try to make our way through so many enemies. Iphidamantus
approved of his council, because his friends and himself had mutually bound
themselves not to leave one another till they were in a place of safety.
Getting then aboard his own ship, he found all those there in an equal
astonishment. His presence heartened them, and the speech he used to them
wrought upon their wavering minds the same advantage he got by his first
Oration. Hereupon they armed themselves, and despising danger, in confidence of
the valiant Iphidamantus, resolved themselves to what sad disaster soever
fortune should prepare for them. The Mariners perceiving that the vessel of
Polexander plyde to the South-west, took a contrary way, and taking down the
Christian colors which they carried, put the half Moon in the place, to try
if in this occasion a little cunning might not be more advantageous then power.
The success of their enterprise was conformable to their conceived hope. They
were taken for Turks, and, as such, were neither fought withal nor stayed,
but without any hinderance sailed through the fleet. When they were in the Van,
they saw another Army composed of many great Gallions, and of all kind of
vessels as well with oars as sails, over which waved the Standdards of
Castile and Portugal.

Iphia mantus, r^vished with this encounter, it is now said he to his companions
that we have no more cause of fear. See the accomplishment of our ordinary
prophesies, and the Army which we saw, though far off from the place where we
were prisoners, has without doubt broaken our chains and finished our
slavery. Yet let us not be reproched to have seen the enemy so near without
fighting; show them that we know how to make a retreat, but not how to fly.
Whilst he spoke thus, his ship got farther off the vanguard of the Turks, and
to tell them that he was none, set up the Cross upon his vessel, and with his
own hands, in sight of the enemy threw the half moon overboord, and
commanded to salute them with all his Artillery. The Turks no sooner knew the
trick that had deceived them, but they gave them from their fleet above two
hundred Canon shot. Four Galliots by the command of the General were sent out
to seize on that Christian Vessel, but all the industry of the Turks was but
to their own confusion; for Iphidamantus retired fighting behind the vanguard
of the Christian fleet. Presently as it he had attended but that signal, they
put themselves in Batalia. The Turk made his cressant without stirring from
the place he had chosen, and both the one and the other receiving command to
fall on, began the fight in a marvelous good order. The wind (as messenger of
that absolute power, which almost continually causes the best success to
follow the best causes) forsook tha Turks, and to have part in the victory,
came on the Christian side. This favorable change, was received as a certain
presage of that days good fortune, and encouraged the Soldiers to witness by
their shouts, the impatiency they were in till they were at hand strokes with
their enemies. The great Gallions of Portugal which were in the front of the
Christian Army as so many forts, (whence they ruined the Turks) began by the
noise and smoke of their double Canon, to make the sea open even to the
depths, and obscure the air with enflamed clouds. The enemies grew therewith
terrified, lost their order and were flaine unrevenged. At last all mingled,
Galleys set on Galleys, Ships boorded Ships, in brief all vessels little and
great, of oars, and sails, fought either in gross, or separated. It was
there that the inconstancy of the chances of War appeared. Those who were
lately Conquerors are now (in their turn) overcome, and such a one who had
been made a slave, recovers his liberty by the servitude of those who had put
him in fetters. By little and little this forest of Masts grew lightsome, the
noise lessened, by the death of some, and the wearisomnesse of others, and both
the fleets seemed to be but the shadow of what it was at the beginning of the
battle. The Christians were the Victors; and though the Turks by their
obstinacy in fighting, made known they knew not what it was to fly, yet at last
they were constrained, and without their obdurateness had confessed, that the
power of earth is weak to resist the hands of heaven. The Sun was no sooner
set, then the victorious Army content to see their powerful enemies not dare
to appear before them, would not drive to despair those they had put to
flight, you could see no more of them, then some few scattred vessels from the
body of the Army, yet in fight. Amongst others, Iphidamantus ship which had a
good share in the glory of this day, was grapsed with a Turk, the combat
equally entertained on both sides, left none to doubt of the valor of those
that were assaied or those that defended. The Turks were more in number then
the Christians, yet had they been put to the worst without the incredible
valor of their Captain, who alone, made all the assaults of his enemies vain
and bootlesse. The valiant Iphidamantus desiring to show by some remarkable
blow, that there was no pride so high, which he could not abate, nor strength
which he could not master, threw himself among the arms of the valiant Turk,
and let drive at him so surious a blow with his sword, that he sent into the
sea all that the other had on his head. The Turks amazed at the fearful blow
their Captain had received, resolved, not to stand wilful in a combat which
could but add a particular shame to the general. This deliberation being as
soon executed as taken, the two ships sundred; but Iphidamantus that would not
overcome by halfes, followed the Turks and boorded them again. The combat
began a fresh, more bitter then before; and the Turkish Captain, flying after
vengeance with an heroike fury; made Iphidamantus see that there is no valor
like that which is seconded with choler. After a hundred times trying to finish
this duel by some extraordinary blow, Iphidamantus, threw himself into the
Turkish vessel and made his enemy recoile, but the Moore with a pass on
Iphidamantus, stroke him with his Cimiter on the Caske with such a force that
he made him fall at his feet. His companions thought him dead, and the affright
making them forget their honor and their faith, they left him to the mercy of
the Turks, and saved themselves by the favor of the night. Bajazet (for so
was this victorious Turk called) quickly caused Iphidamantus to be taken up by
six of his soldiers and carried into his Cabin. Whilst he took pains for the
ease and solaging of his prisoner, and seemed to have forgotten the general
routing of the Mohammedan Army, a tempest more careful of his safety then
himself, took him from among the Christians (who pursued their victory) and
brought him to one of the Azorez, that he might there recollect those that
remain of his fleet. This place had been appointed before the battle for the
Rendezvous of the Pirates of which he was the chief. The next day after his
arrival five or six ships came in, the next day eight or ten, and in this sort
in less then six days he had made a new Army. Straight he resolved to go
see, whether the Christians had not enterprised somewhat on the place of his
usual retreat. He gave them directions for the order they should keep, in
case they should be forced to fight by the way, and so weigh anchor from the
Azorez and came out in the head of his fleet. Though his charge and the humor
of those he commanded, was capable to take up an entire man, yet this generous
Pirate reserved the better part of his time to give it to Iphidamantus. He
forgot nothing of whatsoever he judged fit for the healing of his wounds, or
for the satisfaction of his mind, and told him oftentimes that so brave a man
as he never appeared more glorious then when he was constrained to suffer under
a misfortune. That the chance of War being never in our power, we are to take
it as it falls. That it is true victory was often accompanied with many
advantages, but they followed many times without any merit; that he had heard
spoken of many Captains, whose death or captivity had given more cause of envy
then of glory, to those who had either killed or made them attend their
triumphall Chariots. Iphidamantus that made profession of true generousnesse
was ravished with that in Bajazet, and giving himsel^e over to the charms of
his wit as well as to the strength of his reason, knew not sometim whether it
had been advan^agious for him, not to have lost his liberty. He admired the
good aspect of this Pirate, the sweetness of his wit and converse, his manners
directly opposite to others of his condition, and above all his admirable
complaica^cy, by which he seemed to make himself a slave to them who where
already his. So many virtues met he, in a person who in his opinion was
destitute of all, that at first they made him, his admirer, and soon after so
passionate a friend, that for it he would have wronged himself, and called
back his affection as if he had committed an injustice in giving it to
Bajazet. In the mean while this famous Pirate, had time so favorable that the
fifth day he d^ried the great Rocks which are as so many Bastions and Rampards
for the defense of his Island. The next day he came to the entry of his h^ven,
and was not there admitted, till he which had the command of it, had been to
know him. I phidamantus was astonished to see what ceremonies Bajazet himself
was feign to observe ere he set foot on shore, but he wondered more and was
ravished when he drew near to a Fortress which was in the midst of the
Island. It was a place which nature and art had equally fortified. On the
East side there was a Rock which extended it self to the sea by precipices
and disgorgements of clear waters. Toward the South the Rock was extremely
high, and had been cut with the chi^l: It was full of little lodgin^s, where
the Pirates Wives dwelt and kept their Children and their goods. At the place
where these two Rocks abu^ed almost together, they left an overture of thir^y
or fo^y ^home. Over this passage there was a great A^ch which some Arabians had
built, and to make themselves immortal by the lasting of so mavelous a
work, had eng^n on black marble, their names and Country. This Arch had
fifteen fathom o^ largeness on thirty of long, and was divided in three. The
first part was full of little Chambers so industriously built that they seemed
to be cut out of the Rock it self. From thence you entered into a Fortress
built with stones of that hugeness, that the imagination of Iphidamantus could
not conceive any thing so strong in all the Mechanical Engines that was not
far too weak to remove or raise them. Four Towers and four piles of lodgings
covered like tarrasses compassed one Court of fifteen fathom in square. In the
midst there was a Fountain which cast out water through the throat of a Lion
of brass which in noise and casting his head toward Heaven made the mettle it
self terrible. When you had gone through this Castle, you entered into a
Garden, where, on the South side was to be seen a little Wood of Cedars, Palms
and Cipresse, and toward the west, another, of Orange trees made into a
Laborinth. The hedges of all the alleis were of Jessemines, Citrons, and an
infinite number of those sweet trees which give the hotter Countries all the
advantage they have over our climate. At the top almost of the Rock which was
toward the East, you might see a fall of water of six foot broad, which as a
piece of ice fastened on the hanging of the Mountain was received in a great
and vast basin. All the water fell into one pipe, and after it had been
somewhile underground, was seen again in this hanging Garden, and spouting out
of the trunck of an Elephant which a Rhinoceros had overthrown, carried his
force so high that you lost fight of it before it was mounted to his full
height. This place was inaccessible on all sides, but to get to it, there was
cut in the Rock toward the West a staire which by a hundred steps came to
join with one of the corners of the Arch. Within this proud Building the
Generals of those Pirates had always lodged since they became Masters of it,
and as such, did Bajazet rest there as often as any tempest or other important
consideration kept him in the Island. Under this great Arch there were raised
two Platformes, on which twenty field pieces served for a warning to strangers
that this place was forbidden them. On the flancke of these Cavaliers, ran out
to great Bastions, which were as the two Arcenalls where were kept all the cast
pieces and double Canons which could not serve them a shipboord. On this side
was seen an artificial Lake, into which they had on floates cast two pecces to
command the plain and open Country about it, and by this Lake only was there
an entrance into that great enclosure, after the clensing of all the Artillery
of these six different defenses. When Bajazet was within Canon shot, he stayed
his fleet, and according to the Maxims of his government, sent to ask
permission from the Governor of the place to come in. Iphidamantus who till
then had rested as ravished in the consideration of the outside of this
Fortress, was extremely surprised to hear Bajazet speak thus. The generous
Rover smiling to see his prisoner so admiring: Know said he, that he who
commands these Pirates as I have done this year, is the sole man who has
power to put a Governor in that Fort, and who may the first year either
change him or strangle him without giving an account for it. As Soon as this
particular Governor is in full possession of the place, and that the General
has put the arms and command in his hands, he never uses them with so much
rigor against any as against his person who gave him the authority. And indeed
by this Maxim only he preserves himself, for were he suspected to have but
the least intelligence with the General, an ordinary death were not the
greatest punishment he should stand in fear of. But when he has past his
year of probation, and can give contentment to the different humors of his
companions; then they give him the title of General of the Land, that is, he
has an authority within the Fort as absolute, as mine is in the rest of the
Island over the Pirates and vessels. Barberoussa, so is he called that now
commands in this place, and has been near forty years, the fortunatest
Pirate of the sea, yet has he but executed the commands of his Captains, and
now is come to the place of General by Land, more by the care I took not to
solicit him to do ill, then by the affection he had toward his own party.
Leave them to wonder at the permission which I ask, and know that I have no
more power in the Fort but what he gives me, who is under charge. And since I
have now a mind to go in, I must do so, that he must first think it
fitting. What I now have told you is but the least part of the policy of these
Pirates. They have their Laws and their Maxims as well as the Estates the
best governed, and I have noted that whereas, in those, one may often see many
virtues degenerate into vices, here have I seen many vices very much
approaching unto virtues. I confess that honor and honesty are enemies with
whom our Pirates are seldom at truce or peace. I know that conscience is the
first thing they put off, who would be Citizens of this Commonwealth, and that
justice cannot be received among such persons as have no other enriching then
by the loss of others, and make it their boasting to possess nothing that was
lawfully gotten. In a word, it is true, that here all moral virtues are
condemned; but know, that what in a well governed State is effected by the
respect borne to good and wholesome Laws, here, every one is kept within the
bounds of his duty by the absolute power of him who is the Master. Every man's
particular interest, here is instead of justice, and though there be no
recompense for those that live well; yet is there so general a fear of
punishment appointed for the least faults, that it is the bindrance why every
day some murder is not committed, or some treason contrived. You shall by and
by see at the entry of the Fortress a great many heads not only of mean
Soldiers, but of such as have been in the place that now I am; of whom the
justice, or to say more properly the mistrust of these Pirates has made most
bloody and dreadful examples.

Whilst Bajazet thus entertained his prisoner, those whom he had sent to
Barbaroussa returned with the leave they went for. As Soon as he had it, he
went on, and coming to the Lake with Iphidamantus, went into a boat which
came thither to waft them. Iphidamantus was staid by Barbaroussa at his
landing, and could not be received into the Fortress till Bajazet had bound
himself on his life to be answerable for him. When Iphidamantus was in the
midst of the place, he marked the inside, and admired the incredible strength
that Art had joined to Nature. Bajazet undertaking him, You have good cause,
said he, to view well this place, for it is such a one, as you may well call it
the Masterpiece of all the Invention and power of man. These channels full of
water which turning one within another, represent a sleeping Serpent, are great
proofesof the industry and pains of those that first contrived them. The Lake
by which we came hither, is only filled with the water which by little and
little comes from those channels: and what I find most strange in this work,
is, that by secret conduits and pipes hidden under ground, these Pirates can
let flow all these waters over what part soever of the Island they please, and
when any necessity requires it. I will show you when you please the place,
where by this devise all the camp of the King of Morocco was drowned, when
that Prince thought to have brought the Inhabitants of this Island to the
utmost extremity. Bajazet ending his discourse to Iphidamantus, and receiving
the Rovers which came to tender their duties to him, ascended to his stately
Palace. He made an honor to it himself, and lead his fair Prisoner to the
lodgings he had provided for him. How will my Readers neglect those famous
cabinets and proud chambers, where the curiosity and luxury of our Age, have so
high and costfully laid open their charms, after they have seen the
description which I am obliged to make of Iphidamantus lodgings. This Prince
first came into a chamber hung with tapistry of a cloth of silver, on a ground
of gold, the best wrought, and richest that ever the Portugals have brought
from Persia or China, the rest of the furniture was of the same stuff; on this
tapistry there were diverse Arms of gold and crystal, and between them
pictures, some in tablets of crystal of the rock with gold, others of rubies
of Emeraulds: and glasses, whose borders covered with Diamonds, took away the
light and luster of their cleerenesse, and were at once both the pleasure and
the pain of the eye that beheld them. The roof and the floor of this chamber
had their different beauties; but let the ingenuous Reader supply what I cannot
express, and imagine what Iphidamantus had over his, when his feet trod on
that which Kings wear on their heads. There was no bed in this chamber.
Bajazet through this brought him into another, which having nothing of the
other, was more magnificent and delightful. The floor and the walls were
covered with a worke-made in compartments of Ebony and Ivory heightened with
streakes of gold and silver, and enriched with Moresk-worke, and devices, cut
on curious stones. Above the wainescot there were a great number of vessels of
Jasper, Crystal, Agate, Amber and Emeraulds, and of perfume boxes of gold,
which made the pleasures of smelling, envy those of the sight. From the foot
of these vessels sprung a vine of gold, which ran over a frame of silver, the
leaves were of gold, enammelled with green, and the bunches (to represent a
white grape) were composed of pearels of different greatness, and several
beauty. The leaves of the windows were of the wood of Cedar and Roses, and the
panes were of Crystal. The seeling was of a hollow mirror, made of many
Venice glasses, so industriously joined together, that by a miracle in
perspective, you would have thought your self to be under a vault of an
extreme highness. On one side of the chamber there was a bedsted of silver,
with Persian coverings, the Cushions were of blew velvet, embroydered with
pearls, the Tables and chaires all alike, and the foote-clothes suitable to the
bed and seats. Bajazet left Iphidamantus with his Chyrurgeons, and eight or
ten Moorish slaves, who had all carquenets of silver about their necks and
legs; but before he left him, he fell into this false Civility, which every
Gentleman condemns, and every well-bred man practices: He desired his pardon
for the incommodity he was to receive by so ill a lodging. Iphidamantus made no
reply to his Compliment, but made him perceive his admiration of the others
prodigious riches. Two or three hours after, Bajazet came to him again, and
after some discourse Iphidamantus besought him to relate by what conquest he
had got together so great treasures, in comparison of which those of the
greatest Kings were not considerable. You see by that (answered Bajazet)
smiling, that the life of a Pirate is not altogether unworthy an honest man,
since it does equalize him with Kings. But you wonder at small things. When you
have seen the public magazins, and known the riches of particulars, you
will be enforced to believe, that if we had as much ambition as treasure, we
were capable to conquer the whole world. Another time I will tell you, how we
came by this wealth. For the present, think on your rest, and the end of your
cure. This discourse was seconded by many others, and those ended, Bajazet
took his leave of Iphidamantus and withdrew himself. The two or three first
days, the Pirates much troubled with their ill fortune, abode in a
tranquillity not usual to them. But as soon as the hopes of that which might
after betide them, had made them forget the past disaster, they drowned their
losses in wine; and to make up their late abstinence, redoubled their feasts
and debauches. Bajazet, who was naturally an enemy to these riots, that he
might not be a spectator, was almost continually with Iphidamantus. One day as
they were talking of the adventures of Polexander, a Pirate called Achaim, came
and presented to him, a man, who for his face and habit was taken for a
Spaniard. After Bajazet had seen him, Achaim intimated, that when the tempest
had separated the rest of his fleet and driven them as far as the Isle of
Capevert, he met with this Spaniard. He will tell you, who he is (said the
Pirate) and of the new world which a certain Genuois has lately discovered
for the Kings of Spain. Bajazet very humanely entertained this Spaniard, and
promising to send him to his Country, entreated from him the particalars of his
voyage. The Spaniard finding his fortune beyond his hopes, thus satisfied
Bajazets cu^iosity: I am said he of Arragon, and am called Michael Diaz. You
have perhaps heard that the bold Christopher Columbus, promising our Kings to
discover for them a new world stored with gold and precious stones, hazarded
himself, to make a way through the Ocean and after a voyage of threescore
days cast anchor at the Isle of Guana^an. From thence sailing further from the
North, he entered into one of the Ports of the Isle of Cuba, and lastly stayed
in that of Hayty. He there took possession of that new world for the Kings,
Ferdinand, and Isabella. After he had made a league with the Cacique of the
Island, and freighted his ship with gold, pearls, men, and other rarities, he
returned into Spain. I will not relate the honors he received from our
Princes, and with what desires he enflamed the Spaniards to attend him in the
conquering this unknown Country. I was one of them that accompanied him in his
second voyage, and after an abode of eight y^ares in the Land of gold and
pearls and being enriched beyond my hopes, and now by the ^ury of the winds
and hatred of fortune brought to an eternal slavery or shameful beggary. God
grant those which follow me have better success, and that so much gold which
they have gathered be not all at once swallowed up by the seas. Bajazet
^ceiving by the Spaniards discourse, that there came a fleet from the new
world, asked him whether his companions had not been shipwracked with himself?
No said he, I pa^d thence before them to carry the n^wes into Spain of their
coming. Yet I fear that the tempest has sunck them. For Don Francis
Bovadilla who is General of the fleet, would not be advised either by Roldan
Ximenez or Antonio de Torrez Captains of the men of war, but is put to sea.
Bajazet being satisfied in that he desired to know, dismissed the Spaniard, and
gave Achaim charge to be very careful of him. Achaim took the Spaniard with
him and spread through all the Island the news his prisoner had brought: The
Officers, as well Mariners as Soldiers were so overjoyed with it, as if the
extreme desire (they expressed) of possessing those new treasures, had been an
infallible assurance of their getting them. Other Pirates giving themselves the
liberty of things unworthy the mentioning, ran up and down the Isle exciting
one another to the conquest of these riches; and fancied to themselves every
Spanish vessel to be a Mountain of gold, their wise and valorous General had
more judicious thoughts, for not being able by the relation of the Arragon, to
compute, how many fail there were of the Spanish fleet, he would therefore
send to discover their number that he might so fight with them, without running
the hazard of being beaten: he called for one of his most expect and judicious
Captains, and giving him instructions in those things he entrusted to his
prosecution, commanded him to go aboard and set sail, without sudden
returning, till he brought him certain news of the Spanish fleet. Trust (said
he) none but your own eyes. Number if you possibly can all the ships in their
fleet, and by your speedy return; do so that we may have time enough to arm
so many vessels as we shall need to fight with them. The Captain failed not
instantly to prepare for the execution of his Generalis commands. He first
sought out Achaim, to be informed of the course he was to steer, and choosing
those he would make use of in his voyage went out of the haven by the favor of
a little gale from the Land. Bajazet the very next day assembled the principal
Officers of his Estate, and confirming to them the news Achaim had brought; I
do not think said he that we need deliberate long on this affair. Our Laws,
our Customs, and the examples of all Ages taking from us the liberty of
deliberation, reduce us to a necessity of fighting. Nor is it, to know what
your thoughts are, that I have caused this meeting, but to agree of the means
whereby we may atchieve, what we are bound to execute. Thalemut, a contemnor of
whatsoever was divine, and the Image of all brutishness, (interrupting
Bajazet) Providence (said he) and Council are as unnecessary to great
executions, as incense and sacrifices. Only chance makes the success happy or
unfortunate. That, gives victories, and causes overthrowes; and if we must be
once more beaten, it is not all the wisdom in the world that can prevent or
warrant us from it. Raiz spoke, and advised, that an enemy, to be fought
withal is not to be fleighted, but at such an enterprise, to take with you,
all that was requisite, both of wisdom and courage, was not to leave to chance
all the glory of what should happen, the rest were of his opinion; and after
their custom, applauding the valor and conduction of their General, retired,
to provide what was fitting, to revenge themselves of the aff^ont they had
received from the Spaniards in their last encounter. Bajazet seeing himself at
leisure for the rest of the day, visited Iphidamantus, and acquainted him what
was resolved on. They were together till the night was far spent, anddeaving
matters of war for more pleasing discourse, fell in talk of their amorous
adventures. Bajazet sighing at their remembrance, witnessed how unfortunate he
was, and casting his eyes on Iphidamantus, as if he had been the cause of his
passion; why is it not permitted me (said he) to lay open to you the wounds,
which a too tyrannical respect, and more violent considerations have hitherto
kept hidden from the knowledge of men? Bajazet, could open himself no further,
for in the same instant he entered whom he had sent to discry the Spanish fleet.
He told him that he had not been far to fulfill his Commission, and that he
had met with the Spaniards far on this side the Islands of Capevert, and (said
he) if now you have a mind to them, there is no more time to be lost. They have
the wind good, and their vessels are not so sluggish but that they make good
way. For their strength it is not to be thought on, they are but thirty or five
and thirty sail, and come on with so much security by a course which they
think unknown to all else, that they will trouble us more to find them, then
to vanquish them. Bajazet, hearing this news, would presen^ly have embarked,
if the respect he bore to Iphidamantus had not staid him. He could not leave
the Prince, and yet he would not engage him in the voyage, standing sometime
without knowing on what to resolve, at last he turned toward his prisoner, and
observing him as he had been his King; be pleased (said he) that I bestow some
days on the necessary occasions of my charge, and that I submit my self to a
Law, which at the same time that it makes me commit an offense contrary to that
respect I owe you, makes me withal do penance for it. Yes Iphidamantus, I am
forced to leave you, and to content the insatiable avarice of a barbarous
multitude, must forsake that supreme happiness, which Fortune had (as it
were) miraculously sent me. No, no, replied Iphidamantus, the mishap you fear
shall not betide you. I will follow you wheresoever you go, if it be permitted
me during my imprisonment to dispose of my self. But my dear Bajazet let not
the consideration of my captivity hinder me from part of your glory; and let
not your Rovers fear that during the fight I might cast my self among the
Spaniards and so deprive them of my ransom. I am contented to be bound in the
vessel I embarque in, and that I only have so much liberty as will serve me
for fighting. Ah generous Iphidamantus, (said Bajazet) why will you out of an
alacrity hazard a life that should be to you so estimable? and why will you
follow the Fortune of one so unhappy, that seeing the Heavens too weak or too
inexorable for him, has for his conservation been constrained to have recourse
to the power of Hell? Iphidamantus stopping him at these words: I cannot dive
(said he) into those reasons which oblige you to actuate what you do, but
contemplating Bajazet in himself and not in his Fortune, I should esteem my
self unworthy to live, should I be so cowardly to forsake you in your danger.
I therefore entreat you not to refuse me the liberty I desire, and since the
time presses you, let us spend it better then in unprofitable contestations.
You are of a race said Bajazet, to whom it is natural to overcome, and an
indiscreet resistance should not oppose it self to your glorious destinies.
But let not your generousnesse put you to any trouble, we have more time for it
then we need, go to your bed, and give me leave to walk whether the noise of
my companions calls me. Thus left he his fair prisoner and followed by thirty
or forty of his black slaves, rid through all the quarters of the Pirates. He
made those to march that were yet behind, and stayed on the Key of the Haven
till he had seen-them all embarked.

The end of the first Book.
The first Part of POLEXANDER. The second Book.
THe presence of Bajazet so hastened the embarquing of his men, that before
Sunrising, all his fleet was ready to set sail; he commanded presently that
they got into the road, and himself the while, who had promised not to depart
without Iphidamantus returned to the Fort to take him along, and entreated him
more then he had done the day before, not to hazard himself in so troublesome a
voyage. Whence comes this change, said Iphidamantus? Would you falsify your
word to me? You have granted me my liberty till your return, do not then make
show that you repent you of it. I confess, (replied Bajazet) my importunate
solicitations offend you, and being so well acquainted with your valor as I am,
it is to envy your fame, to advise your repose; with this he brought
Iphidamantus to the Port, and shipped himself with him in a kind of vessel,
of which the English have been the inventors, and call them by the name of
Barges. The fashion of these vessels, is very long, and straight, and does not
only give the pilots the means to govern them without pains; and the better to
resist the impetuousnesse of currents, but makes them so good sailers, that
there is no Gally but they outgo in swiftness. This brave Rover got in a
moment to the place where his fleet was at anchor; and having sent by his
Vice Admiral the orders he would have observed in this enterprise, by
discharging a Peace of Canon, gave warning to his fleet, to weigh anchor. At
two of the clock in the ^ternoon, they went out of the road, and had the wind
so favorable, that it seemed, both (...) and the elements conspired together,
to ravish from the Spanyard the first spoils of the new world. The pirates were
above threescore leagues from their place of retreat, when they descried a
great Ship, which with full sails held course for the Hesperides. At this
sight, they made all their vessels and the Sea about to resound with their
terrible shou^ings, and some of them even violating the laws of their exact
discipline, slipped from their squadron, and not attending the command of their
General, advanced to attaque that vessel. Bajazet knew well how to chastise
this insolence, and caused the guilty to be put into the reer-guard, and
desirous himself to view and fight with this vessel, bid clap on all sails.
His excellent Ship had soon left all the rest behind, and in less then two
hours, came up so near, that she was within Canon-shot of the other. Bajazet
unwilling to fall on ere he had denounced war, discharged some shot over; but
seeing they answered not, b^lieved this contempt deserved to be punished; he
gave then his Gunners charge to shoot into the sails, and to his Mariners to
grapple themselves with the body of the ship, both his commands were executed:
but Bajazet was wondrously surprised, when in stead of well armed Spaniards, he
saw men almost all naked, and the most of them armed only wi^h bows and
arrows, some had club^, and javelines, and darts, whose points were of gold or
silver, and bucklers covered with plates of those two metalls. Bajazet
witnessing to Iphidamantus the grief he had to fight with unarmed men, forbade
his soldiers to shoot; the Pirates thinking that they had not so much as need
of their swords to conquer so weak enemies, thought it enough to take chains
to bind them withal. They did so, and presently leaped into the others
vessel, but they were charged, and repulsed so furiously, that they were
constrained to forsake their chains, and to betake themselves to their swords.
Bajazet fearing, lest their choler joined to their accustomed inhumanity might
cause a prodigious slaughter on the strangers, got amongst them, and though he
could not save the life of all, yet did it for the greatest party. When he had
mastered the ship, he commanded his Lieutenant to search her; the Pirate went
under hatches, and hearing some talk in a Cabin abaft, went in; but he was
forced to stop at the entry, his eyes were so dazed with the luster of the gold
and jewels. This Cabin was hung with a stuff made of feathers, so cunningly
mingled with gold and pearls, that nothing could be seen more rich or more
beautiful: from the top hung a Canopy of the same stuff, kept up by great
cords of gold, and bordered with little bells, covered with Diamonds, and other
precious stones: In one corner of this Cabin, the pirate espied, (lying on
carpets, as fair as the rest of the furniture,) a man of twenty, or one and
twenty years, who by his Majesty and good aspect, seemed to be the sole
ornament of that place; he had two men at his feet, which made show of an
extreme sorrow, and seemed to solicit him that was half laid to think of his
safety; as soon as they saw the Pirate, they made signs to him to draw near,
and getting him to kneel as they did, made him to kiss the skirt of their
Masters robe. This ceremony done, the eldest of the strangers asked the
soldier who he was, and who commanded the ship that fell upon theirs. The Turk
answered to all his demands, and loath to keep Bajezet longer from the sight of
those rarities, went out to carry him the news. Bajazet came presently down
into this rich chamber, and civilly drew near to him that seemed to be the
Master of it. The stranger went not out of his deep musing by his approaching
so near him; but on the contrary, with a downcast look, and still laid,
intimated that he was sensible of nothing but of his secret sorrow; one of
those two at his feet arose, and making a reverence to Bajazet, with a grace,
that savoured nothing of the Barbarian: Sir, said he, in Arabic, he whom you
see here almost dead with sorrow, is called Zelmatida, and has for his father,
the great Inca, Guina Capa, son of the Sun, comforter of the miserable, and
Monarch of the Fountains of gold; but all this greatness has not been able to
avert the misfortunes which have brought my Lord the Inca, into a contempt of
his life, and the hatred of himself. Bajazet pitied the fate of Zelmatida, and
more in consideration of that, then of his great titles and magnificence, he
came to him, and used some complements in Arabic: Zelmatida hearing the Pirate
speak, and I king the man, broke off his silence, and made him understand by
five or six words, that he was not a^le to recompense his courtesies. Bajazet
admired the greatness of courage that this Prince made show of in his
captivity; and judging of his wisdom, by the little he had said, protested,
that he had never seen man, who under the load of his great (...), preserved a
mind in more tranquillity, nor was l^sse dive^ed by the favors he received of
those from whom he was to expect nothing but rigor and violence. This
admiration obliging him to the continuance of his discourse, he ^old Zelmatida,
that his condition was not changed in effect, though it were in appearance, and
that his good asp^ and virtue were so favorable pastports, that there was not
a nation in the world, (...) barbarous soever, that had inhumanity enough to
violate them. The Prince* all ^uried as he was in his melancholy, yet answered
Bajazet in such sor^, that he gave him new desires to serve him. The Rover, yet
left him as soon as he could do it with civility, and found out Iphidamantus.
Coming to him, My dear friend, (said he) I profess^ I am i^finitly obliged to
Fortune, although she is the cause that I have lost the only thing that could
make me happy: to her I owe your amity; and see yet, she has now put into my
power a Prince, who has more amazed me by the greatness of his soul then
that of his birth. Herewith he related to him all he had seen, and (...) him to
de^cend into the Princes Cabin, I must (said he) have the content^ent to bring
^gether two men, who best of any know how to join those things which from all
tim^s have been incompatible, I mean, youth and wisdom, a great courage, and a
(...) moderation. Iphidamatus blushed at these p^ises, and not willing to make
him a reply* besought Bajazet that he would bring him to the sight of a person
of that excellency. They both went into his Cabin, and as soon as they came in,
Iphidamantus drawing to him by his extraordinary beauty the eyes of Zelmatida
overcame his long sadness. He rose to salute him, and showing him to his
companions, twice or thrice pronounced the word of Isatida.

These compliments were interrupted by the noise of the Pirates and report of
the Canon, and Bajazet doubting what it might be, made Zelmatida to understand
the cause of his voyage, and entreating him to rest himself, went with
Iphidamantus, whether he was called by the necessity of his command. He was no
sooner aboard his own vessel then he saw whiten the sails of the Spanish
fleet, and that his own had put themselves in order for fight. He changed a
little in the disposing of the vessels. He put some in the vanguard which were
in the battle, and going from one to another, encouraged the old Pirates by
the glory of their past actions, and the young by the emulation they should
have to equal their companions, and all, by the assurance of victory and the
greatness of the booty. We go not to expose our lives for some proud and
brutish Master, who looks on, with an insensibility, the* loss of those who
by their hazard and travel secure his idleness, and with their blood
maintain his tyranny. If we have the day we shall not share the profit with
any but our selves, and the fruits of our fighting shall not be devoured by
those that took no pains in their gathering. Let this pleasant thought run
still in your minds; and to stir you up to do bravely say often to your
selves, that your sufferings, incomodities and wounds shall have a fairer
recompense then that which is justly reserved for Cowards, who for a small pay
prostitute their courages and lives. This said, he put himself in the front of
his fleet and lead them to the combat. The Spaniards on the other side
discovering this powerful obstacle, unexpectedly, were long before they could
resolve what to do. At last seeing their enemies draw near, they thought
they must with iron defend that gold which they by iron had got together. They
soon cast themselves in batalia, and that valor which is natural to them,
being enflamed by the extremity to which it was reduced, made them perform
such actions as could not be compared but with themselves. At first they stood
as ready for defense, and unwilling to mingle unless they were enforced,
fought with their Canon. Bajazet, perceiving their intention commanded that
with full speed they should fall on them. The Captains quickly obeyed, and
presently sunck three or four little ships. Bajazet and Iphidamantus went to
back them, and after a furious fight Roland Ximenes was slain by the one and
Torrez by the other. The Admiral Francis Bovadilla was taken prisoner but he
died the same day of the wounds he received in the fight. The combat lasted
till night, by whose favor six Spanish ships got away, the rest were either
sunck or taken, and every where this cruel and brutish brood of Pirates
(which have no consideration when they see their prey) dealt alike with those
that begged their lives, and those that begged them not. The heat of the
combat so long time disputed was no sooner cold, but Bajazet remembered
Zelmatida. He found him in h^s ship in the same state he left him. He asked him
whether he would go; any where, (said he) where I may find death. This answer
touched Bajazet, and made him resolve to get the Prince out of that place whose
solitude more fed and increased his melancholy. He so fitly made him the
proposition that straight he accepted of it, and went presently to Iphidamantus
Cabin, where leaving them together, he went to take a view of his men and
vessels. He had lost many, but being accustomed to the like mischances, he
bethought him of those were left, and comforting them for the death of their
companions, by considerations answerable to their nature, he made them steer
toward their own Island, and gave the valiant Hally the charge of
Vice Admiral. The night, after this bloody fight, had its disorders and
batteries. The weather altered, and the wind grew so furious that the victors
failed little of running the fortune of the vanquished. They were four and
twenty hours in a tempest, and had they been nearer the Land then they were,
without doubt they had saved nothing of that which with so much labor and
blood they had gotten. They were driven by the violence of the wind to a
desert Island situated almost under the Tropic of Cancer, and were
constrained to lie there till the storm was past. They set sail with the
first fair wind; and the second day of their navigation the tempest began
again, and made them run a greater danger then they had escaped. The bold
Bajazet, for all this, forbad his Pilots to stand for the Port they came from;
and believing that the Elements were not harder to be overcome then men, he
opposed the skill and strength of his Mariners to the violence of the contrary
winds, and strove to make the very storm to be part of his victory. His
daring or rather rashness had all the success he could desire, and after a
many days and nights striving against the tempest, he came at last within
sight of his Island with all his own vessels and his prizes. He dispatched
presently one of his men to the Governors of the Port and the Fortress, and by
the same letter letting them know the fortunate success of his voyage, sent
them word withal in what manner he would be welcomed home. This being done, he
came again to Iphidamantus and Zelmatida who were walking in their ship, and
thence showed them right against his Isle two ships that played furiously on
each other with their Canon. The Princes seeing they were grapled, signified to
Bajazet that they had a great mind to part them. Bajazet to please them,
commanded his Pilot to make up instantly to those two vessels, and coming
near to one of them, he knew her, and told the Princes that she was commanded
by Cid Hamet his principal Captain. Iphidamantus discrying the other! O (said
he) that is Polexanders ship, it is his infallibly. But Bajazet not believing so
great and so good news, came up to the Combatants to see if Iphidamantus were
not mistaken. At his near approaching them, he saw Cid Hamet fall. The loss of
a man whom he knew to be so exceeding valiant, touched him near and in such a
sort, that casting by all consideration he threw himself into his vessel to
be revenged. Iphidamantus followed him, and presenting himself first to
Polexander entreated him to give his enemy his life. Polexander knowing him,
yes brother (said he) he shall have his life, though his brutishness deserves
to be punished. He might with one words speaking, have freed us both from a
great deal of trouble we have had, and yet by a malicious obstinacy, he would
neither tell me his name, nor his country. It Is the same we followed before we
were severed; I found him among the Turkish ships, and thinking he belonged to
Alcidiana, used him with all the mildness you can imagine: But his arms and
habit, made me suspect I was deceived; besides his vessel which carries for
her devise the Phoenix with a double A. confirmed me, that it was Lynceus, or
some other of Alcidiana's Pilots, and therefore I would be no longer in this
ignorance: I entreated him then to tell me who he was, but all my prayers and
promises were in vain; I was therefore constrained to come to threatenings, and
from threats to blows. This Barbarian got among the great number of vessels
that fought, and put me to trouble enough to find him out; at last I espied him
standing out to Sea, I got after, and have still given him chase so hotly, that
I have at last brought him to that pass in which you now see him. Iphidamantus
she wing Bajazet to Polexander; His General (said he) whom you see there, will
free you of the vexation you are in, and tell you wether he belong to the Queen
Alcidiana or no. Polexander gazed on Bajazet, so did Bajazet on him; and after
a long silent considering one another, Bajazet intimating to Polexander the
great contentment he received in seeing him: Let Fortune (said he) hence
forward, handle me as she pleases, without a murmr I will receive all her
persecutions, and acknowledge, that since she cannot give me all the bliss I
ask her, yet she has at last given me a part of it. Yes, Polexander, you are,
you and Iphidamantus, the two persons I have most wished to see, next to one
whom my duty and affection commands me to set in the first place. Believe no
more then (if it so please you) that it was the incivility of this Rover, which
has drawn you into these rude places, but the strength of my desires, and the
power of my good fortune: For this wretch at your feet, he has been always at
my command; and has followed me ever since he was ten years old; and the
reason why you took him for another, is certainly, by means of the vessel,
which he took about a year since from a valiant commander, who lost his life
before he lost his ship. In a trunck I found some letters, by which I
understood, that that Captain belonged to Alcidiana, Queen of the Inaccessible
Island. I ever thought (said Polexander) smiling, that fortune laughed at my
credulity, and that she only gave me false hopes, but to bring me to a most
certain despair. Here with he fainted, and losing all his strength in a moment,
made it appear, that the wounds of the soul are little less dangerous then
those of the body; he came quickly to himself, and taking Bajazet by the hand,
in one selfsame time (said he) we have had a very contrary intention, for I
followed you as my enemy, whilst you searched all occasions to make me your
friend. But I am now recovered and cured of that unjust pusuit, and desire your
pardon for believing you capable of an ill action. Iphidamantus here
interposing; Bajazet (said he) knows the ground of your choler, and is not
ignorant for what cause you accuse him for the theft done by Almanzor. Bajazet
seeing Zelmatida coming near, interrupted Iphidamantus, and entreated that he
would present him to Polexander. Our Hero casting his eyes on him, was no
less taken with the goodness of his countenance, then the novelty of his
attire; Bajazet told him who he was, and by what chance he fell into his hands.
This little increased in Polexander a desire to know more, but unwilling that
his curiosity should be uncivil, he at first offered him his service and
friendship, and put off till another time, the showing his desire to know his
fortune. Whilst these four Horoes gave one another reciprocal admirations,
Bajazets messenger returned with a branch of Palm, which was the usual token
that they sent the Generals from the Isle, when for any notable victory they
had deserved the triumph. Bajazet received it, and showing it to all his fleet,
gave a beginning to the warlike magnificences of his entry: The drums, the
timbrells and trumpets resounded every where. The vollies of musket shot
answered all that noise, and the Canons drowned both, till they were all
landed; the General made them all go in before him, covered with their arms,
enriched only with the blood of those they had slain* and so entering in, his
Barge was followed by the Spanish vessels, as so many slaves waiting on his
triumphant chariot. This pomp was short; for the nature of the Pirates, being
such, that they knew no other pleasure but their private gain and prey, obliged
Bajazet to cut off that which pleased him most, to do that which was most sure:
He came then ashore with Polexander, Iphidamantus and Zelmatida, and went into
a tent set up for him upon the strand. All the Captains of his fleet, whose
wounds did not hinder their marching, came to see him, rather to glut their
avarice, then to receive the praise of their actions. When they were all in
those places they were accustomed to command, and the soldiers which were not
of the guard a shipboard, were all hushed and silent. Bajazet came to the
entrance to his Pavilion, and thus bespoke them: It is not our custom, my
companions, to be entreated to fight, no^ do we affect the vanity of being
praised for our (therein) well performance. There are some which should be
forced to take witness of their coming off, if they were bound to justify
their being there; but it is not so with us: for as we weigh not the
approbation of those that love us, so we fear not the ill tongues of those
that envy us. It is here a maxim, that either our enemies have made no
resistance, or that we have not fought, when we come home without wounds. Now,
I look on you, and that I not only see you as brave men should be, but that I
behold you reduced to the half of what you were when we began this voyage; I
confess, how great soever our victory be, we have bought it too dear. It Is
true that we have Spaniards enough amongst us to take when we please, that
avengement which the sorrow for the death of our companions can require at our
hands. Let us give (if you please) the rest of this day to survey our selves,
and to take that rest which the desire of our returning to new toil invites us
to.

To morrow we will see what our valor has given us; the slaves and the riches
shall serve for a second dressing to our wounds: But I little know what your
worth is, when the greatness of your gain shall advise you not to take at all
the least part of your good fortune. Night coming on when Bajazet had done
speaking, made the Captains, and all the soldiers retire into their quarters;
those which were wounded got to their beds, and the rest lost the memory of all
their travells among their feasts and debauches. Polexander, Iphidamantus, and
Zelmatida staid with Bajazet, and all four taking their way to the fortress,
were there received, after the Laws of the place had been punctually observed,
Bajazet lodged Polexander and Zelmatida, as richly as was Iphidamantus, and by
the number, as well as the magnificence of his lodgings, made his guests
confess that he was above the condition of Kings. This illustrious Rover
joined to the splendour of their lodging, the delicacy of feasting, and the pomp
of sights; day and night his slaves gave the Princes new delights, and
sometimes on the Sea and sometimes on the shore, represented sports and fights,
wherein by a pleasant temper was seen the sweetness of peace mixed with the
bitterness of war. These pleasures which were able to inchant sadness it
self, did but slightly sleepen the griefs of the Princes: They sighed in the
midst of all delights, they had joy in their countenances, whilst despair was
in their souls; and though they strove extremely with themselves, to be
pleasing company, yet the memory of their misfortunes surmounting all their
complasencies, compelled them in despite of what they could, to make their
perplexities to break forth. Polexander, who thought himself the most unhappy
of all men, and Zelmatida, who in his own opinion, was mishap it self, went
every day out of the fortress, and sought the most desert places of the Island,
to give themselves more freely a prey to the fury of their passions. Now, one
day that these four Heroes were in one place together, Zelmatida suffered
himself to be so much transported with his grief, that not thinking whether he
were alone or no: O Love! (cried he out) O death! how equally barbarous and
cruel are you? These words awaking Polexander from his musing, it is at this
very time (said he) that you must acquit your self of what you have ever daily
promised; and let us at last see whether Fortune and Love are as powerful in
your world, as they are in this wherein we live. Zelmatida ashamed of what he
had done, blushed, and answering the solicitation of Polexander, I intend not
(said he) to deny you the recital of my adventures, since I willingly would
lay down my life for you, if I thought my self worthy of the honor I should
receive in losing it for your sake; I shall always be ready to expose mine
said Polexander, for the preservation of yours; but since you intend to oblige
all us here, deny us not any longer the knowledge of your fortune. I am ready
to obey you, said Zelmatida, on condition that Garruca speak for me, and relate
to you that which he knows better then my self. Polexander, who knew how hard
a thing it was for a brave and honest man to resolve to speak of himself,
granted Zelmatida's request, who went presently, and taking Garruca, and
causing him against his will to sit down, gave no time of quiet till he saw him
in a way fit to content him. Garruca, that had no pleasure equal to that of
publishing the ver^es of the King his Master, began his discourse thus:

The History of Zelmatida, heir to the Empire of the Incas, and of the
Princess Isatida.
IF the great Zelmatida were not considerable but by the splendour of his birth,
by the extent of the Empire of his ancestors, and by the abundance of gold, and
precious stones, which are in their command; I would tell you of the Incas
original, the establishing of their authority by the great Mango Capa, son
of the Sun, the manner of their conquests, the sanctity of their laws, the
riches of their Temples, the pomp of their sacrifices, and the incredible
magnificence of their Court; but all these things which might seem mavelous
to you, because they should be new, are so low and contemptible in comparison
of the adventures of my Lord the Inca, that I should be an enemy to his fame,
should I give them a place in my relation. Let us then put off to another time,
the knowledge of our manners and treasure, and understand, that Zelmatida is
son of the great Ioca Guina Capa, surnamed the Victorious, who not content with
an Empire of fifteen hundred leagues long, fights daily, to give it no other
limits then the bounds of the world. This Monarch having made a way through the
mountains, which we believed inaccessible, made war with a barbarous people,
who by the loss of an unhappy and bru^sh liberty, found the use of reason, the
knowledge of the gods, and the felicity of civil society. Beyond these people
reigns a nation as remarkable for their beauty, as redoubted for their valor:
They are warlike women, which now enduring the servitude of men, and the infamy
of the business of their sex, are always armed, and have made slaves of those
that would have been their masters. Guina Capa, to try whether they were
invincible or no, entered their territories; and after two great battles,
finding them worthy his friendship, concluded a peace with them, on condition
that the Queen should give him one of her daughters. This fair and valiant
Princess came to visit her conqueror, but he had scarce seen the least part of
her charms, when he fell passionately in love with her; they were married in
the presence of the two armies, and he willed that there should be nothing but
of the warrior at the feast of this alliance. Some few days after the
marriage, the famous Guina Capa repassed the mountains, and retired to refresh
himself in the stately city of Cusco. Whilst he tasted these incomparable
sweets, by the possession of the fair Amazon, he forgot not to think of his
warlike affairs: Six hundred leagues from Cusco, toward the North, there is a
great country, watered with a river, called Ancasmayu, that is, the blew
River: the Inhabitants of that country, were rather cruel then valiant, they
eat one another; and though from all time they had lived under the authority of
a King, yet were they so wild, and so much enemies to humane society, that
they lived in the woods, and among the rocks, in cavernes, with Tigers, Lions,
and Serpents, of which they made them gods. The Inca Tupac Yupanquy, father of
Guina Capa, was the first that undertook their conquest, of purpose to draw
them from their bruitishnesse, but after a war of many years, he found that he
did but little advance his intention, and unprofitably wasted him time and
forces. He therefore returned to Cusco, and sent thence Guina Capa, to try if
the valor of that young Prince would not change the fate of his arms, and
those of a nation as warlike as savage. Guina Capa began the war with so much
courage and fortune, that after many battles, and an infinite number of
skirmishes and sieges, he compelled the King of Quito to forsake the field.
That Prince seeing himself out of all hope of succor, and his country almost
conquered, shut himself up in that city, which gives name to the whole
Kingdom; and after he had killed with his own hands one of his wives whom he
loved most dearly, he expired on her dead body, in bewailing the murder he was
constrained to perpetrate. The victorious Inca came into Quito with a
triumphant train, and finding this city worthy to be one of the seats of his
Empire, beautified it with Temples, Palaces, Aqueducts, fountains and channels;
he had been above a year in this new Kingdom, when he was called back by the
Inca, Yupanquy; he left some troops in Quito, commanded a flying camp to the
side of the mountains, and forgot nothing which he thought requisite and
capable to keep those Barbarians in their obedience: but he was scarce gone out
of their territories, when they revolted, and cut the throats of all his
officers and soldiers. The Prince stirred by so wicked an action, returns to
Quito with new forces, and cut in pieces the most part of the rebels. The end
of this sedition was the beginning of another; every year produced one: for
this people, impatient of the yoke, never failed to take up arms as soon as
Guina Capa was out of the country. The Prince at last grew weary of so many
insurrections, and resolved to war in such sort, that the Savages should be
forced to petition for peace. To this end he commanded his armies to march as
soon as he was returned from the Amazons country: and after he had sometime
tasted the sweets of his marriage, departed from Cusco with those invincible
forces which were particularly appointed for the guard of the Incas. The fair
Amazon followed the King her husband, and would needs with him partake the
incommodities and dangers of the war, as she had done the delights of peace.
After a journey of some months, the Inca came to the frontiers of Quito, and
suspending his ordinary goodness, struck the Barbarians with terror, by the
severity of his punishment, whosoever was taken with his arms in his hand, was
either hung on the trees, or cast into the rivers. But to kill one part, and to
defeat the other, was not to vanquish all; those people more savage and void of
reason then their gods, got together again as soon as they were routed; and as
if they had been strengthened by their overthrows, they returned to the charge
with more fury when they saw themselves brought to a few, then when they were a
good army. At last both parts grown weary of fighting, they made a kind of
truce; the Queen at that time, found her self great with child, and during
that time, so contented the King, that during that time he forgot all the ill
success of his war. The Incas Amautas, which are the Princes appointed for the
service of the gods, assured him that he should have a son, and that the birth
of that son, though accompanied with many tragical accidents, should be the
entire conquest of Quito, and of many advantages, illustrious and behoofefull
for the empire of the Incas. Guina Capa nothing doubting of these predictions,
left the Queen in the stately Palace of Quito, with four thousand men for her
guard, and returned against the rebels with a hundred thousand fighting men: He
pursued them even to their cavernes, and the precipices of their rocks, and
after a slaughter of two thirds of them, enforced the rest to lay down their
arms, and be subject to his lawer. When he had reduced these Savages to peace
and obedience, he commanded a cessation of all hostility; and to win them more
easily deprives them not of any of their ancient liberties, save of their
men-eating, and sacrificing them to Idols; by little and little he drew them
from the woods, and made them build houses: He gave them Legislators to govern,
and Priests to instruct them in the worship of the true Gods: And desiring to
make their servitude not irksome, told them, that the Prince whom he intended
should command them, was not a stranger, but a Prince borne amongst them, and
might call himself their countreyman. He meant, the child the Queen went
withal, and to keep his word with them, would that the Queen should lie in at
Quito. The Savages, rather more cunning by their misfortunes, then won and made
more pliable by the Inca's mild treating, gave him thanks for his favors, but
in a little time after, they made known by their horrible and bloody actions,
that they were the same men they had been. The Queen daily expected her hour
of delivery, when these inhumane villains made themselves masters of Quito.
They straight ran to the Palace, slew the guards, and meeting with Guina Capa
ran him through diverse times, and left him for dead in his chamber. They had no
more respect either for the sex or beauty of the Queen, then for the Majesty of
the King: but pulling her out of her bed, they drew her unworthily and
bruitishly by the hair out of the city, and exposed her to the rage of two
Tigers, which (accustomed to such sacrifices) followed those Barbarians, and
were adored as their tutelary gods. Those beasts which better deserved the name
of gods, then those barbarous villains did of men, stopped by a power truly
divine, began to crouch and fawn on the Queen, and having nothing of their
first nature showed either a fear of, or a respect to that body which for a
prey was thrown to them. Those signs of humanity (it I dare say so) were not
alone the cause of those bruites astonishment; for they kept themselves as
guards about the Queen, and tore in pieces whosoever durst come near her. This
while, the Princess who had but life sufficient to bring her child into the
world, died as soon as she was delivered; the Tigers took it, and licked the
Infant, and by their pitiful howlings seemed to say that they were much
afflicted for not being able to succor it: In the same instant appeared a
great troop of men armed with great targets, bows and arrows; the Tigers were
no way afraid at their sight, but letting them come so near, till they had
discovered the Queens body, they withdrew, and ran out of sight among the
rocks. Those which were in the front of that troop, having noted the action of
the Tigers, began to cry out, that their great Prophet was to be believed, and
ran to take up the body of the Queen; they laid her on their targets, took up
the little Inca, and gave him to some women that were in the midst of their
troop. As soon as the child was dressed, those unknown men turned their backs
to Quito, and witnessing by their shouts, the excess of their contentment,
marched alwa^s in batalia to the foot of the mountains which divide the
kingdom of Quito from that of the King Quasmez. Before I go further, be
pleased that I let you know the Infant of the generous and deplorable Amazon;
but what need is there, that I should tell you since the illustrious and
unfortunate life of my Lord the Inca, may make you clearly see, that no other
then he could have so tragical and fair a birth? It was Zelmatida, who before
he was borne, gave both love and terror to the most furious animalls, and was
the object of Prophets, the desire of Kings, and the hope of nations. But I
perceive not that I wander, and leave the charitable troop which carried away
my young Prince. Suffer me to follow them, and according as things happened,
discover to you those mysteries which I see you would have me to let you
understand. Those who so opportunely came to save my Lord the Inca, were sent
thither by the great Quasmez, who raigns over the one and the other sea, and
whose Empire extends it self from the territories of Mexico to those of the
Inca's. As soon as those men were on the mountains, they chose twelve of the
swiftest among them, and sent them to their King with the news of their
returning. Go, (said the Captain of the Troop aloud) and relate to our
Prince what you have seen, assure him that his prayers are heard, and that we
have found the body of the dead Princess and the newborn Child in the paws
of merciful Tigers. These posts departed and performed their Commission with
an extraordinary diligence. The others, the while marching by little Journeis
for fear of endangering the health of my Lord Inca, got through the Mountains
and entered into the Country of one of the Ca ciques tributary to Quasmez: When
they had made a days Journey or two in that Kingdom, they began to publish,
that the Child which they conducted, was he by whom (as their great Prophet
Tisnatidez made them hope) they should recover the treasure they had lost. This
news was no sooner known among the people, but all strove who should do most
honor to Zelmatida. In all places where he passed, the Inhabitants brought him
presents, and bowing their faces to the ground, seemed to expect their
protection from a little Infant that was not able to defend it self, nor to
oppose the least injuries that any would enterprise against him. Those which
with so much respect carried him, after many days journey in this fashion, at
last arrived at the Court of Quasmez. As Soon as he heard of their arrival,
you might see break from his countenance an unusual joy, but it is unpossible
to tell you how much he expressed, when his people delivered the Inca into his
hands. He looked on him, he kissed him, and embracing him as strictly as he had
been his own Son; O cause (said he) of my future rest, (though he understood
him not) I hope one day to see the end of my afflictions, since the holy
Interpretor of my Gods has promised me, that the return of my happiness is
to be the masterpeece of your valor. The Queen his wife, who was present at
all these things, would not suffer Zelmatida longer in the arms of her husband
but took it and carried it away, and taking all the care that a good mother
ought to do of those she brought into the world, kept him near her to his age
of twelve years. He grew so tall and so strong at that age, that Quasmez began
to have him taught all the exercises that the children of Kings are accustomed
to learn. His excellent inclination had soon drawn dry all the knowledge of
his Masters, and confirmed the old Prince in all the hopes he conceived of him.
There was no game of strength, address or disposition wherein he carried not a
way the Guirlands that Quasmez ordained for the Victor. Though this good King
saw him endowed with all the quallities he had often wished him, yet lived he
not with that quiet of mind which should be given him by so excellent a
breeding. The more he saw the King grow, the more was his melancholy and
disquiets redoubled. His showed discontents when there was no cause, and
without clearing to my dear Master when he requested him, what subject he had
for it, he consumed himself in useless sorows, in lieu of staying the time
prescribed for the accomplishing the prophecies. The King was in his fifteenth
year, when five or six hundred Mexicans leaving the Forts they had built on
the Mountains which cut that space of Land which is between our two Seas, came
far on into the Kingdom of Quasmez. Their incursion was no sooner known to
the Inca, then he petitioned the King his Father to permit him to go against
those ancient enemies, and learn them to be contented with their usurped
Territories. Quasmez made no great difficulty of it, but gave him four
thousand of his best Soldiers to accompany him in this expedition. Be pleased
to imagine the content the young Prince received, to have the means to give
them a trial of his courage, and to know by his apprentisage what he might
after expect from himself. He departed then with the four thousand of Quasmez
men, that he might not discontent him: But when he knew the small company of
his enemies, his generousnesse would not suffer him to take them at advantage.
He marched right to them with all his troops, and as soon as he came to a
certain place from whence they discovered a great extention of Land, he
perceived that the Mexicans began to entrench themselves in a little valley. He
sent to them one of his followers to intimate that he would not fight with them
because he was the stronger; though the History of former wars had tught him
that they had not made use of that moderation. The Prince of whom I speak
(said the Soldier) will never follow your ill example, nor shall your cruelty
oblige him to an action destitute of mercy. Assure your selves then, that he
intends to fight with you, not to murder you. Besides he has a better opinion
of you then of his neighbors, and believes, you are valiant men, since you
have not feared under the conduct of your King, to spread your selves so far
from the ancient bounds of Mexico, and to run so many hazards to subject to his
Scepter the Provinces of so many Caciques. The thought of this has obliged him
to deal nobly with you; and therefore intreates you to signify to him what
number you are, that he may send back part of his forces, and so coming to an
equal combat, you may know by your defeat or victory, if with justice or no
you are got to be Masters of so many Nations. The Mexicans received this
defiance as a cause to increase their reputation, and their Captain who was a
young Prince and Cosen to Montesuma, finding therein where withal to satisfy
his vanity, sent the King word that he was ready to meet him half way on
condition that he would stand to the terms of his defiance. That they were
but five hundred in all, yet they would not refuse the combat if they were to
encounter but with two thousand: It seemed as if fire had flowne out of the
eyes of the King when he received this answer. Our of the four thousand he
had, he chose five hundred whose service he intended to make use of in that
expedition, and gave them by his words and his example more courage then they
had either from nature or the exercise of arms. He commanded the rest to
retire, and that they should not come to the skirmish till they saw their
companions either dead or prisoners. Being thus severed, Zelmatida commanded
his five hundred Soldiers to march, and the Maxicans, quitting their
entrenchment, came to meet the King with all the resolution that Soldiers
could witness. These two troops did not confusedly fall on pel mel mingling
themselves but fought a long time by little squadrons and as soon as the hail
of arrows was passed, every one betook him to his dart and half pike. The
King making his way where ever he came slew five or six Mexicans before he came
to their Captain. When he met him, he thought of nothing but how to vanquish
him, and though he found an extreme resistance, yet he taught him, that there
was no proportion either betwixt their valor or strength. He hurt him with
seven or eight thrust of his Javelin without receiving any wound but one on his
left arm, and at the last blow overthrew him at his feet and without
difficulty disarmed him. The Mexicans seeing their Captain fall, betook them
straight to their heels, and of some two hundred that remained, there were not
twenty that put themselves in case to die like men of courage. The Soldiers of
my Lord the Inca moved by his example gave the rest of the enemies their lives.
They made haste yet after those that ^ed, and overtaking them, bound them two
and two together. On the word of the Commander of those prisoners, the King
with his own hands took off the cords he was bound with, and perceiving him
to lose much blood, stopped it presently by the virtue of certain words which
are well known to all the Soldiers of our Countries. This remedy yet not
having the same power to hinder weakness and fainting as to stanch blood, the
Mexican Prince could no longer sustain himself on his feet. The King caused
him to lie down on the earth, and leaving a guard with him, went onward to
rejoice with those of his who only stood spectators of the fight. They
witnessed by their shouts, and the arrows they shot into the air, the joy
they had for this victory, and came in a good order to meet the Victor. When
they came together, it was he that could first kiss his hand, and show most
his affection and wonder. The King told them in few words how the business had
passed, and after he had praised the valor of his enemies, commanded some of
his followers to carry by turns the Prince of Mexico. He had no sooner settled
things in those parts, but he dispatched to Quasmez the swiftest of his
Soldiers, to carry him news of the good success of his Army. Whilst this
post went to Quasmez the King disposed of his troops in such a sort that you
might see something (which I know not) both of war and triumph. He separated
them into four batalions, made two of them to march before him and two after,
and in the midst put the Mexicans, that they might be conducted by those that
made them prisoners. Their Captain was carried by six Soldiers, and somewhat
distant, and after him you might see Zelmatida, almost as bashful as if he had
been led in ^umph by his enemy. He was not come half his way, when Quasmez who
with an extra ordinary transport had received the news o^ ^o ^enerous an
action, came to meet him accompanied with many Caciques. I cannot tell you the
joy of that good Prince, the honors that he did to the Inca nor the Sacrifices
he promised the Gods for so good a day. He fell on his knees, and lifting his
eyes to Heaven* O Sun! O Stars! Gods eternal and just! I yet hope in you
(said he) and acknowledge that your Prophet has not deceived me. Forgive then
my doubts, and perfect my happiness! This prayer ended, he put himself on one
Flancke of Zelmatida and without changing the order that the I^ca had commanded
his Troops, to them added his own. He marched still with him, and would have
him to make his entry so into the Town. The people threw on them both their
wishes and benedictions equally, calling then the Authors of their liberty and
good fortune; The Queen met them at the Palace gate; and not remembering the
countermand of the King her husband, a hundred times alowd, blessed the hour
that our King was brought to them. He retained in memory these words, and
thinking on them since more seriously then he did then, began from thence to
entertain some great suspicions, and so fell after into strange disquiets. The
day of the Triumph being passed; Zelmatida had a great care of all his
prisoners, and sending to the Mexican Prince, as soon as he was well, means
sufficient to pay his own ransom and his followers, confessed withal that it
appertained to so great a courage to vanquish and overcome. The Inca that had
gotten from Qua^mez free leave to dispose of his prisoners as he pleased,
called them all before him, gave them a sweet remonstrance that they ought to
learn by their defeat to content themselves with the Territories of their
Ancestors, to measure their ambition by their power, and not to come, so far
off, to seek for the loss of their lives, at least their liberties. After
this, he told them they might take their own way where they pleased, without
the fear that any of the subjects of Quasmez could hinder their return home.
The Mexicans knew not what to say at this excess of nobleness, and their
Prince retayning and suspending a while his natural vainglory; Truly (said
he) to the King, if the great Montezuma knew your worth he has not a Crown on
his head that he would not partake with you, to get him such a friend.
Zelmatida was not long without returning him an answer to his complement. He
entertayn'd that Prince as his brother, and sent him presents, which absolutely
gained him, and made him resolve to love his vanquisher. Two months after he
left them, the King heard from him by two Mexicans, which were of the
Prisoners. They presented him a ceremonious Letter which the Prince writ to
him, with a many vessels of Gold, and many habiliaments worthy the delicacy
and luxury of the King of Mexico. He gave the Messengers new presents to
out-goe those of their Prince, and writ to him back with so much freeness that
he entirely got the love of that Mexican Prince. I should be too long to tell
you the other brave employments wherein the King has since that time been
engaged, or to tell you subsequently all the acts he has done; the many
enemies he has overcome, and the admiration he has given to many Caciques,
whom he enforced again to the yoke which they had shaken off. He was not much
above seventeene years old, when the powerful constellation which had
domination over his life, drew him from the delights and idleness of Peace,
wherein he spent his best years; and presented him a famous occasion to make
known his courage. This happened from a refusal that Sodomond Cacique of the
Province of Cenusia had made to Quasmez, of the payment of a thousand emeralds.
The good King which never undertook war till he used all means to preserve
peace, sent his Ambassadors to Sodomond, to represent the injustice of his
refusal, and the miseries he was drawing on, by the violating his Faith on an
infinite number of Innocents. The Ambassadors found him at the Emerauld mines.
They mildly acquitted themselves of their Commission, and forgot nothing that
might make Sodomond capable to acknowledge his weakness and the strength of
Quasmez. But this brute reflecting neither on the one or the other, gave the
Ambassadors an ins^lent answer, and testifying to them the disesteem^ he held
of the King their Master; go tell Quasmez, said he, that his tyrany is not
redoubtable but to them that have not the heart to deliver themselves. For my
self that am not only borne free, but a Prince as himself; I can no longer
endure that he should use me as a slave, and term me his Tributary. The
Ambassadors grown angry at his insolence, replied, that if he were free and a
Prince he owed it to the generousnesse of Quasmez, and if he would renounce the
quality of a tributary, he ought at the same time give over the title of a
Prince, in as much as he possessed the later but on condition that he should
perform the former.

But (said they) those that give you these pernicious counsels, represent not
to you the inconveniences that are inseparable to them. Come again to your
first thoughts, since you think you have pleased your self so well in
following them, and remember, that the tribute of a thousand Emeralds being the
sole means that the Cacique your Father could find to preserve to himself
his Mine, you cannot deny the same tribute, without running the hazard to lose
the same Mine. Sodomond would hear them no further, but commanded his guard to
take them, and bury them alive in the bottom of the Mine of Emeralds. The same
day that Quasmez heard of the cruel death of his Ambassadors, he had news
that many of the hundred Caciques his tributaries, won by the policy and
promises of the King of Mexico were joined with Sodomond, and hoped to make up
an Army of a hundred thousand men. This news much afflicted the good King, not
for the fear of having so many enemies on his hands, but for the compassion
and pity he had of the ruin or death of so many innocents which should
necessarily be found covered with the desolations of War. This charitable
thought would not out of his mind, but made him ponder night and day to find
some means to smother this revolt in the birth. Zelmatida seeing him more
melancholy then he was accustomed to be; My Lord (said he) command all us young
men of your Court to take arms and to expose our lives to avenge you on the
disloyalty of your enemies. I am the least of those of my age, but if you
vouchsafe to trust me with the justice of your quarrel, and the good fortune
of your arms, I promise to bring you Sodomond and his accomplices dead or alive,
and by exemplary chasticements pluck for ever out of the minds of the other
Caciques the seeds of revolting. Quasmez weighing what my Lord the Inca might
do by that which he had already performed, gave consent to so just a petition,
and giving him an Army of an hundred thousand men, conjured him to assay all
the ways of sweetness and agreement before he came to a battle. You will
wonder certainly at this, that in so little time Quasmez could bring a hundred
thousand men into the field, and this wonder may arise from your judging of the
customs of our world by that of yours. But I know so much of your manner of
living to tell you that it is otherwise there. Amongst you there are none go to
the wars but gentlemen and beggars, the first to get honor, and the last to
rob and ransack; the rest, which are commonly the richest, stay at home, and
contribute but very little to the charge of war, attending the success with
as much quiet as indifferency. We have more laudable and generous customs. We
are all borne Soldiers, and upon the least occasion, are found ready to march.
There are none left in the Towns and Villages but women and children. Old men
and young, rich and poor take arms, and because they are made equal by their
valor, they go all with a like affection where their Prince and party calls
them. I make no doubt but this declaration has ceased your astonishment, but I
am sure that the rest of my discouse will give you another that shall be far
greater, as it shall be more just. Prepare your selves for it presently and by
the miracles that I shall relate to you, judge to what a point of greatness
Zelmatida had raised ^imselfe, if love, jealous of his reputation, and fortune,
enemy of his extraordinary virtues, had not chained his arm, and taken a way
his desire of glory with that of his life. The Inca having mustered his
Troops, and put some order amongst so great a number of combatants, marched
directly to the Province of Cenusia. Sodomond came to meet him, and offered him
battle with his own forces, and those of all the other rebels. Zelmatida to
obey Quasmez would not accept of it, but on the contrary sent new Ambassadors
to Sodomond to propose to him most advantageous conditions of peace. But when
he saw that neither his offers nor threatenings touched the Barbarian, he
resolved to fight, and let fly his bloody colors. He went straight through all
his Army, and accommodating his speech to the nature of his Soldiers, filled
them with valor and indignation. Presently Sodomond whose pride had taken from
him the knowledge of his strength and courage, bel^eved that he might fight
with Zelmatida, and with this opinion came and defied him. Zelmatida was
ravished with this challenge, and accepting it, made himself ready to make
Sodomond repent him of his rashness. At the first blow ^e gave him a wound in
his right arm, and with his second, struck him to the earth. He might have
killed him, had he listed, but thinking that revenge unworthy his courage, he
left him to the mercy of his Soldiers, who tore him in pieces. The end of this
combat was the beginning of the battle. Twenty rebellious Caciques had formed
with their men, twenty batalions, and had disposed of them so, that they had
but one front. One of these Caciques, a very experimented Captain, had so
ordered his Troops that they might not be defeated but one after another, or
rather to give time to a routed batalion, to fly without being pursued, and
after they had new ranked themselves behind the rest, to frame a new batalion.
Macaraib, (so was this Captain called) came in the head of the first batalion,
and was the first too that, Zelmatida sacrificed to the just choler of Quasmez.
His Soldiers made some resistance, but being entered into and broaken, some of
them were slain, and the rest to reunite themselves got behind the last
batalion.

The second conducted by Abrayba, the third by Terracequy Cacique of the Isle
of Pearls, the fourth by Torrucia, and the fifth by Procorosa scarce stood at
all before Zelmatida. He took these five Caciques alive, and causing them to
be chained, sent them into his Camp: Tamanama lead the sixth batalion; It was
a Prince in the flower of his age, very fair and valiant, who carried on the
crest of his headpeece a handful of hair which the Princess Coriza had given
him for a token of her affection. He came up to Zelmatida with a warlike pace,
and love raising his courage, he promised to himself to cut off the head of
Zelmatida, and to present it to his Mistress. Zelmatida that was almost of the
same age, was moved with his sweet countenance and manhood, and desiring to
make him his friend, resolved to save his life. He fought with him then, but in
such a manner, that he gave those, who stood spectators of the combat, good
cause to think, that he had no great desire to overcome him. Tumanama
perceiving that all his power was too weak to atchieve his generous intention,
and how Zelmatida would not make use of the advantage he had over him, retired
five or six paces, and setting the point of his Javelin in the earth. Brave
warrior (said he) to the Inca, deprive me not of the honor that many a
combat has given me, and imprint not on the front of a Prince, who would be
thy friend, the shame of being vanquished. I know that being inwrapt in the
rebellion of my brothers, I should be so too in their punishments: But, do for
the love of the fair Coriza, that which thou will not for mine, and know that
the remorse of violating my faith, is a greater punishment then that
wherewithal thy Armies threaten me. Zelmatida, taking this young Prince by the
hand, I accept thy friendship (said he) upon the same conditions thou
presentest it me. Live then victorious, not of thy enemies, which is but a
common glory, but of thy self which is the greatest of all victories; and
since thy conscience will not suffer thee of a party whereinto some discontent
has lead thee, take that then which she proposes thee, and give thy
companions an example how they should acknowledge their faults. Tumanamafelt
himself so redevalbe to Zelmatida's courtesy, that turning his arms against
his Allies, he joined his batalion to the Troops of Quasmez, and ran furiously
to set on Bononiama chief of the seventh batalion. I should be too tedious
should I relate to you the defeat of the other Caciques. You may know, that of
thirteen remaining, five were flaine by Zelmatida, two by Tumama; and the rest
taken prisoners. More then threescore thousand were killed, and with the loss
of their lives paid for the extravagancies of their Masters. Quasmez lost there
twelve or fifteen thousand men, but by the victory he obtained brought into the
number of his slaves many Princes, which before by means of a small and
inconsiderable tribute were absolute Lords of their estates. Of those,
Zelmatida brought him twelve prisoners, with thirty thousand of their Subjects,
and gave him a particular account of what he had done. Two days after his
arriva^l being alone with him; My Lord (said he) the Gods present you a fair
occasion to imitate their clemency, and to a way to attain to that supreme
dignity whereto their good deeds have raised them. You have in your prisons,
Princes, whom you may retain as slaves, or put them to death without
injustice, for humane Laws would that Malefactors should be punished. But if
you give them their lives, and forget their faults, shall you not do an act
more glorious for your self, and so much the more just, the nearer it
resembles that merciful goodness wherewith the Gods support us, and pardon
our offenses? Believe me, send back these wretches to their own homes to do
penance for the fault they have committed against their faith as well as
against your Majesty. And to leave them an eternal sorrow for it, free them
from the servitude of tribute which they were wont to pay to your Crown.
Quasmez was so exceedingly movedwith the extreme nobleness and wisdom of
Zelmatida, that the very next day, he called before him all the Caciques, and
mounted on a Theater with Zelmatida, commanded a Herald to proclaim the
deliverance of the prisoners. The Herald after silence made, spoke thus:
Quasmez, Sovereign Monarque of the Lands between the two Seas, of the Mines of
Emeralds and of gold, and of the fishing for pearls, after that by the
victories of his Son, he has made slaves all the Caciques which were before
but tributary to him, declares, that he gives them all their liberty which
justly they had lost, and discharges them and their successors from all the
tributes to which their Provinces were engaged. Think with your selves what
the joy was as well of the Princes as their people, after this Proclamation:
They all fell on their knees, to signify their resentment of this grace, and
when they were risen again, engaged themselves to pay double the tribute that
Quasmez had taken from them. Eight days together they celebrated a feast for
this peace, so glorious to the Conquerors, and so profitable to the conquered;
and the Caciques being all returned to their several homes, filled their
Provinces with the praises of their deliverers. Quasmez this while tormented
with an unknown grief, languished in the midst of his triumphs, and the more
cause of content he found in the person of my Lord the Inca, the more still his
displeasures and disquiets increased. At last the Gods (touched with the
humility and the zeal which accompanied the prayers of that religious Prince,)
heard him then, when he began to leave off all hoping. One day while he was
talking with Zelmatida, there came one to advertise him, that the great Prophet
Tisnatidez, whom he tought so many years dead, was newly arrived, and desired
his permission to see him: Quasmez no sooner heard this news, then he
commanded that he should be brought. The while lifting his eyes and his hands
to Heaven; Great Gods (cried he) I confess I have of late murmured and
distrusted your providence! I have offended! but you know that never crime was
more remissible then mine, since I committed it not in doubting of your
all sufficiency, but in thinking my self unworthy of your protection. The King
was not a little troubled to see Quasmez in such extraordinary transports,
without his knowing the cause, but he was not in it so long. He saw enter into
the place where he was, a man of the age of fourscore years, white as a Swan,
lean as a Skeliton, clad with the skin of a wild Beast, and girt with a great
chain of gold. This old man regarding the King, with eyes that showed an
inward joy, and without saying ought to him, addressed himself to Quasmez, and
speak thus: I know great Prince how many times you have believed me a liar, or
to say better, how often you have not believed your self enough happy to hope
for that good success that our Gods have promised you by my mouth. But the
long time that you have passed without seeing me since the loss of the
innocent and unhappy Xaira, has caused you to think nothing which I had not
foreseen, and for which you may well be pardoned. And our Gods have not so much
remarked what you spoke, through the diffidence you had of your self, but that
they took notice (through your frailty) of the greatness of your zeal, and
the opinion you had of their all-powerfullnesse. For this, they promise you,
this day, the accomplishment of all your desires, and they advertise you not to
fear to expose this young Prince to the hazards of a most difficult
enterprise. By him the prison of the unfortunate Xaira shall be burst open, the
hopes of your enemies deceived, and your Realm more flourishing then ever. At
this word, turning him to the Inca, go (said he) whether the goodness of the
King invites you, who has been to you in lieu of a Father. The enterprise to
which you are destinated is perilous, but it is one of those that is preserved
for such as have your courage and fate. When the Prophet saw that Zelmatida
gazed on him with amazement; no, no, (added he) you are not the Son of Quasmez
but by adoption and love; and though he has bred you as his own child, yet
it is another that was the Author of your life. Do not ask me who he is, he
only knows it to whom nothing is hidden, and who taught me the time and the
place where the guard of this King should find you. Content your self that
your birth is illustrious, and that another day leaving the name of Zelmatida
which Quasmez has given you, for another which shall not be less famous, you
shall attain the Throne of an Empire which shall be as great as the Earth, if
it were not ordayn'd in Heaven, that it must soon fall into the hands of a
Nation which is yet unknown to us. But before this misfortune befall, you shall
fill both the one and the other World with the same of your great actions, and
shall restore to the virtuous Monarch that has bred you that incomparable
treasure which his enemies have as vainly as perfidiously forced and stolen from
him.

Whilst this old Prophet spoke thus, Quazmez wept at once both for hope and
fea^e. The love he bore to his own blood, strove with that he bore to the
King; and no sooner had he put himself in case to thank his gods that they
had heard his prayers, but that he afflicted himself for their being heard. He
feared all the perils by Sea and Land, and some times even wished he could
forget the thralldome of his daughter, that he might not be constrained to
expose my dear Master to such dangers that his affection imagined beyond all
humane ability. At last the authority of the great Priest interposing, Quazmez
was forced to consent to this separation. It Is true that the great courage of a
King contributed much to this resolution. He burnt with impatiency to be^
cleared of what he was to act, that he might know the name and quality of
those that gave him life. Quazmez and the Queen his wife, twice or thrice
swounded at this parting, and dividing all their apprehensions, for two
affections wherein they found no difference, saw themselves brought to such a
strait, that they wished continually that the King would depart, and yet could
not endure that he should go away. The great Priest desiring that Zelmatida
might not los^ a time that was so favorable to his enterprise, put an end to
his fruitless griefs, and made him resolve to be gone. Zelmatida presently
left the Palace, and notwithstanding all the sadness and affliction that his
noble disposition threw on him, to leave those personages to whom he was so
much obliged, he took what servants he thought fitting and began his journey.
The great Priest conducted him many days by ways unknown to him, and made
him go through all the kingdom of Quazmez, entertayning him with nothing else
^ut with the brave adventures that were reserved for him. When he was on the
frontieres of Mexico, he brought him into a little wood, overhung and covered
with two great Mountains, and led him into a Cave, which was the usual place
of his abode. After they had rested there a while, the venerable old man,
drawing aside my Lord the Inca, it is here (said he) that I must leave you, and
let you perfect an act, for whose good success I can contribute nothing but my
prayers and tears. Yet, before we part, I will acquit my self of the promise
I made you, and acquaint you what the gods have deigned to make known to me
touching your birth and adventures. I would I could buy with my blood and the
rest of my life, as perfect a knowledge of all that concerns you, that I might
free you from the travel and pains whereinto I foresee you entering. Content
your self with what is permitted you to know, and without further enquiring
know that you are the son of a great King, and a Queen excelling all others
for endowments. The rest shall be some time yet concealed from you. Whilst the
High Priest spoke thus, he perceived by the actions and disquiets of my Lord
the Inca, how much the desire to know the truth of his Original troubled his
spirits. To take him out of this torment, he thus continued his discourse:
Understand that Quazmez had a daughter, the fairest that ever trod on earth,
almost at the same time that you were borne. He had been above twenty years
married ere he had any child. This cross nevertheless did but increase that
piety which to him is natural. Instead of complaining for his misfortune, he
made his recourse to the gods, and to make them favorable to him, redoubled
his prayers and Sacrifices. In the greatest heat of his devotions, his Queen
found her self with child, and brought such a general consolation to all the
kingdom, that it seemed with the birth of her child there were to be borne
some felicities, which were not to be found on Earth. They called that which
she went withal, Given of the Gods, and when he was borne Quazmez received him
for such. And as soon as he was permitted to carry it out of the chamber, he
took it in his arms, and carried it himself to the Temple and to the Altar
of his gods. He sacrificed to them an exceeding great number of all kinds of
beasts, to render them thanks for the birth of that daughter: he consecrated
her to them, in giving her the name of Xaira, and to this present added such
offerings, that people go at this day to see, as the miracles of piety and
royal liberality. His paternall love stayed not at these good works; but it
had a curiosity for the time to come, and would know to what Fate the gods
reserved this little creature. I found fault with this desire, and advised him
either not to diminish his contents, or to increase his misfortunes by
foreseeing them. Besides, since the mournful accident (that made me forsake
the World) and which my skill made me vainly foresee, since I cannot avoid it;
I had made an oath to contain my self in the ignorance of man, and not to
make my self doubly miserable in searching to know more then others.
Notwithstanding all this, the commandment of Quazmez, and that secret
inclination which easily makes us seek after those things we have sometimes
affected, constrained me to consult and overlooke my forsaken books, and
observe the Stars with the same pleasure and the same observations as I
looked on them before my misfortune. But what indignation, what malevolence
saw I not in Heaven against this poor Innocent? Truly there is not a star
of any disastrous aspect that was not turned against Xaira. I knew it, and if I
dare say so, knew infallibly that that Princess was threatened with five or
six all extraordinary accidents. I saw her stolen away in the cradle,
nourished by the hands of the King her fathers greatest enemies, condemned to
serve one day for a Sacrifice to the cruelty of th^se Barbarians, and if she
chanced to escape this last misery, destined to wander through the world, and
to suffer all the indignities that a slave is capable to undergo. These
prodigious objects so amazed me, and absolutely mastred my senses, that without
an ability for farther inquiry, I forsook my speculation to throw me at the
feet of the Altars, and besought the gods that they would divert those dire
portents which would induce some miscreants to doubt either of their goodness
or providence. After I had perfected all preparations requisite for the
receiving my gods, and to be filld with their inspiration; I felt their
presence, and heard their voices, which speaking within me, said: Know that
within this month shall be executed the blackest and most detestable treason,
that ever perfidious Subjects can perpetrate against their Sovereign. Quito,
now triumphant, shall be the^ad Theater of this bloody Tragedy. Without the
walls of that City shall be done such an abominable act by the death of an
incomparable Princess. Let some try to find her and give her, her last
honors, and let the newborn Infant be taken up who coming from the womb of
his mother shall be received by the paws of pitiful Tigers. By the valor of
this child. Xaira shall be restored to her Father, his enemies shall be
punished for their inhumanity, and the greatest Empire of the world shall be
the reward for the miseries and virtues of that Princess, who must be
unfortunate for her own glory. The gods, having thus spoke to me, left me, and
I found my self much comforted. As Soon as it was day I came to Quasmez, and
concealing from him part of what I knew, entreated him, that for his own
quiet, and the content of his Subjects, he would cause the Princess to be
nursed in some safe place, and to put so many guards about her that it might
not be in the power of any of his Subjects, much less of any stranger to see
her. The King would know particulerly what I gave him this coucell, but
beseeching him to cause Xaira to be brought, before I passed further, he
commanded five or six of his principal Officers to go fetch her from the
Queen. As they who were thus commanded were about to obey him, they heard a
great noise, and at the same time saw the Queen enter into Quasmez chamber all
undressed and so transported from her self, that had she not happened on the
Kings bed, she had fallen in a swound on the planching. Quasmez astonished as
well by the Queens swounding as by the council I late gave him; knew not
whether I would conceal from him the death of his wife in showing the fear I
was in for that of his Daughter. And in this doubt, he bewailed his wife as if
she had been dead, and looking on me now and then, with his eyes full of
tears: I fear (said he) my Father lest the gods be incensed against me to see
that I have neglected them, to bestow all my cares and affection upon a
creature. I had no^ leisure to answer him, for five or six women all bloody
with dishevelled hairs rushed at the same time into his chamber, and casting
themselves about his bed, even terrified us, to see them tear their faces and
beat their heads against the floor.

This tragical beginning was ended by yet more bloody actions. Four men with
stating eyes, and foaming mouths presented themselves to Quasmez, and speaking
all at once: Since (said they to him) we have not been vigilant enough to
preserve our happiness, we will not be cowardly enough to out live it. And in
so saying they turned the points of the arrows they bore in their hands upon
themselves, and sticking them with violence into their throats, so amazed us
with their desperation, that they took from us the means to succor them.
They fell all four dead at my feet, and confirmed me in the opinion I had of
the loss of the Princess. The King, transported with grief and choler, threw
himself out of his bed, and went into another Chamber, to give time to his
guards to take away the bodies of those desperate men, and to stay the madness
of the women that would follow their example. For my part, I stayed by the
Queen, and seeing her recovered, gave her by my discourse some kind of
consolation. I told her that she must force her self from this sorrow, and not
be the cause of the loss of the Father after that of the Daughter. The love
which she had still borne to Quasm^z, was sufficient to overcome all her other
affections, and to suspend for a while the thought of the rape of Xaira. After
I saw her so well recollected, I entreated her to walk to her husband, and to
endeavor by her persuasions to make him constantly to endure and suffer the
loss of the little Princess. She punctually observed all that I desi^ed her,
and so winningly gave Quasmez this bitter potion, that he took it with a great
deal of patience. I saw then that it was time to apply the plaster I had
provided for that wound, and I therefore told them that the will of the gods
was, that their Daughter should be nursed up by their greatest enemy. That the
design the Miscreant had to wrong them, should result clean contrary to his
intention. That they should not engage nor trouble themselves to make any
pursuit after those that had stolen her thence, since nothing but ill would
come of it. But (said I) if in this disaster, as well as in the rest of your
life, you will conform your self to the will of the gods, without a murmr,
patiently undergo, what they have thought fit to be done. I promise you, from
them, that one day you shall see your Daughter in that great fortune you
reserve for her. There is (by a prodigious accident) a child to be borne, from
whose valor you must expect, not alone the deliverance of Xaira, but withal,
the enlarging and establishing of your Throne. If the presence of a thing that
should be so dear to you, can sweeten the bitterness of your loss, I know by
what means you may obtain it. Till then, I speak so loud, that all might
understand me, but at that word coming more near to them, I told them in
their ear, that they should presently cause to march to the City of Quito
three or four thousand of his most hardy and affectionate Subjects, and after
that I acquainted them with that which I had been taught from the mouth of the
gods; They were pleased to be advised by me, and to follow my counsel and
execute this enterprise, made so good an election, that those whom they sent to
Quito, found you as I foretold; and took you thence so fortunately that
without any peril they delivered you into the hands of Quasmez. This Prince
would willingly have kept his loss from the knowledge of his Subjects, but
being instantly spread abroad, and known even to the furthest par^s of his
Kingdom, he thought it was not fit to leave his people in this despair. He
published therefore through all his Provinces, that which I had foretold of
Xaira, and to assure them, discovered to them somewhat of his design on you.
This news was the cause that all those who saw you in the hands of the
Soldiers that brought you, doubted no more of the truth of my predictions, and
consequently, though you were but an infant gave you all the honors they
conceived they ought to their deliverer. That which remains for you now to
know, is, not what you should do, for you understand that already by what I
have told you; but the place where your valor must be seen, and the means
whereby you may come off with renown. Know then that you must go as far as to
the foot of a great Mountain called Popocampecho. You may easily know it by
the flames it sends forth day and night. There shall you find against whom to
exercise your courage. Tread under foot all difficulties, and when you shall
have overcome your enemies, march on till you come before a City that gives
name to the great Kingdom of Mexico. Twill be in that place that you shall
need to use all your strength; but if you do not betray your self, I assure
you that you shall come off victor from the combat which you must there
undergo. Yet, among so many good fortunes, I see a disastrous accident may
betide you, but I dare not make it known to you, so openly as is fitting, for
fea^ lest in striving to make you avoyde it, I my self throw you headlong into
it. If you love your own content take heed you trust not to any thing but
your own courage, and without thinking how to conquer any thing new, have no
thought but for the recovery of what you have lost. Above all make but little
stay at Mexico, return to Quasmez with his Daughter, and if you will not be
all your life time worthy of pity, fail not, before the Moon has been six
times at full to be at the place where you were first taken up from the paws
of the pitiful Tigers. Believe me my dear Son, remember all my
advertisements, and in so doing, you shall be more great then were ever your
predecessors. The old Priest thus ended his discourse, and made my Lord the
Inc^ take a little repast; which done, they went both out of the caverne, and
walked musing till they came to a very large and open plain. The Hie-priest
stopping at the end of this champion, stood long times looking on my Master,
and on the sudden (I know not what divine fury agitating him) he lifted his
eyes to Heaven, and as if he had remarked that the misfortunes which he
foresaw, could not be avoided, he began to weep on Zelmatida, gazed upon him
with as much pity as if had been ready to dye, and left him without the power
of speaking to him one word. The Prince taking this sad parting for a certain
presage of the miseries that should accompany his enterprise, yet gave not ov^r
to pursue it with as much fervency and delight as he had resolved. He traveled
many days and nights without discovering the fatal mountain where those
puissant obstacles were to be met withal which Tisnatides had foretold him.
Now, on^ night when the obscurity and absence of the Moon gave a great luster
to the lesser light^, he saw fire which rising from the earth, to a certain
height, fell down again on it self, and spreading into the form of a Crown
hung in the air so long as Z^lmatida was to come from the place where this
light had made him stay, to the foot of the Mountain Pococampecho. When, by
the extreme flame that flew out of it, he knew the place that he had so long
wished for, he forgot to remember the menacing^ of Tisnatidez, and stopped
short, not to admire that rare effect of nature but to defy in combat those
unknown enemies whose vanquishing was not so certainly assured him, but that
he had need of all his best manhood to atchieve it. After hehad stayed there a
little while, without occasion to defend himself against any thing but coals,
and burning flints which breaking out of the entralls of the Rock were thrown
on him by the force of the flame, he withdrew a little farther from so
incommodious a station, and entered into a hollow way. He had not gone five
hundred paces, when he came to a four cross way and saw by the light of that
fire which came out of the Mountain a woman chained by the feet and the hands,
and who in spite of her fetters, tore off her hair, se^atched her face, and by
her pitiful shreekes in voked both men and gods to her succor. There were
fast by her five men, of which three had already breathed their last through
their wounds, and the other two seemed by their languishing aspects to
testify, that only the grief to leave that fair desolate Lady hindered them
from dying. This bloody adventure, did not only fill the Prince with
astonishment and pity, but animated him to deliver the prisoner. He was
hindered by the arrival of four men, who through fury, or baseness pursued
one of those single men. His nobleness stirring him at the sight of so foul
an assasinat, carried him among the combitants, and causing him to take the
part of the weakest, he made him the strongest, by the death of two of those
murderers. He would have gone on with his just punishment, when a new combatant
appeared, who, to be a partner in this revenge, struck him down dead with
who^ Zelmatida was fighting. There was but one left, who weakened by his
wounds, and affrig^ted to see himself in the ^idst of three so p^tent
enemies, let himself fall at their feet, and as soon dyed, certainly with the
very fear of dying. Zelmatida seeing no more enemies, came near to those two
valiant warriors to rejoice with them for their victory, and to ask them the
ca^se of so many m^ders; but presently they cast themselves f^r aloof from
him, and after the one of them had reproached the other with his many
ingratitudes and perfidiousnesse, they began so sudden and so furious a
comb^te, that the last commer struck dead the other, before Zelmatida could
separate them. This strange accident so much troubled him, that without
considering whether he might undertake with justice the revenging the
vanquished, he would needs fall on the vanquisher. But the wounded man
withholding him, do not (said he) avenge an ungrateful person, who to
satisfy a brutish passion has violated the most holy Laws which are amongst
men. And after he had said so, he crept or rather drew himself along near to
the enchained Lady, and casting on her his half dead eyes, it is you (said he)
incomparable Coriza, who by your charms, stronger then duty, blood and
obligations, have reduced me to that cruel necessity of betraying my
benefactor, and to throw by that respect I owed your virtue. Whilst he spoke
thus, the Victor came near, and accused him of many horrible crimes; but the
other instead of answering to his accusations, showed him the fettered Lady, as
to tell him, that the excuse of all his faults was written in so fair a face.
Nevertheless he asked forgiveness from his Conqueror, and so falling down,
yielded up his life on the feet of the fair captive, either to have the
comfort of kissing them at his death, or to witness by this act of humility,
that he desired pardon both for his love and boldness. In the mean time the
party victorious, threw himself at the feet of the Lady, kissed her fetters,
washed them with his tears, and with down cast eyes, you (said he) shall be
most just if you make me undergo all the rigor that the most unworthy and
most ungrateful amongst men deserves. The Lady interrupting him, Tumanama
(said she) neither accuse your self nor me of your ill fortune. Your
generousnesse and my confidence suffered us not to suspect a man who by so many
actions made us to know him to be as discreet as trusty. Yet O fair Coriza
(answered Tumanama) you have not failed to be exposed to the injuries of a
cruel captivity, and to endure all the outrages, that the bruitishnesse of a
Monster had a will to exercise against your virtue. At the names of Tumanama
and Coriza, Zelmatida recollected his spirits, and coming near these two
lovers, would see before he spoke, whether this Tumanama were he, whose
friendship he had gotten by those generous ways which I have not long since
related to you. He therefore looked on him, and knowing him, what (said he)
shall Zelmatida be so unfortunate that his dear Tumanama will not know him?
These words brought Tumanama back again from the deep meditation wherein he
was in undoing his Mistesses chains, and made him turn his eyes on Zelmatida.

After he had earnestly looked on him, he knew him, though the lightsomnes of
the place was not sufficient to make them well know their countenances: and
rising to embrace him; O my deliverer (said he) has the providence of the gods
brought you into these Deserts to save my life a second time, and to preserve
to the fair Coriza this unworthy cause of her afflictions as well as of her
love? Zelmatida embraced him often times before he made answer, and hiding
from him the truth of his voyage, told him that the service of the King his
father obliged him to go to the Court of the King of Mexico unknown; he came
thither by chance, where five men would have murdered him whom he had killed.
But tell me (said he) by what strange accident the Princess Coriza came to be
in that estate I found her, and why you have flayne a man who seemed to take on
him her defense? That story is long (replied Tumanama) yet I will not forbear
to relate it as succinctly as I can. But first be pleased that I unloade my
fair Princess of those chains, with which the perfidious Maranita has
showed her more his bruitishnesse then his affection. When he had said thus, he
kneeled down, and was in that posture till he had broken all the fair Coriza's
bonds. This done, he presented Zelmatida to the Princess, and adressing his
discourse to her; See said he Coriza the generous Prince, that for your sake
forgetting my revolts and insolences, would not only give me my life and
preserve my honor, but withal disdained not to receive me into the number of
his friends. You see what he has done for your deliverance; give me leave to
relate to him by what mishap you came to have need of his courage, and that I
may justify my self for the death of the traitor that fought for you. Coriza
here began to speak, and told Zelmatida that the perplexities wherein she was,
gave her not the liberty to satisfy the obligations in which she was bound to
him, as well for her own conservation, as for her lovers; but (said she)
until a better fortune give me abler means to acknowledge your favors,
accept the recytall of my mishappes for a beginning of my payment. Here
Tumanama began, and making use of the permission that Coriza gave him; I was at
the point (said he) to Zelmatida, to receive, not the recompance of my
services, for they are not considerable, but the greatest proofs of the
goodness of Coriza; when as Maranita whom I had bred up as my brother, and
made partaker of all my secrecies as the best of my friends, resolved himself
on a treason so brutish, that it is not possible love should be the cause of
it. I had sent him to accompany the Princess and to receive her, out of my
commands, but he most perfidious, having long before combyn'd with some others
like himself for the taking away of Coriza, surprised her one night and
carried her away from the midst of her guards and chayning her, as you saw,
brought her into this place, with an intent to go further even to the Court of
Montezuma, to find there a Sanctuary for her perfidy. The news of this attempt
being brought me, imagine (if possible you can) the complaints I made, the
blasphemies I threw out against the providence of our gods, and the horrible
actions my despair made me resolve on. I flew after the ravisher of my bliss,
without the knowledge or my advertizing of any of my subjects, and fearing no
danger but that which threatened Coriza. I ran through the Woods and Mountains,
and got into the country of my greatest enemy. I was so happy in my search,
that yesterday at Sunset I descried Maranita's troop. That object
transporting me with (...); I neither considered the number of my enemies, nor
the inequality of the combat I was about, but desperately fell in among the
traitors, to have atleast the contentment to die in the sight of my Coriza.
Maranita, either not enduring to see me, or persecuted with the remorse of his
Conscience, made ten or twelve of his associats to turn on me, and kept forth
his way whilst I strove to rid me of those that would stop me. I spent all the
rest of the day, to bring them in case that they should no more contest with me
for my passage and party of the night to follow the ravisher. You saw how I
found him, and you must now inform me who were those that fought with him, and
what obliged you to fight in his defense, Therewith Coriza spoke. Zelmatida
(said she to her lover) cannot satisfy your demand. I alone know the true
cause of that combat, not only because it was done in my presence, but that by
my endeav^ur it was undertaken. You shall know that among those whose service
Maranita made use of for my rape, there were two, who not being able to see me
without loving me (at least they strove to persuade me so) gave me their fayths
that they would free me from the hands of that Traitor. But they asked me for
my ransom, that which I could not grant them. I feyn'd yet, to consent and did
so dex^rously keep them in their resolution, that seeing my self at the point
to lose that person which of all in the world is most dear to me, and
incomparably more precious then my life; I would try this last remedy, and by
all means ^ee me from the tyranny of Maranita. I called then for my two
lovers, and having conjured them to leave me no longer at the mercy of our
common enemy; I persuaded them so effectually, that presently under some ill
pretext they quarelled, and fell on him. Truly on this occasion he showed a
great deal of courage. Two of his enemies he slew, and though his own had not
come to help him, I believe he had been able enough to have dispatched all
the rest. Amongst the five bodies you see lying there on my right hand, are my
unfortunate lovers. This while those that remained of the conspiracy, desirous
to revenge their deaths, let drive at Maranita, but being stoutly repulsed,
they were constrained to take them to their heels.

Maranita transported with fury, followed them, with those of his own party,
and was an hour before I saw him again. For my self, I was not in a little
trouble, for I saw an occasion present it self, to get me away, and when I
would have put it in execution, I knew, that by reason of the chains on my
heels I was not possibly able to go. I threw my self then on the ground
again, and calling oftentimes Tumanama to help me, I would needs try whether
my fetters were not strong enough to free me from my slavery. I had already
many times beat them against my face, when I perceived Maranita retiring
before four men, who doubtless would have made him smart for the death of
their companions. This new combat stayed my fury, and made me hope to obtain
by other hands then mine own, the end of my captivity. And truly, but for the
succor you gave him (said she, regarding Zelmatida) the traitors themselves
had avenged me on the Author of their treason. But it was ^t he sho^uld receive
the punishment of his crimes, from the hand of him whom he had the most
offended, and that he should fall, under the victorious arms of my dear
Tumanama. This Princess could no longer continue her discourse, nor the
Princes stay longer by her, for at that very instant they perceived a Troop of
armed men like the thieves that run through the Realm of Mexico. Zelmatida and
Tumanama, attended by some servants, went to meet them, and without giving them
time to bethink themselves so furiously charged them, that a part of them were
left dead on the place, and the rest got away and saved themselves in the wood
that is at the foot of the burning Mountain. Zelmatida seeing that these
petty incounters were so easily put over, persuaded himself that the
Hie-priest had made matters far more dangerous then they were, but he soon
changed his opinion, for he saw a man higher then he by the half, who made the
same noise in running as a man would do armed after your fashion. This Giant
carried on his shoulders a club, heavy enough to brain by his weight many men
at once. He lifted up this mighty logge of wood against Zelmatida, and
threatening him, yield (said he) or prepare thy self to suffer the punishment I
reserve for those of thy quality. Zelmatida instead of losing time in vain
replies, employed it in purging the world of a Monster who alone was able to
make it desolate. He darted a long Javelin at him which fell luckily at his
feet and gave him a great wound. The Giant roaring as an enraged Lion, threw
himself on my dear Master and had almost overthrown him; but his agility
serving him instead of strength, he passed this great stroke in slipping aside,
and gave the Giant a blow far more dangerous then the first. The Giant feeling
himself so wounded recoyled to take his aim and kill his enemy with one sole
blow of his club. But seeing it a veiled him not, he betook him to other
weapons and gave my Lord the Inca diverse blows which he could not avoyde. He
was wounded in many places, and had been in danger of his life, if desperately
throwing himself on his enemy he had not luckily stroke his head through with
his half pike. The Giant, with the blow took his death and fell at the feet
of his conqueror. About that time the day arose and Zelmatida weakened with his
travel and the loss of blood was enforced to lay him on the ground. Coriza
ran quickly to him with two of his slaves, and weeping told him, that whilst he
fought Tumanama was like to be murdered by other thieves, and that he was
exceedingly wounded. In that extremity the gods made known that they watch
always for the safety of extraordinary men, for within a little after
Zelmatida saw many men and women coming out from among the trees and bushes
which grow on the descent of the mountain. These people seemed to be very much
affrighted, for such as had taken the boldness to come down lower then their
companions, fled presently after with as much fear and have as if indeed they
had been pursued. Zelmatida looking on them, beckoned that they should come to
him, but whether they took no heed to it, or were too much afraid, once,
they would not come out of their fastness. This while Tumanama was no sooner
recoverd from his fainting occasioned by his wounds, but he besought Coriza to
inform him whether my Lord the Inca were dead: He is not, said the Princess,
but his prodigious valor has triumphed over that terrible Giant as well as on
his other enemies. If it be so, replied Tumanama, bring me to him, to the end,
that taking that excellent man for a witness and executor of my last will, I
may before my death pay some of those obligations for which I stand engaged to
you, and give you a defender that may free your virtue from the oppression of
any miscreant. Coriza melting into tears at the discourse of her lover, helped
to raise him, and taking him under the arm, led him where Zelmatida was laid
down. Imagine, the contentment those two perfect friends received in their
interviewe. Tumanama hardly being able to speak. Zelmatida (said he) to my
dear Master; the Gods reserve you for so many other fair adventures, that I
am most assured, that this last shall not give an end to your life. Therefore I
conjure you by our sincere amity to take Coriza into your protection, and to
put her in possession of those estates that I leave her, as a token of my most
humble servitude. He could not continue this discourse for his being environed
with the same men that had so long looked on Zelmatida from the top of the
Mountain. They began all to gaze on the two Princes; and to show their
astonishment by their gestures and their cries. Some went to visit the bodies
of those that were slain, and the first they met withal was the Giant. At
sight of him, their cries or to say more properly, their howlings redoubled.
Some of them after they had turned the Giant on all sides came running to the
Princes and inquired, which of them 'twas that had been able to fi^ish so hard
an enterprise? Tumanama weak as he was, failed not to raise himself to speak
to those Villagers, and tell them in what manner Zelmatida had vanquished the
Giant. Instantly they threw themselves on their knees round about my Lord the
Inca, and kissing his feet and his hands, cried out, that the fearful
Popocampecho had received a chastisement for his offenses, and that one of
their gods had taken the shape of a man to avenge all Mexico. Scarce had they
finished these words when men, women and children came and cast themselves at
the feet of Zelmatida, and kissing the earth, give him all the thanks they
could. Zelmatida entreated them not to go on in their Idolatries, and told
them that he was no god, but a man, who having almost shed all his blood, was
even ready to expire if he were not the sooner relieved. These words increased
the wonder of the country people, and made them more earnestly to search for
their remedies. Some ran one way, others another, and those of the better sort
staying to assist Zelmatida and Tumanama, carried them to certain houses which
were at the foot of the Mountain toward the Sun rising. Tumanama being less
wounded then Zelmatida was recured in few days, by virtue of the herbs of the
burning Mountain, and desirous to observe that which my dear Master had
prescribed him, took his leave of him as soon as he could, and departed
toward his own home to fast there those delights which the possession of the
fair Coriza could give him. Zelmatida, who was honored as a god amongst those
rusticall people, was looked after with so good success, that in fifteen days
(by virtue of those herbs they applied to them) his wounds were all closed
up, and cured. I cannot relate to you the love those Mexicans showed him, nor
their well treating him. Amongst all their kindnesses he still mused on his
journey, and thinking on the predictions of Tisnatidez, imagined the event of
things clean contrary to that which happened. If (said he to himself) a combat
whereof the Hie-priest told me not, but as of an accident scarce considerable
has brought me to the extremity wherein I am, I must presently resolve, to
perish in that which I am to undertake at Mexico. I remember well his very
words. There (said he, speaking of the burning Mountain) you shall find
against whom to exercise your courage. And when you have overcome your enemies;
go on, near to a Town that gives name to the Kingdom of Mexico. It will be
there that you will have need of all your forces. What extraordinary forces
should the gods send me (continued Zelmatida) to be a victor yet on the second
occasion, since in this first I have met with none which have not been almost
overcome? This consideration lasted no longer then his sickness. As Soon as he
could walk, he forgot what was passed and feared, not what was to come after.
Yet stayed he sometime with those people to get his perfect health and
strength, and to exterminate that mischievous brood of Robbers. He therefore
got abroad, followed by all the inhabitants of the mountain, and marched into
the thickest of the woods and the depth of the caves to find out those public
pestilences.

In eight days he executed of them two hundred, and discovering the last place
of their retreit, he besieged them, and after two or three affaults, seeing
they were too well entrenched to be taken, he permitted (the poor people whom
these monsters had so long time persecuted) to burn them, and for ever to
destroy the seed of them. When he saw that there was no more to do for the
safety of the villagers, he thanked them, for the respect he had there found,
and by a speech that drew tears from all that were about him, promised his
assistance whenever they should stand in need of it. He thought by this,
that he had bid them farewell, but he was much deceived, when he would have
been gone: They told him, that for the good he had done to all the country,
they were bound to conduct him where his valor should receive the reward it
had deserved. This new promise of honor displeased him extremely; but well he
might strive to put it off, and feign important designs to alter the
resolutions of those people, 'twas all to no purpose, and when he thought to
have stolen from them, he found it as much impossible. There was nothing then
but patience; go he must, and be content to conform himself to the will of
his rustica^ll and indiscrete admirers. The day of their departing agreed on,
there assembled at least five or six hundred accoutred after their manner; that
was, from the gyrdle to their knees covered with feathers of diverse colors,
Hats of flowers on their heads, and bows and arrows in their hands. They were
ready to dislodge at day break, and as soon as Zelmatida was ready, they put
themselves in order and marched by six and six before him. They sung in such
a tone as was never heard, and leaping, and dancing in such postures, enough to
make a man die with laughing; seemed to leave nothing undone which could be
wished for by their deliverer. One amongst them that had the stature of a Giant
carried a Lance made of an entyre tree, at whose end he had fixed the head
Popocampecho, and underneath were hung his arms in manner of a trophy.
Zelmatida followed accompanied with two men that Tumanama had left him.
Fifteen or twenty of Popocampechoes companions, whom they had kept alive for
this triumph, were bound in chains of gold, and came after my dear Lord,
compelled by the bastonadoes of their guard, which were often redoubled in
remembrance of the miseries they had formerly endured by them. During all the
journey, the King passed not by any place that was inhabited, where he was not
received with all the honor that they could have given to Montezuma himself.
Those that lived on the high way prepared Sacrifices for him, and presented
themselves with the same respects and ceremonies as they observed before their
gods. Those which abode further off came to attend him as he passed with
presents, and all gave him the title of their Deliverer, as if in the death of
Popocampecho he had exterminated all the Monsters of Mexico. After many of such
pleasant days travel, the King espied a town far greater then all the rest
he had seen in his journey. He asked the name of it, of the most eminent of
his troop, who told him that it was the capital City of the kingdom, called
Mexico, and that they conducted him thither to be presented to the Queen
Hismelita, who in the absence of Montezuma did perform all the royal offices.
The king has commanded me to tell you that this news amazed him, with such an
apprehension that he never met with before. He knew before the end of this day
that this fear had been the certain presage of his imprisonment, and a
secret advertisement which he received from the gods, to observe all those
things which they had anounced to him by the mouth of their hye-Priest. But in
lieu of giving this explication to his fear, he condemned himself as a weak
man; and taking rash resolutions, scorned all the perils which he was to run
through. This done, he began to take notice of the marvelous seituation of
Mexico, and before he came on that long causeway, which crosses the marshes
where it is built, stayed in a Plain so covered with flowers and trees,
compassed with so many channells, and watered with so many sources of living
fountains, that he confessed there was nothing more delightful to be seen. He
had walked a little while amongst those trees, when they which marched in the
van, stopped, and caused the rest to do so too. The reason of this stay was
soon known, as well by the shoutes of some as the talk of others. The most
forward came to the King and told him that Hismalita was set down in that
meadowe with all her Court, and should seem was expressly come thither to
receive him. Presently Zelmatida commanded that all those that were before him
should open their ranks, and range themselves in file on both sides the way. It
was as soon done as commanded, and then the king saw the Queens Troop; when
he imagined that they saw him, he took a javelin, and marched up to that
Princess with such a grace and majesty, that in the judgment of all those
that were with Hismelita, they were found to be beyond comparison. I have heard
by others more particularly then from my dear Master of this interview. I will
therefore make an essay to relate to you what I understood of it, though in so
doing I go beyond the bounds prescribed me. Though Zelmatida be not now in
case to terrify any, you must not therefore conceive him so in that brave day
as you see him now before you. Those griefs that gnaw him, and that despair
which continually kills him, had not yet changed the first color of his
looks, faded the freshness of his color, nor deaded the fire of his eyes. To
speak him to you in one word, he was that body of which you now only see the
shadow. Add to those charms that which fame made march before him, to conquer
reason before sense could be overcome, and with all (...) perfections
contemplate him before the Queen of Mexico.

As soon as he had done his obeisance to her, he entreated pardon for the
insolent train wherewith he was enforced to come before her, and concealing
his condition and Country, made himself taken for a kinsman of the last
Cacique that Montezuma had brought under his obedience. He told her that his
duty and ill fortune equally constraining him to leave his Country, he was
come to serve Montezuma; and that passing near to a Mountain that throws
forth fire, he had been set on by thieves, and had killed some of them, since
when, at the entreaty of those who conducted him, and besides, seeing an
express commandment signed by the hand of the King he had made some stay
there, to purge the Country of those villains; and that after the end of that
little war he would have rebetaken himself to his intended journey, but that
it was not in his power to rid himself of the people that came with him. That
he had been compelled to present himself before her in the estate she saw, and
(weighing his being forced) he beseeched her humbly to consider him as a
prisoner, that does nothing but by the command of another, rather then as one
indiscreet whose vanity makes him not know himself. Hismalita, replied, that
for his delivering Mexico from a Monster, esteemed indomptable, there were not
honors nor triumphs beyond his desert. That the pesants of whom he complained,
had done nothing but what was commanded them: And that he should expect more
glorious assurances of the magnificence, and love of Montezuma, then the
rusticall intertainement of the inhabitants of Popocampecho had made him show
of, in witnessing to him their sensibilities of what he had done for them.
These discourses gave place to others; and the Queen after she had dismissed
the people that encompassed her to behold this meeting, retained no more but
Zelmatida and his two followers. The Court, thus remained freed, and had a long
time its eyes fixed on my dear Master, as on an object worthy of admiration.
Hismalita had never a Son, but she had four Daughters, who though not much
resembling, were nevertheless perfectly beautiful. Zelmatida gave them almost
the same compliment he had given their Mother; but he had no sooner cast his
eyes on the tallest, though she was not the eldest, but a second fear almost
put him from himself, and left him no longer to doubt of the cause of his
first. The accustomed civilities being ended, the Queen commanded my dear
Master to tell her what the misfortune was that had obliged him to abandon his
Country, and by what miracle he became able to vanquish Popocampecho. He had
not power enough over his soul to obey her; for he spoke with such remarkable
diversions, and deportments so far unlike those which were expected from him,
that Hismalita took heed of it, and all the Court believed that he was thus
confused, because he had not been accustomed to live among that pomp and
luster wherewithal great Princes are environed. He entertained the Mother, and
looked on the Daughter, he smiled instead of answering the Queen when she asked
him some serious question, and he was heard to sigh in recounting some
adventures wherein he had all kind of advantages. The end of that day being for
my dear Master an unpleasing conversation; the Queen commanded him to follow
her. He came along to her Palace, and for all that could present it self for
his object, he gave not over his musings. When he was in the Queens Chamber he
impatiently wished that he might entertain that young Marvel that had so
easily overcome him. An occasion offered it self, for Hismalita being engaged
to dispatch two posts which the King her husband had sent her, retired into her
Council Chamber. By her absence, Zelmatida abode in the most delectable
company he could desire, and found a facile means to content his new passion.
The first that began a word to entertain him, was she, who in so little a
space of time had caused so great a change in him. She had a far better wit
then her sisters, and her conversation was so sweet, that it is to be believed,
that had she had less beauty then she was endowed with, the charms of her
mind were strong enough to win and arrest eternally whatsoever he were that
deserved the quality of an honest man. Her high humor had till then kept her
in such a contempt of our sex, that she believed not, men were worth the pains
to be overcome. And though she were in a Court which from all times had been
the seat of pleasure, of love, and all galantry, she yet lived with an
incredible severity, and reserving all her light to her self, she did not only
laugh at the curiosity of those of her age, but instead of borrowing from Art
strange attires and ornaments, she would not endure that nature should freely
serve her self of the greater part of her own.

Living in this manner, it required the same spirit and the same knowledge that
my Lord the Inca possessed, to have the same passion. He made it appear from
that evening that his Love was of that nature which instantly deprives men of
all judgment. For Izatida (so was the Princess called) asking him some
question, he found himself speechless when he would have given her an
answer. She noted in his face, I know not what of a man transported with joy;
and who the more makes known his irregular passions by his unprofitable
strivings to conceal them. And although Zelmatida would never be won to
believe that this young Princess loved him, yet a thousand proofs too
visible, have made me ever think otherwise; and I am certain that the residue
of my relation will make you of my opinion: This Princess then unwilling that
the loss of a person whom she already esteemed as one of hers, should be
known; told him that understanding from himself a part of those adventures
had befaln him, and the persecutions wherewith fortune had crossed his virtue;
Her sisters and her self would willingly know the rest, and that they
entreated him to give them that contentment; and not condemn for too much
boldness a curiosity which grew only from the esteem they had of him. My
dear Master, from thence, taking occasion to begin a discourse that might
serve for his Love. I have (said he) too much proof of the Justice, or rather
of the hatred of the gods, to believe that there has ever any thing happened
in my life may be worthy your esteem or curiosity. It Is for you, and those
incomparable beauties about you, that those powers reserve all that can be
called glory, value and admiration. Men are for no other end in the world but
that you might have slaves; and that the Altars which you have merited, may be
perpetually laden with offerings and sacrifices. O how happy may they esteem
themselves who have purity enough to be offered in so famous an oblation I but
who dares vaunt of so much purity? Izatida, foreseeing what would ensue on this
discourse, broake it off; and reviving the first, You may have liberty of
speech (said she to Zelmatida) but you cannot deprive us of that opinion which
the public voice has given us of your valor, and we know well (I speak for
my sisters and my self) how to distinguish your humility from that which fame
has made us to admire in you before your arrival. What could report speak in
my behalf (replied Zelmatida) who being b^t one, most miserable, whom fortune
left to wander through the world, to make her power to be feared, am brought to
that cruel necessity to end my days without a name, without any rest or hope?
Izatida (who questionless knew what he intended) replied; I have never heard
that a man of spirit would so absolutely give himself into the hands of
fortune, but that he would reserve a means to be revenged when he found that
he had her in his power. You have hitherto done such things that they are so
many witnesses whereby that enemy has made you acquire more glory then she
has been cause of the loss of your repose, and by consequence has given you
more then ever she took from you. Quit then that ill opinion which you have of
your fortune and your self, and assure your self that there are not many
felicities which your virtues may not with reason pretend to. This discourse
had longer continued, if Izatida's sisters had not interrupted her, and by
their jealousies, as it were, ravished from Zelmatida the occasion to make
himself known to be no less winning in his conversation, then he was
redoubtfull in his combats. This while the Queen had perfected her dispatches,
and then returned where she left her daughters with Zelmatida, and from thence
going into her bedchamber, gave her new Guest the goodnight. As soon as he
was gone forth, ten or twelve Officers came and accompanied him to the lodgings
provided for him. He was brought into a chamber so fair and richly furnished,
that if he had not too well remembered the loss Izatida had made him (...), he
might there have refreshd and unwearied himself of all his former travells.
But his affections hindered him from enjoying that rest which his valor made
him find in the very midst of his Enemies. Sometimes he entertaind himself
with Izatidaes sweet eyes, sometimes with the whiteness of her complexion,
then with the beauty of her stature, and after with the color of her hair.
But when he passed from the allurements of her body to those of her mind, he
was no more capeable to fear the disasters wherewithal Quasmez High Priest
had threatened him. Prophet (said he, so loud that he was heard by his
followers) give me leave to accuse you of injustice in your counsels. Why
would you have me to defend my self when I see no enemy to assail me, if you
give not that name to the sole Author of my lives felicity? Certainly you
little knew the power of Isatida's eyes, when you thought me able enough to
resist them.

But what said I? No, no, you had a perfect konwledge of it, and well foresaw
my captivity, when you foretold me that I should be victorious in this last
combat if I were always my self. You were not ignorant that that would be
impossible for me, since to behold this wonder, and to be master of himself,
was to trenche upon the wisdom of the very gods, and to act something beyond
their miracles. In the like discourse he passed the rest of the night, and
without comforting himself with any of those hopes wherewithal Lovers are
accustomed to flatter themselves; made no other resolution then to force Xaira
from her prison, and himself to abide eternally in that of Isatida. In this
thought he called his servants. Those that they had given to serve him, dressed
him whilst he entertained himself only with his passion. He was in this
melancholy till the Queen was up, and when he knew that she was ready to go to
the Temple, he came forth to accompany her. Hismalita obliged him to spend most
of the day with her, and the hour being come at what time she was used to
walk, she brought him into those fair Meadows, where he saw her the first
time, and her Daughters were with them. Isatida who that day had begun to
borrow something of art to make her more lovely, appeared to the Kings eyes, as
if beauty it self seated in her Throne, imperiously commanded him neither to
do nor think any thing but for her. As soon as those who carried the Queen
and the Princesses had set them down, Zelmatida was engaged to be with
Hismalita, and constrained not to discourse with Isatida but with his eyes and
thought. The Queen entertained him a long time with the state of her affairs,
and the secret factions that the jealousy of diverse Caciques, and the arrival
of some unknown men had hatched among her Subjects. The nothing-to-thepurpose
speeches wherewith Zelmatida interrupted the Queens discourse and the
counsels out of all likelihood which he would have her accept as the safest,
made him so unlike himself, that Hismalita had small cause to take him for
that famous Heir of Quasmez who had made himself dreadful to all the
Potentates of our world. And to say truth, who would ever have thought, that
this great Prince who till then had never any passion but for fame, who had so
absolutely renounced all the pleasures of youth and sense, and who by the
strength and solidity of his deliberations had astonished the ancientest
Counselors of the State of Quasmez, had been capable of such an alteration?
Yet he was so, and added so many extravagancies to those which had already
weariedH ismalita, that she diverted her speech to some others that were near
her, to have no more on her hands, a man, that was such ill company. This
disgrace, was, to him, very favorable, for by that, he had sooner the liberty
to speak to Isatida, and to continu e the discourse which he had begun the day
before. He drew near her, and unheard of any body, took so fitly an occasion
to make her know his sufferings, that in lieu of those ordinary neglects which
are most commonly the first answers of those that are spoken to in the dialect
of love; he received from Isatida only words of civility. All the rest of the
day passed in the like entertaines, and (if I may speak it) before that my
dear Master left that amyable Princess, he had cause to believe that her
discretion much pleased him. The night coming on, the Queen returned with all
her Court, but more satisfied with Zelmatida's valor then his wit. On the
other side, the Prince, not being able to repent the overture of his affection
to Isatida, was willing to let some days slip away, to give time to that
Princess to accustom her self to his passion. In the mean while, the
continual converse he had with her, made him discover so many new inticements,
that he had been indeed more insensible then judicious, if he had preferred the
hopes of an Empire before those of the enjoying Isatida. Besides he saw
himself received with so much sweetness, and his discourse listened to, with
so many signs of satisfaction, that had he been less scrupulous then he was,
he had been a^ured of the Pincesses good affection. But his discretion and love
forbad him to hope for so great a happiness, yet finding her one day in a
place where with freedom he might use his language; he let his passion so much
transport him, that he made her a more ample and express declaration then any
of his former, and that she might not condemn him of boldness or daring,
assured her that he was the son of a King. This audacious proposition was in
all likelihood to have a contrary success then it had, but the Prince his
infinite love, and the purity of his intention deserved not a less favorable
treatment. Isatida blushed at the freeness of my dear Master, and rested some
while silent, but coming at last from her bashfullnesse; I shall be glad (said
she) to see whether you be capeable of that perfection whereof you vaunt your
self. I accept of your service, and promise you to put your patience to the
test.

See how Isatida expressed her affection to my Lord the Inca: but (said she)
it is possible that you are ignorant how rigorous the conditions are, by which I
give you leave to serve me. It behooves you to have an asseduitie without
example, that your respects go even to Idolatry, and that Death it self be
not powerful enough to break your silence, And more, take it for most
certayn^ that you lose me for ever, if ever your love comes not only to the
knowledge of the Queen my Mother, but to any person else whatsoever, though it
were to wrong both the one and the other of these two lovers to attribute this
effect to causes less illustrious then their virtues; yet I have often thought
that the overture which Zelmatida made of his birth to the Princess was not
one of the least weapons that love made use of, to subdue this imperious
valor. Things being on these terms; the King bethought him of Quasmez, and at
the same instant resolved to employ Isatida for the delivery of Xaira. One day
therefore, finding an occasion to speak to her, without any over-hearing, he
entertained her long time with the obligations he stood engaged to her, gave
her new assurances of his inviolable fidelity, and making, as I may say, his
heart to come on his lips, constrained Isatida to confess in her self that
it was impossible not to suffer her self to be overcome by the persuasions of
a Lover so discreet and passionate. When Zelmatida saw her so well prepared:
If I may be permitted (said he) to forget my self for a little time, and
glorying in my good fortune, aspire higher then I ought; be pleased fair
Isatida that I desire from you a new favor, to assure me that you have not
repented of those which you have already bestowed on me. Isatida stopping him
as he was going on with this discourse, told him that those words which he
employed to prepare her to accept his petition, were so many injuries done to
her friendship: That she conjured him to believe that there was nothing,
whilst he was as sage and respectfull as hitherto he had been, which he
might not without vanity promise himself from a person who made a particular
profession to be just; That he should not therefore fear to make known what he
desired from her, and that he should assure himself that his request should
be absolutely unjust or else be granted him. Zelmatida, unwilling to show of
too much boldness or too much fear, lest any of them might seem too much
affected, and by consequence vicious, thought that he might adventure. He
besought therefore with his usual grace a favorable audience from Isatida, and
obtaining it, told her in few words his engagements to the King Quasmez, made
known the principal accidents of his infancy, the revelation of the
High Priest, the rapt of the Princess Xa^ra, and entreated her not to take it
amiss, that next the honor of her favors, he wish^d for nothing in the
World so much, as the occasions to serve that good King, who had ^ver been to
him instead of a Father, These words were followed by many other, that seemed
to conclude how it was in the power of Isatida to set Xaira at liberty. The
Princess hearkened very attentively to the beginning of his speech, but seeing
the ferventnesse where with he pressed her to deliver a person unknown to her;
She interru^ted him, and assured, that his High Priest had ill divined, and
that there was nev^r any X^ira nor maid stolen away in the Court of Hismalita.
It Is not that I would put you out of hope; I have a Governesse who has been
in the Court these fifty years, and she loves me with so blinded a passion
that she will tell me whatsoere I would know of he^, though in the revealing,
it should hazard her life. Set your mind then at rest, and ^xpect from my
diligence all that you can expect for the ^leering of your employment.
Zelmatida had set his knee to the ground to thank Isatida, and began his
actions of gratitude, when by the coming of one of Hismalita's E^nuques he was
interrupted. For she naturally ^ealous, cruel and suspicious, would not suffer
my dear Master (since she perceived he affected it) but with much a do, the
conversation of Isatida. Yet she made him no show of her ill humor, but caused
him to be continually watched by her trusty spies; and as soon as she knew him
to be with the Princess, she still found some pretext to take him off. Garruca
could not go on with this discourse, for diverse of the Pirates entering into
Bajazets chamber, and telling him that they had unshipped and stowed all the
riches they found in the Spanish ships in their Magazines, presented him an
Inventory of them. After he had seen it he locked it up, and told the Rovers
that when they had given the dead the honor they merited in their lives by
their brave actions, he would cause the storehouses to be opened, to
distribute and partake with the living, that which their valor had given them.
The most aged of the Pirates having praised the justice of Bajazet, told him
that all things necessary for the funerals of their companions were ready, and
they only waited his command to begin the Ceremonies: Bajazet would willingly
have put it off till the morrow, but loath to displease, he dismissed them with
an assurance that within an hour he would come forth of the Cittadell.

The end of the second Book.
The first Part of POLEXANDER. The third Book.
THE generous Bajazet, witnessing to the three Princes the sorrow he had to
leave them, and to lose the continuance of the marvelous adventures which
Garruca so well related; went to put on his funeral habit in which he was wont
to appear at the funerals of the Pirates. The hour being come wherein this
pomp was to begin, you might have heard resound the noise of Trumpets and
Timbrells throughout all the Island. Bajazet then caused himself to be armed,
and coming out of the Fort, went to join with the other Captains and
Officers, as well by Land as Sea. One amongst them read to him a List of all
the dead Captains, and in few words, made as it were an abridgement of the
life of every one, and besought him in the name of the Pirates to assist at the
funerals of so many valiant and happy Mussulmen. Bajazet, in general, thanked
all the assistants for the honor done him, spoke of the dead in advantageous
terms, and after repetition of the principal points of their lives encouraged
evr'y one to contemn all dangers when the good of the common cause came in
question. Bajazet finished his Oration just when the three Princes came to him,
and concealing the true cause of their arrival, beseeched him to be pleased
that they with him, might give what they believed was due to the memory of so
many valiant men. We shall not, my companions and my self (answered Bajazet)
those alone that rescent the honor that you will do us, but the Souls of
those that we are now interring will rejoice at it, and if you please to add
your suffrages to your presence, we doubt not but they will worthily satisfy
the interrogation of the two Angels, and be delivered from the torment of the
grave. Polexander understanding not well the meaning of these words, believed
that they were some mysterious words in the Religion of Mahomet, and resolved
to remember them, to have their interpretation at the first convenience. This
while Bajazet put himself in the front of the pirates, and so came to the
place where lay the bodies that were to be buried. All things being ready at
the coming of Bajazet, every one began to march in his rank. The Captains
chosen to carry the corpse, took their places, whilst their Talismans and
their Dervises put themselves in the order they were to keep in their
marching. These Mahometish Monks carried in their hands lighted tapers, and
sung with a sad note these words. Ialihae, hillala Mehemet, ressullaha, tungari
bicberemberac, whereby they would say; That God is God, that there is no other
God but he, and that Mahomet is his sole Councellor and only Prophet. At those
words, others answered them in a different tone, and pronounced these words:
Alla rhahumane ashamubula, alla illa alla huma alla. By this prayer which they
make for that dead, they say that God is merciful, that he will have pity on
the deceased, that there is no other God but God: After these Priests went
diverse Soldiers armed after their fashion; they carried Lances in their
hands, on whose ends were the Turbants of the dead, with horse tails. Next
came those that carried the bodies of their companions in bieres made like
square chests, and covered with great clothes made of cotton very white. The
manner of the Mahometans is, to carry their dead to be buried the head
foreward, and so were these, and there was to be seen on the fore-end of their
bieres other turbants covered with feathers and compassed with lighted candles.
Bajazet, all alone followed those bodies, and some thirty paces behind him,
marched all those that had command under his charge.

The Companies of the dead Captains followed, but in an other order then they
had kept till that time. Every Soldier carried his arms reversed and
witnessed as much grief as if he had been the nearest kinsman, or the most
affectionate of the departed. There was one Soldier of every Company who
trained an Ensign on the ground, and behind him came fifteen or twenty
Soldiers, who bore shattered lances, broken oars, and colors of white
taffata whereon there were red crosses. At last, some Moors led in their
hands, very brave horses, which had their saddles turned the upside down on
their backs. All this Troop marened very slowly and in great silence, whilst
the Dervises continued the forsaid prayers. Their place of buryalls was chosen
in a little wood, which was some five hundred paces from the Fortress. As
soon as the Priests were come thither, they rancked themselves about the
graves and ended their prayers. The Captains, the while set the bieres on
tables right against the pits. They took off the clothes and boords where with
they were covered, and then every one might see the dead wound up in such
sort, that they had the face and the feet out of the wynding sheet. The Priests
took the little pieces of paper that were on the stomachs of the deceased, and
after they had made a composition of Saffron and water of Orange flower wrote
certain words which the Moors believe to be powerful and mysterious in their
Religion. These words being writ, the Dervices hung the scrols with black silk
about the necks of the dead, and said a long prayer, by which they asked from
God and Mahomet that the souls of the defunct might be delivered from the
punishment of the Angels. And therewith the Dervises set the bieres on the
ground and with clothes of cotton let them down into the graves, seven or
eight foot deep. They threw in some habillements and some of the colors
which they bore to the interment, as a mark that the dead had gained them.
Afterward they covered the graves with many great planckes, that had been
prepared of purpose, and raised on them with turfes and stones, Tombs of some
six foot long and four hie, and three in largeness. During this business,
the Priests gave not over their prayers to obtain of God that those dead might
answer pertinently when they should be examined by the two black Angels. This
ceremony ended, every one departed with diverse actions of thankfulness, and
Bajazet being disarmed on the place, returned thence, in the company of
Polexander, Zelmatida and Iphidamantus. Bajazet asked them, if they were not
well satisfied in the honor that those of his Religion gave to the dead.
Zelmatida confessed, that the ceremony pleased him, but Iphidamantus went
further, and besought Bajazet to tell him, what those Pirates did believe
should become of their souls after death; and why they made so many prayers to
obtain from God that the dead should be delivered from the interrogation of
the two Angels and the torment of the grave? That which you ask me (answered
Bajazet) is so peculiar to the Mahometans, and held so great a mystery in their
Religion, that you ought to have been bred, or to have long time lived among
them, to give you an account of it. Yet I will endeavor to satisfy your
curiosity. And though I am a weak Theologitian I dare assure my self to
clear you of it, since I most particularly informed my self of that point,
when the necessity of my own defense engaged me to accept the charge which I
now undergo. Know then that all those who believe in Mahomet, hold for an
Article of faith, that the dead are liable to give an account of their actions
in this life, and that they are to give it before two extremely rigorous
Judges; and those are two Angels, the one is called Mongir, and the other
Guaneguir. The first carries always a club of iron, the second holds with both
his hands certain hooks exceeding sharp, and they are both black. Scarce can
a dead man be in his grave so long as since we buried our Captains, but the
two Angels come. They command the dead to arise, to kneel, and to cover his
body with his soul, so as during his life time his soul was covered by his
body. As soon as the deceased has given satisfaction to these several
commands; the two Angels begin to examine him on diverse points of his belief,
and on the principal actions of his life. That is: Whether he has constantly
believed in Mahomet, whether he has endeavored to do good works enough to
keep him from those black and dreadful Countries which they call Algenas
Alsaitanas. They ask him an infinity of more questions, as, whether he has
observed the ceremonies of the Zala, whether he has been a great Alm'ner,
whether he has not failed to fast his Radaman, which is the same that the
Christians call Lent. If he have paid all the dues that he owed to the
Ministers of Mahomet, and in short; if he has never broken any of the
commandments contained in the Zuna of that great Prophet. When as the dead,
(that has then no more liberty to lie) has given an account of his life, and
that the black Angels are satisfied; They leave, and vanish from him. Presently
after there appear to him two others more white then snow that rejoce with him
for his good deeds, and promise him eternal recompances. They lay him as he
was before the coming of the two first Angels. One puts his arm under his
head to serve him for a bolfter, the other in the same manner keeps up his
legs, and both of them guard him, entertain him, and promise not to forsake
him till the day of Judgment. But if it happen that the deceased, condemned by
his own conscience stand mute before the black Angels; or gives them an
account like an ill steward that knows not what he has done with the goods
that were entrusted in his hands: Mongir, gives him so great a blow on the head
with his club that he always carries for that purpose, that he drives the
poor crimenell more then fifteen foot deep into the earth. And presently
Guaneguir making use of his hooks fixes them on the wretch, and draws him by
force out of the ground; nor does this exercise end, for as soon as the dead
is plucked out of his hole by the one, the other knocks him in again with his
club; and so continuing this double punishment, they never leave him in rest
nor ought to leave him till the day of Judgment. Bajazet giving the Princes
thus to understand the secrets of so extravagant a Religion, astonished them.
Iphidamantus likewise turning to Bajazet, I confess said he, that your people
here are very charitable, and scrupulous to be of a profession, sufficiently
contrary to the rules of a devoute life. You are deceived (said Bajazet, The
Zuna of Mahomet gives us a privilege to war with those that are enemies to
his law, and to hold for goods lawfully gotten all that we can take from them
by our utmost force, or otherwise. Besides you took no notice that in the
relation I made you of the interrogatory of the two Angels, you heard me not
speak of any theft or murder. After this doubt cleared, Iphidamantus replied)
I have no more to ask you, but I find that Mahomet was very provident in
fitting the mysteries of his religion to the humors of those that should
embrace it, and so tempered all things, that according to his accommodations a
man may be a great murderer, a great thief, and a very honest man, and
altogether. It is profanely spoken said Bajazet to give the attributes which
abuse has made abominable, to permitted and glorious actions. Mahometans
never steal. They content themselves with the taking from the enemies of their
Prophet all means they have that might hurt them; and by a new kind of
vindicative Justice they chastise those that bandy themselves against the Law
which God has visibly sent from Heaven to the earth, and published by the
mouth of Mahomet. Though by these words Bajazet seemed to be very passionate in
defense of the Alcoran, yet he uttered them in a certain negligent manner,
that it made the Princes think he believed not all that he spoke. In talking
of these curiosities they came where they used to lodge. Bajazet, according to
his custom gave the three Princes their dinner, and during the repast, related
to them diverse secret ceremonies which made up the principal mysteries of the
Religion of Mahomet. They were taken from the table by the shouts of the
Pirates, and the noise of the brazen drums. Bajazet knowing that the Princes
were resolved to end the day as they had begun it, told them, that they were
about the election of twenty new Captains to fill up the places of the dead;
and that there would be something passed in this meeting worthy their seeing,
Hereupon Bajazet took his leave of them, and went to the place where all his
Army attended him. Polexander and Zelmatida more to please Iphidamantus then to
see things so unworthy their high and sad thoughts, went out of the Fort, and
came into a great plain which was appointed for the mustering of the pirates.
They saw presently that at a signal given the Army divided it self into
Regiments, and so stood till Bajazet had taken the whole view of them: straight
after the Regiments joined, and made up four batalions. The Officers that were
wont to give them the Oath, came to the head of the troops, and after five or
six words spoken made them raise such a shoute, that it lasted near a quarter
of an hour; This noise being ended, the Sergeant-Major gave another word, and
presently the batalyons marched, and in marching separated into Companies; the
one half took to the left hand and the other to the right, and both of them
by their evolutions, making a crescent, shut it up at last and represented a
perfect ovall. Bajazet and all his officers were enclosed in the midst, while
all the Captains left their companies, and that according to their age or
merit they came near to Bajazet, they brought him a horse, on which he was no
sooner mounted but he made a sign that he would speak. At that action all the
troops drew and pressed so near, that men and arms touched, and there being
a general silence, Bajazet began thus: My Companions, we are not reduced to
the cruel necessity of that people which are governed by Masters that know
not the Laws, or know them but to violate them. Here neither the
fantasticknesse of the Sovereign, nor the interest of a Favorite, nor the
consideration of birth, nor the necessity of affairs give commands to those
that deserve them not: Our valor and services are the only stairs by which we
mount thither, and the most ambitious amongst us would think himself guilty of
a weakness that he would not pardon in his own breast, if he had had a
thought to gain his companions either by bribes or promises. But we must avow
for our honor, that as there are no corruptors amongst us, so there is not one
that will be corrupted. Let us this day renew so ancient truth, by the election
we are bound to make. Let us give our Suffrages to great Services, to many
wounds, and to long experience, and since the honor to command is the destined
wages for the actions of the heart, let us fill the vacant places with those
that we shall think most worthy. I know it is very hard to give a voice for
some one amongst this infinite number of brave soldiers that encompasse us.
But why do we frame to our selves these difficulties? Our laws prescribe us
what to do: If two be equally worthy of a charge, let the eldest be chosen.
Those with whom their age leaves the contentment of hope, ought not to envy
others the comfort of being recompensed.

Bajazet, for speaking thus, was no less admired for his wisdom then he had
been at other times for his courage. All the Rovers witnessed their admiration
by a certain humming of their voices passing amongst them; and the three
Princes ravished with the eloquence of this illustrious Corsary, avowed that he
deserved to be, not the Captain of a Troop of Thieves, but the absolute
Master of all the people of Africa. Whilst they thus entertained themselves
with the prayers of Bajazet; he that thought on somewhat else, was dismounted
from his horse, and caused his troops to be ranked that they might give their
voices after the accustomed manner. Every Company carried their ticket to their
Captain, and every Captain delivered with his own (which was worth four)
into the hands of his Colonel: the Colonels were bound to put all these
billets into order, and to meet together to confer the one with the other.
These cockets, being filed together, were carried to the four chief of the
Council. Those Officers reserved none but those wherein were writ the names of
the most ancient Soldiers, and went presently to deliver them to the General.
The power of the General appeared particularly in this occasion. He had
liberty to choose amongst them all, those that pleased him best, and his
Suffrage was of so great esteem, that when he had chosen them, they were
reputed more old then the others, though indeed they were the younger. All
these particularities being observed in this last election, and Bajazet neither
augmenting nor lessening the age of those that were named, drew twenty little
scroles where were the names of twenty Soldiers, which were mounted to the
dignity of Captains in the places of those that had been buried in the
morning. These preferrements pleased them all, and the news being presently
carried to the ships, you might see on the one side the air enlightened with
artificial fireworks, and on the other darkened with the smoke of the Canon.
During this noise and confusion, the General assisted with all his Captains
went through his Troops, to find out those that had changed their condition
by this election; but those old Soldiers received it with countenances that
testified enough that they put no difference between their present fortune and
their passed condition. Those who had been their Captains came and took and
told them that hence forward they were companions. It is above twenty years
since you gave us that name replied the new Captain; besides, we that never
saw you command any thing that was not just, have received your injunctions as
proofs of your wisdom, and not as signs of your authority.

Bajazet admired this reasoning, and said alowd that there was great appearance,
those Captains would command admirably well since they knew so well how to
obey: And therewith took the Baudricks and Colors of the dead one after
another and presented them to their Successors. Our laws command (said he)
that you make us an abridged relation of your life, before we give you the
last marks of the command whereto you are lawfully called. They, without any
astonishment did what they were enjoined, and spoake of things so strange, and
so ridiculous, that Bajazet, as well accustomed as he was to their manner of
life, had much a do to refrain from laughter. The rest of the day and all the
night following were spent in plays and feasts. But the three Princes being
retired with Bajazet, sat down at table; and presently after, Polexander
causing every one to depart the room, took Garruca and made him seat
himself by him, and this generous Favorite knowing well what the Prince
desired of him spoake thus.

The continuance of the adventures of Zelmatida, and Isatida.
I Will, since it is your pleasure, begin my discourse where it was
interrupted, and will continue it by the jealousies and suspicions of
Hismalita. This Queen had melancholy fits and disquietings, which amazed all
her Court, and made the wisest avoid all occasions of seeing her. She endured
not Zelmatida but by constrayning her self. She sought every day some pretext
to be rid of him, and the consideration of this stranger made her to hate her
own blood; she gave to Isatida diverse proofs of an anger that was the more to
be feared because it was less broken out. Whilst this secret hatred crossed
the felicity of those innocent Souls, and made them fear all that their
amorous imaginations could frame the most horrible and fearful; Fortune came
to assist Love, and by a pranke of her wonted inequality, would do service to
virtue, deride the cruel policy of Hismalita, confound all the providence of
her Counselors and Divines, and contribute her assistance to the accomplishing
of things that had been so often promised to my dear Master. She corrupted
(if I must use that word) those whom the Queen most trusted, that so Zelmatida
might be in safety and discover all the designs that they set on foot to
destroy him. Many of Hismalitaes domestiques, won with the sweetness, the
courtesy, and the liberality of this Prince, advertised him of what was
deliberated in their Mistress cabinet, and believed that to be trusty to her,
was to be unfaithful and traitors to their gods and themselves. Amongst others
Galtazis (who in the body of an Infant had the wit of a man, and as very a
dwarf as he was might be called, not the defect out a miracle of Nature) was
the first that gave Zelmatida intelligence of the bloody resolutions that
Hismalitaes fear made her take against him. This little one had been given to
Isatida when Montezuma conquered the Estates of the Cacique of Zampoallan, and
presently grew so passionately amorous of the Princess, that he every day
blessed his misfortune and captivity, since through it he had attained to the
glory to be the slave of so fair a Mistress. Hismalita that almost in all
things showed a jealousy of her daughter had taken him from her, and imagined
that by her savours and caresses she might so gain him that he might serve her
for a Spy. But this generous little courage abhorring all baseness and
treachery, continued constant to what he had promised Isatida; and had it not
been by the express commandment she gave him, to feign, and make a show of
extreme love to Hismalita, he would rather have died, then done things so
contrary to his thoughts. When Zelmatida came to Mexico, Hismalita loved
nothing more then this dwarf, and believed him so much hers, that she feared
not to discover to him what she had of most secrecy. But he that knew well on
what conditions he gave himself to that Queen, judiciously advertised his
true Mistrisse of all that most imported her, and by his good Council, made
her to take hold of such occasions to please Hismalita, that the jealous Mother
was constrained in despite of her self, to confess that Isatida alone gave
her more delight and consolation then all the rest of her daughters. Now this
little-one, in all things following the inclinations of Isatida, very often
without knowing them, had scarce seen my Lord the Inca, but he loved him, and
so extraordinarily that he thought him only worthy to serve his fair
Mistress. Zelmatida for his part, was extremely pleased in the conversation of
this little-one, and seeing how judicious and faithful he was, feared not to
let him know his affection. Galtazis seeing things happen to his wish,
interessed himself in this Love, and contributed thereto not much less then
Zelmatida himself.

And now, knowing from Hismalita, what fear the presence of this stranger
threw on her, and learning some of those predictions on which all those
jealousies were founded, he as soon gave my dear Master notice of it, and
concealed not from him, that, in the end the Queen infallibly resolved to have
him murdered. The dwarf intimating thus much, advised him to absent himself
for a while, and by a necessary flight avoid those cruelties that accompanied
the jealousies of Hismalita. But Zelmatida, embracing Galtazis, and laughing at
his fears and counsels; My friend (said he) since by a Law imposed on
nature, all things must have an end, O how happy am I, to have met with so
fair an occasion to perish in! I shall not die of a vulgar death, but shall
have this advantage over all other men, that my death shall beget an envy in
all those that can lay a claim to any generositie. Galtazis knowing the great
spirit of Zelmatida, I confess (said he) that you are worthy to se^ my fair
Mistress. Go on invincible Prince and fear not but the gods will turn away
those disasters that threaten you. This little-one, after he had thus confirmed
my dear Master in his resolution, left him, and went certainly to make it
known to Isatida. The Inca having now thanked the Sun, to whom he had a
particular devotion, though he knew not yet that he was the Author of his Race,
bethought how to gain Hismalita by some eminent service for fear to lose
Isatida. Yet among these different cares, he forgot not to bethink himself
that Quasmez asked his daughter from him, and accused him for not being enough
grateful to him; He therefore sought out Isatida with an intent to speak to
her yet once more for Xaira; but the Princess ^ut him off the displeasure of
petitioning twice for one thing. For as soon as she could with freedom speak
to him. I am to give you an account (said she) of the matter you entrusted me
withal. I have enquired after the Princess which you seek with so much
passion, and perceiving that my Governesse made some difficulty to speak to
me. I did often times by embraces woe her to tell me if she had heard any thing
spoken of Xaira. Whilst I solicited her with so much earnestness, she used
such actions as made me believe she went about to discover some great secrets
to me; for on the sudden, she changed countenance, and so great a trembling
seized her, that she was a long time before she could answer me. At last she
recollected her self, and swore to me that she had never seen the Princess
X^ira. But as if she believed that her oaths were not sufficient to make me
credit it, she accompanied them with so many sighs and tears and other signs
of affliction, that but for you, I should have repented the asking her the
question. Yet Zelmatida let not this make you despair; you are assured even by
the mouth of a Prophet that Xaira is living, you are expressly come into this
country to free her from prison, you are he who infallibly must give her
liberty; let time then agitate and the superior causes, and think not that
the wills of the gods either advance themselves or recoyle as it pleases the
fantasticallnesse of our vows. The king persuaded by Isatidaes reasons,
admired the power of her wit, and became daily so idolatrous of it, that it is
not a small sign of his excellent nature, that in so general forgetfulness
of himself, he constantly remembered how much he was obliged to Quasmez. Some
few days after this conversation which had caused Hismalita to lose the rest
of her complying, or rather of her dissimulation, she received two general
intelligences equally sad and deplorable, which made her betake her self to
other thoughts then how to be avenged of my dear Master; The posts that came
in hourly, reported news that Montezumas was either killed or at least taken
prisoner in the town of Tevich, and that the Cacique Coatelicamat accompanied
with those of Zusolia and of Tlamacolapan and many other Provinces, were
coming with an army of two hundred thousand combatants to besiege Mexico.

This unexpected insurrection, for which they were unprepared because it was
never dreaded, joined with the death or prison of Montezuma spread such a fear
in all the spirits of the Court, that Hismalita giving way to this first fright
was at the point to abandon Mexico and to retire her self to Vacipale. In this
extremity they were forced to have recouse to Zelmatida whom the Mexicans
called the eye of Vitcilopuchtli, which is the God of providence, and the right
arm of Tezcatlipuca which is the God of battles. In effect they looked on
him as a God, where the power of all the two thousand they adored was enclosed;
and when he went through the streets, men by Troops followed him; and Mothers
showing him to their children, threw into those innocent souls the seeds of
adoration and love. Hismalita who by a weakness very ordinary in the most part
of Princes, put off her passions according as was councelled, and had not love
nor hatred but what her Ministers inspired withal her insensible nature, put
off to another time all that her hatred had intended, and fitted herself to
deceive Zelmatida by fair apearances. You might have seen her then instantly
altered, and from fierce and insupportible as she had always been to him, she
becam eso complying and submisse, that my Lord the Inca has since confessed to
me that he pitied so shameful a weakness, at the first council she held,
after the news of the imprisonment of the King her husband and the inroades of
her enemies, she sent for Zelmatida and entreated him to be present. He obeyed
her, to witness to Isatida, that in whatsoever concerned her, he would neither
find backwardness nor difficulty. As soon as he was in the Council Chamber,
and that he saw Hismalita attended on by so many men of state, he made show by
his action that he was ready to execute all that they pleased to command him.
Hismalita called him forward gave him an honorable place, was a long time in
commending his valor, and rendered him new thanks for his services done to
Mexico. Then she enlarged herself on the hopes they all had of him; and
speaking of his age with admiration, told him that Tescatlipuca had not endowed
him with such rare qualities to have them as it were concealed in vulgar
occasions. That he was infallibly destinated for great executions; and though
he were very young they were obliged to believe that he had no less wisdom
then courage: And that she therefore conjured him, in case that Mexico were
beleagured, to command those warriers which she should choose for her defense,
and to make appear in the public conservation, the same valor which he had
showed in that of some particulars. That in recompense she promised him not
only in her own name but in that of Montezuma and his successors, all the
share that he would desire in their fortunes. Zelmatida retaining till this
occasion that wisdom which seemed to be borne with him, answered the Queen
that the honor to serve her was an advantage for whose acquisition there was
naught which a man of heart should not undertake. That he would accept it with
an extreme contentment, but that he humbly besought her to dispense with him
for the employment she would use him, since he had neither experience nor other
parts which were necessary for so great a charge. All the Assembly was much
satisfied with the modesty of this answer, and thought it fit to resolve of
nothing that day, but that they should meet again the next morrow to conclude
all things. The next day then, was the great Council held. Hismalita and the
old Princess which could not follow Montezuma were present, and after diverse
contestations, the Queen not only partaged the affairs of the war, and the
leading of the Troops, amongst six of the most experienced Captains that were
about her; but also (for all the resistance my dear Master could make) shed
eclared him General as well within as without the Town. When he saw there was
no apearance of gainesaying what was resolved; I Will obey (said he to Hismalita)
since it is your pleasure, but on condition, that I undertake nothing till I have
consulted with those that are more experienced and wiser then my self. The old
Mexican Princes, that were naturally proud and by the merit of their actions,
found themselves much pleased with the Kings Declaration, and assured
Hismalita, that she might rest herself in quiet, and contemn the descent of a
small number of seditious persons: Hismalita was easily persuaded; and after
she had received Zelmatida's oath went out of the Council with him, and to
establish him in his command, made him to be carried through all the City, with
the same magnificence, they were wont to carry their Kings on the days of
their triumphs. This necessary and troublesome ceremony being done, my Lord
the Inca shut himself in private withal those of command under his charge.
Presently he got made the description of all the Kingdom of Montezuma and the
Territory of Mexico. Then he desired to know the places already possessed by
the Rebels, and those they were to come by. When they had made kno wne to him
all this, he informed himself of the number of Soldiers, of the quantity of
ammunition and of the fortifications of the Town. He put off till the morrow
the mustring of his men of war, gave command to one of his Livetenants to
visit all the public Magazins, and to send to all particular houses to see
what provisions they had. Hismalita the while, and the same day, went about to
see the defects and the advantages of Mexico; and from that morning set them on
work every where with so much diligence, that he made the Town capable to
sustain a siedge of two years. During all these great business, he forgot
nothing of that which a perfect Lover owes to her he affects. He saw Isatida
punctually twice in a day, and saw her with so much the less nicety, because
he feared not Hismalita's Eunuques. The kind wellcomes he received from the
Princess and the tears with which she confirmed her innocent and true
affection, gave him a courage able to have conqueted the whole world. There is
no doubt (said he) but that the gods take pleasure to hear the vows which are
just. I have often prayed them for some occasion to expose my life for your
service, and to deserve some way a commendation from your mouth: They have
heard my prayers; and the rebellion of your Subjects, in not so much a sign of
their hatred to you, as it is to me a proof of that love Heaven bears me, It Is
in your mame Isatida that I undertake an employment far above my abilities. But
all shall be possible whilst I have your protection and assistance. Confirm
there the honor which the Queen your Mother has done me, and be good enough
to persuade your self that I will acquit my self worthily of the charge that
is imposed upon me. If you believe thus much you will oblige me to lose that
ill opinion I have of my self, and by that happy deceit, you will make me
like those who transported by the force of their imagination, have alone gotten
battles, and made their way through ruin it self. Whilst Zelmatida spoke
thus affectionately, Isatida looked on him her eyes half shut, and unable to
answer, she being so near touched, stood, as one that was neither half awake
nor well asleep. At last she came to her self, and seeing my dear Master at
her feet, conjured him to have more reason then her self. After these few
words she held her peace, and was yet sometime silent. But when she could
speak indeed, she made it well appear by her discourse, that the truest love
is accompanied with fear, She imagined difficulties which could not betide her
otherwise then by the apprehension of those dangers to which she saw her lover
exposed. After that love had expressed all that has, of tenderness, fear and
disquiet; Reason became Mistress, and showed Isatida how far her counsels and
fears were unjust: She condescended to these remonstrances, and was
constrained by her good disposition not only to consent to what the King
desired of her, but oftentimes to entreat him to forget what was passed, and
to be yet once more the Defender of the empire of Montezuma. Zelmatida that
knew very well how to husband with a great deal of discretion, the wit and
favor of Isatida, and who, for her sake feared so much, that most commonly he
avaided the occasions of entertaining her and believed that he ought no more to
wrong her facility. He therefore retired, and it was well he did so, for he was
no sooner in his lodging, but Hismalita sent for him. He went to the Palace,
and understood that the Queen was retired into her Cabinet with the chief of
her Council. There was order left for his entrance, and that was the cause he
attended not at the door. As soon as Hismalita saw him, she arose to receive
him, and seating him in a chair next below her own: It Is fit (said she) that
we make you a partner of the ill news which are newly brought me, and that by
the Picture which the King my Lord has sent me, you should know the deplorable
estate into which his great heart and unfaithful fortune have precipitated
him. Praised be the gods, he is not dead as I feared, but the perfidious Tyrant
of Thevic detaines him prisoner, and so unworthily uses him, that as I
understand by his posts, he wishes himself a thousand times in a day in the
stately Tomb that he has caused to be built for the glory of those Monarques
from whom he is descended. His cruel enemy threatens him continually with
death, and to make it more full of grief and infamous, he thinks to bring him
to the spacious town place of Mexico, and to execute him in the sight of his
wife and children. But wretched and unfortunate Hismalita! thine eyes shall
never behold this horrible spectacle, or thine arms shall not be strong enough
to pluck thee from so sad a destiny.

After a shower of tears shed by the Queen in ending this complaint, abode a
while in silence and her eyes shut, at last she opened them, and extending her
hands to Zelmatida; dear stranger (said she) or rather some visible god that
art descended from heaven for the safety of Mexico, be favorable to my just
prayers, hearken to those of all my Subjects, look on the fetters and bondage
of Montezuma! and suffer not the impious Coatelicamat (confidering his
powerful offenses) to have cause to confirm himself in his abominable
intentions. Go on with your weapons drawn, to meet this Monster, make him to
feel the weight of that arm under which the mighty Giant Popocampecho fell,
and by the like stroke avenge a wife unjustly persecuted, avenge those
children whose innocence would make the most barbarous to relent, avenge
millions of Souls which are guiltlefly tormented, and avenge the gods in
avenging your self; Zelmatida blushing at the flattery and impiety of the
Queen, was twice or thrice about to answer, but judging it a crime to contest
with them, he took another Subject to talk to her, and comforted her for the
imprisonment of Montezuma, in promising to expose his life for his delivery. I
accept of all your offers (replied Hismalita) and feel from them I know not
what hope that seems to assure me of the return of my prosperities. But
bethink you as well of your own conservation as of ours; believe less to
your courage then judgment; execute not that by your self, which your
Soldiers may perform, and lose not us by your too much hazarding your self.
There is no danger to be run (answered Zelmatida) when a good cause is defended
and that Justice goes along with our arms. The disloyal Coatelicamat shall
feel that remorse and those terrors wherewith traitors are tortured, and his
unfortunate end shall be an eternal and most fearful warning to all Rebels,
to keep those Laws inviolable which the gods have ordained them. This
discourse ended Zelmatida and some of the Mexican Princes went forth from the
Queen, and resolved that instantly they should advance to meet the rebels.
The two or three next days were employed in the viewing and mustering of the
Troops, and the king found that he had above a hundred thousand men. Of those
he left part for the guard of the City, and as soon as he had taken leave of
Isatida, marched out of Mexico, with all the presages that might assure him of
the victory.

After he had put his Army in batalia beyond the lake, he took the way of
Culhuacan, which is four miles from Mexico, and sent forerunners to learn
news of the enemy, and knew at their return, that the Rebels marched as men
that knew how to make war, and that on the hearing that they were come out of
Mexico, their vantguards had entrenched themselves in a village, whence it was
very hard to force them. Zelmatida, very glad of this news, kept on his way,
and made his men march day and night. Some Thevician Couriers came to meet
him, and began light skirmishes. The Inca caused them to be undertaken, to the
end to advance his troops the most he could when he came to certain Hillocks
which covered the bourg, he encamped, and advised to lodge there all night. At
day break he resolved to force the enemy, and therfoe chose out of his Army
ten thousand of his best men, and of them composed five batalions, which he led
himself, where he intended they should fight, and after he had given such
order every where, that it was hard if the onset thrived not, he made all to
fall on at the same time. Those which were led by Zelmatida, willing to make
appear their deserts, mastered the intrenchment, forced the barricadoes, and
though they defended themselves very well within the Bourg, yet at last they
became Masters of it. They flew all that had not time or cowardice enough to
save themselves by flight. This first exploit, succeeding so happily;
Zelmatida, thought it fit to pursue the enemy. All his Troops were resolute on
it, when there came news from Hismalita, by which my dear Master understood
that the Cacique of Zempoallan was within a little journey of Mexico, with
above thirty thousand men: Hereupon he assembled the Council of war, to know
what was expedient to be done. There were diverse opinions, but upon the
intelligence received that the Cacique of Thevic, and five other Princes were
but a days journey thence, and came with above four hundred thousand
combatants, they made Zelmatida resolve to retire, and to go and oppose that
inundation which came by the way of Zempoallan. The next day, at day break the
army dislodged from the bourg, except four thousand men, which Zelmatida left
there to amuse the Enemy. But the Mexicans, who for the most part are
heartlesse, and who fight not but when they are assured by their great number;
no sooner saw the Theviciens but they forsook the bourg, and came to seek
their safety in the gross of the Army. By this Zelmatida understood the defect
of his troops; and changing his first Council, intended to undertake nothing
that should be difficult with a people that obeyed not very well, and fought a
great deal worse. Well then imagine him encamped on the side of the lake, in a
great plain, that on the North has the town of Culhuacan, on the South, that
of Iztacpalam, on the East that of Mexico, and on the West that of Tlacopan.
Having lodged his Army in places so advantageous, and made good all eminenties
that might annoy his enemies, he came to Hismalita, and stayed not longer then
he was enforced to take new commands, and consult of a means to hinder the
joining of the troops of Zempoallan with those of Thevic. This done he visited
Isatida, and seeing her in an affliction that could not be augmented: Madam
(said he) I intend not to condemn your sorrows, since that nature and reason
it self cannot give you more just ones. But if the desire to serve you deceive
me not, and did not make me hope for more then I ought, assure your self that
you shall yet see the King your father on his Throne, and all those enemies
that from all parts come to pillage this brave City, shall be soon sacrificed
to those tears which their perfidiousnesse has caused to fall from you.
Isatida could not answer my dear Master, but speaking to him with her eyes,
which all dying as they were, were yet capable to revive him; she made him know
that the imprisonment of the King, nor the debordment of their enemies was not
solely the cause of her afflictions.

Zelmatida was constrained to leave her sooner then he intended, and to get him
again to his Army, which aff^ighted at the coming of the Theviciens, would
have forsaken the field and retired into Mexico. But the Princes arrival
confirmed and retained them in some order. Presently he went to descry the
enemy, and unwilling to give them time to lodge presented them battle. This
boldness did not alone astonish the Theviciens but withal gave a terror to
the Mexicans. But the last took heart by the belief they had that Zelmatida
was a god to whom nothing was impossible, and the worst Soldier amongst them,
animated by the Prince his presence, made himself believe that he was become
extremely valiant. When the Inca perceived all that multitude prepared to
fight, he would needs hearten them to it, and an oration fitted to the humor
and spirit of all that were there, persuaded them that there were no forces
able to resist them. The Cacique of Thevic, carried away by the unruly notions
which the ^ge to reign gives the amoitious, made his Army march to meet with
that of Mexico. As soon as they were in that case, that they could not go
off, but must fall to handy blows; Zelmatida made his first troops give on,
but they found such a resistance, that they began to give back, when he sent
others to assist them. Wheresoever Zelmatida appeared, the Theviciens were
defeated, but every where else they were masters, and knew so well how to
press the Mexicans, that without the conduct and valor of Zelmatida they had
been all cut in pieces. He endured the shock of three or four thousand men,
slew the Cacique of Themocolapan, and made so glorious a retreat, that in the
judgment of the very enemy, it went for a victory. See in what manner the
Theviciens remained masters of the field, and blocked up Mexico by Land and
Water. Every day the king made sallies, wherein his prudence and valor going
hand in hand crowned him with the more glorious palms, by how much he had the
worst Soldiers, and fought with the best and in great number. Hismalita was
not in a little trouble to see the cowardice of her Soldiers, and knew not
what way to witness how much she was obliged to Zelmatida; but being dextrous
and crafty, she thought she could not more powerfully win my dear Master
then by giving him the means to see and entertain Isatida. This conjecture
being confirmed by her confidents, she notedly increased her former affection
to the Princess, and took more care then ordinary to discourse and to have
her in her company. She even some time made her to be dressed before her, and
desiring that she should be always richly attyred, caused to be made for her
both roabes and dressings of such value and so artificially wrought, that the
feathers, if they did not therein contest for the prize, yet did they for their
well suting with the Dyamonds and Pearls. Zelmatida enjoyed all these
felicities; and knowing Hismalitaes intention, bethought him to make the Seige
last long, that his good fortune might be the longer lasting. He forgot not for
all that any thing that could give him the name of a great Captain, and not
hazarding but when 'twas, to good purpose neither himself nor his troops,
wearying the enemy, and made them repent of their enterprise. He from time to
time also proposed to Hismalita diverse ways of finishing the seige, and
advised her to join the Inhabitants of Mexico with the men of war, to force
the Enemy and make him resolve on a battle. But the Queen that would not
hazard any thing before she had heard news of Montezuma, conjured him to
suspend this good design, and attend the succors which would infallibly be
sent her from those Provinces which were not revolted. The King easily
consented to it, and blessing in himself the blindness of Hismalita, was
ravished to see that his fearful Enemy, seemed to affect the occasions that
might please him. Now, one day being with her, there came one to signify to
him, that there was at the Gate a man sent from the Cacique of Thevic that
desired to speak with him. Zelmatida, that would not in the presence of the
Queen make use of his authority of General, entreated her permission for the
entrance of the Thevicien. Hismalita, who in this novelty imagined to her self
some overture of peace, was willing to see him. Zelmatida therefore sent two of
his guard to receive him, and to conduct him to the Palace. Straight after he
came and was presented to the Queen.

As soon as he had made his entry, with incivility enough, he demanded leave
to deliver his charge, and that he might see him who commanded the men of
war. Hismalita showing him my dear Master; See (said she) the Man you seek.
At that word Isatida changed color, and if all the company had not been
attentive to the Herald, no doubt at that time the change of her countenance
had discovered the secret of her heart. This while Zelmatida came near the
man, and told him that he might speak boldly, since the Queen did him the
honor to think it fit; the other told him he was sent by Accapouzalco,
Cacique of the rich City Xochmilco, and Sovereign of the mines of gold, and of
the lake of delights, to defy ten of the most valiant men that were among the
Mexicans. The king took pleasure in the boldness of this Barbarian; and how
many (said he) will this invincible man have with him? My Prince (replied the
Soldier) makes too little esteem of men, to make any account of their
assistance; he always fights alone, and alone carries the victory. He will
have no more seconds in this little occasion then he has had in the greatest;
and conjures thee, if thou be as brave a man as thou art reputed, that thou will make one, and choose to thy self among thy friends ten, nay twenty which
are worthy to assist thee in this combat. Zelmatida began to laugh at this
proposition, and was a long while ere he could get the Queens good will to
accept of the challenge; at last he had it, and sent back the Herald with an
assurance that the next day he would be without the town with his friends, to
give his Master a little exercise. Imagine into what trouble and perplexity
those words out Isatida, and what disquiets she underwent all the rest of the
day. As long as she was with the Queen, she was in those anxieties and
constraints as are imaginable. she looked on Zelmatida with eyes that witnessed
at once both her anger and fear.

The close of the day was the end of that torture; she withdrew into her own
lodgings as soon as she was permitted, and began to figh at liberty.
Oftentimes she accused my dear Master that he loved her not, since he feared
not to displease her, and sought without her permission occasions to lose
himself. He left her not long in this ill humor, but came to her as soon as
he had left Hismalita. When he saw how coldly she entertained him, and by a
serious aspect intimated how much she was displeased; he came near her with a
great deal of submission, and witnessing his fear to her; shall I (said he)
be enough unhappy to have brought you to doubt of my respect or my faith? I
confess I have somewhat enlarged my self beyond the bounds of my servitude,
but Isatida what language would you have used to your slave, and with what face
durst he to have presented himself before you, if he had refused so fair an
occasion to serve you. The Princess that could not be angry with a person in
whom she discovered daily more signs of love, respect and generosity; I will
not (said she) treat you so rudely as your disobedience deserves; and I forget
(for this time) the boldness that you have taken to dispose of your self
without my consent, and am not angry that you have met with so fair a Subject
to make you yet so considerable. But I permit you not this combat but on
condition that you undertake it with ten of your friends; and more, if my
prayers be heard, that is, if you return victorious, I command you upon pain
to run the hazard of my indignation, not to engage your self ever in any
dangerous enterprise till you have advertised me of it, that I may see whether
I ought to permit you to put in execution. Zelmatida (answered) that since he
had the honor to see and to tender her his service and liberty: He had
relinquished and put off all power on himself, and reserved only that which
was to serve her eternally. Be pleased then to believe that I will never
undertake any thing without your permission. Nor had I accepted the defiance of
Accapovealco, if on the sudden when I cast mine eyes on yours, I had not
known that you gave me your consent, and that your all-generous soul granted
me secretly a favor, which was not permitted to be asked you. But Isatida,
give over these troublous objects, and reflect on my new felicities. Do you
not admire the goodness of Hismalita, and the affection that she shows me even
in those things wherein I still thought to have found her my enemy? The
Princess made well known by her answer that she was not accorded with my
dear Master, and a little casting down her eyes; Zelmatida (said she) you have
your weakness as well as other men. You believe with too much facility those
things which you desire with so much passion. The favors which you receive are
too great not to be suspected. I know Hismalita, and find that she has done
too much to persuade my self that she will follow her now inclination. Fear
may be hinders me from judging aright, and it is possible I may wrong the best
Princess of the world; but you Zelmatida are the cause of it; see then if I
have not subject enough to hate you, since that for your sake, I live not as I
ought, and that by little and little I become unnatural to make me seem good.
Our Lovers spent most part of the night in this conversation. Isatida in
dismissing Zelmatida told him that he ought to leave to him that does all with
justice the ordering of things to come, and to expect from his goodness such
events as should be worthy him. In the mean while he should retire to take
that rest whereto the combat he was to undertake the next day obliged him, and
that he might assure himself that either her prayers should not be heard, or
else be very advantageous to him. Zelmatida that used to obey the Princess
without long consideration or delay, gave her the good night, and so went to
his bed. By day break he was up, and had already walked above two hours in a
garden into which opened the windows of Isatida's chamber, when one of the
principal Officers belonging to Hismalita came and told him that the Queen
desired his presence. He went to her, and she found him with the same assured
conntenance that she had seen he days before; and admiting in her self the
great heart of the Prince, grew angry with her self to have as many causes to
hate him as she had to love him; she had a mind to entertain him, but that
one came and related that the Giant had been twice already even at the gates of
the town. This news was the cause that joy and sadness dividing men's minds,
represented to some Zelmatida victorious over the Giant, and to others the
Giant triumphing over Zelmatida. But he that thought on nothing but of doing
acts worthy his love, left the Queen, and coming into the chamber of Isatida,
found her all in tears. He besought her to ratify the permission which she
had given him, and not believe his enemy to be invincible. I know (said she)
why you use this language to me: No, no, I do not think the Giant invincible,
yet have I notwithstanding, a thousand reasons to be afflicted. The peril to
which you are going to expose your self, would obliege me to it (I say) were
you a person but indifferent to me; since for my sake only you are engaged in
this combat, and by consequence in spite of my self become guilty of your
death, if it happen that the chance of war give the advantage to your Enemy.

Indeed knowing your courage, and having heard related so many marvels of it,
I should have cause not to apprehend the event of this duel if all things were
equal. But when I consider that you go to contend with a Monster, as tall
again as your self, I cannot receive those reasons that persuade me that I
do you wrong to have you fear him. My Lord the Inca, by these words felt
himself bound in new chains, and without daring to take the boldness to ask
from the Princess the least favor in the world, told her that before night
she should be obliged to praise him, alive or dead. Whilst Isatida betook
her self to her prayers with her Governesse and dwarf, Zelmatida went to take
his arms, and accompanied with one only Squire went out of Mexico, and came to
the causey where the Giant stayed for him. The walls of the City were ranged
with men and women, to see by the success of this combat what the fortune
would be both general and particular. The lake was covered with Canoas and
other vessels full of Theviciens; and the place where Zelmatida was to fight,
was a square expressly made on the great causeway, for a corpse du guard, and in
case of necessity to serve for a place of defense, and to fight with those
that after they had gotten the causeway would enter into the town. Zelmatida
appeared there, rather armed for the triumph then for the combat. He wore a
head piece covered with a great many feathers, which came on his shoulders and
covered part of his face. His arms were half naked, and for all defensive
armor had only a Cuirasse of quilted cotton, and a buckler of gold, on which
to signify the extremity of his love, he had caused to be painted the mountain
Popocampecho, all on fire, and round about the buckler these words engraven: My
heart preserves all his own. He had a quiver full of arrows, a bow hanging
as a scarf, and two long Javelins, armed at the ends with golden pikes. For
the Giant he was more extravagantly covered, and more advantageously too. He
had the whole skin of a very great Tiger; the muzell of the beast served him
for his head-peece, and the rest, tied in five or six places, was for a good
Cuirasse. He wore a bow and arrows and a great club. As soon as he saw
Zelmatida within shot of his arrows, he shot two at him that had pierced him
through and through, if he had not dexterously avoided them. My dear Master in
coming nearer, darted at him one of his Jave^ns, but it rested hanging in the
skin of the beast that armed the Giant, and could not wou^d him. He knew then
that fighting after this manner, he should not make an end of his enemy; he
therefore came close up, and passing upon him, thrust the half of his Javelin
into his right thighe, and by that would took away his strength of upholding
himself. The Giant retired to be revenged, and to brain his adversary with one
only blow; but his rage taking away his judgment, and my dear Master
returning upon him, ran him through the second time. The pain of this new
wound, made the monster foame; and he threw himself on Zelmatida to have
stifled him in his arms, and cast out his left hand to have catched him by the
hair, but the Inca avoiding his holdpierced his arm, and left the Javelyn in
the wound. This great wound made the Giant mad: he threw his club away, and
uncovering all his body, cast himself on his enemy. Zelmatida seeing so fair
an occasion, took his ^owe and let fly an arrow, which passing under the
Giants left arm (which was then lifted up) stroke him right at the heart.

With this the Monster gave a great cry, and catching his vanquisher in his
arms, bore him to ground with him; he fell on one side, and Zelmatida on the
other, so unhappily, that meeting the head of an arrowe he gave himself a
deep wound: the Giant died presently, and by his death struck so strange a
terror into the hearts both of the Thevic's and Zempoallan's Army, that had the
Mexicans been men of valor, there is no doubt but that very day they had
given end to a Seige which began to make them practice by force that sobriety
which is natural to them. As soon as they had stynched the blood that
Zelmatida lost by his wounds, he returned into Mexico, with all the pomp that
so great an action could be attended. He was not only admired of Hismalita and
of all the Court, but his enemies themselves were forced to acknowledge that
whilst he defended Mexico they had little hope of taking it. In the City they
spoake more advantageously. The people blessed the day in which that valiant
defender came thither, and from the defeat of one sole enemy, promising to
themselves the like of three or four hundred thousand more; foolishly called
on to the fight those whom they durst not see, but from the top of their walls.
As soon as Hismalita heard the success of the combat, she made show of an
excess of joy, which makes me say, that the incomparable power of the virtue
of my Master, overcame the ill nature of that Queen, and made her capeable of
a good action. That which makes me think so, is, that he was received with an
extraordinary freedom, and that all the evening she spoake of nothing but his
victory, but cry up often times in exaggerating the generositie with which
Zelmatida would overcome his Enemy. Let us leave here (if you please) the
vulgar resentments, and entertain our selves a little with those of Isatida.
Though the Queen her mother knew she was not well, yet had she not the
patience to have her absent, but sent an absolute command that she should
dress her; that nothing of sadness might be intermingled with the public
rejoicing. Isatida came where she was expected, but at her entry they might
perceive in her looks such a kind of coldness, that she had been generally
condemned if the pretext of her sickness had not repressed the indiscreete
zeal and reproaches of all the people. She never cast an eye on her victorious
servant, and by that entertainment so little expected, taught him a fair
lesson of that humility of mind, wherewith we should receive those disgraces
that betide us, then, when we think we have least deserved them. He was much
troubled at it, and detesting all the honors they did him, put this day into
the number of the most unfortunate in his life

Presently he called to mind all that he had done, nay all that he had thought
on since he left the Princess. And seeing that the witnesses of his Conscience
set his mind at rest, he took this indifferency of Isatida as a remedy which
she had found to allay that vanity which possibly so many happy fortunes joined
together might have caused in him. As soon as Hismalita was retired, Isatida
that took notice of her servants discontent, sent him word by Galtazis, that
she desired his company to her chamber, that she might know from him that which
her indisposition had not suffered her to behold. Zelmatidaes heart leapt at
this welcome command, and was so transported with it, that his wound opened,
and notwithstanding all that they could apply to it, bled such a great quantity
of blood, that the Princess took notice of it, and grew as pale and feeble as
if her own blood had run from the wound of my dear Master. He came near her,
and taking her by the arm to assist her; You see (said he) how my heart it
self gives you a testimony of its fidelity. It has always feared, that my
words were by you suspected, and that you doubted of the assurances which my
mouth for its part gave you. It knows that it is an interpreter artificial
and cried down, and that all ages have attainted it of treason and flashood.
It is long since too, that it has stroven by all means to make it self
known to you. At last Fortune is come to his aid, and facilitating things
which seemed impossible, has given it that which it could not obtain from
nature. It Is (fair Isatida) that it speaks by my wound, and the drops of
blood that fall thence, are so many words by which it makes known to you its
infinite love; and protests that my mouth has said nothing to you till my
heart had given it a most express commandment. Isatida, coming to her self,
whilst my dear Master spoake to her thus passionately, could no longer hold
that little anger, which she had resolved he should undergo. I must confess
(said he) that you have a great power over our m^des; surely, we sh old not
think it strange that you overcome Giants, since you show your self of suffi
ci ency to vanquish that which is naturally invincible. Triumph then
(Zelmatida) since you deserve it, triumph over my choler, as well as of the
second Popocampecho. But be not like those unfortunate Conquerors that have
found their grave in their triumphant Chariot. Go, think on your wounds, and
when you are in case to be seen, I will tell you the cause of my anger: In the
mean time I command you to fear it no more; it is now as unable to hurt you
as the Giant you have overcome. My dear Master would needs persuade Isatida
that his wound was nothing, not considerable; But as soon as the Princess
opened her lips to repeat the commandment she had given him, he obeyed
according as was accustomed; and that separation was an ill far more sensible
then that he had received in his combat. After his being in his Chamber, they
closed his wound, and though indeed it was but little, yet for all that it
incommodated him extremely. The next morning he came forth, and had almost the
whole days liberty to see Isatida. He besought her a thousand times to tell
him the cause of her anger. You believe (said the Princess to him) that I have
no cause to complain; But know that I have subject enough, since against my
command and your promise, you have not feared to hazard that which is mine, and
to fight alone against a Monster, who thought himself strong enough to defeat
a whole Army.

My dear Master seeing the pleasing indignation of the Princess, shall I
believe (said he) that any thought of me could at any time possess a mind so
much divine as yours? Certainly though hitherto I have found goodnesses in you
which are no where else seen: Yet did I not imagine them so infinite that they
could extend to the care of my preservation. But I know whence this tenderness
comes. You look on me as the work of your own hands, and would retard my
loss, since you believe that your power would suffer some diminution, if you
should suffer to perish the least thing that is if it bore any mark of yours.
This nimblenesse of wit (answered Isatida) wherewith you put off any thing that
might hurt you, hinders not me yet from being offended* and that I believe not,
but you esteem little of my friendship since you make no more difficulty to put
me into a perplexity. I know what you can say to justify your action, and will
not give so much to my fancy, but I will give more to your considerations.
Therefore I forget what is past and look no more on your last actions, but on
that side where they are to you most glorious and honorable; But if ever it
happen that you neglect my entreaties, and do not tie your self scrupulou^ly
to those necessities I shall enjoyne you; know, that I shall not be always
good, and that I shall have power enough over my self, to take from you those
favors which by you shall be neglected. This conv^rse had lasted longer, but
an extraordinary noise arising about the Palace, engaged Zelmatida to prefer
the safety of strangers before his own. He ran where the clamor and confusion
was greatest, and saw that on all ^ands the Mexicans fled, and ran into the
Town with an incredible terror and disorder. He stopped these Runawaies, and
suffering himself to be transported with the just anger that so general a
cowardice had lightened in his soul: Have you resolved (cried ^e to them) to
deliver your selves, your Wives and Children to the fury of your enemies. Must
the pro^d and triumphant Mexico, which neither fears the force nor the
subtleties of so many people banded against her, be this day turned into ashes,
by the infamous treachery of (...) Inhabitants? What a shame is it ye
Mexicans? You call the Rebels within your (...)* and abandoning to them all
your entrances, signify to your Queen that (...) intelligence with the
Theviciens and bear a part in their disloyal ^volt. (...) words had so great
a power on these timorous souls, that they were streigh^ fac^s (...) and
following Zelmatida, cast themselves furiously on the Caussey. The The viciens
tha^ had gotten it, were forced to quit it, and retire into their Camp after
they had (...) twenty thousand men on the Lake and the cause way. Zelmatida
thought himself (...) sufficiently revenged: He therefore the night following
made a sally on the (...) of Zempoallan, and surprising them, fell on so
fiercely, that the Cacique and three of (...) Sons were there slain and
above thirty thousand men with them. The rest (...) terrified forsook their
entrenchments, and being no longer stayed by the (...) of their Commanders,
fled confusedly even to the Frontires of Zempoallan. The Cacique of Thevic
failed not the next day to make show of more then four thousand boats on the
Lake, in the least of which there were four men, and with them encompassing
two third parts of the Town, caused a general affault to be given. It was
then, that the Mexicans; thought themselves lost; but Zelmatida having bin (as
a man might say) every where at the same instant sustained the affault more by
the greatness of his courage the^ the mumber of Mexicans; and repulsed the
Theviciens with as little advantage as they had gotten in all their former
fights. This glorious day giving an absolute terror to the besiegers, gave rest
to the besieged. Both sides for two days were quiet and undertook nothing.
Z^lmatida gave all that time to his passion, and being scarce absent from his
fair Princess; t^ied by his generous promises to free her from the fears
which the King her Fathers imprisonment threw on her.

Do me the honor to believe (said he) that the Cacique of Thevic will not
trench on the life of Montezuma, and chiefly in a time when the ill success
of his affairs threatens him with an approaching ruin. If he be wise, he will
not be obstinate in a siedge so disadvantageous to him, and if he be so
imprudent to continue it, we shall soon bring him to repent it, so that by one
way or other it will behove him to look to the safety of the King your Father,
that it may be a means to preserve himself; and in restoring to the King his
liberty, by that way may buy both his own and his peoples freedom. Isatida,
whose love made her easy to be persuaded, believed firmly all which Zelmatida
told her, and doubted not, but that by his assistance Montezuma might be
delivered from the hands of his enemy. Zelmatida perceiving that the Princess
gave ear to his reasons, and was willing to be comforted, told her, that among
so many unfortunate as were in the world, he was the man alone that every day
saw his hopes to grow less and less, and that laboring for the safety of
another, labored at the same time for his own perdition. I must no more doubt
(said he) but that my happiness shall be of no longer continuance then the
captivity of Montezuma. His reestablishing shall be my ruin, and the same
moment that settles him again in his Throne shall drive me far off for ever
from the happy place where all my felicities are enclosed. Take no heed (said
she) of common mishaps, and since it is beneficial to us to beguile our selves,
let us not be more clear fighted then we have been hitherto. For the rest,
call to mind that in delivering Montezuma and protecting Hismalita you fight
for Isatida. If what may betide from her be capable to work on you, assure
your self, that your pains and travel shall have their reward. These Lovers
had continued this pleasing discourse, but that one came to advertise Zelmatida
that two Heralds sent by the enemies desired permission to see him. He came
presently forth and going into the Temple of the god of battles, he there met
Hismalita. He intimated to her the coming of two Theviciens, and besought her
to hear them. They were straight brought in, and one of them presenting a
great Role to Hismalita, told her that the Cacique his Sovereign Lord sent her
that Declaration written with the blood of those that were slain before
Mexico. The Queen who for diverse considerations wished for nothing but peace,
caused the writing to be unfolded, and commanded one of her Officers to read
it. The man having a perfect knowledge and well versed in the Charecters of
Thevic, deciphered them thus.

Coatelicamat Cacique of Thevic, Conductor of the outraged Innocents, and
perpetual Enemy of all Tirants. To Hismalita Queen of Mexico, and to the
Stranger Zelmatida.
GReat injuries exciting great resentments are not satisfied but with
extraordinary re venges. The Theviciens and as many other Nations as I lead,
oppressed by such as call themselves their Fathers and Defenders have been
constrained to take arms, for their common deliverance and have not feared
their own loss, so they might crush by their proper downfall the cruel
authors of their calamities. Heaven has at this time declared it self in a
cause so just, and the ambitious Montezuma is fallen into that servitude which
he prepared for so many free Nations. I hold in my chains this prodigious
example of the change of Fortune: I make him feel how insupportable that
disaster is to serve his enemy, and to be brought to the necessity of
undergoing the rigours of a merciless Master. But the weight of his fetters,
the horror of his dungeon, and his other miseries, are but the beginning of his
tortures. I reserve others for him after I have burnt this proud City, the
retreat of Monsters that devour the flesh, and drink the blood of the poor.
In the mean while, since by thy valor, O too much blinded stranger! the
punishment of the Mexicans crimes is yet procrastinated, and that I must
content my self with a part of my vengeance; know, that even to morrow, all
the prisoners of most importance, which I have taken with Montezuma, shall be
sacrificed to the god of Justice and Liberty, to take them off from the race of
men.

Hismalita arose from her seat, and transported with choler, snatched the Roll
out of the hands of him that read; she gave it to Zelmatida, and withal, what
(said she) will your great courage suffer the royal dignity to be thus trodden
under foot, or permit that seditious persons and traitors dare, unpunished,
violate the eternal Laws by which the gods have established their own power,
in confirming that of Mona^s? And in so saying, she tore in pieces the
Declaration of the Cacique of Thevic, and ^ent the two Heralds that had brought
it, to be presently hanged. The Cacique understanding the ill success of his
insolent deputation; resolved to defer no longer to vengeance, which he had
so often promised to his accomplices. To that end he kept them in arms all
night, and the next day morning was seen from the top of the walls of Mexico,
a great Scaffold raised in the midst of the Lake, upon many boats linked to
o^e another. On one side of the scaffold there was an Altar, on which was an
Idol of g^ld, which held a Javelin in his hand; many great ^aions of gold
round about the Alta^* and in them, those instruments wherewithal the Mexican
Priests did use to open those men that were sacrificed to their gods. When the
enemies saw all the walls of Mexico ranged with men and women, they caused
those Priests to mount the Sc^ which they had chosen for that sad ceremony.

The Priests perfumed the Idol, and repeated oftentimes the words of Ven^ce,
Retribution and Liberty. After them were seen some Soldiers, who g^ed and
brought those that were condemned to their deaths. The first, being at the
place desti^ for execution, was laid on a table, and with an horrible
inhumanity, a Priest ^ke (...) great knife into his left side, and thence drew
out his heart; presently he stuck it on the end of a javelin to make it seen
the farther off, and after he had so held it a while, gave it to one of his
companions. This done, two Soldiers took the body and (...) i^to the lake;
twenty men were executed in this manner, and (...) knowi^g s^e of them, cried
out alas, thus infallibly will these Barbarians put to death all (...) T^iths
(the Mexicans call all their great Lords so) which have been taken prisone^
(...) the King. She had scarce ended these words, but she heard a muttering of
voices, mingled with the resounding of trumpets, and presently saw on the
scaffold the wretched Montezuma, who clad in his royal habiliments, had his
chains on his legs and hands, and witnessed by his trembling and lamentations,
that he was never worthy of that quality which he was now about to lose. At
this sight Hismalita growing furious, tore her hair, plucked in pieces the
Diadem she had on her head, and was with much ado held by the Princes that
were about her. What ye Mexicans (cried she) will you endure that the hangman
shall lay his abominable hands on the sacred person of your King, of your
visible god? What is become of that faith you swore to him on the Altars, and
in the presence of the gods? Do you no more remember that you have
acknowledged him for your Master, for your Father, for your Life? and at his
coronation; all falling on the Earth, offered your selves as Sacrifices ready
to shed your blood for his preservation? She would have continued her
remonstrances, but a new object of grief, depriving her of understanding as
well as speech, put her some time from her self; she came again with being
much troubled, and came again to her more sorrow and anguish; for she saw
four Priests take Montezuma, and despoyling him of his robes, bound his eyes
and laid him along on the same table, where the other prisoners had lost their
lives. The excess of her resentment rendering her speech, Hangman (cried she)
strike not the King, see me here ready to receive the blow, come, come, glut
your rage upon the unfortunate Hismalita, and in so saying, she fell as dead
among the arms of her women; and fortune would have it so, to the end that
that Princess by the violence of her afflictions should learn to be no more
insensible of the misery of others. She was no sooner swounded but the boats
of Mexico fell on those of the Theviciens, and during their fight, one man
alone forcing his way, in spite of so many enemies, ascended the scaffold where
Montezuma was ready to be executed; threw five or six of the Priests into the
lake, overturned the Altar and the Idol, and unbinding the King of Mexico,
changed his scaffold into a theater of triumph. The Mexicans seeing so glorious
a beginning of the enterprise of my Lord the Inca (you may well think that any
other then he, could not have performed so difficult an action) rushed in on
their enemies, and fearing no more death, fell on them so vigorously that above
a thousand boats, and more then six thousand Theviciens ^nke to the bottom.
There were taken of them some four thousand, who laden with chains were
thrown into the town Prisons. Hismalita returning from her swound, was told
that by the wonderful valor of Zelmatida, the Theviciens were overthrown on
the lake, and Montezuma delivered when he was at the point to receive the
stroke of death. The enemies wounded and fettered which they drew along the
streets, were sufficient proofs of those victories which she might doubt of;
yet imagining that her happiness was too great to be true, she could not
believe it till she saw Zelmatida; who, leading Montezuma by the hand, came to
restore to her that other precious half of her self, and bring again all
those prosperities and glories she had lost. As soon as she had resettled
Montezuma in his throne, and left him with his Queen and daughters, he
departed without saying any thing, and causing the trumpets and other
instruments of war to sound every where, drew out of the town all those that
were of age sufficient to fight. He made them to be fylde along the causseyes
with an extreme diligence, and put them into batalia in the sight of the
enemies. The Cacique of Thevic knew the design of the beseiged, and in spite
of the terror that the name of Zelmatida gave him, prepared himself to fight,
and did all that could be expected from a man that was as valiant as he was
ambitious. He put his people in order, and told them, that if they overcame
their enemies, they went not away with one sole victory, but that there were
five or six linked one to another. Therefore in winning the battle (said he)
your liberty is assured you, your Tyrants become your slaves, all Mexico is
conquered, and our short misfortunes followed by perpetu^* ^elicities. Zelmatida
for his part went from batalion to batalion, and according to the diversity of
minds and countries, changed his tongue and persuasions. Every one was
animated by his own interest, and the eloquence of this invincible Commander.
Presently the skyrmishes began, and continued on both sides. At last the gross
of the Army moved, the battalions joined, and their arrows gave place to more
mortal weapons; I will not make you a particular description of the battle,
nor anoy you in remarking what the Mexicans performed. Let us fix (if you
please) on Zelmatida, since it is his victory that you would know, and not that
of his enemies. This Prince then searching out the ambitious Cacique of Thevic
among his troops, was compelled in finding him to come to handy strokes with
many hardy Theviciens, whom he overcame not without much hazarding himself. At
last, being already all bloody, and weary with so many brunts already
sustained, he met with Coatelicamat, that was driving before him a whole
batalion of Mexicans. he put himself between the Runawayes and the Cacique,
and coming up to him, his pike in his hand. Cacique (said he) this is the day
that thou must undergo the punishmens for thy disloyalty. The Cacique without
being dismayed at the threatening, knew Zelmatida, or at least doubted that it was
he. Contrary then to the custom of miscreants, his courage increased by the
remembrance of his c^imes, and the neerenesse of the peril, made him lose the
fear of it. He came resolutely to Zelmatida, and Zeimatida received him with
an intent not to spare him. The combat was long and furious, but it was
reasonable that the justice of heaven should have his ordinary slowenesse to
chastise so sam^ us an offender. Zelmatida which from all times had been
chosen by that incomprehensi^le, to perfect this remarkable vengeance, struck
so great a blow at his Enemy, that he cut off his right arm, and redoubling
it as soon, gave him another so great a wound, that that monstrous toy of
ambition, fell on the earth, and saw fall with him all his abominable hopes
and expectancies. Zelmatida quickly clapped his foot on his bel^, and aiming his
Javelyn at the others throat, repent thee (said he) if thou will have me give
thee thy life. Coatelicamat, with a constancy as great as his ambition;
answered: I will never repent me, since I never do any thing till it first
seem just to me. For the life that thou promisest me, I laugh at it, for I see
it is not in thy power; but if thou will do me any favor, tell me what thou
art, and whence thou come. Zelmatida swore to him that he could not content
his curiosity, since he could not tell of what country he was, nor of what
parents borne. At that word, Catelicamat lifting up with fury the arm that was
left him, as if he would have stricken some one; Impostors (cried he) they are
your eyes that have been the authors of my crimes. You assured me that I
should one day see my self seated on the throne of Montezuma, if I could
escape the thundering arm of the Inca. In saying this last word, he plunged his
hand into his wound, and by that violence tore out his Soul that would not yet
have abandoned his body.

The death of Coatelicamat was the entyre ruin of all his army. The Mexicans
had their wills of them, destroyed them clearly. They pierced without
resistance the greatest batalions, and went on, beating those disordered
troops till late in the night; the flaughter was horrible, and of that
prodigious number of men which came to the Seige of Mexico, there was not above
fifteen or twenty thousand that saved themselves. Twelve thousand were taken
alive and brought into the City to be sacrificed to the gods of the Estate.
Zelmatida did his utmost to hinder so great a Massacre, but knowing that he had
to do with Barbarians, who place their pleasure and glory in spilling the
blood of their adversaries, he left them and returned into Mexico with two
thousand, that remained of the six thousand men whom he had made the ^roope of
his guard. The old men, the women, the children and the Soldiers, that were
left behind for the defense of the town, losing all memory of what they owed
to Montezuma, received Zelmatida as their king, and called him the victorious,
the father of the people, the defender of Mexico, and the only hope of the
State. These glorious Titles were followed with offerings and inestimable
presents. All that particular persons had gathered of gold, silver, pearls,
costly habiliments and other excellent movables, were thrown a^ the feet of
their Deliverer, and were as generously refused as they were free^y (...).
Zelmatida having been a long time in freeing himself from the prease of the
pe^le, came at last to the Palace, but instead of shoutes and bonefires, of
which all the City was full, he met there with nothing but terror, silence,
solitude and o^scurity. This sad apearance struck him to the heart, and made
him presently cast his thoughts on I^atida. He stayed the first that he met
withal, and asked them of the King and the Queen and what new accidents had
begot in the Court so general and unhoped for a sadness; they answered him,
that Montezuma and Hismalita were together, and showed but little by their
countenances their feeling or resentment of their common deliverance.
Z^lmatida, presaging then the ill that the baseness and cruelty of the husband
and wife have made him suffer; went to see them; and relating to them with that
grace particular to him, the success of the last battle, drew them as by
force out of the depth of their insensibility; and desiring to bring them
absolutely to their minds; What good (said he) friend to your Enemies, has
made you insensible of your felicities, and ties up your tongues in a time when
you should use them in actions of praise and thanksgiving? Come, come, let us a
way to the Temples to offer pure offerings, and sacrifices of laud to the
divinities, by whom your perfidious Subjects have been punished, your dear
M^xico delivered, your throne exalted, and your celestial persons avenged from
the shame of fetters and the infamy of a public death. Do not you fear that
your gods take notice of your ingratitude? and that repenting the good which
you so ill acknowledge, they raise not again the cruel and felonious
Coatelicamat, and give you over to the rage of his accomplices? Zelmatida, after
he had used this bold language to those timorous Princes, turned himself to
some Priests that were with them; and you too (said ^e to them* contemners of
the sacred character that makes you reign over your like; do you mis^value
the authors of your power, and for fear to brush at the iniquity of men,
betray ye the cause of the gods? Run, run to the Temples, adorn the Altars,
s^nd even to Heaven the odor of your perfumes, and let all ring again with
your sacred Songs and Eulogies. Montezuma not daring to oppose things so just,
rose from his (...), and taking the Queen went with Zelmatida and all his
Court to the great Temple of (...). He could scarce enter, it was so full of
people; but as if he was come thither only but to confirm him in his first
errors, and to have most certain proofs of that misfortune which he did but
suspect, all the people saluted him but for fashions like, and fixing their
eyes on Zelmatida, called him a hundred times the father and deliv^ of M^xico.
The prayers being ended, Montezuma returned more confus^d and afflicted then
when he came. Hismalita that regarded no more my dear Master out as a Monster
ready to devoute her, could not at all open her mouth to answer him, but
followed the king her husband. As soon as they were all at the Palace, they
gave (atleast in show) the good night to Zelmatida, and put off till the morrow
the ent^rtayning him with public affairs. The generous Prince, pitied the
folly of those two Princes, and resolving in himself to try his uttermost to
free them from it, went foreight to Isatidaes chamber. It was told him that
Montezuma had sent for her, and that she should be that night with the Queen.
What a friend had that fatal Messenger been to Zelmatida, if he had given him
his death when he brought him this unwelcom news! My dear master had not
suffered but one death, when since that unfortunate day, he is passible of all,
and passible without seeing any end of them. He was not content with an answer
to him so fatal, but enquired after the causes of that novelty, but learning
nothing that could give him satisfaction, he retired himself to his lodging,
not to take any rest, but to increase his vexation by the agitations of his
Soul. The day following so sad a night, was far more sorrowful. My dear
Master could not see the King nor the Queen, and that which afflicted him more,
he could not possibly either know where the princess Isatida was, nor to see
any of her attendants. It was late night when Galtazis came to him from
Hismalita, and signified, that her religion, and certain vows which she and
her daughters had made during the imprisonment of Montezuma; obliged them to a
long retyrement, and she therefore besought him that he would not think it
strange, and would not believe that without very great and lawful causes, they
would deprive themselves of the contentment of seeing him. But (added Galtazis)
I am to inform you or some things more true and more important too, then these.

Retire to your own lodgings, and do me the honor to expect me there. In the
mean time, recall that vigor and great courage by which we have known Giants
to be so easily over com. With those helps you must encounter such as are more
redoubtable then those that you have vanquish'^. Galtazis in leaving him, gave
a paper into his hands, and prayed him (by way of diversion) that he would take
the pains to read it. Zelmatida retired, and commanding all to leave him
alone, and willing to see what the dwarf had given him; He unfolded the paper
and read that which follows.

Mirzenia, unworthy Archiculti of the sacred Ziamacazques, and least servant of
the gods: To Montezuma Image of their Benediction.
AFter the sacrificing the three hundred Panucien slaves, which thy sovereign
valor destinated for the Gods on the day of thy triumph, after the
besprinkling their holy Images, bathing the feet of their Altars, and washing
the tyles of their Chappells, with so much blood as was consecrated to them;
After the filling the Censers royal, with the precious gum of Cop^llii, and
perfumed the heavenly nosthrills with so sweet an odor; I have poured out mine
own blood from all parts of my body, and by my purifications have merited the
sight of the great Zezcatlipuca, whose providence watches always over the
Empire of Mexico. His presence has rent the vayles that hid from me what was
to come hereafter. I have seen the shadow of future things more clear then
the beams of the Sun, and behold that which they reserve for thee, both of
good and evil: Thy Reign shall be less remarkable by thy conquests then by
thy imprisonment, and thy life, which is to be unfortunate shall be far less
so then thy death. Thou shall be despoiled of thy Empire without losing the
Title of King, and though it be transported into a strange family, thou shall
yet have successors of thine own race. I see coming from another world,
Monsters, that fly on the sea, and and throw fire every where. They shall
disgorge on the shoares unknown men, who by their presence alone shall destroy
those people that obey thee; and thy self consenting to their loss, shall
suffer one of those men to take thee prisoner in thine own Palace, and to
lead thee in triumph through proud Mexico.

These great revolutions have their prefixed term. The time is near. Thy
calamities approach. Thy enemies leave their aboades, and already some of those
Monsters that are to produce them, have been seen on our coasts. The only
remedy which I find for thy ills, is, that thou get a Virgin Princess,
Daughter to a great King whose power thou redoubtest. By her intercessions thou
shall avert thy misfortunes, confirm thy tottering Throne, and make thy
Children to reign many ages after thee. But who can give thee knowledge of
that royal Virgin, and by what good hap without example, can thou ravish her
out of the arms of her Father? If ever thou possess that treasure keep it
more carefully then thy life; be more jealous of it then of thine Empire; h^ve
a car^ it be not stolen from thee; and above all keep it hidden from that
redoubted Stranger, who under pretext of offering thee his service and arms,
will come to steal her from thee. This Conqueror of Nations will enter thy
Territories as a man unknown, but by his valor, he shall soon make himself
Master of thy Subjects, and by her also he shall pluck thee from a shameful
death prepared for thee. At that time thou shall lose the Virgin which thou
have so carefully kept, and that loss shall be followed by all those wherewith
the gods threaten thee.

Zelmatida having ended the reading of the scrole would have given it an
explication that might not be displeasing to him. He therefore justified
himself in his own thoughts from all that which might make him to be that
stranger which this prediction deciphered, and speaking as if some Judge had
questioned him: My conscience (said he) my passed actions and my designs
absolutely belly this false prophet. I neither pretend t^ the Crown of Mexico
nor to the life of Montezuma. It Is true I love Isatida, and (...) deprive me of
the happiness of seeing her, is to force me to strange extreamities. As (...)
was further thus going on, Galtazis came in and surprised him in his deep
meditations. My Master (said the little One to him, he was wont to call him so)
I bring you the cruel explication of the Prophecy I left with you, but I
bring it you imperfect, since I could (...) understand but the end of the
discourse which on that subject Montezuma had with Hismalita. Be assured (said
she to him) that the time is come, in which, we and our Empire are to fall into
the hands of strangers. My delivery is a great and a certain (...) of it, and
the love which all my Subjects bear to the invincible stranger, ag^eing with
the inclination of Isatida, makes it so evident, that unless I will betray my
self I can no more doubt of it. I know that the fatal Virgin is in our
custody, and that we may shut her up in a place where none shall see her: But
to whom shall we ^ust, that may hinder her being stolen and forced from us. We
will not resolve, nor you, nor my self, to keep her during both our lives;
and those others which we shall choose as the most faithful for this important
deposit, may be (it is possible) the first that shall deliver the Maiden into the
hands of our enemy. Hismalita, at that word, inter^upting the King her husband,
I know said she an expedient far more easy then all that. It Is fit that the
death of one single person should save the lives of a whole Nation; and that we
secure our own and our Empire, by cutting off those that are to deprive us of
them! O never have so horrible a thought (replied Montezuma) it is expressly
forbidden us to lay violent hands on the Virgin. She ought to be more precious
to us then our own lives, and I have learnt from the very mouth of the great
Mirzenia, that in the very same instant that this Innocent shall die, I shall
meet the full period of my days. Know then, what we must do (answered
Hismalita) let us send her to my Brother, and conjure him to keep her for us
as carefully as he does the valiant Inca, which those of Quito put into our
hands after the death of Guina Capa. We shall have cause to live at quiet when
this misfortunate Protectresse shall ^e so far from all men's knowledge, and
seeing that the captivity of Alisma (who without doubt is the to-be-feared
stranger, with whose fury the gods do threaten us) has made us live these
twelve years in a tranqu^y which has not been interrupted but by your
bondage, let us be confident that the imprisonment of our Daughter will make
our good days everlasting. I should be of your mind (replied Montezuma) if
Mirzenia had spoken to me but of one stranger, but I take notice of two in his
prediction; and when I shall believe that Alisma may pass for one of them, I
must yet fear a second. And that second is no other then that invincible
stranger, who may term himself more then I, the absolute Master of my Empire.
To put him to death, besides that it is expressly forbidden me, I cannot consent
to it, since I have no mo^e life, nor other Crown then what his valor has
given me. I am not (said Hismalita) swaied by these considerations unworthy of
a royal soul, but I am resolved by the menaces of Mirzenia. Make me see, that
that stranger cannot die without the loss of our selves, and I will make you
soon know, that Kings ought not to have any consideration but for themselves,
and as they are above all the services that can be rendered them, they are so
too above all the conceptions that nature gives to common persons. May the gods
this very day accomplish all their threats (said the King to her) rather then
I consent to those mischievous Maxims! No, no, the stranger shall never perish
by my will, nor shall the life that he has given me be the cause of his death.
That which we have to do, is, to intertaine him in such sort, that our people
may know that we are neither so weak spirited to be jealous of him, nor so
ingrate to deny him the recompense of his labors: It Is possible that time may
clear our doubts, and make us see that we interpret ill the will of our gods.
Galtazis after he had thus faithfully related the discourse between Montezuma
and Hismalita, advised him to stand on his guard, and not to trust so much in
the goodness of the husband, but that he should be always armed against the
malice of the wife. My dear Master thinking less on his own conservation
then that of Isatida; but, Galtazis (said he) where is the fair Mistress? What
does she with Hismalita, is it impossible for me to see her? And should she be
taken for the Virgin mentioned in this impertinent prediction? To all this said
the Dwarf I can give you but little satisfaction. My fair Mistress is more
strictly guarded then her Sisters, she lies with the Queen her Mother, and
goes not out of her Chamber. She weeps, she sighs, she pities your misfortune
more then her own; and knowing in what perplexity you are, she sends me to
entreat you, either that you will go out of Mexico, or secke not the means to
see her. As for that which belongs to the prediction, I cannot tell you whether
Isatida be the Virgin so necessary for the conservation of Montezuma; but I
will tell you that I most passionately wish it, for if she be the Maiden, I
fear not any more that terrible anger which I read in the eyes, and all the
actions of Hismalita. For other things, prepare you self for the honors that
Montezuma resolves to confer on you, and feign so well that he may not
perceive that you do dissemble* I will inform you to morrow, if I can, the
counsels which the night shall give to my fair Mistress. Galtazis took back
again the letter, after he had given this advise to Zelm^ida, and returned to
the Palace. The Inca was left alone, and knowing not what to resolve on,
passed in a moment from pity to indignation, and from love to all hatred. At
last reposing all his affairs in that providence which had never forsaken him;
let us suffer Zelmatida (said he to himself) and prepare our selves for all
the injustices that fortune is capable of: provided, that the hope to see
Isatida again be not taken from us, we may vaunt our self sufficiently strong
to overcome all things. These speeches and others the like intertaining him all
night, he rose without taking the least rest. He was no sooner out of his bed,
when five or six of those old Princes (who during the siedge of Mexico had
been witnesses of his noble actions) came to him, and said, that Montezuma had
sent them to accompany him to the triumph that all Mexico did owe to his
incomparable vaiour: Zelmatida, much surprised at so great a change, begun his
discourse by very obliging demeanures, and continued it by as humble thanks
which he besought the Princes to present to Montezuma. I know (said he) that
all that which comes either from gods or Kings, ought to be received by men
with as much amazement as glory; and it is a most proud humility, to reject their
presents, under pretext that they do not deserve them. The king yet I hope
will have so much goodness, as not to constrain me to a thing which I refuse
not because I am unwotthy of it, but I would refuse it, because my condition of
a banished man, and the calamity of those that brought me into the world,
permit me not to be fortunate. Those Princes used a^ their eloquence, to get
him to receive that honor, and grew so earnest in it, that they deputed one
from among them to give notice to Montezuma of Zelmatida's refusal. The weak
King (if ever there were any) going from one extremity to another, came
himself to the lodging of my Lord the Inca, and after he had asked his pardon
for his retirement, told him, that he had not kept himself alone two days,
but to the end that he might pass all the rest of his life in the others
company. Your generousnesse which is not less known to me then to my Subjects
(said he) assures me that you have already forgotten those faults that my
necessity brought on, and that you will not impute them to neglect or
ingratitude. Zelmatida unmindefull of Galtazis advice, thought that Montezuma
spoke to him really and truly, and on that opinion finding himself to be
extremely obliged to his courtesy: My Lord (said he) I will believe, since
you will have it so, that my services have not been altogether unprofitable to
you. But to have me persuade my self that they are equivalent to the
recompense which I receive by the honor you do me, is to forget who I am, and
in what manner Kings are accustomed to converse with men of my rank. Montezuma
would feign have found out some complements to have gone beyond those of
Zelmatida, but nature, that had not so much ^efriended him, enforced him to
carry that by his authority which he had never gotten by his eloquence. He
took Zelmatida by the hand, and drawing him almost by strength out of his
Chamber, put him himself in the royal Chair. Well my Lord (said Zelmatida)
in rising out of the Chair, I will receive this honor since it is your
pleasure; but I beseech your goodness not to exact any more from my complying.
It appertains only to you to triumph, since it was by the virtue of your
Subjects, and the fortune of your ^mes, that the Theviciens and their Allies
have been defeated. Do you triumph then; and profane not your renown in
communicating it to a miserable stranger* My Master, in this sort resisting the
honorable violences of Montezuma brought him to that straight, either to
appear himself alone in that triumph or to cut off the principal ceremonies.
The King (besides) desirous to make known that this triumph was not prepared
but for Zelmatida; commanded all those to march on that had been chosen for
the pomp and show, and taking my dear Master by the hand, walked on foot to
the Temple of their god of Battles. He caused there to be celebrated, the
bloody Sacrifice of the immolation of Slaves, and straight after were seen not
only rivelets of blood glyding from all corners of the Temple, but also the
bodies of the poor Theviciens carried by hundreds to the places appointed for
their burial. This abominable devotion being ended, Montezuma returned to the
Palace as he came, and made an exceeding great feast for Zelmatida, where all
the Caciques that were in his Court, assisted the Princes of the blood, and the
chief knights.

When the tables were taken away, the rest of the day was spent in music,
plays, and many other kinds of galantryes, which plenty, peace and
voluptuousness, had made the Mexicans Inventors. The night had her particular
rejoycings. Hismalita gave Zelmatida a ball, and brought in Isatida and her
sisters in such ornaments, and with such charms as were capable to vanquish
mere insensibility. Zelmatida in lieu of fayning as Galtazis had advised him,
and to suspend his love to give place to his wisdom, seemed as distracted at
the sight of Isatida. He left Montezuma that then stayed with him, and passing
through the company without heeding whom he thrust, got thither where his
passion transported him. The Princess perceiving it, not only blushed, but was
so far offended, that fayning to have some what to say to the Queen her
mother, she turned her back to her unfortunate slave, and left him to make a
long and cruel penance for the fault which he had committed against her
commandment. Montezuma noted both the one and the other action, and Hismalita,
finding in it new cause of distrust and hatred, had not power enough over her
self to dissemble it. Her ill humor broke out in such a fashion, and
principally against Isatida, that my dear Master had almost lost all respect,
and had even a will to accomplish that part of the prediction which spoke of
the ravishing of Isatida. He was nevertheless restrained by the fear of
displeasing the Princess, but he caused in himself so great an Effort by this
constraint, that with the excess of grief, he fell as it were dead at the
feet of Hismalita. O how that Queen (if I deceive not my self) prayed, that
he might never come to himself again! But her malice was not heard; for just
heaven who saw no offense nor crime in the passion of my dear Master, sent
him supernatural strength to supply that which nature had lost in him.
Montezuma ran first to him, and causing him to be taken by some young knights,
witnessed by his assistance that goodness is not incompatible with weakness.
Zelmatida, recovered from his fainting, and ashamed of what he had done,
believed he could not better justify himself, then in supposing some strange
ill. He therefore complained, and asking pardon of the King for his
disturbance, humbly besought his permission to retire. Montezuma consented, and
to show how dear that Prince was to him, broke up the assembly, and gave
command instantly that the high priest should cause prayers to be said in all
the Temples for the health of my dear Master. Zelmatida who till then lay
buried in his usual musings, awakened from so deep a flumber; and how (said
he) to the three Princes, have you been able to endure the company of one so
troublesome. Garruca knowing the intention of his master, arose, and but for
Polexander, who stayed him, had been gone, that he might not be constrained to
continue his discourse. Thereupon Bajazet spoake, and addressing himself to
Zelmatida; You have cause (said he) to deprive us of the content which the
relation of your adventures gives us. For our silence is a sign that we have
not that feeling of it which we should. And truly we are either jealous of your
fame, or insensible of brave actions, since that so many miracles as Garruca
has made known to us, seem to have no more touched us then would the recital
of some vulgar accident. Zelmatida blushing at the prattling of Bajazet took
Garruca, and making him sit down again, go on (said he) and speak of me
what thou will. I shall find it more supportable then the explication Bajazet
gives of my words. Polexander, unwilling to speak any thing to Zelmatida for
fear of some new interruption, entreated Garruca to continue his discourse. He
would have obeyed him, but in the instant a noise of drums and trumpets
hindered him, and made Bajazet send to know the cause of this novelty. The
slaves which were on the Guard came and told him that there was newly arrived
in the Island a man with an extraordinary attendance, who desired to speak
with him.

Bajazet sent to the Captain of the Fortress, that he should do his charge,
and having taken his pledges, he permitted the stranger to enter. These done
were done almost in an instant, and Barberossa brought the stranger to his
General. The good aspect of the young man was not the cause alone that drew
the Princes eyes upon him. He was clad after such a fashion, that a man must
have been void of all curiosity that would not earnestly have regarded him.
He had an habilliment imbroydered with gold and silver, made in so particular a
fashion, and so becoming, that you could not have seen any thing fayrer. He
wore a kind of Helmet after the ancient manner, on which waved a great plume
of feathers of all colors, and about his neck he had a collar of gold, in
which was written in letters of Diamonds [Alcidiana gave it.] Two the like
circles served him for garters, and to those were fastened two long chains of
gold, which were carried by two dwarfes. As soon as he came before Bajazet, he
presented to him a linen Roll, and before he unfolded it; I am (said he) the
slave of Alcidiana. The richness of my chains may let you know the greatness
of her that makes me wear them. I go from Country to Country to publish her
mervailes, and for fear lest the incredulous and jealous should accuse me of
flattery, I always carry her picture, to make all eyes witnesses of those
truths I proclayme. A tempest throwing me on this Isle, I had near neglected
to come on shore for fear of profaning the beauties of Alcidiana, in showing
them to Barbarian^. But when I understood it was the seat of famous Bajazet, I
presently set foot on shore to lay open to his eyes, all that which nature and
the Sun ever yet made most worthy of admiration. Unrole then that linen cloth,
and see, or rather imagine in seeing an Image, though imperfect, of that divine
Queen, what think you should she be her self? Bajazet ravished with the
discourse as well as with the fair presence of the slave, unfolded the cloth
that he held and discovered so fair a picture, that he was forced to cry out,
that Art had gone beyond all that Nature could do. You blaspheme (said the
slave to him) for if ever fortune bring you a shore on the Inaccessible Island,
and that you have a sight of Alcidiana, you will cry out more justly, O how
far has Nature gone beyond all that Art is able to produce I My exclamation
(replied Bajazet) is an effect of my astonishment and not of my incredulity. I
doubt not but Alcid^ is far fayrer then she is in this portraict; and if you
wanted another witness then your self to confirm me in that opinion; there
is a Prince in this place that will not refuse you his testimony. A Prince
(replied the slave) and who may that Prince be? never other then Pol^xander
has been so happy to s^e Alcidiana. It may be I speak of him, said Bajazet.
The Slave would have gone on with his discourse, when Polexander pale and
trembling, as a man in the cold fit of a violent ague, presented himself
before him, and kissing the fetters he wore; yes (said he) O most happy
Pallantus! I am the unfortunate Polexander, whom destiny judges not only
unworthy to review thy incomparable Mistress, but also to carry as thou do,
the marks of her glorious servitude. The Slave after he had some while
considered Polexander, threw himself at his feet, and against his will
kissing them.

What Prince (said he) reigns there this day on the Earth, who owes not this
homage to him whom the divine Alcidiana has acknowledged worthy of her
esteem, as well as of her anger. Ah Pallantus (replied Polexander) thou have
not joined the ^steeme of thy divine Queen with her anger, but to imitate
those cunning Physicians who to make their bitter and unsavory pills or potions
to be taken, mingle it with something pleasant and sweet. But I am too much
used to bitterness to imagine that thing that is offered me can have any kind
of sweetness. Tell me then (dear Pallantus) the most cruel of all my
destiny; and without flattering me with an esteem that I shall never deserve;
let me know that which the just choler of A^cidiana has reserved for my
rashness. Pallantus would willingly have hidd^n from Polexander that which he
knew of his fortune, but fearing to offend by his discretion, the blind
obedience which he had sworn to Alcidiana: Do not doubt (said he to our
Hero) but that my fair Queen esteems of your valor, and hears not without
astonishment that which Fame speaks of your nobleness. But your daring has
not pleased her, and when she knew that you respected her not with all the
f^are and all the reverence that we ought to bear to sacred things, she has
resolved by a long absence, to chastise the irregularity of your desires. Her
indignation had been satisfied by putting you to this affliction, if the
impudency of her Subjects had not obliged her to take from you, for ever, the
contentment of seeing her. What (said Polexander) was it not enough for me to
be punished for my offenses, without engaging me to bear the iniquity of
others? No (answered Pallantus) the faults of your friends being mixed with your
own, has set you for a mark to which aims all the most rigorous justice of
Alcidiana. The errors of Amalthea, the solicitations of Pisander, the tears of
Amintha, and the irregular love of a people made fool by your valor, have
brought my Queen to forbid you the coming into her kingdom, and to condemn
you to death, if you ever chance to violate what she has forbidden. O errors!
O solicitations! O tears! O popular blindness! (said Polexander) how much am
I beholding to you? that have obtained for me a favor that I value not much
less then the love of Alcidiana. Yes fair Queen (he added) casting his eyes
on the picture of Alcidiana, yes, I will die of that death to which you have
condemned me, and will die, if I can, without displeasing you by disobedience.
Polexander stopping at these words, seemed to expect Pallantus answer, but
perceiving that the Slave repented him of what he had spoken: Go not about
(said he) by your word to disguise the passions of your Princess. Remember it is
she alone to whom you owe both your respect and complying, and that in mincing
those things which her Majesty commands you, you violate the purity of your
faith, and make your self unworthy of those fair chains which your unsoyled
loyalty has acquired you. Say then boldly that Polexander must perish, and
that Alcidiana her self has designed to pronounce his Sentence of death. But
Pallantus, to the end that none may doubt of the will of that Princess,
conceal no longer my just condemnation; let me see the terms that begot
(...), in what words it is contained, and be assured that I shall receive it as
the most glorious signal by which my life has yet ever been honored. I will
satisfy you answered (Pallantus) since Alcidiana will have it so, and that at
the same time I make her beauty to be adored, I cause her power to be
redoubted. In saying this, he unfolded a great volume sealed with a golden
Medal, where was the portraict of Alcidiana on one side, and on the other a
Phoenix on a Cedar, with four words that may be thus expounded [Only like my
self.] Pollexander took this vellome with a kind of adoration, and rendering
particular homages to the picture of Alcidiana, he read his condemnation with
such a tone, that made them well judge, his life was not so considerable to him
as the glory of that Queen. These were the words of the Declaration.

Alcidiana seated in the throne of the Sun, by a long succession of Kings, to
all that shall see the Decrees of our Will, Love and Fear. The sanctity of our
Empire, and the purity of our people, had remained inviolable through many
ages, and the contagion of strange manners had not yet infected our Provinces,
when cert^ine unknown vessels brought thither, with the knowledge of some
vices, men impudent enough to practice them. It Is true that these cunning
criminels, borrowed the ornaments of virtue, to hide the deformity of their
lives, and that the innocence of our people might not be corrupted till they
had been beguyled. But although crimes are not crimes when they be not
voluntary, and by consequence our Subjects, not criminal, since they offend
without an intention of offending: Yet the complying with their errors, and the
little care they had, not to be deceived, made them at last guilty. Now, He, by
whose power we reign, having commanded us to stop the current of this Ill: We
forbid all our Subjects to entertain correspondence with any strangers, or to
receive them into our ports, without giving us first notice of them. And We
command to the Princes of the Sacrifices, and to our Pilots, which are yearly
sent to the Islands of the Sun, not to take any stranger into their ships, and
rather to lose themselves in fighting, then to yield to the discretion of those
that shall assail them. And for as much as we understand that some of our
Subjects, more by ignorance then malice, publish certain discourses, that tend
to the contempt of our Authority, and the shame of our s^x: We condemn to an
everlasting forgetfullnesse, as well the name of him that can be said to be the
Author, as the Cause. And it is Our pleasure that our Isle be shut up to him
(...) ever. And if his boldness dares give him a heart to set footing thereon:
We ordain and command that he be presently taken as an enemy to our greatness
and estate, and sacrificed with his Accomplices on the Altar of the god of
vengeance.

Polexander, after he had read this Declaration, kissed it, and showing a
secret joy of his ill fortune, restored the volume into the hands of Pallantus.
The illustrious slave, seeing so incredible a resignation, from a man whom he
looked on as the miracle and astonishment of his Age: Truly (said he) those
that vaunt of knowing you, do infinite wrong to your virtue; It is exceedingly
above their relation and discovery, for my part, I confess, that till now I
have been ignorant in that which has been most admirable in your life. Let
no man talk to me hereafter of that invincible courage which by many heroical
actions has acquired you the love or the admiration of all men. Let that
magnanimity be forgotten, which has made you refuse those Crowns that have
been offered you, to render them to those from whom fortune had plucked them.
Let us think no more on that generous humanity by which you have entered into
the greivances of your enemies and participated with their disgraces. In a
word, let there be a perpetual silence of all those eminent virtues which you
practice in your prosperity and let none admire but at the strength of that
soul that makes you receive with a benediction the unjust Judgment of a
passionate Judge, and to run to a death that you have not deserved. Alcidiana
shall pardon me if she please, in saying, that she knows not what she
condemns, and that Amalthea has not only been wise in abandoning all reason
to follow so worthy a subject, but that her error should give a desire to those
that fear to die, as the vulgar of her sex. Polexander, unwilling to answer to
the beginning of Pallantus speech; took from the latter end, his cause of
reply, and asked him, what that Amalthea was, who at one time he seemed to
condemn and absolve. It Is a young Princess said Pallantus, lost with love, and
one with whose loss Alcidiana much touched, has commanded me to search all
the Islands that inviron hers. If by chance she be fallen into the hands of
Bajazet, you will render a signal service to my Princess to restore her.
Presently Polexander cast his eyes on Baj^zet to entreat him in the name of
Alcidiana to cause Amalthea to be searched for amongst his slaves. Bajazet
prevented his petition and told him that ever since he had been chosen
General of the Rovers, no man had taken any woman but that he presently set
her at liberty. Pallantus having no other business in that place, would have
taken leave of the Princes, that so he might not give that time to his
pleasure, which he ought to the service and honor of Alcidiana. But Polexander
stayed him, and entreated that he would bestow on him the rest of the day, that
at more leisure he might instruct him of somethings that belonged to the
service of his Queen. Pallantus durst not refuse to give the Prince that
contentment. He therefore stayed with him, and signifying that he desired his
company apart. B^jazet brought Zelmatida to Iphidamantus, and left those two
slaves at their own liberty. They went forth together out of the Fortress,
and engaged themselves in so long and so pleasing discourses, that it was two
hours within night before they returned. B^jazet, the while had tried to alay
the mel^ncholy of the two other Princes, by new diversions: and showed them a
certain warlike dance, wherein his slaves armed at all points showed equally
their strength and activity. This exercise was done part by day, and part by
torc^light, to give more luster to the diversity of their habits, and the fire
works that set forth the dance. Polexander came in a little after it was
ended, and as if he had received some news that obliged him to depart
instantly, he addressed himself to Bajazet, and speaking to hi^ seriously,
tell me (said he) on what conditions are men accustomed to have their liberties
from you? When you are ready to depart (answered Bajazet) I will set down your
ransom: Let it be then presently (replied Polexander) for if your service stay
me not, I should be glad to be no longer here. Yet (said Bajazet) you will be
pleased to give us some ^ime to think of this separation. Besides Pallantus,
whom you have retained, intends not to set sail by night, and I know you would
not leave him in the hands of Pirates. This jeasting, being well liked on, gave
occasion for others, which diverted the Princes, till they were called to the
Table. They were entertained as before, that was with so great magnificence,
that Pallantus not knowing what to admire among so many (...), was constrained
to say that Fame which seemed to flatter when she published common things, was
exceeding envious and sparing in relating such as were extraordinary.

Polexander hereupon speaking, you would have (said he) far more cause to
find fault with report, if you knew as well the virtues of Bajazet as you do
his power and riches; His fortune seems to you wonderful, and it is in that
which heaven is to him most injurious. But although he affects to conceal
himself even from his friends, yet I have neither had so little curiosity, nor
so small credit, but that I have learnt the most important actions of his life,
I will one day relate them to you. Let us for this time go on to what more
concerns us, and seeing that the continuance of Zelmatidaes adventures cannot
be deferred to another time, let us give it the rest of the Evening. Zelmatida
did what in him lay to contradict Polexanders proposition, but being pressed by
Iphidamantus and Bajazet, you (said he) shall be obeyed; and Garruca who is not
of the wisest, when I am to be spoken of, means not to refuse you a thing in
whose relation he takes more pleasure then he can by it any way give you.
Iphidamantus and Bajazet told Zelmatida, that he should leave to them the
liberty of judgeing of those pleasures, and since himself, otherwise
distraught, gave so little heed during the first narration, there was no
appearance that he had taken notice whether of the two Garruca or his auditors
had received most contentment. Brother (said Polexander to Iphidamantus) suffer
him to believe what he list, so that he permit Garruca to relate and us to
hearken to him. Herewith he arose from table, and taking Bajazet by one hand,
and Garruca by the other, went into Iphidamantus chamber. Zelmatida in lieu of
following them, got to walk on the Terrafles of the Castle, and left them all
the liberty they desired. When every one was placed, Polexander imposed
silence, and Garruca beginning a new, thus ended the adventures of his Master.

The end of the third Book.
The first Part of POLEXANDER. The fourth Book.
THE sickness of my Lord the Inca (which I may say without lying was both
feigned and true) was not of long continuance. His desire to revisite Isatida
being more powerful then all the vows and sacrifices of the Mexican priests
soon gave his health again. All the whiles he kept his chamber, Montezuma was
not a day without seeing him, and by a thousand different testimonies of
franknesse and affection made him see that he rather sined through weakness
then malice. And as soon as he saw him well commanded that through all Mexico,
they should begin anew their feasts and rejoycings which had been forbidden,
and willed all his Courtiers to call back, by new shows and gallantries, those
pleasures which the sickness of my Master had banished from the Court. For a
whole Month together there was naught seen in Mexico but daunces, feasts,
plays, sacrifices and other demonstrations of joy. But excuse me (if you
please) from their particular relation, and indeed the misfortunes whereinto
we are now getting will not give way for me to dwell on the description of
those vain and deceit^ull rejoycings. Rather prepare your selves for the
recital of more sad accidents and actions; the most barbarous, that fear,
superstition, and cruelty were ever able to produce. Montezuma, unbeguiled and
redeemed from his old Errors by Zelmatidaes conversation, and charmed with his
incomparable qualities, began not only to laugh at the predictions of his
Divines, but to take notice of that enraged fury where withal Hismalita
solicited the death or banishment of my dear Master. Yea, he had already
declared himself for the Inca, and had commanded the Queen his wife to
esteem of him as of his son, when a new accident made that poor King to
relapse into his vain terrors, and the cruel machinations of Hismalita; see
how arrived this disaster. Zelmatida perceiving that Isatida was almost
continually with the Queen her Mother, and that it was impossible for him to
see and speak with her, resolved to get through this impossibility, and to
find m^anes to cast himself at the feet of the Princess to ask her pardon
for his rashness, and either to obtain the continuance of her favor, or her
leave to destroy himself in her presence. This business he deliberated on
with Galtazis, and being not able to be hindered by the inconveniences which
that Little-one could lay before him, told him f^r a^l reason, that his life
was the least thing that he was to hazard to get out of his miseries. He
concluded therefore with the Dwarf, that one evening he would get over the
Queens garden wall, and hide himself at the end of a long ally where Isatida
was wont to walk alone. He was not long from putting this design in
execution, but did it so misfortunately, that being discovered and followed by
Hismalitae^ Guard, he failed little of losing his life. However he saved
himself, and ^eing certain that he was not known, he threw off those clothes
wherewith he had disguised him, and as if he had been ignorant of the tumult
he had raised, came and offered himself to Montezuma. The ^ing was surprised
to see him, and presently his natural simplicity made him bele^ve that my
Master was innocent of that which Hismalita seemed to accuse him. He tol^ him
that some thieves would have forced from him Isatida, and exagerating those
fears which this attempt brought on him; I will (said he) give order to it,
and take such course that the treasons of my Enemies shall no more avail them
then their Arms.

Zelmatida imagining that Montezuma suspected him not, besought him to make
known what he would have done, and to repose all on him for the chastizing of
the attempters. The king embraced him, and thanking him for his offer; no, no
(said he) I will not hazard the defense and strength of mine Empire for the
punishing of a few traitors. Let us rest quiet, and leave to common persons
these no more honorable executions. With these words he dismissed Zelmatida,
and shutting himself up with the furious Hismalita and her cruel ministers,
took resolutions answerable to the worth of their minds. It was resolved (as
we have seen by the events) that Isatida should be put into the Castle of the
Lake, and that without making much noise on it, they should oblige Zelmatida to
quit Mexico. The night ensuing this unhappy council, was chosen to put it in
execution, whilst Zelmatida, ignorant of the ill intended against him, and
nigh desperate with anger, and the captivity of Isatida, melted himself into
tears, in the Palace gardens, and durst do nothing but threaten men and
praying the gods: Hismalitaes ministers took Isatida from her chamber, and
conducted her with the Governesse and the Dwarf to the Castle that was
appointed for her prison. This was not done so secretly but that Zelmatida was
advertized of it by break of day. Do not ask me (if you please) what his
resentments were, comprehend them by your own, if ever the like disaster put
you into the like despair. The same day Montezuma assembled the Citizens of
Mexico, and declaring to them the outrage offered him, represented to them the
continual cares and disquiets wherein he was engaged for the preservation of
his estate. That nation, inconstant, brutish and fearful, if ever there were
any cried out that the thieves were to be pursued, and without making any
distinction of persons, to punish all those that should be found guilty.
Montezuma, seeing things brought to the point that he desired: I am not (said
he) so careless of your preservation, that I am yet in an estate to fear ou^
common Enemies. My daughters are in a place of surety, and free from running
the hazard of being stolen from me, they shall enjoy all those delights and
pleasures which they had with me. After this Declaration, all those poor
people retired, blessing the wisdom and providence of their King. These fair
shows were good enough to deceive the common route, but among men of
understanding the affairs had another face. Zelmatida more clear sighted, and
more interessed then the rest, presently knew Montezumaes intention, and
knowing not what to do to succor his Princess and relieve himself, saw
himself brought to the cruel necessity of not daring to make his sufferings
to be known. By himself he wept, he sighed, he cursed both heaven and earth;
sometimes he resolved to strangle Hismalita. Then he intended to rety^e to
Quazmez, and to return with a hundred thousand combatants to make good the
fear of Montezuma and Hismalita, and forcing Isatida from her prison, to
accomplish the predictions of their Prophet. But 'twas to much purpose for him
to make these generous propositions, he was too faithful an observer of
Isatidaes law and will to put them in execution. It behooved him therefore to
be patient, and to try if he could do that by cunning, which he was fobidden
to undertake by force. Perceiving then that Montezuma bore him not so ill an
aspect that it should be taken notice of, nor so good as to obliege him to the
often s^ng him; he dissembled as the other did, deceived that extravagant
Prince, as that Prince thought to deceive him; and in the mean time strove to
see, or at least to write to Isatida. To this end, as soon as it was night, he
got into a boat, and hulling on the Lake, lay there till break of day. Many a
time he ran the hazard to be slain on that Lake, and was forced to carry a
great b^ckler to defend him from the shafts that rayned on him, as soon as he
came near to Isatidaes prison. But neglecting those small dangers, he forbore
not to put himself on the Lake eve ry night, and to discover all places of
that fatal? Castle. Now one night when he had resolved to go a shore on a
point of land, by which there was an entrance into the Fort, he saw coming out
a man, who after he had made them retire who had accompanied him, put himself
alone into a boat, and began to row with an incredible swiftness.

Zelmatida, that had well learned that art in a very little time, followed him;
and overtaking him almost in the midst of the Lake, thrust hard (of purpose)
on the other boat. The man in it, grown angry by the encounter, asked my
Master what he was, and why (violating the express commands of the King) he
durst in the night stay upon the Lake. Zelmatida, that had more mind to gain
then to fight with him, answered that he was of Tlacopan (which is a little
Town situate on the bank of the Lake) and who, being about his affairs late
at Mexico, was then getting homewards. The way you take, answered the other,
and your language, give you the lie, and intimate to me sufficiently your ill
intention. You are infallibly one of those who dared to attempt on the lives of
the Princesses; and therewithal threw a dart at Zelmatida. My dear Master
happily avoided the stroke, and in lieu of avenging himself; whoever thou
be (said he) that have wronged me, both by thy words and actions, know that
I resent it not, since entreating me as thou have done, it witnesses thou
know me not. I confess (answered the other) that at the first I knew you
not, but I do now, and give the Gods thanks, that their providence rather
then chance, has brought me to a place, wherein I have liberty, to discover
that, which till this time I have been constrayn'd to keep hidden. Zelmatida,
thinking, he had been taken for some other, replied, I am not he, whom thou
imaginest. Yes (said the other) you are the very same, and your speech as well
as the action lately done, is to me an infallible testimony of it. Yes, you are
the worthy heir of the great Quasmez, you are, I say that Zelmatida to whom I
ow my liberty and life. Zelmatida being unable to call to mind a person that
knew him so well, came as near to him as he could, and after a conjuration to
tell his name: I am indeed (said he) Zelmatida, but I remember not that I have
yet ever been so happy to oblige you for your liberty or life; yet I owe you
both (it was replied) how ill soever your memory be, it can neither forget my
name nor fortune. I am that same Axiaman, who, driven by a desire of glory,
entered into your territories with five hundred of my companions, and from your
own hands received a condign punishment for my so much daring. I was
vanquished and taken prisoner; but I must confess to your glory, that never
man so generously treated his Enemies as you did both me and my companions. The
remembrance of it is still with me; but not daring to signify it to you for
fear of your loss, I have waited till some occasion might offer it self,
wherein without failing of my duty to my Lord the King, I might by some
service acquit my self of the favors you have done me.

After Axiaman had made this generous declaration to Zelmatida, he came into
his boat, and acquainted him how he came to know him, and what reasons had
induced him not to make any demonstration of it. For other things (said he) you
are in that place of the world where you are the most feared, and I assure you,
that were you known here for what you are, your life would have its period
before the next day: but Zelmatida (said he) if my obligations to you, may free
all suspicions which my birth and condition may give you, and if you believe me
of honesty enough to be trusted, I beseech you by the liberty and life that I
owe you, I conjure you by your own safety, to let me understand what might be
the cause that has made you leave the Marks of your greatness, to abandon
your throne, and to put your person into the hands of a Prince, who sometimes
would have given the half of his Empire to whosoever would have brought him
your head.

Zelmatida stopping Axiaman; my dear friend (said he) the belief that our
Divines have gotten to themselves through the superstition of weak spirits
rather then by the truth of their predictions, exercises at this day its
tyranny over the council of Kings as absolutely, as over the Assemblies of the
common people. The most wise amongst the Caciques preoccupated with these vain
errors, have no more hope; neither in the abilities of their Ministers, nor in
the valor of their Armies; but regulating all their affairs by the melancholy
visions of their false Prophets, draw on their ruin in striving to divert it.
Montezuma is not the man alone stricken with this dangerous malady. The
contagion has even reached Quasmez, and has to himself made his own
happiness ^o insupportable, that some have been enforced to use strong
oppositions to hinder him from going out of his own Territories to put
himself into the mercy of his mortal enemy. The pity to see so good a Prince
in so strange a phrensy has caused me to come alone into this Kingdom, and
here makes me live unknown. It Is true I had gone hence long since, if a cause
sufficient to stay me eternally. forced me not to put all things else in
oblivion rather then to part hence. And I must tell it thee Axiaman, and in so
doing, I make thee the depositary of my fortune, of my life, and of mine
honor. Axiaman hearing Zelmatida talk thus, threw himself at his feet, and
embracing his knees, no, no, my Lord (said he) I recall that indiscreet request
I made to you. Discover not so great secrets to me. Their importance makes me
mistrust my self, I begin to fear the weakness of humane minds, for it may
chance that by one of those mishaps which troubles the judgment and makes the
most innocent to off^nd, that striving to keep my faith inviolated to you, I
fall into some perfidy. Zelmatida raising up the Prince, I know Axiaman (said
he) better then Axiaman knows himself, and I think that neither hope nor
fear, which can do all, shall be ever able to make him guilty of an ill
action. Hear then, dear Axiaman my deplorable fortune, and have pity on a
wretch to whom both life and death are equally funestous: I am come to Mexico
to seek out a treasure which Montezuma has stolen from Quasmez, and in lieu
of finding it, I have lost my self. That eternal and sovereigne power, which
reigns over all men, has made me love Isatida, and my will yet more absolute
then destiny, has imposed on me a necessity of serving her all my life, and to
conceive of her as of something far more to be valued then either the Empire
of Quasmez, or that of Montezuma. Axiaman, stayed not to answer till Zelmatida
had made an end of his discourse, but interrupted him, and said that he needed
to know no more of it, to be satisfied of many things that were passed, and
especially of the causes of Isatida's imprisoning. I ask you no more (said he)
your business on the Lake, I have discovered that design, and I see whither
you would go, but to cut you off from a fruitless labor, I will tell you
news, the most pleasant that you can receive in your ill fortune, and it is,
that I am the sole man entrusted by Montezuma for the guarding of Isatida. On
the sudden the Prince gave way to be transported with his first conceptions;
But presently reason and nobleness opposed themselves against the fury of
those pernicious Counselors, and represented to Zelmatida, that he ought to
exact from Axiaman nothing that was unworthy of either of them. He suppressed
therefore in himself the unjust requests that he intended to make him, and
sighing often; Is it possible (said he to Axiaman) that you are Isatida's
Guardian? I am so (replied he) and judge you to what Montezuma's opinion of my
fidelity obliges me. That Is my despair (cried Zelmatida) that Montezuma has
made so good an elect ion. All the ways to get Isatida are shut to me, and I
may obtain from the most brutish and cruel of all the Mexicans that which I
neither can expect nor desire, especially from you. Axiaman (continued this
poor Lover with a sad tone) you have then Isa^ida in your power, and you may
when you please, taste the sweets of her sight and converse? I have that good
fortune (replied Axiaman) and if the prison of the Princess were not to me a
continual cause of discontent, I should think my self happier in keeping he^
then in commanding all Mexico. How, cried again Zelmatida, you keep Isatida
Axiaman, you guard Isatida? Axiaman interrupting him, for fear he should
entreat somewhat which he could not grant; my Lord (said he) suppose your
self in my place ((...) you please) and wrest not from a person that can deny
you nothing, till you have considered, what an honest man owes to his word,
owes to those that trust him, and ow^ to himself. I ask nothing of you
(replied Zelmatida) but that you will deplore of fortune. I will do more (said
Axiaman) without being f^lse to Montezuma or to my ^fe I will bring you to the
sight of Isatida -- Add not (said Zelmatida) add not any condition to what
you offer. Yes, dear Axiaman, I promise to ask you nothing nor to e^terprise
ought after so dear a sight. If you fear that my passion is likely to (...)
me, charge me with fetters, bind my arms and hands, and let me have nothing
(...) the use of speech. I will endure all on condition to have yet once the
happiness to behold my fair Princess, and to know from her own mouth what
she has resolved of my life: I will get me far away from Mexico amongst
places not habitable to end my deplorable destiny. Axiaman, resolute to give my
dear Master that contentment; it is, enough (said he to him) I know that
Zelmatida can do nothing that is not worthy of himself: Be then (my dear
Lord) to morrow at this hour, at the foot of the great Tower of the Castle,
and assure your self that you shall see Isatida, if she expressly forbid it
not. Zelmatida a thousand times embracing Axiaman, and calling him as often the
Author of his reviving, took leave of him and retired to his lodging. He could
not shut his eyes all night; but to execute what he had resolved, he went out
of his chamber at break of day, and was at the rising of Montezuma. After
diverse discourses, he fell on that of his house, and inventing to the King
diverse most important news, told him, that he was called home by his Father,
and that the Cacique his Uncle, by the marriage of his Daughter, with him, would
make an end of all those differences which had almost ruined their Family.
Montezuma seemed to take no great pleasure in this discourse, and put it off
till an other time. Think with your self whether this day that was to be
followed by so happy a night, seemed not long to Zelmatida. He would a hundred
times have made himself believe that it should be eternal; But his
impatiencies were at last satisfied and the night came on as dark and irksome
as he could wish it. At the precise hour he came to the place assigned him,
and without any long stay, he not only saw Axiaman come to meet him, but in the
same instant was conducted to Isatida's chamber. Scarce had he strength enough
to walk, joy had so much transported him; but as soon as he saw that high and
divine object, the small vigor he retained forsook him, and left him as dead,
at the feet of that fair and sad Princess. She wept to see this extreme
constancy in a personage so dear to her; and commanding her Governesse to
bring water, threw it herself on the face of her Lover. He came again, and
seeing that Isatida held him by the hand, he failed but little of losing his
life indeed by this new excess of contentment. He came to himself by little
and little, and abiding on his knees, strove oftentimes to say something to the
Princess, but he strove in vain. Isatida desirous to pur him out of trouble,
what (said she to him) Zelmatida, you afflict your self for seeing me in this
place, and that fortune does not conform her self to your desires. This is
not the first day you have complained on her, and my imprisonment is not the
sole subject that you have to accuse her of injustice. Ask the gods for
revenge; they are above her, and when they please they can take from her that
absolute power, that makes her so redoubted in the world. If you entreat them
with a free heart, they will hear you, but that you may seek them as you
ought, that is, with a mind void of all hatred, choler, and all other
impurities, it behooves you to leave Mexico, and not to irritate any more by
your presence, such persons as have not less cause to disaffect you, then they
have power to avenge themselves. At the end of these words, she wept again,
and would have raised Zelmatida: But he remaining as before: I will obey you
(said he) with a dying voice: Yes Madam, I will hence, and of all those
injuries which I have received in Mexico, I will remember none but those which
are in common with you. I forbid you that resentment, answered Isatida. What?
w^ld you not that those who have brought me into the world, should make use of
that power the gods have given them? Yes; Yes, and I will that you love them,
and that you look not on them as Princes obliged to those violences which are
inseperably annexed to the condition of Kings, but as on the Father and Mother
of Isatida. Go then, and seeing Axiaman is so much your friend, let him
sometimes hear from you; and with that word she left her unfortunate Lover and
retired into another chamber. A^ (said Zelmatida) are you gone, and would you
have me live? With that he fell again as dead, and Axiaman was feign to take
him up in that case and carry him to his boat. He stayed with him till he was
out of his fainting, and when he saw him recovered, he would have spoken
something to have comforted him; but Zelmatida thinking on nothing but the good
he had lost: Isatida (cried he aloud) Isatida, you have left me, and insensible
of it that I am, I have not yet expired. Isatida, Isatida! What will become of
me, now I have (...) for ever the hope of seeing you? Axiaman would have left
him to his compl^ witout interruption, but seeing he gave not over; My Lord
(said he) Fortune, who has tried you by prosperities, will now see whether you
are proof against disgraces. Let her know, that what weapons soever she makes
use of to assail you, she will still rest with the shame of being overcome and
to have found you invincible. I invincible (replied Zelmatida) and Fortune
overcome? Alas I give her all the honor she can expect by my undoing; and
since she has the power to banish me from Isatida; doubt not, but she is too
powerful for me to conquer. Axiaman judging that Zelmatida's grief was too
ingenious, not to draw from all kinds of discourse, causes enough to
strengthen it, took leave of the Prince, and remitting him into the protection
of the gods, withdrew into the Castle. Zelmatida remained till day break on
the Lake, and putting a shore on the caussey to give no cause of talk to any
body, and stayed there yet above two hours looking on the hight of the Towers
of Isatida's Prison. At last, he returned to the Palace, and going to
Montezuma, besought him for leave to be gone. Montezuma lead him to his chamber
and made him dine with him. After dinner he went to the Palace of birds, and
by the way made him a thousand offers (at least in show) to put him from his
journey. But my dear Master was constant in his resolution to be gone, and
remercying Montezuma for his proffers, desired him for all recompense to permit
him to depart. Since it is not in our power to keep you longer (said the King
to him) we consent, though with grief that you forsake us. But be pleased that
first we acquit our selves of what we owe to your valor, and yet enjoy your
company three days longer. Zelmatida told the King that he would obey his
command. Thus his departure was resolved on, to be the third day, and Montezuma
took for a color of this stay, the new honors he would do to Zelmatida. It Is
true, that during those three days, my dear Master was served as if he had
been King of Mexico. The Grandies of the Kingdom came in ceremony to visit
him, the people went all in a crowde, and after they had thanked him for all
that he had done for the safety of Mexico, presented him the most rare things
that either Art or Nature had bestowed on that rich Province. Montezuma and
Hismalita added to these Presents, others, rich enough and precious to glut any
man that had pined for Gold, Pearl and Diamonds. All these apparent favors
were so many punishments to Zelmatida. He did nothing but sigh all those days,
and nothing comforted him, but the hope he had that after his departure,
Isatida should have more mild and kiude usage. The night following, the third
day being come, he would yet once more see the Prison of the Princess; and to
that end put himself alone on the Lake; and when he perceived the Castle
through the darkness; fair Palace (cried he) place, sacred by the presence
of the most perfect creature that Heaven ever showed to the Earth, be more
faithful then they that unjustly possess thee. Keep the treasure which I
leave thee, and know, that her preservation is thine own. If thou chance to
consent to the falsenesse of thy Masters; I will return in spite of all
Mexico, to chastise thy disloyalty, and to bury the pride of thy Towers and
Pavilions underneath their own ruins. From this transport he fell into
another. He repeated the name of Isatida hundreds of times. He called on Death
as often, and I doubt not but he would have given that to himself, if he had
not feared to disobey the Princess. At last, the day of his departure
arriving, he took leave of Montezuma, and went out of Mexico accompanied with
all the Court and the most part of the people. He went to lodge at Tlacopan,
where he was received as he had been the King, and the next day (followed by
two men that Tumanama had left him, and fifty slaves to carry his baggage) he
took the way of the Province of Cotosta which is fifty Leagues from Mexico
toward the East. He had already traveled two days and two nights, when he
fell into an ambuscado which infallibly Hismalita had laid for him. He was
assailed in a valley by a great many thieves, and enforced to use all his
endeavors to defend his life. Tumanama's two men were there slain, and
fifteen or twenty of his slaves. He himself there received diverse slight
wounds, but he did such things in this encounter that are beyond humane
belief and went beyond the force even of Giants. After near a whole days
resistance, he became Master of the field, and retired into the next Village
with the remainder* of his Train. He was compelled to abide three or four
days there, that he might not anger or inflame his wounds, but he underwent
in that place a greater hazard then he escaped in the field. Two nights
together his lodging was beset by unknown people, and assailed with so much
fury, that but for the help which the Inhabitants brought him, it had been
certainly mastered and entered. These last assaults causing him to reflect on
the first, he judged they could come from none but the express command either
of Hismalita or Montezuma, and by consequence that he could hardly avoid
Death. His high courage made him respect this danger as he was wont to do
others, and made him resolve to surmount it in making show that he contemned
it. He came forth therefore in the open day from his lodging, and buying some
slaves in stead of those he had lost, gave the Inhabitants of the Bourg to
understand that he had not gotten himself so many Enemies, had he not saved
all Mexico from the fury of the Theviciens and other Rebels.

Those few words wrought such an Effect in the minds of those Mexicans, that
they all went into the field with him and left him not till he came to Cotosta.
Tendilly who was Governor thereof for Montezuma, came forth to meet him, and
did him so many extraordinary honors, that if Zelmatida had been capable of
fear or suspicion, he might well have doubted that Hismalita was contriving
some new plot on him. And indeed his Death had been unavoydable if the very
party who was to murder him had not preferred the life of this Prince before
the hope of a great fortune. He came into Zelmatida's chamber whilst he slept,
and awakening him, my Lord said he arise and save your self, there are here
twenty men sent to kill you. The Prince, casting himself out of his bed, took
a Javelin which he carried as he traveled, and turning himself to the
stranger; where (said he) are those traitors. Do not stay nor amuse your self
(replied the stranger) by fighting with them, but follow me, and know that thou
have not a greater Enemy then our Governor. Zelmatida believed the man, got
out of Cotosta without giving notice to his slaves, and forsaking the common
way, slipped yet once more from the rage of Hismalita. He got into the Deserts
of Calcicoeca with his guide. Ten or twelve of his slaves escaping the hands of
Tendilly, fled from Co^osta, and ignorant what way to take, followed the first
that they saw. They were yet so fortunate, that without any such intention
they came to the Port of Calcicoeca. They had not been there two hours as
they told me, when I arrived with the first vessel that touched the firm land
of our world. But be pleased to let me make a necessary digression to clear
you of some things which doubtlesly you have stumbled at; and that leaving the
Inca my Master in the Deserts of Calcicoeca, I relate to you my adventures.
Although I speak Arabian, yet was I borne at Cusco, and son of the I^ca
Mi^raic the last of the brothers of Tupac Inca Yupanquy, Sovereign moderator
of the Empire of the Incaes. Nature bestowing on me nothing good but an
incredible desire to see other countries then mine own, and other manners then
those of my countrymen; I stole from Cusco at the age of seventeene years,
and went thence with certain Merchants which traffiqued along the coasts of
Chily. We were driven from the land by a tempest, and after we had been above
fifteen days at Sea, we were shipwracked against a desert Island which is
far from the maine Land. Those that could save themselves by swimming got to
the Island, but finding it Desert and not inhabited, they saw well that they
had not escaped their first shipwreck but to fall into a second. Of twelve that
remained of us, six died in four days, and the two next days ensuing, five
more followed them. When I saw my self alone, and equally depressed with
grief and hunger, I ran to the top of a Rock to find within the waves the
end of my afflictions; but at the same time I descryed a great vessel in full
sail coming right to me. I gave the gods praise for so unhoped a succor, and
descended to the haven to mere it. That ship had great sails made of
Palme-leaves, and many huge Anchors of wood, and seemed so unwiedly and heavy,
that it was scarcely shook by the Tempest. It came at last into the haven, and
I presently besought the aid of those were in her, and by signs having made
them understand the woeful estate into which I was brought, I got them to
succor me.

They took me very humanely into their vessel, and after they had given me to
eat asked me the name of the Island. I made known that I was thrown on it by
a tempest, and that they should not find therein either man or beast. They
were it seemed very much grieved at it, and abode all the rest of the day in
their ship, not knowing whereon to resolve. At last they put to Sea again,
and taking to their first course, were more then thirty days without seeing
land. They arrived the three and thirtieth at the Island Junagava, and being
known there, made a solemn Sacrifice on the Shore, and a feast to all those
of the Island that would be assistants. I learnt in a small time the langu^ge
of my Conductors; and understood that parting from a great Island called Japan
or Japon to traffic to the I^es of Zebut, the Tempest had driven them to that
where they found me. They set sail as soon as they could to get into their
own Country, but as they were within sight of Zebut, they were descryed by a
Pyrat of China called Ocya Acem. He set on them, took them, and putting all in
chains, steered on for China, and there sold them, and me amongst the rest,
and by that misfortune I saw that great Empire, which to say truly is far
more rich and admirable then the Inca's. It Was in that delightful Country that
fortune began to be weary of afflicting me. I there recovered my liberty which
I had lost, and the charity of that Nation was so great that in less then two
years I was Master of six great ships, which the Chinese call Juncks. I got
from the Governor of the maritine Towns a permission to traffic to Liampao
and other Ports. I was acquainted in sailing with the Portugalls, and their
communication, causing me to remarke in them a subtlety of wit, a politenesse
and valor which I had not met with in any other Nation. I gave my self over
to my insatiable desire of travel, and resolved to see that Country which
bred so generous a people. I therefore sold my Juncks and my Merchandise, and
putting all I had into gold and pearl, I embarked my self with a Portugal
called Duart Tristao, and saw all places of the east Indies where the king of
Portugal is Master. I stayed some time in the straytes of Meca, and during my
abode there, I bought two Arabians, who taught me the language I speak, and
gave me the knowledge of the Empire of the great Signior. I pased by the
fortresses of Diu and Goa and finally arrived at Lisbone. I was presented to
the great King Emanuel, and abode two whole years in his Court and that of
Ferdinand and Isabella kings of Castile and Leon. It was there that I
understood how a Genovois called Christopher Colombus had discovered a new
world, and by the description they made to me of it, I knew it must needs be
the same where I was borne. Presently I was touched with a desire to see my
dear Country. I therefore put to Sea with the son of that happy Genovois,
and arrived with him in the Island of Hayti, he gave me a vessel to go to
that of Cuba. After that I had stayed some time there and learnt the customs
and language of the country, I returned to the young Columbus and by my
entreaties obtained from him a pretty good ship, but it had not any Cannon. I
embarked with an intention to get into mine own country, but the wind drove
me to the Port of Calcicoeca, a little after that the slaves of Zelmatida
arrived there. I humanely received them, and understanding their adventure, put
what they brought in a place of safety. I asked them news of the kingdom of
the Incaes, when lo a great noyle coming from the land broake off our
conversation, and made me come out of my Cabin to discover what was done on
shore. I saw two men pursued by above a hundred, and defended themselves
against so great a number. The tallest of those two hardy combatants made show
of an extreme valor. I saw how he mingled with those that followed him, and
dispersing them by his incomparable blows, gave not over killing till he was
called back by the cries of his Companyon. But what need I tell you all that
passed on this occasion? It Is enough you know that Zelmatida was the invincible
warrior who alone fought with so many mad men. The inequalily of his combat,
and the desire to assist so valyant a man, drew me out of my vessel. I landed
with thirty of my mariners, some armed with weapons of fire and the rest with
halberds and pikes. I marched right to the murderers, and gave a discharge so
to the purpose, that my musketeers shot down twenty of them, and so terrified
the rest, that they took themselves to flight. But their Leader who was the
same Tendilly of whom I have before told you, compelld them to return to the
charge. When I saw that they came on again, I came near to Zelmatida, and
presenting him one of the two swords which I had brought: Inca (said I to him)
not thinking to speak so well, avenge thy self now of these Barbarians, and
know that in employing this iron which I put into thy hand thou shall give as
many deaths as blows. Zelmatida admiring the new weapon, would feign see
whether it had as much virtue as luster. He caused ten or twelve of my
musketeers to advance, and putting himself in the Front, went to meet
Tendillyes Soldiers. He struck at the first, and seeing with what facility
his sword entered the bodies of his adversaries, believed it to be some
inchaunted weapon. The Traitor Tendilly was in the midst of his Company, who
cried out that they should lay hold on that mortal Enemy of Montezuma, and
the future Destruction of all Mexico. His soldiers, affrighted with the shot,
gave no ear to his commands, but imagining to escape death by getting further
from the harquebusiers, they took no heed that the fatal bullet struck them
as mortally a far off, as near. Zelmatida angry to have so good arms and find
so poor resistance, ran to Tendilly, and coming to him, almost struck off
his left arm with one blow of his Sword. Tendilly fell down, and asked his
life from Zelmatida. The Prince seeing him in so ill a case; keep it (said he)
since thou love it so well, but learn to make better use of it. He presently
left him, and turning to me, whoever you be (said he) whether man, or god, who
are come to assist me with arms sufficient, not only to exterminate these
poor thieves, but all the men in the World; make an end of what you have
begun, and taking me from a place wherein I have as many Enemies as Montezuma
has faithful Subjects, deliver me from this vexatious necessity, either of
losing my self, or destroying of others: This speech, full of judgment,
joined with the brave aspect of the speaker, and the brave actions he had newly
executed, assured me that Zelmatida was something more then a man. I told him
that I had a ship in which he might imbarque himself, and by that means be
secure from the fury of so barbarous a Nation; and there withal showed him my
vessel. He left his Enemies, who had no mind to stay him, and giving them the
honor of the field which he had won, marched toward the Sea, and we all
presently went aboard. Those which I had before taken into my ship, no sooner
saw Zelmatida, but that they began to make great shoutes of joy, and threw
themselves at his feet. He praised their fidelity, bewailed the death of their
companions, and promised to reward their affection. Which done, he turned him
to me, told me his name and his quality, and in few words acquainted me, why he
had been pursued by the inhabitants of Cotosta. Hereupon I commanded to weigh
Anchor, and by the favor of a fresh gale, our vessel got from the shore.

I demanded of Zelmatida whither he desired to go; he answered me that he
could wish to get to one of the Ports of the kingdom of Quasmez, and told me,
that if he deceived not himself, we might come thither i^ coasting the firm^
land of Mexico. I commanded my Pilot to take that course, but the wind that
most commonly opposes Navigators, drove us far into the Sea; and after a
voyage, or (to say true) a tempest of many days, made us luckily enter into an
arm of the Sea, which like a great channel opens into the Isle of Cuba, and
makes a safe harbor against all winds: we gave thanks to the gods for so
wonderful a deliverance, and strove to get to a kind of for that we saw at
the bottom of the haven. Before we could get to it we were discovered by those
that were there in guard, and we presently saw all the shore ranck^d with
Soldiers, who with their arrows strove to keep us from landing. Zelmatid^,
weary of the Sea, and remembering the discourse Galtazis had with him about the
imprisonment of Alisma, resolved to get a shore, and if it were possible, to
free that (...) prisoner. The arms which I had given him, answering the
greatness of his courage, made him think no enterprises difficult. He
therefore threw himself into the water, with all those of us that were
fighting men in our ship, and by his wondrous valor, we got to be Masters of
the landing place. The Savages were beaten back, and forced to shut themselves
in their Fort. Zelmatida^, the some day, assailed it and carried it in less
then two hours. One part of the Garrison was taken, the other slain, and
their Captain, laden with chains, brought to Zelmatida where he was retired.
Thi^ Islander, having fixed his eyes long time on my dear Master; it is pity
(said he) that we have thee not for our Cacique, or that we were not borne thy
Subjects. Zelmatida was much pleased with the boldness of his Prisoner, and
retayning him, commanded his companions to prison. He asked him diverse
questions, and found that (...) answered all with good sense and judgment. At
last he asked him what he was; the other replied that he was a Mexican borne,
and noble by his condition, Tecuitli an affectionate servant to Montezum^, and
by his command establishd Guardian and Captain, of that place, under the
direction of the great Cacique of Cuba. I have well noted there was something
great in the said Zelmatida. I do not demand thee what important cause has
made thee an exile in this Island; the knowledge I have of Montezuma's affairs,
gives me already all that which thou can instruct me in. Ha, (said the
prisoner) who ever thou be that have had the honor to enjoy the glorious light
which parts from my visible God; how comes it that thou turn'st thy arms
against those that are borne the Slaves of his greatness? Thou shall know the
cause another time, answered Zelmatida; for this present, thou must tell me
where the Prisoner is whom thou have kept these many years. The Mexican made
him no reply to that question, but throwing out a prodigious cry caught up my
Sword, and turning it on himself had dyed on it but for Zelmatida. The Prince
taking notice of his great loyalty, live (said he) and preserve to Montezuma
the faith thou have sworn him. I will have intelligence of what I search by
some other way. In the mean time, thou art free and may either stay with us,
or be gone, if thou think us unworthy of thy company. How unfortunate am I
(cryde the Mexican) to have so great an obligation to the Enemies of my king?
but I will not betray my faith (said he) turning toward my dear Master, nor
yet abuse thy nobleness. Zelmatida more and more ravished with the man's brave
mind, took off himself the cords, wherewith he was bound, and offering him
his hand, I will not force thee to love me (said he) but if thou knewst how I
have been treated by Montezuma and Hismalita, thou would seek Masters more
worthy to be served. We must accuse for their faylings (said he) their
condition rather then their nature. They sin of custom innocently and to
betraye them because they reward not our fidelity is to reproach the Gods that
they know not how to make a good c^oye of those that should be their
Lievtenants. Zelmatida desirous to try whether he could draw any thing out of
him, but (said he) it is no great matter of fidelity to conceal things
already known. There is the less reason to ask any thing of them, replyde the
Mexican, howsoever never hope to get from me that which I am bound to conceal.
Thou art Master of that which we have so long time and so carefully kept, and
thou must now bethink thee what thou will do with it. Zelmatida let him go
when he saw there was nothing to be had from him, and believing for certain
that Alisma was shut up in that Fort, intended to deliver him from his long
captivity. The night hereupon aproaching, he caused diverse branches of Trees to
be lighted, which in that Isle serve for torches, to begin his search withal.
He took himself an exact review of the Fort^esse. There was neither Covert,
Cabine, Place nor Corner, which he looked not into.

He had already gone round about the Fort, and already feared that all his
pains would be to no purpose, when he saw arise out of a place under ground, a
great number of little fires, which having stirred a while about in the air,
cast themselves into the form of a crown over his head, and as if they had
been aff^ighted at his sight, descended with a noise, and so re-entred the
place from whence they came. Zelmatida, astonished to see so many flying
lights, turned him toward me, and asked me what this prodigy meant? Nothing,
but what is happy (said I) but if you will follow my advice, command those to be
gone that bear the lights, and follow those guides that offer you theirs. My
dear Master took my council, and throwing himself first into the vault, saw
all as light there, as if it had been full of torches. He saw nothing in it
but those wandering fires, which after they had made many rounds, fixed
themselves at last to the roof of the Cave. Zelmatida this while went from
corner to corner to find some door, and searched so nearly, that at last he
found one cut out of the Rock. This door opened not inwards, nor outward, but
moved downwards and was sustained in the midst by two Tampins of the stone it
self, which kept it equally balanced; He thrust it accordingly, and presently
all those little fires, came off from the roof and entered by that opening. He
followed them, and finding a little round winding stayre cut out of the Rock,
would needs see whither it lead. He descended it by the light of his flying
guides; and when he was come far down, found a square room, and thought he
heard one lamenting. He turned his ear that way the voice came from, and saw
at one of the corners of that dungeon, a man laid on the Earth, which had his
two legs put through two silver rings, his body gyrt at the middle with a great
chain, and his arms bound behind him. This object, which could not be seen
without horror, moved the King to pity. He came near, and looking earnestly
on him, saw in his countenance something that was both Heroic and venerable.
This constancy increased the Kings compassion, and wrought in him a desire to
free him from so cruel a Prison. He asked him whether his name were not
Alisma, and whether or no the Rebels of Quito had not sold him to Montezuma?
At these words the poor captive lifting up his eyes, gazed on Zelmatida as on
his Releaser; who ever you be (said he) who by your aspect and language seem
not to be of the number of mine enemies, and who already knowmy name and
fortune; believe it it is not without the particular providence of the gods,
that you have been brought hither. Thy continual showers of tears has moved
their goodness, and since I have always believed that they were not in heaven
but to recompense the good works that were done on Earth, they make me this day
see that I was not deceived, and that I should not die with the grief of being
faithful to my Master. It is above fifteen years that I have lived (if to
die a hundred times in a day be to live) under the weight of those chains
wherewith you see me laden, yet all the extremity of those tortures which my
hangmen hourly renew, has not vanquished my patience, nor make me discover
those secrets wherewith I was entrusted. I cannot tell you by what miracle my
Soul has been able to endure in a body so afflicted as mine, since I have
had none other food then a little Maiz and water, and some ill fruits which
twice a day I am forced to eat, by the soldiers of this Garrison. But what
misfortune would be comparable with mine, were it not for the company that
these little Cucuyes have afforded me, who more pitiful then men, come in to
me as often as my keepers do, and mingle their living lights with the
obscurity of this Dungeon. And you O the only man whom I have seen since I
have been in the power of Montezuma, if you fear the gods, and take pleasure
in well doing, tell me by what force or cunning you have been able to enter
this place so strongly fortified and guarded. My Father (answered the King) I
fled from the persecution and ambushes of Montezuma, when a tempest threw me in
the Port. I have been so fortunate, that I presently deleated the Garrison,
and made my self master of the place. Most certainly it is the gods, who as you
told me, moved with your tears, have vouchsafed to avenge you on the
inhumanity of the Mexicans and their accomplices. This resolute old man, finding
I know not what remainder of joy, which the length of his afflictions had not
been able to consume, assured my dear Master, that he never despaired, but
that he hoped yet to make the Rebels of Quito, and the ambitious Mexicans to
feel what a just indignation could inflict on them.

Whilst he spoake thus, the king handled his chains and tryde to undo them,
but seeing he could not do it alone, he commanded me to put to my hand and to
help break them. We did it by the means of some instruments we sent for, and
set the generous Alisma at liberty. The long time which the good old man's legs
had been hampered, and, as it were, shortened in his fetters, would not permit
him to make use of the liberty was given him. It was impossible for him not
only to walk, but well to stand up. Zelmatida, perceiving his weakness, held
him up on the one side, and my self on the other; we helped him up the
stayres of his prison, and carried him to the Mexican Captains lodging. As
soon as the violence of his pain was lessened, and gotten out of his
fainting, occasioned by the change of air, he asked for something to eat.
Zelmatida gave him of the best he could find to comfort his heart; when his
body, weakened through fastings, watchings and tortures, was somewhat
strengthened by those sweet and nourishing remedies, he fell asleep and
continued all the rest of the night in such a repose as was a very new thing to
him. Zelmatida lay down all clad, on some coverlets he sent for from the
ship; and awaking every foot, sometimes to be informed of the old man's
health, and other whiles to know what was done in the Fort, remained till
break of day without giving any intermission to his disquiets. He then arose
and went with five or fix soldiers to take a view of all places where there
were put Sentinels. He met the Mexican Captain, who was has^ (...) ^king on a
high bastion, and ruminating all alone the bitterness of his pre^ed (...). He
told him that his silence and fidelity had not the success he promised him^,
and that he would no more ask him the reasons which obliged Montezuma to
cause that place to be so guarded. I know, answered the Mexican, that your
curiosity, or to say better, the justice of heaven has gone beyond the care
and providence of my King. Alisma is no more a prisoner; and this brave
personage, who has been always an example of that faith which we owe to our
Sovereigns; knows by his ow^ experience, that those which continue loyal are
never unfortunate. At that word Zelmatida interrupting him, since (said he) you
have Alismaes virtue, hope for his fortune, but we will not exercise your
patience so long as some have done his. You may at this instant enjoy your
liberty, which he has not found but after many years of imp^ment. With this
he left the Mexican and returned to us, where he found the magnanimious old man
awake, and speaking to him with as much ^espect as if he had spoke to his
father, asked him how he had passed the night. So well (answered Alisma) that
me thinks I have recovered all my former strength, and that I now want nothing
to renew the wa^e with the traitors who have involved in the same ruin the
great Guina Capa, and the splendour of the Empire of the Incaes. Whilst he
spoke thus he had his eyes fixed on Z^matida, and found in his face I know not
what resemblance, that brought on him an universal trembling. Zelmatida took
notice of that agitation, and fearing some sickness in Alisma, entreated to
know if he desired any thing that might comfort him. My son (answered the old
man) the best remedy you can give me, is to tell me who you are. Father
(replied Zelmatida) to my great grief, I can make you no answer to that
question. I know not who I am, though some have assured me that I am the son
of a king. The great Quasmez, Prince of all those lands which extend themselves
from the deserts of Quito, to the Mountain of Popocampecho has bred me up as
his successor. Yet within this little while I have understood that he is not my
father. A^er that Zelmatida had in few words told him as much as he knew of his
own birth, and that he perceived the old man would know more, he continued his
story, as I have related it to you, and declared to him all that which had
betided him, even to the very hour he delivered the other out of prison.
Alisma, hearing these brave adventures, fell on his knees as feeble as he was,
and lifting his eyes and hands to heaven; I give thee thanks (said he) who ever
thou be, that presidest in the government of the World. Humane understanding
certainly has too little extent to dive into the depths of thy wis^dome, or ^o
know the means thy justice uses, to cause all miscreants to fall into those
punishments which they worthily have deserved. The good old man after he had
ended this deed of Piety, arose with the help of Zelmatida, and then stood a
while silent.

My dear Master, who had an extraordinary care of him, made him then take some
repast, as himself did, to resist those griefs and disquiets that continually
vexed him. This little meal ended, Alisma would try if he could walk. He
therefore stood up, and leaning on Zelmatida and my self, found that he
sustained him a great deal better then he thought. He made five or six turns
to use his feet, and finding strength enough to go without any help, he
took Zelmatida by the hand and entreated him to walk forth. My dear Master
followed him, and fitting his pace to the old man's, brought him to take the
air on a bastion. As soon as they came there they sat down, and Alisma, then
looking on Zelmatida, but looking on him with tears in his eyes: Alas (said
he) had not the rage of the Barbarians murdered the king my Master, and ^ore
cruelly slain the Queen his wife, and the child she went withal, the Empire
of the Incaes doubtless had had a Prince of your age succeeding in Guina Capa,
and with him an a^uted hope to be more flourishing then ever. But that you may
know in order my countries misfortunes, and that compassion and nobleness bind
you to take share in my griefs, and by consequence in mine intentions; I will
tell you some particulars which were never known to any but the great Guina
Capa and my self. I am an Inca by birth, and son of the valiant Sayri Tupac,
brother of the victorious Yupanq^y. I was the first that with Arms entered the
Kingdom of Q^ito, when Yupanquy intended to conq^erit. I have always
commanded his Armies there, not only as long as he lived, but also when the
invinci^le Guina Capa succeeded in his Empire. Some other time I will relate to
you the different and cruel adventures of that war; let it suffice for the
present that you know how Guina Capa after he had brought the Savag^s of Q^ito
to sue for peace, and had granted it to them, he retired to spend some days in
a strong place which he had built to hinder the excursions of his enemies. In
that place I commanded, and after the treaty was come thither with part of my
forces. The next day after my Princes arivall he intimated that he had deep
secrets to communicate, and therefore bringing me to a place where he could not
be heard of any, he spoke to me in this manner. You know Alisma with what
affection I have always desired that nothing should pass in all my commands,
either for the affairs of peace or business of war, but that you should be
privy to it: and for my part I know with what affection you have always been
industrious for the good of my Crown.

These two things, that is, my love and your fidelity have invited me to cast
mine eyes on you, as on one who are to be my successor in case the Sun our
Father permit not my Children to fill the T^rone of their prdecessors. I know
the Queen my wife is with child, and that she may be delivered of a Son, for
which, it is possible, our visible god has heard both my vows and yours. But
what cause soever I have to rejoice, I miss not some interior motions that
seem to presage the deliverance of my wife shall be deadly to her, my self
and the child. If you knew me less then you do, I should fear least you
might have some ill opinion either of my judgment or courage: but I know you
will take nothing from the estimation you make of them both; though the
fearfullnesse that shows it self in my discourse may seem to persuade you
that I am no more my self. I fear not death, Alisma, nor need I other
witness then you. I have long since prepared my self for whatsoever the gods
are pleased I shall suffer. Yet since providence is a virtue, that makes us no
less famous then our valor; I desire to set my affairs in order, and by an
establishment which may pr^serve my estate and name, expect what is to come
with that tranquillity which cannot be disturbed or altered by any good or
sinister fortune: In a word, Alisma, my brother and son, I will ordain you my
successor, and by a public Act bind all the Incas and people that obey me,
to acknowledge you for their Sovereigne. But I give you not this Present
without the thorns which are inseparable from it. I mean, that you shall never
pardon those people whom I lately subdued, if they ever go about to shake off
the yoke they have received, or attempt any thing against the oath they have
made me. Guina Capa made me this speech with a great quiet of mind, and
putting into my hands the royal Javelin which he carried in all ceremonious
actions, commanded me to keep it well. It Is not without cause said he that I
charge you to have care of it, for I would have you know that on it depends the
fortune of my Son, if I have one; that of my Wife if she survive me, and your
own if you become my successor. I did a^ that possibly I could to put from
this good Princes mind those (as me thought) vain imaginations: But alas,
they proved soon after to be too true. He was but a little while to recreate
himself in the place of my command, but after he had a hundred times embraced
me, his eyes full of tears, went thence to have the peace proclaimed and get
to the City of Quito which he had made choice of for the Queen's lying in. O
Peace! More bloody and sad then the war had been! O abominable brutishness of
a Nation more wild and inhumane then either Tigre or Lion! Can I remember thy
cruelties without putting my self into the number of so many valiant men whom
thou have destroyed? But I vainly complain on the Authors of those
desolations. The happy success of their crimes, makes them persever in them,
and their gods as insensible and barbarous as they, neither hearken to the
vows nor lamentations of such as petition them for vengance. I turn then to
you, O living Image of the fairest Princess that has ever worn the sacred
Bandelette of the Incas, and beseech you to hear the tragical end of the
great Guina Capa, that so your courage excited by your compassion, may go on
to continue that revenge which I before had set on foot. Know then, that a
little while after the feigned obedience of the Quitonians, the King my Lord,
that would have lived amongst them, as a Father with his Children, sent back
into the Provinces of his ancient Empire, the most part of the Troops which
had served for the conquest of the new; and by this disarming, delivered
himself to the fury of these savage beasts; For he was surprised in his
Palace, murdered by these Monsters, and by them devou^ed, if we may believe
that which they have dared to publish.

The Quen was drawn through the street of Quito, and (out of the town) exposed
to two Tigres, who by a prodigy of the goodness of heaven changing boththeir
nature and custom, became pitiful and honored their prey instead of
devouring it. I have learned from some that were present at this marvelous
Spectacle, that that woeful Queen was delivered among those Tygres and that she
died as soon as her child was born. There were that added another miracle to
the former; and it was that the Tigres had not only compassion but charity for
the little creature, and that after they had lickt it and defended it from
those that would have killd it with their arrows they forsook it not, till
they saw the Infant in the hands of a troop of men who seemd to be come thither
of purpose for his succor. Those who were supposed to be the Subjects of the
King Quasmez, carried away the body of the Queen and her child, and since that
time I have done my utmost endeavor to recover them both; but notwithstanding
all the care I have taken, and all the promises I have made by my Ambassadors
to the just Quasmez, it has not avayled me to recover, nay not so much as to
know what was become of them. Some few days after the execrable paricide of
Guina Capa, I heard of it by some Soldyers that had saved themselves from the
rage of the Quitonian^. Presently I published this great Accident amongst my
troops, and intymating to them my grief and resolution, I brought them into
the field, and went from place to place, to incite the people not to leave so
great a Murder unpunished. In a small time I found my self accompanied with
an army wholely composed of such men as would preserve nothing to themselves
after the loss of their Princes: and in that war giving my self none other
title then the Avenger of the royal blood of the Incas, I never thought on any
one of those Advantages which the King my Master had left me. I weighed not the
becoming a King, nor that I had to deal with so many enemies, so that the
whole world might know with what contempt of my fortune and life, I pursued
those traitors which triumphed on the death of the King and the miseries of my
countrymen. I sent the sadd n^wes to Cusco, and conjured all the Incas to the
revenge of their Elder. Instantly I entered with my Army the country inhabited
by the traitors, and overwhelming (to my great grief alas) the innocent with
the guilty, commanded that all should be put to fire and sword. Whole towns
were burnt, the fields laid waste, and in brief the whole kingdom of Quito
became a mournful Theater where disloyalty on the one side and vengeance on
the other made show of what they had most tragical. In the term of five or
six years that the Gods favored my attempts, I reduced the Quitonian traitors
to the necessity of searching in dens and the precipices of mountains room
and places to hide themselves from my good fortune. I became absolute master of
the field and but for two hundred thousand combatants which the king of Mexico
sent to aid the Qui^onians, I had compelled them to a Peace as dishonorable as
their Rebellion was execrable. These new Enemies made me alter my resolution,
and to march right to them, to hinder their joining with the Quitonians. I drew
then my Troops from the Mountains where they held the Rebels besieged, and
stayed behind with a body of four thousand men to hinder the excursions of
those we had set at liberty. On my third days march, I fell into an ambush
that those desperate traitors had laid for me, and though I saw my self beset
on all sides, yet I happily freed me, and cut most part of the Quitonians in
pieces. The heat of the fight so transported me, that without consideration of
the fault I committed, I followed the run-awaies, and so far that at last I
saw I was alone in a great Forest. Amongst the trees and rocks I lost those
that I pursued, and repenting my coming so far, I began to think on my
retreat, when presently I was set on by three Quitonians; one of them I l^yd
dead at my feet, and forced the other two to fly. In ch^ller I followed them,
and tending toward the reins the fatal Javelin which the great Guina Capa had
left me as the last and greatest token of his affection, I was about to strike
it through the body of the hinder most, but he cast himself after his
companion into the mouth of a Caverne. The ^ury w herein I was, took away my
judgment, and thrust me into the Cave after those two Barbarians. I fell very
low, and found my self so amazed with the fall, that It was a pretty while ere
I came to my knowledge: At last I recovered my wits, and saw I was in a very
spacious place, and in some places very light: I looked all about, and
discrying not those that hid them there, I confess I was somewhat astonished;
I then thought of nothing but how to come out of that Caverne, and searched so
much that finding a little overture in the corner of the Rock, with much a do
I got through i^ and came into another Cave, greater and more lightsome then
the rest. I then thought on the King my Masters Javelin, and returned for it
into the first Vault, I found it in the place where I fell, but at that
instant; I know not what thought of death seizing on my mind, I was unwilling
that a thing so precious should after my death come into the hands of my
enemies. I therefore resolved to leave it there, and to hide it in a cleft of
the Rock, which I saw there fit to preserve so dear a pledge or gage,

With tears then I took leave of a Present which the love and memory of my
dear Master made so extremely to be valued of me, and so buried it in the
intrailes of the Rock; which done I yet passed into the greater Caverne, and
from thence into another far larger, where me thought I heard some talk, and
coming in thither, I met not only those two which I had pursued, but many
others of their companions who rushed upon me with fearful howlings, and
spite of my resistance binding my hands and feet, carried me out of that Cave.
I heard, or I believed I heard in going out of that place, the voice of a man
either very sick or very weak, who, calling me by my name, Alisma (said he) my
dear Alisma at last thou art fallen as well as my self into that snare which
our common enemies have these many years laid for thee. At that time I amused
not my self much to weigh those words, but during my prison, my memory
retaining them, has not only many times repeated them, but making me call to
mind those terminations which are proper to the language of the Inca's, would
persuade me though without reason, that none but Guina Capa was utterer of
those complaints. When they were made to me, I was not permitted time to give
an answer, for those by whom I was taken, redoubling their howlings and blows,
carried me out of the Caverne, and traveling night and day came at last to the
Mexicans camp. There they set me down, and loading me with new chains,
presented me to him that commanded Montezuma's Army. The generous Cacique (who
is the same that has hitherto kept me in this place) received me with a great
deal of humanity, and entreating me oftentimes to take my misfortune
patiently, said that he would bring me to a place where I should have
intertainement worthy my loyalty and condition. He was as good as his promise
whilst he remained in the Kingdom of Quito, but after he had got again all
that I had taken, and cut in pieces all those Troops whom my disaster had made
desperate, he brought me to Mexico. There was I most ignominiously lead through
the streets for a spectacle to a brutish Nation, and more cruelly exposed to
all tortures that the fury of Hismalita and weakness of Montezuma could invent
to draw from me those truths which were more important to me then my life. My
silence, and the scorn I had of their torments, near madded them, and but for
I know not what reason that hindered them, I persuade my self they were
resolved to put me to death. After I had been a year prisoner at Mexico, I
was taken out of a Castle that is in the midst of the Lake which invirons their
City: Zelmatida interrupting Alisma at the remembrance of that prison: Ah (my
Father said he to him sighing) how well do I know that fatal abode! but go
on I pray, that we may quickly leave this Island, and giving our selves over to
be lead by our just anger, may at once fall on Mexico, and run with the same
pace to our just vengeance. Alisma, beginning again; there remains nothing
(said he) for me to make any further relation save the miseries which I have
suffered these ten years of my imprisonment here. They have been great, they
have been horrible, but they had been worse, if the generosity of him who had
me in his custody, had not made a favorable construction of those commands
which came to him from Mexico and lenified t^ furious spirit of the Cacique of
this Isle, who witnesses by his brutishness that he is worthy to be brother
to the cruel Hismalita. But we shall always have time enough ^or this
unpleasant narration; let me at this present make known what my intention was
in declaring to you the last actions of the great Guina Capa 'Twas to oblige
you to go with me to the Caverne where I have hidden that Princes Javelin, and
after I have taken thence the declaration he made in favor of me, to transact
to you all the right which I have in the Empire of the Incas, and to make you
known for the sole and lawful Heir of the victorious Guina Capa. Yet I
present not to you this great fortune, but on condition, that as true successor
of my Master the Inca, you undertake and set forward to avenge his blood and
that of the Queen his wife, to offer to their ashes the d^sloyall Quintonians,
and force out of their hands those Provinces which they have to our great
mishap won from us. Do not imagine that in making you this donation I intend
to free my self from the pains and perils of so long a war, or that age
having made me fearful, I resolve to end my days in a secure idleness. No,
no, Zelmatida, I will (if the gods grant me life) conduct you not only to Quito
but to Cusco, and dye with my weapons in my hand, in establishing you in Throne
of our Kings. Let us on then as soon as possibly we can to begin this holy
war: Let us on to dig out the fatal Javelin of Guina Capa, that the sight of
it may serve us to gain to us their affections, and to make us to be followed
by those who undertake not in affairs any other part then what their own
interests prompts them to. Zelmatida was a long time ere he could resolve to
accept those offers which Alisma made him; but fearing to offend the good old
man, and seeing besides in this donation far more likelihoods of perish^ng ^hen
governing, he gave consent to all that which Alisma had proposed. Yet
conceiving that the Javelin and Declaration of Guina Capa, were but to small
purpose for the making a war: Father (said he to the generous old man) I
find a far shorter way the^ yours, to begin our enterprise. Let your Javelin
alone in his Caverne, and without losing more time, go we to my Father the
good Quasmez. I am most assured that he will give us an Army sufficient to
avenge the blood of Guina Capa, and not only to conquer the Provinces of Quito
but even the very Realm of Montezuma. Let us run headlong on nothing I beseech
you (answered Alisma) and let us not do that wrong to the memory of the great
Guina Capa, to believe that his Declaration and Seal will be no way
advantageous unto us. Essay we rather to get into the Province of Quito, and
when we shall be in possession of the good which my Lord the Inca has left us,
we will then supplicate the just Quasmez to assist us with his forces that we
may keep it. Zelmatida having consented to the will of Alisma, came and took
me and testifying to me his resentment of the service I had done him, entreated
me not to forsake him, and that we might presently embarke to get us on the
Coasts of our world. I leave you to think with what content I gave care to a
request so pleasing to me. I not only promised that great Prince to conduct him
whither he would go, but protested to him that if he did not refuse my
service, I would not abandon him whilst I lived. My inclination (said he) that
makes me incline to your company, will have me take you at your word; but the
cause that commands me to prefer your contentment before mine own, forbids
me to use the power which you give me over my self. These speeches were
seconded by many other, and concluded to depart without delay. Our ship had
received some wrong at sea, but the Mariners meeting with that which was
needful for her new trimming, that they put her in case to fear nothing but
Land and fire. This while Zelmatida called for the Governor of the place, and
seeing him in a deep melancholy; Your loyalty (said he) and your courage are
capable to make you beloved even of men that esteem far less of virtue then
either Alisma or I do; We should therefore sin against our own consciences if
in some sort we did not recompense your excellent qualities. Common men esteem
not brave actions but when they are done by themselves or by those of them most
affected. But we are more just, and respect virtue in the person even of our
enemy. This consideration obliges us to give you that which the chance of
war took from you, and to leave you free in your Port, with all those who
are now our prisoners. Live then, as you have done hitherto and let the safety
you have found amongst your vanquishers be an advertisement to persevere in
your ^irtue. The Mexican gazing on the King: I am sor^y (said he) to be so much
endeared and to see so much nobleness in a person whom I may not lawfully
love. Yet since the great soul of the World, who forbids me to be a traitor,
forbids me not to be thankful (I will without failing in that which I owe my
King) every where publish the favors I have received from you, and continually
beseech the gods of Mexico that Montezuma, never have successors but such as
are as worthy to reign as your self.

He could not refrain from tears in ending these words. Alisma embraced him
in bidding farewell and wept too. In the mean time Zelmatida sent to his
ship for all those whom he had caused to be chained, and when they were come,
caused their fetters to be taken off, and delivered them to their Captain.
There arose a great noise amongst them, proceeding from the admiration they had
of the no^lenesse of my dear Master. Every one kissed his hand in taking their
leaves, and their Captain himself was enforced by his excellent nature to
wish him all kind of good fortune. Zelmatida entreated him at parting, to send
one of his men to Montezuma, and in signifying (...) him the deliverance of
Alisma, to let him know, that it was done by the some Zelmatida who had served
him against the Theviciens, and who went from his Court upon intelligence given
to him that Hismalita plotted to have him murdered. The Mexican promised that
he would not fail, and with that we went aboard. Though the wind and calm
tempered one with another, seemed to have as much affection as our selves to
the success of our voyage; yet being ignorant of what course to steer in so
vast a Sea and so unknown, we were near two months as well in crossing that
great extent of water, as in coasting the long point of land which advancing
far into the Sea, runs along that Isthmus of fifteen leagues only in
breadth, which is as the middle of Quasmez kingdom. At the narrowest place of
that Isthmus there is a Port, the fairest, safest, and greatest of any I have
seen in my voyages. Into that we fortunately entered after we had many times
tried the incomodity of navigation, and leaving there our ship, with those of
our Mariners which were the worst soldiers, we took the rest, gave them arms
and landed together. Zelmatida knew the country no better then those that
followed him. It therefore behoved us to find some Savage to be our Guide, and
to employ our fire and sword to make us way through the Mountains, Precipices,
Forests and other places, to us inaccessible. We traveled four days in those
Deserts, and on the fifth came to Careca, which is a pretty town, where the
same Torrucia kept his Court, who was by Zelmatida taken prisoner in the war
of the twenty revolted Caciques, and a little after set at liberty. We found
him not in his Palace, for he was gone (as we were told) with th^rty thousand
of his Subjects to the aid o^ Quasmez, who was besieged in his capital City
by an army of two hundred thousand women. Alisma interrupting him that spoake,
assure your self said he to Zelmatida, that the valiant Telesmana, Queen of
the Amazons, and mother to the incomparable wife of Guina Capa is come out of
her kingdom to revenge the death of the king my Master, and to have the body
of the Queen her daughter, which Quasmez has got into his hands, if the
common report be true. Zelmatida had scarce heard this discourse but the fire
getting up into his face: Lets away (father said he to Alisma) lets away and
serve the most just and best Prince that the Sun has ever brought into the
World. Before Alisma replied, I spoke, and seconding with content the
conception of my dear Lord. Let us not defer this journey (said I) for it
behooves us one way or other to hinder their proceeding, so, that Q^asmez
receive not the dishonor to be abused by women. Zelmatida embracing me for
joy, my dear Garruca (said he) thy advice is so generous, that I should be
unworthy to live, if I deferred the executing of it. Alisma who would have
been glad that nothing had opposed his first design, asked Zelmatida if he
remembered not his promises? I shall never forget them said Zelmatida, but long
before I made them to you, I was engaged to serve Quasmez preferrably before
all others. Ah, my father, consider that the question now is not only of honor
but of duty, and of a duty so holy that it cannot be violated without wronging
in the same instant that which is annexed to the mysteries of Religion and the
service of the gods. Alisma having nothing to answer, approved of Zelmatidaes
resolution, and desiring to lose (...) ^tle ^ime as might be, advised him to
stay no longer at Careca. We therefore parted thence (...) day break, and
marched till Sunset.

The next day we made the like Journey, and the third had not been shorter but
for an accident which happily fell out for Zelmatida and Quasmez too. We
descended a Mountain from whose top we had discovered the Town wherein
Quasmez was beseiged and the Amazons camp, when suddenly came on us a troop
of women who incompassing us commanded withal that we should yield. Zelmatida
and Alisma ravished with the beauty of their enemies could not take a
resolution to offend them: They therefore obayed, and presenting to them their
weapons obliged my self and my companyons to give them ours too. This is not
enough said the Principal of that fair Company, you must now follow us and
yield your selves prisoners to the invincible Telesmana Queen of the warlike
virgins. You shall not be disobeyed answered Alisma. For we are both my self
and my companions so much obliged to Telesmana, that we are ready to suffer all
that she shall pronounce against us. This said; Zelmatida was the first that
presented himself, and consenting to have his hands bound endured Alismaes
smiling at it, and that I might manacle my self. Those redoubtable enemies,
put us in the midst of them, and so brought us to their Camp. They understood
at their entry, that Telesmana expected Ambassadors from Quasmez, and that she
was to receive them with all the magnificence that she seemed to make show of
on the like occasions. These news were very pleasing to them, and made them
resolve to take hold of that occasion, and to present us to the Queen, whilst
she was in the state of doing justice; and presently they hastened toward the
Pavillions of Telesmana. I must confess to you; that in no one of all the
kings Courts that I have seen either in the one or the other world, I have not
taken notice of any thing so stately, so rich, so admirable, and in a word, so
royal, as the Guard and the Quarter of that valiant Queen. It was almost a
league about, and twice so long as large, compassed with a di^ch filled with
water, and with a pallisadoe of high stakes. There was but one entrance, where
two thousand Amazons were day and night in guard. We entered the second Camp,
and passed through four thousand warriers that stood on each side in file even
to the Queens lodging. After that she who commanded our Conductors, had been
with the Queen to give an account of the success of her journey; she returned
and brought us into a great Tent, which was as the Hall for Telesmanaes guard.
Thence we went into another that shone exceedingly with gold and diamonds.
There stood three rancks of Amazons, armed with halfe-pike, so neat and
curiously gilded, that they were fitter for a day of triumph then a day of
combat. We past by those fair warriers, and presently saw the worthy Mistress
of so illustrious Subjects. She was environed with a great number of Princesses
and other Ladies, and seated on a throne of massy gold, covered with rubies,
pearl and diamonds. It was ascended to by six degrees of gold and silver, and
over it hung great plates of gold, joined together all thick set with precious
stones, and disposed in such a fashion, that the Sun casting his beams on it,
made the Queen to seem indeed as another Sun. Our guards brought us to the
foot of the Throne, and commanded us to kneel to be examined. The countenance
and grace of Zelmatida and Alisma, though the inequality of their ages made
them far different, caused almost a like admiration in all the Assembly. The
Queen could not refrain from turning her eyes on them, and though she saw
them not well, yet confessed that it was great pity to destroy such men whose
brave aspect gave sufficient testimony of their minds, and the greatness of
their courage. Yet she would be satisfied, and therefore commanded Alismaes
Guard to bid him stand up.

The generous old Man arose, and all bound as he was, after five or six steps
came and kneeld at the feet of the Princess. When he had cast up his eyes, and
that Telesmana had looked on that warlike aspect which his gray hayres made
venerable, she showed a great deal of grief that she must be constrained to
condemn that man to death, against her own natural sweetness.
Notwithstanding it behooved her to go against her own inclynation, and to
resolve it. Yet before she would give the sentence of death, she told him,
that if his courage did not belly his countenance, he should show it on this
occasion, and patiently undergo the disaster whereinto he and his companions
were then fallen. For know (said she) that by an irrevocable Decree made by me
above sixteen years since, I have condemned all men that should fall into my
hands to be burned alive. The respect due to my sex which that of yours has
violated in mine own person and my childrens, compells me to avenge my self
on men with more rigor then any does ordinarily inflict on his enemies. But
let them for all accuse their own inhumanity, that was the first cause of it.
Yes cruel and inhumane as you are, yes Monsters that make Nature to blush for
producing you, you have been so barbarous as neither to have mercy on a woman
whom the gods caused to be borne the fairest and wisest Princess of the world,
nor on her infant yet a part of her self, do not wonder then if after so many
and so great wrongs I betake me to a just vengeance, and make no difficulty of
massacring the innocent for fear of letting escape any one that is guilty. Now
you know my resolution and your own destiny, tell me who you are, and what sad
fortune has cast you into the hands of my women? Alisma, not ^ffecting that
insensibility which makes all things indifferent, and yet free from that ^eare
which brings a change of color in the face, and a stammering in the speech,
answered the Queen thus: If my companions and my self had been less
accustomed then we are to the outrages of fortune, we would complain now of
this her new plotted treason: But being daily at wars with her, we will try
to get the victory by our constancy, and never more find fault with her
betrayings. Yet we must confess that this last treachery is horrible, for we
believed her not false enough to corrupt our best friends, and to provide
Goales and tortures for us where we came to seek for repose and protection.
Yes great Queen, we came into this Kingdom to find a Sanctuary against
fortune, and have here some helps against our enemies. I name not these
considerations, to woo your pity, nor do we love life so well to preserve it
by wiles. You have commanded me to say who I am, I will obey you, and by that
obedience make you confess, that fortune is yet a more cruel enemy then I
have spoake her.

I he City of Cusco claims my birth; I am honored by being descended from the
race of the Sun, and to be Grandchilde to the celestial Mango Capa. If since
the death of the great Guina Capa you have been pleased to hear related the
misfortunes that followed the loss of that Prince and your incomparable
Daughter, I doubt not but you have heard of the name of Alisma. The Queen much
moved at that name; how said she, are you that Alisma who called your self the
Avenger of the royal blood of the Incas, and that have been thought dead
above twelve years? I am the same (answered Alisma) and owe the honor of
seeing you to the valor of that Prince (in so saying he showed my dear
Master) who after many years of fearful slavery gave me at once both my life
and liberty. The Queen unable to suppress the perplexity wherein she was:
Must I (cried she) ^ither violate a law which I have so justly established, or
that I must cause its execution by the death of that man to whom I am most
obliged of all men living? After this, she commanded Alisma to kneel again,
and Zelmatida to arise and answer in his turn; and did it of purpose to see
whether in condemning him she might not save the other. Zelmatida arose, and
standing fixed, lifted his eyes to behold the Princess: She gazed on him as
earnestly, and presently striking her hands together; O gods (cried she) is it
not an Apparition I see? Certainly I have either lost the remembrance of my
Daughters face, or this is the same she had when I delivered her into the
possession of Guina Capa. After this exclamation, she held her peace, and kept
her eyes long fixed on my dear Master. Atlast, not longer a^le to hide her
astonishment, she arose, and cried out, this is my Daughter (unfortunate that I
am) or I am Enchanted. Those words caused a great confusion in the Assembly,
but Telesmana imposing silence, commanded my dear Master to tell her who he
was. Great Queen (said he) you enjoyne me that which the unfortunatenesse of
my birth permits me not to give you satisfaction in. To this present, has it
been to me impossible either to know my Parents or my Country. This worthy
King whose justice and integrity makes him beloved even of the most impious,
the incomparable Quasmez (I say) whom you have beleaguered (pardon me if I say
without any just cans^) bred me up as his Son: Yet I know I am not so, but only
in affection; and the propitious care of the gods gave me that good Father,
when I was abandoned by those who gave me life. Here Zelmatida held his peace,
and expected without any show of fear what Telismana would pronounce touching
his life. But the Queen had not then time for it, a sudden noise of trumpets
and other instruments wherewith the Amazons heartned themselves for fight,
being heard through all the Camp. The shouts and tumlts of those warriors
joinde with the noise of the trumpets gave not over, till the Authors of those
rejoycings were come into Telesmana's Tent. They put us on one side of her
Throne, and presently we saw enter Quasmez Ambassadors. They observed all those
ceremonies used in such Audiences, and came with a gravity mixed with respect
to the Queen's Throne. She stood up to receive them, and witnessed by her
actions that she was full of contentment but that it was accompanied with some
disquiet. By chance, the chief of the Ambassadors casting his eyes on
Zelmatida, was seized on with an ex^reame astonishment. His desire not to be
long in doubt of a thing that was to him of so great consequence, made him gaze
on the Lord my Inca with as much earnestness as he could. Now, he looked on
him; then cast his eyes on Telesmana as if he would ask who her prisoner was,
and then back again on him, and doubting no more but that it was Zelmatida:
Great Queen (said he to Telesmana) the gods the ^avourers of virtue, have this
day made appear a wonderful act of their providence: We came from the King
our Master, to entreat you, to receive his excuses, and for you to justify the
actions that with a violent and armed hand have been executed within his
Territories: But I find ^eete that which shall give satisfaction to your just
indignation, wherewithal to appease your anger, to make you lay down your
arms, to comfort your afflictions, and in short to make you turn the hatred
you bea^e the just Quasmez into an eternal friendship. I bring you, or (to say
more properly) I find in your own hands that treasure for which you
undertook this war, and give you this intelligence, that you have in your
power that victorious Prince which you ask from us. Yes, Madam, under the name
of Zelmatida you have the worthy successor of the great Guina Capa; the
precious Issue of your admirable Daughter, and that Son, to whom the pitiful
Tigres were both Guardians and Nurses. And with this the Ambassador went, and
taking Zelmatida by the hand and showing him to the Queen, see (said he)
Quasmez love and deligh^. Behold the Prince, by whom the gods are pleased that
he shall recover the felicity he has lost: in a word: Behold your Son. No man
can speak of it more certainly then my self, for it was I that took him out
of the paws of the pitiful Tigres, that brought him with the body of the
Queen his Mother, from the midst of the Quitonians, and gave him into the
Arms of Quasmez. Telesmana cleared by this discour^e of those doubts which had
obliged her to resist all respect and force of blood, descended from her
Throne, and falling on the neck of my Lord the I^a; Mine eyes then (said she)
my Son which have been so long time steeped in tears for your loss and your
Mothers, give me now that comfort which the gods have always promised me? I
will now no more believe that my Daughter is dead, since entirely living in you
she has but only changed her sex. But O worthy Heir of the great Gui^ Capa,
miraculously preserved! should you be thus presented to me? What think I o^,
that I suffer you to stand thus long as a criminell? Cut, cut (...) cord^s, and
let us (...) more complain of men since their very wickedness has labored
^or the consolation of all the rest of my life. The Queen in saying so,
unbound Zelmatida; and Zelmatida marked all this without the least transport of
pleasure in ^eing known the (...) of s^ great a Pri^. On the contrary he stood
afflicted among all th^se causes of rejoicing and g^ieved to see Alisma and my
self in danger. And resolving to renounce ^ll advantage rather then to suffer
us to receive the least displeasure, he sta^ed (...) Queen, and told her, he
would neither enjoy life nor liberty, if the companion^ in (...) were not too
pertakers of his good fortune. But what hinders you from (...) brave man?
(pointing to Alisma) He is a King, Guina Capa declared him (...); (...) you
cannot be just and suffer Alisma to be thus in bonds. Alisma on (...) ^ide sa^
that the Queen ought not to be forsworn for the saving of his (...) Master
had done him that honor to declare him King, but it was (...) ^tion that he
had never a Son; that therefore she should end what she had begu^ (...) that
for (...) favor he would desire her only the stay of execution a little while,
that he might at ^is pleasure embrace the King his Master, and for some (...)
enjoy the ^ght of the young Guina Capa. And that after so much contentment he
wou^ walk to his (...) with all joy and glory, and esteem himself the
happiest of all men living. The King insisted to ask Alismaes life. The
spectators of either sex made resound again their joy and wonder, and her
Palace was all in rejoycings and confusion, such as I think the History of
all ages cannot give us an accident comparable with it. The Queen, when the
tumult was over (entertayning the while Zelmatida particularly) sent to command
every one to take his place, and when all were ranged, she went again into her
Throne, and pronounced these words aloude: The supposed death of the great
Guina Capaes lawful Heir, wrought by the malice of men, won me not only to
make a law which condemned to death all men that fell into my hands, but
likewise to denounce a war against the King Quasmez, my brother and ancient
Ally. But this finding again my son by the help of men, I will; That law
be for ever abolished, and putting a period to the war I undertook, I
acknowledge my self answerable to Quasmez, and give him most particular thanks
for so charitably gathering together the remainder of my desolate house.

When she had thus made known her will, she descended from her Throne, and
taking Zelmatida by the hand, gave Alisma and my self the best entertainment
we could wish; Quasmez Ambassadors, ravished with so incredible and such an
unexpected revolution of business, did their complements to Zelmatida, as to
the rightful successor of the Incaes; and besought Telesmana that she would
be pleased they might send their Master these good news. I my self (said he)
will be the Messenger of our common happiness; let therefore some one of you
return to Quasmez, and without giving him intelligence of what has happened,
tell him that I am on the way to visit him. The youngest of the Ambassadors
had that Commission, and presently departed to put it in execution: A little
after the Queen went out of her Camp, holding Zelmatida by the one hand, and
Alisma by the other. Quasmez Ambassadors were on each side of her, and the
Queens guard crowned with chaplets of flowers, encompassed that illustrious
company. In this manner we marched to the gates of the City, where Quasmez
expected us, and in the incertainty he was, failed not of that extreme quietness
of mind, which even the most miserable find in the testimony of a good
conscience and firm confidence every one ought to have in the goodness of the
gods. Telesmana at her coming to him, presented Zelmatida, and after their
salute; See (said she) the cause of the war and the cause of peace. See what
has made me take up arms, and that which has made me lay them down. I know
just and charitable Quasmez that Zelmatida is my son as well as yours; and if
your love and care have made you taken for his Father, blood and nature oblige
me to declare my self his Mother. Quasmez, not knowing where first to express
his joy, and the proofs of his a^ction, whether to the Mother or to the Son,
would have been glad at once to have parted himself betwixt Telesmana and
Zelmatida. Your imagination better then my relation can represent to you all
the particularities of this interview; I will not therefore speak of the
Sacrifices nor magnificencies wherewithal Quasmez caused the return of
Zelmatida, and the peace to be celebrated. Let it suffice, I tell you the
Queen of the Amazons was a month with Quasmez, and after she had witnessed to
him an extreme resentment for those obligations she was bound to him in the
behalf of Zelmatida, she with a royal pomp and convoy took thence the body
of the Queen he^ daughter, took leave of him, and stayed not till she came to
the City of Quito. Zelmatida, who followed her by Quasmez appointment, after
two days stay in that town was importuned by Alisma, to go to the Caverne of
the Javelyn. He consented and we three parted thence with our ordinary
servants, beginning that journey, which the generous old man had been so long
desired. We traveled night and day, and took but little rest till we came to
the Cave that concealed so many marvels. We found not the entry so easy as
Alisma had told us, but contrarily, as soon as we came near it, were set on
by a great Troop of Quitonians, who by their howlings and enraged actions
signified an extreme apprehension of our arivall. Zelmatida, making use of the
good Sword I gave him at Calcicoeca (which the Amazons had restored to him)
slew so many of those desperate people that what he did even passes all
likelihood. Alisma, old as he was, made show of his former vigor, and I, that
was willing to defend my life* tried to make use of those advantages that I had
fetched so far off. But the wonderful valor of Zelmatida and his consorts
strength had been vain against so many enemies, i^ the wisdom of Telesmana
had not seconded the boldness of her son; For as soon as she knew of his
private departure, she caused two thousand Amazons to follow him, and commanded
they should not return without him. Those generous Ladies fell in on the
Quitonians when we were covered with wounds and round beset on all sides, and
drove them to the entry of the Caverne.

Zelmatida much moved with his own disgrace put himself in the front of the
Amazons and did so wonderful deeds of arms, that since they called him the
God of war. At last he forced the caves en^t left not one of the Quitonians
alive. Alisma entered next after him, and ^an ^o the place where he had hid the
fatal Iavelin. He had much a do to draw it out. Yet at last he got it, but he
was much astonished when he returned to Zelmatida and saw him busied in
delivering a Prisoner. He gazed on the man, and presently letting fall the
Iavelin out of his hand, cried out, am I asleep, or do I wake? Is this a
truth or a illusion that I see? my Lord, my dear Lord, is it your self or
your shadow? do you know your Alisma, or wot you who it is that undoes your
bonds? Zelmatida was about to ask Alisma the reason of his astonishment: when
said the Prisoner taking the generous old man by the hand, it is even I Alisma,
who after so long imprisonment and a hundred times escaping the death prepared
for me, see my self freed by the valor of this brave young man. Do you live
then my Lord, replied Alisma? Have you escaped the rage of your enemies? Have
the Gods preserved you among so many Executioners? shall I believe it? Yes, O,
ye just Gods I will, said he, falling on his knees, and acknowledging more and
more that your incomprehensible providence governes by unknown means the
accidents of the world. I will employ all the remaynder of my life in
publishing your miracles, and give you worthy actions of praise and thanks by
continual sacrifices. This said, he arose, and turning to the Prisoner, see
(said he) your son, showing him Zelmatida and speakeing to Zelmatida, Behold
your father, the great Guina Capa, to whom you owe your royal extraction.
Think if you please with how many admirations and transports this knowledge
was followed. Guina Capa on the sudden beleved not a thing so incredible, but
in spite of all reasons that kept him from it, he felt in himself, that he was
obliged by the solicitations and tenderness of nature to acknowledge Zelmatida
for his son. The Prince rejoicing at the life and liberty of the King his
father, kneeled down, beseeching him the permission to kiss his hands, told
him that he asked the Gods no more, since they had granted him that thing which
of all else in the world he had most earnestly prayed for. Guina Capa holding
Zelmatida between his arms, witnessed how much he loved him; and Alisma
presently stepped and presented to the hands of that great King the Iavelin he
had formerly given him. Guina Capa took it, and withal told him, that the
Gods who deprived him of one Empire were too just not to bestow on him a
greater. And with this he took Zelmatida and leaning on him went out of his
prison by the way that the young Princess had made him with the hazard of his
life. Some of the Amazons knew him, and giving him what belonged to his
quality, deputed four from among them to carry this strange news to
Telesmana. Those runners went thence and with an extreme diligence came to
Quito. When they had intimated to their Queen that Guina Capa was living, they
did what they could to make her believe it, but she would not, but rather
imagined that it was some Impostor, who deluding Alisma by some resemblance he
had with Guina Capa, made himself to be so taken indeed. But when he came she
was forced to change her opinion, and to acknowledge him for the true Guina
Capa. Whilst she was in the excess of her joy and wonder, one of those who
pass for Prophets among the Quitonians came before her, and desiring audience:
You see (said he) great Queen, the invincible Guina Capa: the credit which I
have with the Quitonians, and the threats that I have used to them on the part
of the gods, in case they enterprised any thing against the life of that
Prince, have compelled them (spite of their hear^s) to respect him, and not to
hearken to that barbarous fury which solicited them to put him to death. He
himself shall bear witness to what I say, and assure you, that excepting the
displeasures of his long captivity, he has received no ill treatment from the
Quitonians. Guina Capa confirmed what the Priest said, and related to the
Queen all the hazards he had run. Telesmana made him a recital of Zelmatida's
adventures, and by what means she came to know him. Alisma interrupted this
discourse, and besought the King his Master to tell him, if since his
imprisonment, he had never seen any of his own Subjects. Only you (answered
the King) and if you can remember it, it was I that bid you farewell when you
fell into the Caverne which has so long time been my Prison. I would feign
have persuaded my self to believe it, answered the generous old man, but the
assurance I had that you were not among the living, made me reject that fancy
as often as it was presented. Praised for it be the Gods! and thou also O
^atall Javelin (said he) looking on that which Guina Capa had given him; it is by
thee alone that so many miracles have been done, and that the greatest Princes
of the world, after diverse incredible accidents, come to know each other, and
regaine the possession of their Thrones. The Quitonian Prophet added more
matter to Alisma's discou^se; and discovering secrets to come, there remains
(said he) yet a misfortune that must shortly afflict these Princes; but if it
can be quelled, the Empire of the Incas shall be more flourishing then ever,
and the Reign of Guina Capa become a Reign full of glory and happiness.

Telesmana, Guina Capa, and Zelmatida receiving in appearance naught of this
prediction but that which was advantageous to them, abode at Quito many
months. Runners were sent to Cusco, and others to the King Quasmez. In the
mean time, the rest of the Quitonians won by their Priest, came voluntarily
and threw them at the feet of Guina Capa and entreated pardon for their
revolts. The King, the most good and merciful that ever was, forgot what was
passed; and took nothing so much into his consideration as the reparation of
the ruins of Quito, and to make happy the Quitonians. Telesmana would not
leave that Prince, till the Troops which he had sent for from his Kingdom
were arrived. All that time passed in plays, feasts, and other pleasures.

It Is true that two remarkable afflictions interrupted the public joy. The
first proceeded from the funeral pomp wherewith Guina Capa conducted the body
of the Queen his wife into the stately Temple of Quito: and the other arose
from the death of the good Alisma. That faithful servant seeing the happy
success of his Masters adventures, received thence so violent and
extraordinary transports, that they might say the excess of his joy consumed
the little strength that remained in his body worn out with the travells of
war and his long imprisonment. He fell sick, and without any other apparent
cause, was near a month in losing the functions of life one after another.
Guina Capa and Zelmatida asisted him as their Father, and ran the hazard of
following him, so great a feeling had they of his loss. These causes of sorrow
being past over, the Father and Son continued their kindness they had begun to
Telesmana. Zematida in the opinion of his Father and Grandmother wanted
nothing. But his felicity depended not on Crowns. I am compelled to leave the
continuance of Guina Capa's adventures, and the marvells that attended his
return to Cusco, to bring again on the stage the violent passion of Zelmatida
which I have in a manner buried in the recital of so many admirable
adventures. My dear Master had Isatida always in his thought, and since he
left her, never talked with me of any thing but of his hope of reseeing her.
And for all the delights of Quito, and the great hopes to which he was carried
by the King his Father, he endured incredible tortures. He grew desperate for
being among those pleasures, and called himself coward and traitor for having
been capable of any delight in the absence of Isatida. To expiate that crime,
He resolved to leave Quito and to throw himself into new troubles. They would
have me (said he to me one day) go to Cusco, and forgetting Isatida prisoner,
take possession of the Throne of the Incas. If I follow this council I make my
self unworthy of the honor which the fairest Princess of the world has done
me, and rightly deserve that the glory of freeing her from prison be for ever
taken from me. But my dear Garruca, I will not endure to be dazeled with such
false lights; for the charm of worldly greatness which troubles weak spirits
can do nothing on a soul that is full with those of Isatida, Imparting to me
thus his resolution, he prepared to be gone, and that Guina Capa and Telesmana
should give way to it, represented to them that without ingratitude, he could
not stay longer from giving thanks to Quasmez for so many favors he had
received from him. Telesmana could not approve of that journey, but Guina Capa
who has the same generosity and thoughts with his Son, gave him the permission
he desired, and with a great equipage sent him to Quasmez Court. Zelmatida was
received there not only as the Son of a great King, but as the only Son of
Quasmez. The joy for his return was general, and the good Quasmez with the
Queen his wife, seemed ^o have forgotten their Daughter so glad were they at
Zelmatida's arrival. But he that found himself guilty of the displeasure
which those good Princes would not make him any show of; one day, thus spoake
to them: I know whereto your affection and my duty binds me. I owe you my life
and my fortune. Believe not that I am so wicked as to forget that I likewise
owe you the Princess Xaira. Thereupon he recounted to them all that he had
done at Mexico; and after that long discourse, know (said he) that I am going
presently to free that Princ^sse from the hands of your enemies. Quasmez and
the Queen did their utmost to divert him from so perilous a journey: But
Zelmatida falling at their feet, either (said he) take from me the life you
have preserved, or permit me not to respect it as a continual race of
cowardice and ingratitude. No, no, Zelmatida must perish, or Xaira must be set
at liberty. The day after this, he took leave of the two amiable Princes, and
without any other company save Bereamis, some slaves, and my self, marched
right to Mexico. Whilst he was on the way, he continued in so ex^raordinary a
melancholy that it began to be troublesome to me. But it was soon after known
to be the presage of my dear Masters eternal affliction. As soon as we came
to the Frontires of Mexico, we so disguised our selves that we could not be
known, and so kept on the most unfortunate and saddest journey that shall ever
be made. We were all so disconsolate, that it seemed we were going to
execution. Zelmatida had disquiets which took away his strength of traveling,
yet would he never stay. He wept every moment and sometimes being recalled from
his musings by the redoubling of his griefs: Isatida (cried he, pitifully) how
do I fear the malice of those who have always envied your virtue and my
happiness! The nearer I come to the place where you should be, the more my
affrights and afflictions are augmented. If nothing most dismal had betided;
the hope I have to see you, had not been crossed by those fears and horrors
which inviron me. His sighs often took away his means of speech, and the
despair to which he had given himself over, failed little, oftentimes of
killing him by the way. At last he came to Mexico, and understood as soon as
we were entered, that all the Court was in mourning for the death of Isatida.
What became of the King think you at this sad news? It happened not to him
that which is common to all men which are surprised by an unexpected accident.
He caused not the bringer of that frightfull news to repeat the name of
Isatida, nor did he ask him whereof she died. But on the contrary, in lieu of
questioning or complaining, on the instant his sighs, tears, and wonted
griefs stopped. He gazed on us with his eyes open, and wandering and at the
same time, his excess of sorrow becoming absolute Master of his senses, there
was left him nothing of all the functions of life, but that which during a long
swounding gives a little sign that the party is not yet dead. After, what we
applied had recovered him, he commanded me to go through the Town to learn
of what sickness Isatida died; and entreated me that in acknowledgement of
that affection he bore me, I would be able to give him an account of all that
he should ask me touching that dismal occasion. I left him with Bereamis, and
went to get intelligence of a thing that was already but too much known to me.
By chance I met with a Courtier; and growing acquainted with him, I began to
set him on discourse of the Princess death, and he told me all the
particulars. Presently I returned to Zelmatida, and assured him that nothing
had passed in the death of Isatida but what was common to all. That she had
been but a while sick, that after her death, she had been enclosed in the
stately Tomb of the Kings of Mexico which is in the great Temple of Vacipala.
That her loss had been generally lamented; and that Montezuma and Hismalita,
came expressly from Mexico to Vacipala to the Funeral of the Princess. What
hence forward have thou to do in the world miserable, Zelmatida cried the
King? Die now as one desperate, coward and disloyal as thou art, since thou
had not the heart to expire as an honest man. But if thou be not altogether
ignoble, leave not unpunished the death of the most accomplished Princess of
the world. Avenge that Innocent whom thou have murdered. Cover Mexico with men
of arms; and by a general desolation, make that great King nothing but
Isatidaes Sepulcher. Here he grew silent, and a little after turning his eyes
on me. Fortune (said he) then Garruca has given me but imaginary (...), to
take from me that which was real. He cast his eyes up to heaven, after he had
(...) said, and so standing as fixed* seemed to attend that death which he had
already so often times implored. At last he came to himself, and desiring to
be no longer at Mex^co, departed though it were night, and kept on traveling
till he arrived at Vacipala.

The first thing he did after he came thither was to go see Isatidaes Tomb,
he embraced it, he threw himself on it, and uttered such words as would make
you die with grief, did I repeat them; he passed a day and a night lamenting
in this dismal place, and remained so long fastened to the Tomb, that
Bereamis and I thought we should have made it his; with much force we got him
thence, and by our remonstrances won him not to show himself by day, for fear
that being known he might be the cause of his own los^e and his followers. He
made us well judge by his discourse that if he had been alone, or that he had
loved us less, he would not have much cared for hiding himself. But for our
sakes he resolved not to stir but by night. And indeed failed not the next
following to steal from us, to go and continue his lamen^ations near that
fatal Sepulcher. The care we had of him, sufferedus not to sleep long. We
wakened as he went forth, and followed him for fear some mishappe might be^de
him. As soon as he came into the Temple, he ran to Isatidaes Tomb as one mad,
and dra^ing his sword stood a while speechless. Presently he threw himself on
the groun^: and after he had above a hundred times called on the name of
Isatida, spoke these words aloud: What have I now to do, fair Soul, but to
follow you, and a^andon those places that are deprived of the only thing which
made them amiable? But how can I resolve to leave a place that is filled with
your self? You are not dead Isatida. I see every where here the luster of
your fair eyes. It Is their pre^ence that gives me the beams that enlighten me.
All this gold shines not, but because it encompasseth you, and these diamonds
have none other fire but that which you lend them. But O vain consolations! O
discourse unworthy a reasonable man! Thou (...) now no more Isatida but gone
for ever. That fair body which charmed ^e Senses, is separated from that sweet
soul which so imperiously reigned over mine. That complexion so fresh and
lively has but one of is colors, or to say true ha^h lost them all; and those
eyes that could not be seen without love are shut up that their change should
not be noted, for in lieu of being the throne of love (...) they were living,
are ^ow become his tomb, for he is dead with them. Come and see what (...)
done inhumane Father. And thou barbarous mother, approach and see how we^ (...)
kn^w ^o end what you have begun. This is the insta^ that shall free you from
those (...) which your unhappy jealousies threw on you. And thou Isatida whose
name (...) have for the last time in my mouth, if it be not a horror to thee to
^urne the eyes from heaven where thou dwell, and cast them on this
abominable Earth; behold thy Zalmatida ready to follow thee, and to follow
thee in such a sort, that there shall be no more any consideration no^ tyrany
able to divide him from thee. Come then ((...) the p^as) fair Soul, and
receive the other half of thy self, and think it no^ (...) to accomplish the
promise you have so solemnly made me. After he had said thus he arose, and
choosing the place where he intended to strike, was falling on the point of his
Sword, when I caught him behind, and turning away the unfortunate we^pon,
hi^dred the greatest death that all the foregoing ages have bemoaned. He fell
(...) i^o a great choler, but as soon as he had recollected himsel^e: my dear
(...) (said he) I believed not that after your testimonial of so much
affection to me, you would have discovered your ha^red at a time when I desired
to make use of your courage. What would ^ou should become of me? and why think
you it not fit that one sole moment effect that which doubtlesly some hours
shall or at least some days which you will needs add to my miserable life. I
made no answer at all; but Bereamis, representing the wrong he would do his
reputation to kill himself, in lieu of resolving on a revenge worthy himself
and his Mistress, knew so well to make him waver by so many different reasons,
that he won him, and brought him out of the Temple. When we were returned to
our lodging, and that we saw him fit to hear us, we strove to lenify his
afflictions, and a little to divert his cogitations, intended to get him to
depart the next day. But when we proposed it to him, he forbad us to speak of
it, and was eight days entire, to hearken after nothing but his griefs, and
to do naught else but moysten with his tears, the gold and precious stones on
Isatidaes tomb. At last overcome by our importunities he resolved to be gone.
Yet upon this condition that we should not speak to him either of Kingdoms,
nor of war, nor other matters that might divert his sorrow; and we on the
contrary told him, that he could not sufficiently lament his loss, and so by
little and little flattering his affliction, we took of all that it had most
dangerous and made us capable to be hearkened to. From Vacipala even to the Port
where in coming from Cuba we had left our vessel we had none other discourse
but of Isatida. Zelmatida recounted to us all the Graces she had living; then
told us the charms of her conversation and anon the vivacity of her wit. He
extolled the knowledge she had in what ever was good, and forgot nothing of all
that which might make her to be believed for more then mortal. At last after we
had long traveled with much affliction we came to the Port I last spoke of.
Our Mariners ravished with joy to see us after so long absence, ran to salute
Zelmatida, and to express their contentment, but he looked on them as
strangers, nay even as enemies, and could scarce abide the prayers they made
for his preservation. He went aboard, and entered into the same Cabine wherein
Bajazet first saw him. I acquainted the Mariners in few words with all that
which had befalne us, and then went to Zelmatida to know what he intended.
Let Us be gone (said he) and lose our selves far enough from a World wherein I
find nothing but new causes of despair. Let us fly from the unfortunate
Quasmez, from the happy Guina Capa, and never more see those that may hereafter
give us a syllable of consolation. In a word let us seek out death. I
perceived by his speeches that to irritate his melancholy was to lose him. I
therefore commanded my Mariners to steer for the Island of Hayty, and did it
of purpose to find amongst the Spaniards some diversion that might be
sufficient to cure the despair. of my Master. In the mean while I was still
with him, and intended for fear of offending not to speak a word, but when he
should command me.

Our ship was no sooner in full Sea but the wind shifted and made the
Saylors fear a great Tempest: For, how could our voyage be happy, when the
good fortune of my Lord the Inca forsook him at his coming forth of Quito? It
continued foul all night, and the day following we lost sight of land; and our
Martiners, now no more Masters, abandoned the ship to the mercy of the Sea.
The king was insensible of whatsoever was spoke to him. But when one told him
that we were certainly like to perish, and that there was no more hope of
safety; I ask naught else (said he) and am where I have long wished me; the
only thing that grieves me in this accomplishment of my desires, is to see that
so many honest men had rather perish then to forsake so miserable a wretch as
I. Those words drew tears from the most insensible of our Saylors; and we all
told him with one voice, that we thought our selves too happy to be in such an
estate as not to survive so good a Master. If my Soul (said he) were capable
of receiving a new affliction, your love and friendship would redouble my
despair. Whilst we were thus talking, our vessel was sometime driven toward
the East, and then to the South. At last the Tempest ceasing, and our Mariners
perceiving themselves in that fearful extent of Sea which separates the old
World from the new, came and told me that they were not far off from Cape
Vert; and that it be hooved us, to try to land there. They had already fitted
their sails for it, when they descryed Bajazets fleet, and being afraid of
that encounter, steered for the Canaries, yet were we assailed as you have
either seen or heard, and forced to yield; not so much by the courage of our
vanquishers, as by the show of Zelmatidaes obstinacy not to defend himself. At
this word, Gurruca speaking more softely: a see (said he) to the Princes the
principal part of our Kings adventures. I have passed by many excellent
particularities, and clouded the rays of his heroical life, by my simple
relation, but you are enough clear sighted to discover the splendor of his
actions through the obscurity of my language. This accomplished Favorite,
ending in this manner his relation, left Polexander, Iphidamantus, Bajazez, and
Alcidiana's slave, in an admiration so great, that they could no otherwise
express it but by their silence.

They then arose, and went to find Zelmatida, who was still walking on the
terrasses of the Castle. They heard him complaining, and now and then invoking
the name of Isatida. I live (said he) and thou art dead. O weak and traytrous
Zelmatida I How long will thou be a faith-breaker? Polexander came first to
him, and witnessing to him the part he took in his grievances, and the
admiration of his whole life: Do not suffer (cried he) your sorrow to govern
you so absolutely that it makes you forget what you owe to the memory of
Isatida. It Is fit that Mexico should know by her prope^ruine, rather then by
that of her enemies, how much Zelmatida is to be feared. Entertain then by a
vengeance, that should last as long as your self, a passion eternal, and give
to the prophesies of your Prophet an explication worthy the virtues of Isatida.
Bajazet and Iphidamantus, who were of the same opinion, advised to the same
purpose; and amongst the praises they gave Zelamtida, did all they could to
win him from despairing of Isatida's life. The chances of the world (said
Iphidamantus to him,) have such strange revolutions, that every day our fears
are as much deluded as our hopes; and I know by mine own proper adventures,
that we accuse the heavens for the death of those we love, whilst yet their
goodness is doing miracles for the preservation of their lives. Fortune is
thus pleased to cross our contentments, and to play with that false providence
whereby we would imitate the Sages. Zelmatida coming from his musings at the
discourse of the Princes, yet replied to it as little as if he had not
understood them; but answering his own thoughts: Yet I live (said he) and my
cowardice has made me criminal, that all the Mexicans deaths with mine own
cannot expiate my last faults. But whither do my vain imaginations carry me?
Must I yet think on the world? I, who came into it but only to dye, and who
endure life, as a long and violent torture, to which the justice of heaven has
condemned me, at that very instant when I took a resolution to leave Isatida.
These discouses had been seconded by many more, and the sad thoughts which
these unfortunate Lovers communicated to one another, by an amorous infection,
had furnished them with new matter of entertainment, but that a furious wind
arising, threatened them with one of those tempests to which all the Coasts of
Africa and the neighboring Isles seemed particularly to be condemned. This
tempest accompanied with lightning and thunder, took soon from the Princes the
sight of the heaven and the stars. The air seemed all on fire. The sea
carrying his waves even to the places where the thunders framed, strove to
quench the flames. The shores roared, and the Isle it self trembling under the
feet of her Inhabitants, seemed to break those eternal bonds which had
fastened it to the Center of the earth, and would by her flight steal from the
fury of that conflagration. In effect, they saw fire fall from heaven in diverse
parts of the Island, but the reign as suddenly following it, smothered the
ill in its birth. Our four Lovers having far other enemies to contest with
then the toilsomnesse and varieties of that Climat, retired to their chambers,
and having no other witnesses of their actions but themselves, gave their
griefs all the liberty that constraint and civility had tyrannically taken from
them.

The end of the fourth Book.
The first Part of POLEXANDER. The fifth Book.
POlexander seeing his intention crossed by the violence of the tempest, could
not sleep all night. He accused innocent things for the ill which his passion
made him suffer; and imputing the ordinary agitations of the winds and the sea
to the cruelties of Fortune, persuaded himself that Nature and Heaven, Demons
and men, looked on him as their common enemy. He threw even on Alcidiana's a
version the cause of his misfortunes, and ascribing to her by an amorous
Idolatry, that absolute power which is reserved to the Divinity: I feel (cride
he oftentimes) I feel fair Queen the effects of your anger. The Elements who
are no less sensible then men, search out occasions to please you, and affect
the glory of being your servants. They are armed to destroy me. They are
affrighted with the threats of your declaration; and looking on me as a traitor
pursued by your justice, they fear least that in favoring me, they may become
my Confederates. At that word he remembered he had lodged Alcidiana's slave in
his chamber, and that thought smothered the rest of his complaints. But the
generous slave beginning: Leave (said he) your complaining on Alcidiana and
Fortune. They seem to be your enemies, but I doubt not, at the last, they will
discover what they have concealed, and declare themselves for you. I know some
things which in spite of your scruples, all your distrusts, and all the
conceits touching your self, shall be able to comfort you. I expected we
should have gone from this Island, to have acquainted you with them: But if the
storm compells us to stay, I will relate to you some particularities which
have never come out of my Princess Cabinet, and which are not known but to
her self, Amalthea, and Me. Polexander, that could hope for nothing, answered
the fair slave, as if he had doubted the truth of what he spoke; and beginning
to him a long recital of all the misfortunes had betided him, strove to
persuade him that he was only borne but to be miserable. The slave harkned to
all these adventures with an extreme attention, and answered thereto with so
much judgment, that he brought Polexander to doubt of some things, which till
that time he held most veritable, and certain. Whilst these two different
slaves thus entertained themselves, the day broake, and with the day the
tempest redoubled. But the bad weather could not hinder the Rovers to come out
of their Quarters, and assembled at the entry of the Fort to invite Bajazet to
the dividing of the booty. He came from his chamber, and thinking not that what
he went about worth the pains of advertising his Guests; came where he was
expected. As soon as he was in place where his Army might hea^e him, he spoke
thus: This is the day my companions that you shall receive a part of that which
your valor and industry have deserved. Nothing shall be partaged by authority
or favor. Every one shall have that which by justice he can hope for; the
privileges shall be considered. Therefore who ere has any just pretentions
let him present himself without raising any tumult, and make them known to
those who are appointed for their Examination.

After he had left all the Piratts in this pleasing expectation, and ordained
six of the eldest, to receive their petitions, and inquire the merit of those
that presented them, he went with the rest of the Captains right to the
Magazines. By the way he met Iphidamantus, and stopping to give him the
complement, asked him whether he had so much curiosiy as to see the Magazines,
and the riches which his valor had given them. Iphidamantus answering this
civilitie with his accustomed sweetness, told Bajazet that he would wait on
him. They went then to the storehouses, and wondered to see so much treasure:
Those that kept it presenting the Inventory to Bajazet, did not only cause his
wonder to redouble, but made every one that heard it read, believe himself
more rich then all the Princes of Africa. Presently Bajazet called a Council,
to resolve in what manner they might preserve the value of so many rarities,
without discontenting the Soldier, or losing the most part of so fair Jewels.
All those of the council being of diverse opinious, at last stuck to the
opinion of Bajazet; which was, that they should take out of the old Treasure
and the new. all that they could find or money coined to divide it among the
Soldiers, and if that were not sufficient, they might add to it some Ingotts
of gold and silver, that they might have cause to confess that they had given
them more then they ought to have promised themselves. Bajazet, seeing so
general a consent in the Captains, and desirous besides to signify to
Iphidamantus, the esteem that he would all should have of his courage, arose,
and taking his friend by the hand, spoke thus to all the Assembly: It Is at this
time my Companions that we jointly acquit our selves of a part of the debt we
owe this valiant Christian. You have diverse times already solicited me to give
him that liberty which he has so gloriously deserved. I approve of your
justice, and am of opinion that it be done as soon as possibly may be. But to
accompany that action with some thing illustrious, let us give him some
considerable Present, to make appear to him that we make a far greater esteem
of men of valor then of great riches; and may be by that means we may so
win him, that he will have no desire to forsake us. This generosity. being
approved in appearance by all them that heard it: Bajazet arose to go choose
amongst all that was rarest amongst the treasure, some piece worthy of his
liberality and Iphidamantes virtue. Scarce had he gone two steps, but he was
stayed short by the insolence of one of the Assistants. Thalemut an old and
valiant Pirat, but the most brutish and insuportable of all those that beleved
not God and feared not man, was the cause of this tumult. Long before this time
had the beauty of Iphidamantus bred abominable thoughts in this Devil; and
that prodigious affection breeding in him a jealousy of Bajazet, he durst not
t^l then make that break out which was so long brooding within him. But when
he s^w that his General amplified too much, as he list Iphidamantus merits,
and made show of an extraordinary ^ffection to have presents presented: he was
not able to contain himself, nor to give bounds to his fury, he therefore
came straight to Bajazet, his mouch even foming, and his eyes on fire: and art
thou not content (said he) putting his hand on his Cimiter to robb us of this
slaves ransom? But that thou will have us pay for thy infamous actions with
that which we have gotten by the expense of our lives? If thou be so amorous of
this womanish fare, buy his honor with that which is thine own: and do not I
know not under what veil of feigned nobleness, make the salary of a
prostitute to be inroled with the reward of so many valiant men: At that word
Bajazet wholly transported from himself, and Iphidamantus unwilling to live
longer then to be avenged, set hands to their Swords never considering into
what danger the credit which Thalemut had with his companions might throw them.
Never saw ye two men equally offended, run more alike to be revenged. The one
would prevent the other; and each beleved that how great soever the reparation
of this injury might be, yet it could not be satisfactory unless it were done
by his own hand. On the other side Thalemut threatened aloud, and seeing the
dispute of those two valiant men, gave him time to do any thing collected from
the silence and coldness of his companions an assurance that his boldness
pleased them. These two occasions swelling him in pride, gave him the daring to
strike a blow with his Scimiter at Bajazers head, and with such a violence,
that without heavens particular providence, they had seen expire by an infamous
weapon, one of the most glorious lives of the world. Bai^zet avoiding this blow
and looking on Iphidamantus: What (said he) are you confederate with this
Assasin and become enemy to your self? Will you be this Barbarians second?
Whilst he spoke thus, more then twenty or thirty of his Captains interpose
themselves betwixt him and Thalemut.

When he saw they went about to pacify him, in few words he made known his
just grief to them, and by his eloquence thought to obtain the liberty of
avengeing himself on his Enemy. And in that impatiency he was (not enduring
the excuses wherewith the pirates would have moderated his anger) it is in vain
said he, (I will hearken to no consideration to the prejudice of mine honor,
since my interest can win nothing on you. I command by the oath of fidelity you
have made me, by the respect you owe to my place, and by the fresh memory of
those victories I have gotten you, that you will not suffer me to live wronged.
Next if there remain in you any desire of your own preservation, get you from
before me, and keeping off this Christian that cannot be else so by reason,
make your selves not guilty of a crime whereof you are yet innocent.

Scarce had he ended these words, but those Barbarians stood astonished, and
instead of continuing their requests, grew silent, and gave him way. And
Iphadamantus (without any unjust obstination) unable to take from his friend the
liberty of doing what he resolved, put off his revenge to another time, and
somewhat retired with all the Pirates that were about him. The room where this
disorder happened was so spacious that it was fit enough for fight. You might
have seen all the spectators playstered against the walls, and as unmovable
and affrighted, stood impatiently expecting the event of so important a
quarrel. Thalemut was at one end of the Hall, and Bajazet at the other. They
ran at one another. Bajazet, his Cymeter in his hand, prevented that
abominable Corsary, and bore him a blow that in all likelihood should have
bereft his life. The resolute Pyrat put it by, and threw himself on Bajazet,
with a resolution that made Iphidamantus fear the success of the combat. It Is
true, if Bajazet would have been careful of himself, he had not run any
great hazard, but lying open with his body at all times, the sooner to decide
the difference, he could not avoid a great wound, which Thalemut gave him on
his right side. We are to judge equally of all things, there was a proportion
in these two courages; but despair had reduced Thalemut to sell his life at a
high rate, and Bajazet, to take a way the cause of a new sedition by the death
of his Enemy, threw himself on headlong. Let none any more accuse the Poets
for inventing so strange blows that their falsitie is visible; I dare say that
in this combat was seen one so prodigious, that the history being very true
and very scrupulous has made me fearful to leave it to posterity. Yet it is
most certain that Bajazet gave Thalemut such a back-blowe with his Cymiter,
that taking him on the right side, he almost cut him in two, as if he would
have sought for his revenge even in the heart of his enemy, and follow into his
Center the abominable bruitishnesse of that Monster. The fearful sight of so
great a blow, coming from ae man extremely wounded seized on the hearts of all
those Barbarians, and confirmed them in the opinion they had: that Bajazet was
somewhat more invincible then the rest of men. And in lieu of fearing the like
handling and by consequence wishing no good to the Author; they never showed
more affection to the Vanquisher then at that time, norlesse sorrow for the
party overcome. With one voice they proclaimed Thalemut guilty, and by usual
forms of their justice presently attainting and condemning him of treason and
felony, adjudge him dead as he was, to have his head cut off, and to be placed
in the number of those that were set as incorruptible guards at the entry of
the Fortress. Bajazet the mean while not able any longer to resist the
weakness caused by his so much l^sle of blood, fell into the arms of
Iphidamantus, and lost at once his sight and speech. The Prince thought him
dead; and transported with his friendship, spoke words sufficient to have
caused him to be murdered by the Pirates. They yet with muttring let him alone,
and seeing Polexander and Zelmatida haste thither went to meet them as to
clear themselves, from the death of Bajazet. Those Heroes witnessing no such
an occasion, their sweetness of nature as well as the height of their souls,
took their friend, themselves, and assisted by Alcidiana's slaves, Garruca and
Bereamis carried him into his chamber. Polexander, afterward taking his
brother aside, inquired how this mischance betided; but Iphidamantus dissolved
in tears; and could give Polexander no other information of the business but
what he could get by his sorrows and sighs. At last, perceiving how much it
afflicted his brother; he forced himself, and told him in few words the cause
of the combat between Baj^zet and Thalemut. But, (said he to him) let us not
stand on complaints for our friends disaster, let us rather seek to some
remedies, and not suffer him to be lost since we have yet time enough to save
him. Polexander reserving to himself those resolutions he had taken to avenge
the death of his friend entreated his brother to make use of all his credit he
had with the Pirates to assist Bajazet, and not leave him to the mercy of those
Barbarians, who (may be) would be glad to be rid of him. That Prince had an
excellent Chyrurgion with him, called Diceus, who twice or thrice by his art
and remedies had saved his life. On his care, he believed he might entrust the
life of his friend, and therefore called him, and signifying the fear he was
in for the help of Bajazet, commanded him to look on his wounds, and to
neglect nothing that might be available for his recovery.

Diceus expected no second command. He unclad Bajazet, and by the help of
other Chyrurgions laid him on a bed. The greatness of his wounds much amazed
them; yet unwilling to make show of what they conceived, they stanched his
blood, and did it with the promptitude that was admited by all them that were
present. Though this lessing of pain was very great, yet was it not enough to
bring Bajazet from his fainting. He came not to himself till two or three
hours after his first dressing; and toward evening beginning to know those
that were about him, amongst others, he knew the three Princes. He would
willingly have used his accustomed civilities, but Diceus forbad him to speak,
and entreated his friends to retire, for fear that in their desire of
comforting him, they might aggravate his malady. The first night passed in
fear and disquiet and the two days following gave no less sorrow to the
Cortaries, then to Polexander and the two other Princes. The third day Bajazet
rather choosing to dye then not to see his friends, entreated Diceus that they
might come to him. To give him content, Diceus promised to send for them on
condition that he spoke not at all or at most but five or six words. The
Princes who were (in one) next to Bajazets chamber, to the intent to see what
passed, went to see him as soon as they thought by Diceus order, they might
fitly do it. Scarce had Bajazet seen them, but that he expressed a joy not to
be hoped for from a man so sick and wounded, and entreating Polexander to come
near, spoke to him a pretty while in his ear, after which, he raised his
voice, and began to excuse himself to Zelmatida, but the Prince unwilling to
give him that time, he held his peace, and a while thence calling by their
names five or six of the principal Rovers that were come to visit him, he
spoke to them in this manner: My Companions, since in the estate I am, I cannot
promise to serve you any more, I have entreated Polexander not to forsake you.
You cannot doubt of his courage nor experience. The only thing you are to fear
is that he loves you not enough. But be assured of the contrary. He has
promised me to do in all as my self, if he find that his government please
you. Make your selves worthy of a protection far more powerful then mine, and
be confident, that you will have no cause to lament my death. But (said he)
turning to Polexander, I yet ask you one favor, and it is, that you will let me
know in what case I am, and be not so cruel under the shadow of pity to let me
dye without settling my affairs. I have such things in my mind that the rest I
expect in the other life depends absolutely on them; and I protest as being
ready to give up my soul, that if I dye without time to discharge my self of
one thing I never yet told, I shall dye desperate. There happened then in the
persons of those Pirates, a novelty that their nature might make pass for a
prodigy. They were moved to pity, and as if from wild beasts which they were
wont to be, they had been suddenly turned to men, they felt themselves
sensible of grief, and wept in beholding the constancy of Bajazet. Fame that
gets in every where, and has wings to fly over the walls, when the gates are
shut against her, published this sad news in the Army, and knew to paint it to
the Soldiers in such lively colors, that the desire of booty, was neither
their only nor the strongest passion whereof they found themselves capable.
Their shouts of joy were changed into lamentations, their laughter into tears,
and the hopes of their safety being on the sudden utterly extinct, they were
stricken with the apprehension of a thousand different tortures. Yet, since it
was the custom during the sickness of their Generals, that the Pirates
encamped and abode day and night in a body of an Army, they stirred not from
the place where Bajazet had left them in going to the Magazins. Notwithstanding
to give them some refreshing during so long a toil, it was advised to execute
all that Bajazet had appointed. It Is true that the largess was a great ease to
their sorrow, and brought them to themselves by the greatness of the present
liberality, and promise of a second that should surpass the first. On the
other side Baj^zet being left to rest for the space of four and twenty hours,
begun in good earnest to feel how extreme great his wound was. Yet as weak
and pained as he was, it was but little more perceived then in the Princes.
They were so cast down with grief and fear, that it was hard to be judged
who was the sickest, of them or Bajazet. When they were about to take open the
greatest tent, there was not a man in the chamber, whose fear gave him not
several conjectures, though they were all sad ones and deadly. The Chyrurgions
were not the last that doubted of the virtue of their remedies, and power of
their art, since Bajazet had had withal a Fever above thirty hours. They
already heard him talk idely, and now and then sigh and lament: Sometimes he
seemed to threaten, and then that he took leave with a great deal of sorrow
from some one whom he called his soul and his life. By reason of this they
du^st not meddle with his wound, but when they saw they were not to defer it
any longer, Diceus and his Companions put their hands to the work. As soon as
the hurt place felt the pain, there gush't out a stream^ of blood, by whose
loss Bajazet fell again into his first swoundings. Yet they gave not over to
finish what they had begun, and when it was done, near all the Chyrurgions
confessed that they had seen signs of a dangerous wou^d, and said openly that
if within twelve hours the accidents which began to appear, ceased not, there
was no more hope of him. Diceus only despaired not, assuring Polexander, t^t if
bsides the Fever, there happened not some other thing, he promised himself to
save Bajazet. Whilst every one according to his several passion, was of the
one or the others mind, the wounded man came out of his swound, and began to
sigh so often that they well judged some great thing afflicted him. As soon as
they saw him well come to himself, they gave him something to strengthen him,
and perceiving he had a mind to speak every one retired to take from him that
desire. All the night passed in this manner, and the next day till evening they
thought he would have dyed. He knew it well enough and fearing least death
might prevent him, commanded paper and incke to be brought. Zelmatida and
Polexander entreated him, and the Chyrurgions threatened, to divert him from
those strainings which they foresaw he must undergo if he began to write. But
neither of them could do any thing. There was no remedy but to give him what
he called for; but he had not writ above two or three lines, but the extreme
pa^ne he had put him to, was like to cast him into a swound. He grew settled
again and resolute to what he had undertaken, and making a little Roll of the
paper in which he had writ, drew from under his shirt a Picture box that was
enamelled with green, incarnation, and white. As soon as he had opened the
box, his strength failed, the cover fell out of his hand wi^h the Roll that he
held, and himself fell backward on his bolster senseless. Iphidamantus was
the first hat ran to him; who putting his arm under Bajazets head for ease,
saw the Picture in the box. The sight had almost done him as much hurt, as to
Bajazet. He made show of a great alteration, retired two or three paces,
changed color, and as if he was become Bajazets enemy, had no more care of his
recovery, and was a long while in withdrawing his eyes from that portract.
Those that took of the novelty, at first wondered: But ignorant of the true
cause took Iphidamantus transport for an effect of friendship. At last he
became recollected, and impossible to hide all his conc^ptions, O God said he,
must mine eyes deceive me? Reason would not have me believe what they see.
Bajazet, then opening his eyes as if he had awakened with Iphidamantus words;
and coming to himself: just heaven (said he) with a dying voice, must it
needs be that after you had obliged me in occasions such as I most desired not,
you would forsake me in the principal? Permit not, if it be your pleasure,
that I perish under the burden that orewhelmes me! Iphidamantus, as well as
Polexander and Zelmatida was deceived in the explication of those words. They
took them as if Bajazet had a desire to live; but that passion which cannot be
praised in a brave courage, was too much contemned by him, to cause thence the
least lament in the world. He showed an anger that his weakness had
surmounted him at that time, and strove again to take the little paper, and
the cover of the box which he felt in his bed. Feign would he have shut the
box, and put in the little Roll he had, but Polexander helped him since Bajazet
found himself unable to do it. As soon as he had put back the box where
'twas wont to be, he cast his eyes on the Princes, and holding his hand out
weakly to them; see (said he) how fortune plays with us and our hopes! But
what? It is no less injustice to complain of her cruelties, then here is of
weakness if we follow her when she smiles. Whilst he spoke thus, Diceus was
behind Polexander, who entreated him to hinder Bajazet from further talking:
Polexander wrought so, that Bajazet took notice of Diceus, and so fitly that
it took effect. Indeed, the generous sickman apperceiving it, I am still (said
he) and so on all hands that your eyes ask my silence. Yes my friends, I grant
you that favor as I would do you greater, were I in the same case I was three
days since. During this sad converse the night came on, and every one thought
it best to leave Bajazet to his rest. There were no more but the Princes and
five or six of Bajazets most affectionate servants that stayed near him, His
Chyrurgions watched with him till day break, and thought it fit to take off
the second dressing. Polexander, Iphidamantus, and Zelmatida came in, when they
were on that resolution, They entreated Bajazet patiently to suffer the pain
they might put him too, and assured him he should soon be in far better
health. Bajazet only smiled at that discourse, and let the Chyrurgions do what
they pleased. Diceus, himself, having seen the dangerous wound, was in as
little hope as the rest: And the Princes seeing in what extremity their friend
lay, could not so well contain themselves, but that they let fall some tears
as often as they turned their eyes on him. He alone was the man least sensible
of his hurt, and who looked on the dressing of his wound with so great a
strength of spirit, that you might have said, he saw some strangers body
dressed, or that his own was impassible. Whosoever came near him, he
presently comforted, and by his ordinary remonstrances, left them nothing to
say that came prepared to resolve him for death. The day ensuing this dangerous
night, was no more favorable to him then the three former. The Fever left him
not, his ravings redoubled, and all his friends looked on him as they had
already seen him in his coffin. After so many ill hours, the fourth and fifth
dressing gave his friends, the hope they had lost; and Bajazet himself
confessed that he found some kind of ease. He would not lose that good moment,
and therefore prayed that instantly some should advertise all his Captains,
that before his death, ^e desired to have once more the contentment to see
them; and to instruct them in ^ose things which were necessary for their common
safety, and his particular consolation. His command was executed with an
extreme diligence, and two houtes after his chamber was full of those old
Corsaries, who by their long services, had attained (...) the charges of the
sea and war. Bajazet seeing them about his bed, caused the curtains to be
opened, and showing to all a constancy that death it self was not able to
shake, in this manner spoke to them: I have not (my Companions) sent for you to
be witnesses of the consent I bring to this inexorable necessity, which wills,
that I forsake with the command that you gave me, the felicities I promised my
self from your (...) and assistance. To speak in general, there is a great
deal of glory to look on death with contempt, and to receive it with
pleasure. But when a man has lived some time among you, this vulgar
magnanimity loses the most part of his luster, and we learn that the
contempt of life and death, is but the first essay of courage, to which yet,
you believe there is due not the meanest praises. I dye then, without telling
you, that (...) sorrow not for life; and that of all the afflictions which my
precipitated destiny throws on me, I will disclose to you only two, since I
cannot bury them with me, without losing that repose which accompanies the
eternity of the second life. The one is the grief to dye before I had
acquitted me of the extraordinary obligations by which you have plucked me from
the outrages of fortune, and made me conceive high hopes in the very extremity
of my despair. The other (which not to lie to you would make me wish for a
continuation of life, if that wish could preserve me) is, that I dye
ungrateful and perjured, and leaving in danger an innocent which my fury has
engaged, my death makes me guilty of her loss, and throws on my memory the
curses of all faithful souls. It Is in your power my friends, to free me of
these troubles, to hinder the crimes which destiny would have me perpetrate to
disengage my faith, to save mine honor, and in brief that after death, I may
live, love and fight. Promise me then, but swear it to me by the holiness of
your great Prophet, that without any further particular information of those
things wherein I would engage you; You will execute them under the command of
Polexander and Iphidamantus. Interrupt me my friends, and give me if you please
the last proof of your generous obedience. Bajazet, could go no further, the
vehemence of his action having exhausted the little strength that was left in
him. He was therefore constrained to lie down again, and to shut his eyes to
stay his spirits that began to be dissipated. Polexander and his brother that
were at his beds head, gave him some ease, and entreated the Pirates by their
usual generosity not to deliberate longer on so just a request. Bajazet opened
his eyes at the speech of those two Heroes, and witnessing by his sighs, how
impatiently he waited for the Rovers answer; either hasten (said he) by a
favorable blow, that lingering moment that must give an end to my fears and
wishes; or grant me that which I ask you, that so without any despair I may
endure the flownesse of that clock which must strike the hour of my
departure. The Pirates unwilling that their General should again solicit
them: at once lifted up their hands for a sign that they accorded to what he
requested them. Those that were nearer to him spoke for the rest, and told him
that God was too just to hear the prayers of Mahomets enemies, and to deprive
the Alcoran of so great and so zealous a Defender. Bajazet smiled at these
consolations, and though by a little shaking of the head, he showed that he
could no more abide to be flattered with the hope of life, yet he failed not to
thank them for their wishes, and entreated with a great deal of civility that
they would go take that rest which his being ill had so often interrupted. And
in so saying he embraced them all, one after another; and at their departure,
remember (said he) that nothing can dispense with you for that which you have
promised me. They swore again to fulfill it, and for fear of being
troublesome to him, went out of his chamber, and retired into their Quarters.
Bajazet having none but Polexander, Iphidamantus, and Zelmatida with him, lay
sometime regarding them, with eyes that spoke better then he could do, the
griefs which the necessity of their separation brought on him. But perceiving
that thought quickly drew tears from his eyes, he left it, and turning to the
two brothers: It behooves me (said he) to make a profession of my faith before
you, and tell you that the extravagant opinions of the Alcoran, have never
drawn from my soul the belief which I sucked with my milk. The holy
Abrineias and the virtuous Andromeda have given me thoughts far more pure and
unlincked from flesh and blood then are those preached by Mahomet: I confess
that the errors of my youth, and the blindness of humane condition has
corrupted that first purity, and to satisfy my senses I have dissembled my
faith, and concealed those motions which were expected in my obedience by the
just jealousy of a God that would not have our own interests to be more
powerful then his glory. But without declaring my belief more particularly to
you, know that I hold with Abrineias, that the true Worshippers are those that
adore in spirit and truth that God which they cannot comprehend.

Let us now come to such things as to me are most considerable next the
salvation of my soul. I love passionately (my brothers) I love a beauty so
high by her birth, and so miraculous by her virtues, that all that which the
fear of the eternal justice can exact from me, is, to leave her, and not to
despair.

Another mishap is lincked with this. This young N^ell is a captive, and suffers
under the power of an old Tyrant, such persecutions most assuredly makes her
wish for death every day that enlightens her. It Is for her deliverance (my dear
brothers) that I have taken the boldness to engage you without your consent,
and to give the Pirates a word which I have not yet received from you. Be
pleased not to condemn a liberty that not only shows how generous I esteem
you, but withal, that I believe how since thence alone the wretched have need
of your assistance, it must be inferred that you hold your selves necessarily
bound to succor them. I am therefore assured that you will accomplish that
wherein I have engaged you. Alcippus, that will shortly be come back, will
inform you of that which my wound and other considerations permits me not to
tell you. I beseech you stay here for him, and when I am dead, take from his
mouth the meaning of those things I have written, and enclosed in the box you
have seen.

Bajazet felt such a pain in finishing this discourse, that he gave not
leisure to the two brothers to answer to his propositions. Diceus and the
other Chyrurgeons hasted to him, and seeing no natural cause for this
unexpected accident, told the Princes, that Bajazet's wound was the least of
his sickness, and that their applications strove in vain to cure him, since
it was grown remediless by the agitations and troubles of his mind. Bajazet
this while lay on his bed as dead, and had he not been relieved by remedies
more availeable then those of Physic, he had begun a slumber which should
never have ended. The three Princes seeing the Chyrurgians despair, were
brought again to their Laments and Tears, and staying, as tide to Bajazet,
endeavored to beguile both their knowledge, and even to doubt of what they
saw. At last he came from his swound, but it was with such dreamings and
ravings, that the imagination produces, when it has received some violence.
It Is sufficient (said he) not knowing what he said; that your virtue and
beauty has begot my passion: It has no need either of your consent or
complying to preserve it; even that which has given it being will make it
lasting. It Is free from the power of time and fortune; and by a prodigy worthy
your sovereign puissance, those effects that usually ruin other affections,
serve only to establish and confirm mine. But where are you fair Princess?
Barbarous villanes have forced you away, and if the lightning that shootes from
her eyes did not by a severe chastisement prevent their abominable designs,
you should be the deplorable prey of their infamous desires. Ah Monsters! come
not near a Miracle which the heavens admire, and nature has made, to raise
her power above all others. Respect (ye profane) this visible Divinity!
acknowledge the sanctity of the place where you would commit your Sacrilege!
and ye abominable Tyrants, dare you deprive her of liberty that should
command the whole World? Hold ye hangmen, or my just fury -- At the end of
that word; he would have risen and lifted up his arm, as if he had been
about to strike; but Polexander, Iphidamantus and Zelmatida held him, and knew
by this strange and judicious raving, that the illustrious Corsairy was
extraordinarily persecuted by that Tyrant, whose violences they all three felt,
almost equally.

Polexander first spoke, and to settle this troubled mind, said, what he
thought most powerful to give a period to its disorders. Bajazet yet lay
almost an hour, without being well come to himself, and showed by his
discourse that he remembered not what he had said. He even knew not of his
swounding; and believing he had slept, excused him to the three Princes, that
he had given way to the force of sleep. Those Herces being extremely glad to
see so violent an agitation followed by so sweet a repose; told him that he
had watched long enough to be overcome by sleep, and advised him to end the
night as he had begun it. The Physicians and Chyrurgians thought that they
might give him some ease if they took off the dressing which had already been
twice four and twenty hours on his wound. They therefore dressed him, and
finding all signs of infallible recovery, told him, that there was nothing now
to be wished for, either from Art or Nature, for that both had equally well
labored; and that it depended on none but himself to be absolutely out of all
danger. With that Iphidamantus spoke, and embracing Bajazet with the
tenderness of a true brother, if you love us (said he) believe us rather then
the motions of your mind. They are but flatterers and traitors, that would
undo you in feyning to love you. They present to you your misfortune far
greater then it is; and employing your nobleness against your self, make you
believe that you are reduced to that point, that you have neither heart nor
faith, if you are yet capable of hoping and living. Stop your ears against
these Impostors; believe your friends, and be confident that you have no malady
absolutely incurable. Your Physicians promise the curing of your wound, and I
will do as much for your amorous misfortunes. You adore the beauty of the
person that makes you despair, and some adventure to fill the history of your
life, restoring to you that worthy Subject of your affection, will give you
more content then you think to have lost in losing the hope of reviewing it.

Bajazet sighing often at Iphidamantus words; It will be very hard for me (said
he) not to suffer my self to be persuaded by his eloquence that does not less
charm the Eyes then the Ears. I will believe you my dear Iphidamantus. I
cannot doubt of the truth of your promises, without distrusting a power which I
set immediately under that which is infinite. Zelmatida, who had been a long
time silent, seeing that Bajazets despair was not clean void of hope,
suffered himself to be overcome by his ordinary imaginations and expressing
them by words as sad as themselves were; it is for thee alone deplorable Prince
(said he) to whom there remains neither hope nor comfort. The most miserable
are not deprived of that. Thou only, as a prodigy in Nature as well as in Love,
thou despairest not, and yet live void of any the least hope. Thou know
none but death can give thee any rest, or at least insensiblenesse of sorrow,
and yet go thou drawing out a life through the one and the other World, and
dare not take that last resolution which far less miseries then thine have
put into the hearts of the most cowardous and fearful. Polexander turning his
eyes on Zelmatida, with such looks as seemed to condemn the injustice of his
complaints, told him without speaking, that despair as well as hope was a
genus under which diverse species were enclosed. That that despair was the
sweetest, which depriving us of all hope, and unlinking us absolutely from all
life, resembled those unpoysoned potions, which by little and little freezing
the blood and the Spirits, and confounding death with sleep, make those
believe whom they kill, that they do but slumber. See Zelmatida what manner of
one yours is (said he) but mine is of a kind far more prodigious. It
proceeds from hope it self. It divides my Spirit, and as I might say, tears
it in pieces; imitating those cruel executioners that, at once, torment all
the members together, and do so, that of many tortures, they frame one
dreadful, that he which suffers, dies as many times as his body has parts.
Diceus imposing these Lovers silence, too ill handled by their passions,
entreated Bajazet to take a little rest, and to give to the remedies and
Nature, time to perfect that which they had so well begun. The two brothers
and Zelmatida, taking this spoken as well to them as to Bajazet, took leave of
him, and retired into their ordinary lodgings. Bajazet passed the night without
either disquiet or raving.

The next day the Princes visited him, and found his countenance so good, that
they no more doubted what Diceus had promised. The following days gave them
new assurances; and being no more in trouble but for themselves, they felt
their ills grow worse by degrees, as Bajazets diminished. But Polexander when
he had no more the diversion which that Princes wound gave him, he cast
himself altogether on the consideration of his own. He represented to
himself, that there were no kind of obstacles where withal his desires had
not been crossed, still as he overcame them; and that for the height of
despair, he attempted a thing which neither wisdom, nor courage, nor force,
could ever bring to pass. These melancholy thoughts, which for some years had
been the sole entertayning of his mind, made him distaste all kind of
pleasures, and have an aversion to all company. And since he was in the Pirates
Islandthere was not a day passed in which he had not been among the rocks and
deserts of that place, to give himself in prey to the fury of his disquiets.
He went forth all alone, and leaving himself to be guided by two passions
equally blind, lost himself so, that he was constrained to pass the night,
either in the deep bottom of some precipice, o^ on some point of a rock. The
fair slave of Alcidiana bore him company in his retyrements, but ^t was
rarely, because our Herce would as well hide himself from him, as from
Z^lmatida and Iphidamantus, and in his afflictions avoided all other witnesses,
but th^e that were incapable of comforting him. One day going out of the Fort
with the ^re Pallantus, he was tempted with a desire to know the true
inclinations of Alcidi^na, but condemning as soon that curiosity; must (said
he to himself) Alcidiana make a ^cond Declaration to have thee know that thou
art unfortunate, and that it is her absol^te w^ll that thou perish. Pallantus
infallibly heard those last words, for at the in^nt that they were ended, he
turned him to the Hero; and as if he would be willing ^o answer him, I
wonder (said he) at the obstination with which you resist all that ^n give you
any comfort. Believe me Polexander, you are not sick of any of those ^ases
which are not cured but by extreme remedies. You have but this to do, to
(...) much, and not to despair. I have made you a proposition some days past,
which should be extremely dear to you, and in the mean while I see, that you
either conte^ it, or fear it will not bring you out of the troubles wherein
you are, It Is neither the one no^ the other (replied Polexander:) but when I
come to think that Alcidiana would have me die, and that my very name is so
odious to her, that by a solemn decla^ation she has forbidden it to be
pronounced within her territories; I avoid all that may lessen my despair, and
strive to rid me of a life for which all moments make me a ^ll, since they are
so many witnesses of the little obedience I bear to the commandments of
Alcidiana.

Ah Polexander (answered Pallantus) perish, but do not murmr. Alcidiana is a
Divinity, which is no less just when it punishes, then when it recompenceth.
Her virtues are exempted from those faults which proceed of humane frailty,
she does well to pursue you as one guilty, since your passion having offended
her virtue, by a little too much liberty, has obliged her to chastise you by
distance and silence. But O! How advantageous is this to you? for to consider
matters well; is it not true, that since you cannot be beloved of Alcidiana
(for men must not pretend to that happiness) it is an extreme glory to you to
have enforced that divine Queen to have recourse to extraordinary means to
disdeceive her people, and make them know that she loved you not. Make a long
and a serious reflection on a matter of so great weight, and you shall be
forced to confess, after you have well thought on it, that the hatred
Alcidiana shows toward you, is far more obliegeing, then the indifferency
which she has for al^ men else. But that I may make you more capeable of
these Mysteries, I will relate to you some of them, and draw (as I might say)
the veyle from before those secrets which have never been discovered. Whilst
the fair slave talked thus, Polexander was walked on to the Sea shore, and
staying there the better to hear him, won him to begin the recital of those
wonders which promised him so much comfort and repose. Pallantus not perceiving
that the affection he bore to Polexander, was incompatible with the fidelity he
owed his Princess, began in this manner a relation not less glorious for that
divine Queen, then advantageous for out Herce.

The History of Alcidianaes diverse Humors.
AFter that the impudent Siziphus had by your valor received the chastisement
that his Rebellion and pride ought to have expected: Alcidiana testified,
publicly, that the service you had done her, was such as Kings could not
worthily acknowledge, (...) least, then in giving up their crowns with
themselves. But in particular, she found (...) ^lte offended with your good
fortune and courage; and the greatness of the obligation ^ut her into choler
against him that ^ad obliged her. After she had long time ^used, and a great
while given eat to these proud motions, ^he called to her the dis^eete
Amintha, and being shut with her into her Closet. Do not you believe (said
^he) that the rash Syziphus had intelligence with the man that overcame him,
and tha^ ^e had not taken arms against us, but to cause that stranger to merit
the glory to have saved us. To what may not Polexander pretend? since that if
We reign over our self and subjects, we owe that double Empire to his
courage. But what said I Amintha? No, no, we reign no more, Polexander is the
person alone which has right to govern in this Island. Fortune has put us
into his discretion, and the liberty we so much brag of, is not ours, since we
owe it to his victory. Deplorable Alcidiana; give over this imperious mind,
and these insolent contempts, with which thou have hitherto regarded all men.
It behooves thee to learn to honor them, and after thou have disdained so many
Kings, to accustom thy self to respect a stranger and acknowledge him to be
thy deliverer. Polexander could not endure that Pallantus should continue his
discourse, but interrupting him, made show how much the reproaches of Alcidiana
were mortal to him. Truly (said he) Pallantus, thou have not deceived my
expectation, though thy words seemed to promise me great cause of hope and
consolation; I have ever yet believed that the divine wit of Alcidiana was not
capable of being deceived. It has presently noted the falsity of such things
as some flatterers have published of me, and discovering in the bottom of my
Soul, an extraordinary pride and a prodigious ambition; it has well been
perceived that all my actions were criminal, and that I wore not the mask of
virtue, but to make way for my crimes with the more cunning and impunity.
Pallantus thinking Polexander had too fair a Subject to talk for himself, to
be silent, interrupted him as the other had done: and having most humbly entreated
him for his attention.

Do not hope (said he) that I will go on a jot further, if you do not
promise to hearken to what I shall tell you, with that constancy that generous
men attend even when they are innocent, the judgment of a Judge that
pronounces the Sentence of death. Polexander, knowing that he had suffered
himself too easily to be led away by his passion, entreated Pallantus to
pardon him that heat; and swore to him even by Alcidiana, that he would not
violate any more the silence prescribed him. Pallantus would not doubt of an
oath which he believed inviolable, for Polexander, continued in this manner
the recital of Alcidianaes opinions. As soon as the Queen had ended
reproaching her self, she addressed her speech to Amintha, and desirous to
obliege her to an answer: What shall we do (said she) between two
extremities, to us equally dangerous? If we have not an extreme resentment of
the Combat, wherein Polexander engaged himself for our conservation, we shall
live esteemed the most unworthy Princess that ever yet with ingratitude has
paid the Services that have been done her. And if those of this stranger be
confessed, as our importance obliegeth us, we not only uncloathe our selves of
all that Nature has given us of high and great, but bring our selves to the
infamous necessity of living and dying slaves. Amintha, who has alwai^s
testified how much your virtue wrought her to love what imported you, answered
the Queen, that how great soever the dangers were, they were never such as
cowardly minds imagined them. That the two extremities which her Majesty
spoake of, were equally to be feared, but that 'twas easy to avoid them.
That between those two vices there was a virtue, that by a stable firmity
neither leaned to the one nor to the other, and which by a just domination
reigned imperiously over them both. That she should take hold of that virtue,
and not look on her self as ungrateful, or as a slave, but as a powerful
Queen, that being served by a person infinitely below her self, could not
imagine in him, either so much pride to demand excessive recompenses, nor so
much weakness to complain, though he should not receive either great or
little. Alcidiana, finding not in Aminthaes answer the satisfaction she looked
for: If (said she) all things were in that order which heaven prescribed them,
I could make use of those expedients you propose. But if I abide in that
mediocrity what will not a people say, which blames all that crosses their
fancy; and who weighing all rewards and labors in a false balance, neither
believe the one nor the other equitable, if they be not conformable to what
they have prejudged. Yet let us imagine that my Subjects will be more discreet
and judicious then those of other kingdoms. and let us believe that they will
even approve the resolutions I have taken to acquit me of that which Iowe to
Polexander: Do you think that Polexander dazelled with the victory he has
newly gotten over his Enemy, and possessed by that unmeasurable ambition which
youth and valor inspire in all great Spirits, can give any bounds to his
pre^mions? What presents or promises soever we make him, he will value them
infe^iour to his deservings. Amintha here with spoke, and desirous to cut up by
that root the Queens perturbations. Madam (said she) be pleased that without
loss of the respect which I owe to your Majesty, I tell you that these fears
are not considerable since they proceed not from a peaceful and reasonable
Soul, but from a mind full of scorn and sorrow, and by consequence laden
with such motions as perplex it. Do better Madam, do not feign to your self
these disp^asures, which may be you shall never feel, let time work and
Polexander; and put off the resolutions you would take, till you be obliged to
them, either by the necessity of your affairs, or the propositions of
Polexander. Alcidiana wanting power over her self to resist Aminthaes
Council, made all her fears give place to a compleasancy. From that very day,
if you remember it, she sent to visit you, and gave you as a token of
extraordinary favor the privilege to enter the Palace. You came thither, and
as if your victory had been to you a cause of mortification and shame, you
presented your self to the Queen with a confusion and a trembling, which was
noted by all the Court. Alcidiana, who first perceived it, imagined (yet
without any likeliehood) that your anger for being unrecompenced after so great
a service was the cause of your alteration, and that error recalling all the
precedent; she grew in choler against you and her self. What (said she
unheard of any) Fortune then has made me to be borne a Queen, and Nature has
bestowed on me those qualities she has refused to many other Princesses, to
the end that becoming slave to a stranger, I should have a more lively feeling
then others, how rude that necessity is which forces us to leave a Throne and
enter into servitude. Amintha, well judging, that Alcidiana had great
agitations, came near to you, and heartning your astonished mind, by the
actions of thanks, which she gave you in the name of all the kingdom, made
you by little and little to recover both the use of speech and discourse. I
recount to you these small incidents, since in the estate you then were when
they happened, it is not to be believed that you can now remember them. Know then
that you blushed at the praises Amintha had given you, and that you spoake of
your Combat not only as of an action not to be thought on, and by consequence
that neither deserved honor nor recompense; but as of an attempt which should
rather draw on you the indignation and vengeance of Alcidiana. Amintha seeing
things grow to that pass which she had foreseen; turned toward the Queen,
and drawing her out of her musings; your Majesty (said she) may be pleased to
free Polexander from the strange error wherewithal he is preoccupated. I had
thought till now that pride was the only source of all pernicious beliefes, but
this Prince makes me see that humility produces some that are not less
dangerous. He persuades himself Madam, that the Combat he undertook for your
Majesty, may have offended you, and that he then began to be faulty; when he
had so much boldness to declare himself your Champion. Alcidiana quickly
imagining what was the intent of her discourse; was very much pleased with it,
and glad to have it continued, that it might take off those perplexities that
troubled him: the opinion (replied she) that possesses Polexander is more
injurious to me then himself; for he cannot believe that his Combat has
displeased me, without conceiting that the audaciousnesse of Syziphus was not
^o too. Straight, Amintha cast her Eyes on you, as to invite you not to suffer
so injust an explication, and to make your self the Interpreter of your own
thoughts. But understanding that you were too much interdicted to undertake
that answer; she spoke for you, and expressing the dexterity of her wit in so
nice a business: I know Madam (said she to the Queen) that our actions are no
otherwise innocent or criminal but as they are agreeable to those sacred
personages, whom God has pleased to appoint, to command, defend and judge us;
and that those visible divinities, endowed with those lights we enjoy not,
seem no less to be elevated above us by the greatness of their wit, then
they are by that of their birth. Your Majesty yet may give me leave to suspend
a while this verity, and to tell you with all the reverence and humility
enjoined me, that you have given that interpretation to Polexanders words,
which he would already have disavowed, if the Law of duty and respect had not
closed his ^ps and forbidden him to contradict your opinion. It seems (replied
Alcidiana) that Polexander understands our language well, to have no need of
an interpreter, and that if he were of your opinion, he would case you of the
pain you take to defend him. Amintha that needed not to have any thing twice
spoken to make her understand it; looked on you, and calling you to your own
defense. It Is in your choice (said she) to contradict me, or to make it known
to the Queen, that I have said nothing but what shall be confessed, You then
began to speak; and, as I have heard from Amintha, spoke in such a fashion
that Alc^diana had not been what she is, if she had not been fully satisfied
with it. This conversation ended, she re^yred with Amintha, and remaining some
time without saying any thing to her, at last she signified that she was cured
of her former fears, Amintha confirmed her in an opinion very advantageous for
you, and spoke of your discretion, as of that which was no less admirable then
your valor. I acknowledge (said the Queen to her) Polexander is a brave man,
he has an extreme sweetness in his conversation, and his modesty denotes the
solidity of his Wit. But when I think on that which he has but lately done
for me, I confess to you that his sight much troubles me, and as long as I see
him, me thinks, I know not what voice whispers in mine ear: Do not boast any
more Alcidiana, neither of the greatness of the birth, nor of that absolute
power which thou beleevest to have over so many people. Look on this Stranger,
thou owe to him all those things that give thee that advantage and glory. I
do my utmost to rid me of an opinion which I well see you condemn: But the
more that I would persuade my self that I owe nothing to Polexander, the more
does the happy estate wherein I am, and the ruin of mine Enemies make me know,
that when I shall be to him the most ungrateful in the World, yet cannot I be
otherwise to him then the more obliged. Amintha, that thought it not fit to
leave this young and fair Princes, in such perplexitis as might much wrong her:
It will not be hard for you (said she) to reconcile two enemies that will not
yield in any thing to one another. It Is fit that those generous thoughts would
preserve you in that independacy where heaven has put you, should reign as
absolu^ely as ever they have done. It behooves likewise, that you give some
room and place to those that speak to you of Polexanders Combat, and that by
a just regulating, having put all things in the order they ought to observe and
keep, you consider the service of this Prince, as ^o many homages which he
has done to your state and merit; and not as aid which the necessity of your
affairs has compelled you to implore from his courage. In a word, you ought
to look on Polex^nder as a man who allured by the charms of your virtue, and
the sound of your fame, is come to offer you his sword and his life; and not as
a Tyrant, who has secretly contrived the rebellion of your people to thrust
you into slavery. Alcidiana having not power to be so soon capable of
Amintha's council, though she thought it extremely reasonable; told her, that
she needed a great deal of time to be disposed to follow her advice. And
indeed she was five or six days, without being able to suffer your presence,
or resolve for your departure. Time at last plucking from her mind, all her
fears and scruples, she came again to her former mirthsomnesse; and causing
to shine again in her eyes that celestial fire which had been hidden for a
time, witnessed that her disquietts were at an end, and that her Soul had
found again that former peace it enjoyed before Syziphus revolt had made it to
you so considerable. Amintha noted this change, but her respect not permitting
her to make it appear; she waited when some word or action of Alcidiana would
give her the liberty of speech; And she got it in the great Garden of the
Palace. For one day the Queen walking there, told her that after she had
well examined her council, she was resolved to follow it. But (said she) this
secret must rest betwixt us two, and let us consult together, in what manner we
shall acquit us of a Debt that ought already have been paid. Your Majesty,
answered Amintha smiling, have not to do with a Creditor that presses you.
The glory to have served you, is the only payment which he expects for his
pains; and if your Majesty will believe him, he will persuade himself as he
has done already, that his services merit no acknowledgment. Alcidiana turning
her to Amintha* I know not, said she, why (...) stick ^o strongly on this
thought, I find, that there are fa^re more ^her things which in all likelihood
should take up my mind as much as this does: and yet as i^ on this alone
depended the preservation of my authority, and the felicity of my life; I
forgot all the rest, and think my self much troubled, when the care of my
Estate, and the remembrance of other services that have been done me, divert me
from this pleasing meditation. I confess Amintha, that in this I am clean
contrary to my self, and that this change threatens me with some strange
mishap. But I will prevent it if it may be prevented by any humane policy, and
give end to my unrests in exiling from me the person that is the cause of it
ae^l. If your Majesty (answered Amintha) will permit me to leave soothing, and
give me leave to lay before you how your deliberations undo one another, you
may easily free your self from that perplexity which your too n^e opinions
bring on you, and without forcing your mind to any thing that may ^exe it, may
reduce your cogitation only to that of reigning, with that tranquillity and
justice, which have made you the admiration of all your Subjects, and the
desire of all the Princes of the World. The difficulty (Madam) is to work the
greatness of your mind to give way that a stranger (after he had with success
enough, most beneficially done you service) should receive some little part of
that honor which you would have to be wholly restored to your self: And to
give his valor the recompense which your Majesty believes he has deserved.

Indeed (said Alcidiana) there are but those two points in question. Now that
your discourse has diverted my thoughts, I see nothing more facil nor more
reasonable, but when I think a little on the execution of these things, I see
so many obstacles, and frame to my self so many difficulties, that my mind
cannot so settle on it, but that in stead of disintangling them, it becomes
worse incombred in it self. Scarce have I well framed an intention to submit
me to your judgment, but I meet a second thought that opposes the first. My
Will strives with my Will, my fear curbs my desire, and to speak freely to
you, I would willingly without ingratitude be unthankful to Polexander.
Amintha who (may be) would engage the Queen to make a more ample declaration
of her intentions; Will not your Majesty (said she) think me too fancy if I
take the boldness to ask you, whence proceeded these strange contrarieties?
Do you not feel in your self, a certain desire and fear that causes this
ebb and flood in your Will? That Is it (answered the Queen) that I could never
yet come to acknowledge. These disorders are not begotten by any cause at all,
at least not by any whereof I am sensible. The wise Radiotez, who has so often
spoken to me of the trou^les and passions of the Soul, has taught me nothing
that has any resemblance with my afflictions. I have forgot nothing of his
Lectures, and know very well, if I deceive not my self, in what manner hatred
and amity are bred in us. But when I apply that which I know, to the affair
with Polexander, I find that as I have no reason to hate him, so have I no
inclination to love him. Polexander not daring to complain, for fear of
violating the Law that was so necessarily enjoined him, sighed alowd when he
heard these last resolutions of Alcidiana. But the fair slave seemed to take
no heed to it, and thus continued his discourse: After the Queen had ended
this declaration, she stayed a while gazing on Amintha. Amintha on her part
looked on the Queen and said nothing, and so eyed her, that Alcidiana saw well
she required a more ample manifestation of her mind. But she, showing I know
not what pleasing anger. Expect no more of me (said she) I have laid open my
heart to you, if you be not satisfied you must find fault with the want of my
wit and not of my affection. I perceive well that I unfold not my self clear
enough. But how or by what means can my discourse be less perturbed then my
thoughts? Or how can I express that in order, which I conceive but confusedly.
See; all that I can recollect most neat and entire is; That ^nce my ill
fortune has brought me to be obliged to Polexander, (...) passionately desire
to be freed of it; but that which I wish more earnestly, is, if it could be
brought to pass, that I were not at all engaged to him. Amintha, judging that
to urge Alcidiana any more. was to cast her again into her perplexities from
whence she was scarce well gotten* It will be only your Majesty's fault (said
she) i^ your wishes have not their full satisfaction. You are free, if you
please, and if your generousnesse cannot consent to this imaginary requital,
you may satisfy Polexander at all times when you have a will to it. And that
shall be instantly (replied the Queen) with a countenance that witnessed her
satisfaction, and in so saying, she turned to the Palace, sent for her
chancellor, and made him seal a gift of the Principallitie which Syziphus
sometime possessed. She with her own hand filled up the blanks which she
expressie had caused to be left for a Name, and blushing at every letter she
writ, made it be seen she had extremely constrained her self to finish the
Name of Polexander. She did me the honor to be chosen to carry you that
Expedition. I presented it to you when you thought of nothing less; and I
admired the Grace wherewith (after your refusal of so royal a Present) you
accompanied that refusal with all the thanks, all the acknowledgments and all
the submissions that the gift of some great Empire could exact from a mind
extremely generous. The Queen, who (as I have told you) had been
extraordinarily troubled at her engagements to you, was ten times more
perplexed when she knew that you would receive no recompense. She was alone
when I presented her the Grant which you refused. The blood rose in her cheeks
at it, and her extraordinary beauty, borrowing a new luster from a red so
sweet and lively, she appeared to me as beauty her self, environed with her
lightnings, and holding in her hand the thunderbolts wherewithal she knows
how to humble the most insolent hearts, and overcome the most invincible.
Sometimes she stood to consider what I had brought her, and afterward,
lifting up her eyes and looking on me, and speaking with a contempt which was
yet winning: What does Polexander then hope for, since he has refused that
which might bound the desires of the most ambitious amongst men? I fell on my
knees as soon as she began to speak: and extremely desiring to answer her
demand: Madam (said I) if your Majesty vouchsafes the least of your slaves the
glory to speak to you, I will relate the very same words Polexander used, to
make me know that he was unworthy of those extraordinary favors he received
from your magnificence. And with that I held my peace; but the Queen commandig
me to continue my discourse, I did it in these terms:

Sure Madam, it were needful that either by miracle the stranger Prince had
inspired me with a part of his admirable qualities, or that he himself were
here to represent to your Majesty the graces and charms with which he
intymated to me the confusednesse whereinto your incomparable favors had
thrown him. A hundred times he kissed the happy vellom, enriched by the name
and portract of your Majesty, and testified even by some acts of adoration,
that all that came from your Majesty, as well as your self having some
participation with divinity ought to be considered with that reverence we bear
to things celestial At last, when his admiration and ecstasy ended and that
he had recov^red his speech lost by the contemplation of your virtues. 'Twere
fit (said he) dear and too-happy Pallantus, that my words were of an
inestimable price, to have the merit to be employed in that thankfulness
which the wonderful liberality of your divine Princess exacts from my
acknowledgment. But when I consider that there is no proportion, between vain
words and benefits, no less solid then eniment, my own shame ties my tongue,
and forbids me, even those things which reason and duty command me: I would
presently go and throw my self at her feet, to make her see the confusions and
disorders of my mind; and to beseech her most humbly to receive as the actions
of thanks the least unworthy that the greatness of her liberalities can expect
from my resentment. But since it is a happiness, which without a pride as
monstrous as that of Siziphus, it is not permitted me to hope for: I entreat you
Pallantus to employ in my favor the privileges of your glorious servitude;
and throwing your self for me at the feet of your divine Mistress, to assure
her that the glory to have employed my arm in her service and the honor to be
in her remembrance, are to me so high and precious recompenses; that the
Crowns of the chiefest Kings of the world were not illustrious enough to be
compared with them: Let her therefore (if sheep ease) desist from adding so
many rewards one on another, and that by their number as well as value, she do
not reduce me to that necessity of not being able either to acknowledge or to
support them. Go Pallantus, deliver back into the hands of her Majesty, these
last tokens of her magnificence; and for fear least she impute that to pride
which I do out of a true knowledge of my self; intimate to her that those
things which seem the most vast and the farthest extended, have bounds beyond
which they cannot pass: and by consequence, that even ambition the most
inregular, has sometimes met with that which has contented those insatiable
desires which the possession of many worlds seemed not sufficient to have
glutted. This verity being too wellknowne to be controverted; let her Majesty
not disdeigne to let fall a look on a wretched stranger, and understand that
having never hoped for any thing from fortune, he finds himself now raised so
high that he cannot without being dazzled, look on the bottom of that pr^pice
whence her royal hand has as it were miraculously drawn him. It Is then for
want of power to possess, or desire any thing more, that I must necessarily
remain as I am, And therefore give her Majesty most humble thanks for those
new, benefits which her unwearied magnificence sheds on me, and do it as I have
now told you, not out of a vanity of refusing, but an incapacity of receiving
them. Alcidiana not permitting me to say more: go (said she) and if you see
Polexander again tell him, that your Queen loves obedience better then
adoration: I presen^ly arose, and knowing that the Princesses mind was not so
calm as it had been some days before. I retired with an opinion that you had
either offended her by your refusal, or you had much moved her by your
generosity. As Soon as I was gone she sent for Amintha, and as I have understood
from her self, recounting to her that you had refused Syziphus Principality,
made use of the same terms which Iused after you, to make her comprehend your
conceptio^s. What a bu^inesse is this (said she) must a stranger come and
triumph over me in mine own kingdom? And that a private man dispute of
magnificence, and nobleness with Alcidiana her self? Speak Amintha, and
think not that I will longer endure, without revenge, the wrong you have done
me. You were the first that spoke to me of this Polexander, you gave me the
curiosity to see him, you begot in me the desire to make use of his service,
and at last to become indebted to him. I therefore absolutely command you to
work so, that I may owe him nothing, or that I may never think of it more.
Amintha perceiving well that at the Queen was angry in good earnest: It those
two things (said she) which your Majesty proposes were equally in my power,
you should presently be obeyed. This Ins^lent who has had the Front to refuse
that which by a liberality without example you have deigned to offer him,
should be for ever blotted out of your memory. But Madam, give me leave to tell
you, that if you^ Majesty will take the pains to labor on your part, as I
will do on mine; I dare assure you that before night, you shall not only be
free, but even never more remember that there was ever any such man as
Polexander in the world.

Be pleased then to give that into my hands which you gave in charge to
Pallantus. I shall not be so complaisant as he has been, I will make
Polexander know, it is not in his choice to refuse that which your Majesty gives
him, and that you have not called him to your succor, as she would have done
some Prince her Ally, who should have served her for honor only, but that you
employed him as a mercenary, to whom we use to give at the end of his labor,
the Sallary that We think he has deserved. This done, Madam, your Majesty
must act the rest. Amintha has often told me, that whilst she spoake so much
against you, the Queen ^lush'd twice or thrice, and was opening her lips, as
if she would have taken your part; But yet she did nothing, but sending away
Amintha, with an ea^ernesse that showed enough what she would have hidden:
Perform (said she) punctually that which you have promised me, for you know I
use to ch^stize those that fail in what they owe me. Amintha made a very low
obeisance, and departed with a firm belief that Alcidiana, had not that
perfect indifferency wherewith she had spoken to her some few days before. You
know better then I, the reasons she used to get you to accept the Principality
of Syziphus: But I know better then you what Alcidianaes thoughts were, when
she heard you had received it. What (said she, thinking no body heard her) it
is not then the consideration of my Present that has made him take it? 'Twere
Aminthaes entreaties, that made him like of it? but I am overjoyed that my debt
is so well acquitted, and that I have no more cause of obligation for this
stranger. Amintha was in the right, to make him go for a M^rcenary; certainly
he is so, though he counterfeit the Generous, and I now know well, that he
refused at first the Salary for his pains, but only in hope to get more.

When she had said thus, she was silent; and after a great sigh, but how (said
she) shall I know that Amintha has faithfully related to me those words, she
said to him? Is it not to be believed, that to make him receive my Present, she
has told him, that it was my will he should give me that trial of his
obedience, and that 'twas by it alone that he could avoid my indignation? Your
humilities (doubtlessely she has said to him) are artificial vanities; you
would be taken for one unworthy of a Gift, which ^n your own Conscience you
think unworthy of you. You play the modest, when indeed you are the most
ambitious, and (it is possible) you will not receive a^ art ^cause you think you
deserve the whole. Be a little less jealous of your self, and ^leeve, that
how great soever your merit be, and of what importance soever the service you
have done the Queen, the recompense she offers you is infinitely above both
the one and the other. But I hold you too generous to stick at the estimation
of what is offered you. If there be any thing great in this gift, if there be
any thing that ought to come near your ambition, it is the dignity of the person
that sends it you: Deliberate no more then on what you have to do; for as it is
impiety to refuse what the Gods give us, so is it insolency not to receive what
is reached to us by the hand of a King, Alcidiana would be out of your debt.
Be not so overweening to wish that she should be still beholding: in a word
be assured, that your offense shall not be less prodigious then that of
Syziphus if you persevere in your refusal. Pride has been the loss of his
Principallity, let the same thing make you refuse it; howsoever Alcidiana will
be obeyed. Dare you have the impudence to gainsay it? See the reasons
(continued the Queen, raising her voice) that Amintha has made use of to
win Polexander to receive my Present: and if it be so, as I doubt not of it,
why should I give that to Aminthaes entreaties which is only due but to the
merit of my Gift? But whence come these disquiets on me? What matters it
whether my Present or Amintha has acquitted me? One way or other I am so, and
Polexander is to me too indifferent to desire from him that which I never asked
from any one of those whom my benevolences have enriched. See what the
discourse was which the Queen thought she had by her self: It Is your part now
to give it the interpretation it may receive without wresting. But what comfort
soever it brings you, keep it to your self for this time, for at the least
diversion you throw athwart my memory, many things will escape it, which might
serve you for excellent remedies against those ills that afflict you.

Two days passed after this, during which time the Queen lived as if you had
been wholly blotted out of her memory. Amintha came to her with her wonted
assiduitie, and tried diverse ways to get her to speak of you, but all in
vain; for Alcidiana avoiding those occasions with her incomparable dexterity,
made this wise confident believe that she was resolved to treat you with the
same scorn as till then she had used all other men. Whilst these two rare
wits did what they could to deceive one another; the news of the famous combat
betwixt your self and the brother of Syziphus came to the Palace. It was told
the Queen with such circumstances, and to you so honorable, that all the
hearts of the Court declared themselves for you, and it was who could find best
words to express most, the admiration he had of your valor and worthiness.
The Queen her self was constrained to break the vow she had made, and to
speak once more of you. It Is to be confessed (said she alowde) that this
stranger has a great deal of good fortune. Amintha that would not lose so
fair an occasion to know the cause of Alcidianaes long silence; Your Majesty
(said she) has good reason to esteem Polexander happy, since all things
happen to him so favorably. But whosoever considers well the demeanor of this
Prince, will confess that he himself is the Author of his good fortune, and
that the blind chance of arms, and that rash and inconsiderate divinity, to
whom we give the glory all that happens extraordinarily, cannot be boasted of,
with any justice, to govern the actions of Polexander, nor to place on his
head the Laurels wherewith he is crowned. Amintha ended this discourse just
when the great Chamberlain of Alcidiana sent her word that he was to advertise
her of your Combat, and to present her a Letter from you. The Queen went
thence into the Chamber where she was used to give audience, and followed by
all those rare beauties wherewith her private Court was composed, seated her
self in that Throne shining with gold and precious stones wherein she was
placed the second time you had the honor to see her. The high-Chamberlayne was
straight admitted, and kneeling at the foot of the Throne, related to the
Queen the manner of your Combat, and then presented the Letter you had written
to her. The Queen commanded Amintha to take it, and turning to her
Chamberlayne: I will see (said she to him) what the stranger has written, and
he shall know my pleasure. In the mean while (said she smiling) intimate to
him that his good fortune makes me jealous, and that if he go on, he will make
me so far indebted that all my fortune will not be sufficient to furnish me
wherewithal to acquit me. As for you Sarpedon, I do not prescribe to you
those things that are in your charge, I believe you too well know of what value
Polexanders actions are, to entertain him as a common person. When she had
said this, Alcidiana arose, and returning into her Cabinet with none but
Amintha: Let Us see (said she to her) what Polexander has writ to us. We shall
infallibly know by this Letter, that he is not much exempt from vanity as you
would have me imagine. He was surely afraid that we should not hear of his
Combat, or that the honor he got in it could not be well related to us, if it
were not done by himself. Amintha has often told me that she had an infinite
desire to reply to the Queens speech, but being confident that your Letter
would make a better Answer, she unsealed it to give an end to the reproaches
^f my fair Princess, and gave it to her all broken open. The Queen took it,
and presently giving it her again commanded her to read it. Imagine
Polexander, if she were slow to execute that commandment. She read your
Letter, and stopping at all things that made it appear how much Alcidiana was
deceived, brought her to that point to believe that she extemporarily composed
the submissions and humilities that were expressed therein.

She snatched it out of my hands, and would read it her self, hoping to find
it in some what to convince you of vanity, and Amintha of falsehood. But seeing
nothing there that was not to your advantage. Why (said she somewhat angered)
should not this man be made as all others? I confess Amintha my belief has
wronged his virtue. But who would have thought that this stranger, being young,
fair, valiant, victorious, should be incapable of vainglory. For mine own
part, I hold it for a prodigy, and not being able to be won from my first
opinion, I imagine yet that Polexanders extreme humilities want not their
pride, and that the utmost of his vanity is, to strive not to have it
discernd. Your Majesty, answered Amintha, is too just to oppose, or con^ost
with a known truth, and to desire, that because a man appears to be
extremely innocent, he should therefore be exceedingly guilty. But why do I
strive to make that seen to your Majesty which incomparably you discern better
then my self? That which you feign to believe, is but a turn of your good
wit, and a sign that as often as you please, you can make humility taken for
arrogance, valor for cowardice, and changing the face and constitution of
things, bestow foulness and beauty, according as the force of your eloquence
intends to obliege or damnity. I jest no^ (said Alcidiana) and if I had that
absolute power which your ingenious flattery gives me, I should not have so
much injustice to employ it to so ill purposes. I have believed that Polexander
was a man, and I think so still; and therefore cannot consider him but with
those weaknesses where withal the condition of men is accompanied. Were
Polexander (replied Amintha) so happy as to defend his own cause, he would
very hum^ly beseech your Majesty to be a little less clear sighted then you
are, and to imitate the eternal justice, who never condemned a crime that was
never committed. It Is possible Madam, that Polexander has none of those faults
which your Majesty supposes; but if he have not been so much favored by
Nature as other men, is it not a great deal of glory to him to have surmounted
those vices that should have overcome him? or at least to keep them so well
concealed, that the eyes of envy it self are not penetrating enough to
discover them? Your Majesty doubtlesly will believe that I am too obstinate in
the defense of a man that is almost altogether unknown to me, and the love of
virtue is not the sole motive, that makes me wave my respect and complying. I
most humbly yet beseech you, not to have that ill opinion of me, and to
believe, that I will always forsake Polexanders part, provided that you suffer
me not to abandon that of verity. Let it be the love of virtue or of the
virtuous (replied Alcidiana smiling) that makes you so generous, I will never
condemn the conceptions that so fair and high a passion gives you; and to
witness how much they are in my esteem, I would have them advise me what I
ought to do for Polexander: If your Majesty, said Amintha, speak in good
earnest, and would do me the honor to believe your intentions which have your
fame and content for their chief and last object: I engage my self to find
you a moderation by which you shall preserve that advantage which you have over
the greatest Kings of the earth, and send home Polexander with an eternal
obligation to fill the world with the renown of your bounty and magnificence.
You shall be believed, answered the Queen, speak therefore, and speak what
you think in your conscience you are bound to.

The honor (replied Amintha) which your Majesty has done me, being
considered, I should not be dutiful if I were silent: Nay, I should be
disobedient. I will therefore speak, since it is your pleasure; and tell you,
that the proofs of your liberality showed to Polexander, should have filled
him with admiration of your bounty. You have therefore me more to expediate but
to let him know, that you are no less good then great. Six lines from your
own hand may make him believe this, and force him by a mild constraint, (even
then when he shall be capable of envy or ingratitude) to praise eternally your
excess of bounty, and make you honored by all Nations that have any
veneration for virtue. But what should we write to him (said Alcidiana?) It Is
not for so poor a wit as mine (replied Amintha) to give advice in a matter of
this importance. It is for your own, Madam, to furnish your Majesty with
thoughts and words worthy your self. It has embellishments and heights not to
be met withal in other wits, and will cause that by one same and miraculous
effect, you shall imprint in Polexanders mind, an admiration and love of your
virtue, and make him bless the obliging testimonies of your bounty. Alcidiana
won by these fair words, sent for a Cabinet, whereof she had the key, and
taking thence what she needed, writ a letter which I will repeat, because you
never saw it. I knew it by the means of Amintha, who gave it me some few days
after (with the writing tables, whereof I will shortly tell you more. These
were the words.

The Queen Alcidiana to Polexander, twice a Conqueror.
IF in your Combats you have sought for nothing but the glory to be esteemed of
Alcidiana, be confident that there wants naught of your victory. Your valor is
no less considered of her then it has been advantageous to her. She
confesses she ows you her Crown and that even her life was not secured if you
had not taken on you the defense of it. But she stays not there, she is
compelled by the power of your virtue, to confess yet something more. It Is,
that she is not absolutely grieved that she has been unfortunate since Fortune
reserved Polexander to be her deliverer.

After she had ended this letter, she read it to her confident, and after
became so red out of shame, that she was feign to hide her face with the letter
it self. When this confusion was over, the Queen seemed to be angry. And
accusing Amintha, as if she had dictated that which the Queen had written to
you: See (said she) what it is to believe a roole. We cannot choose but fall
into some extravagancy. Truly Amintha, I find you very pretty and merry to
wish me to flatter Polexander. I see well that if I continue to follow your
counsel, at last I shall find my self compelled to love him: and after she
had said thus, she tore the letter in pieces, and commanded Amintha to burn it
before her. Amintha gathered the letter, and in lieu of throwing it in the
fire, by her nimblenesse cast in another paper she had in her pocket. The while
Alcidiana having drained her anger, and Amintha showing by her silence, how
much she was grieved at it; I am in the wrong (said the Queen to her) and will
henceforward know well how to distinguish between those faults I do my self,
and those I commit by the advice of others: I am only guilty of the latter, and
am resolved too to chastise that most severely: But I will defer it till I
have given satisfaction to Polexander in what he expects of my acknowledgement.
She with these words took the pen again, and writ to you a letter which I
never saw. Give me leave Pallantus (said our Hero after he had interrupted
him) that I recite that dear and precious letter to you, and let you know by
the difference there is between it, and the Declaration that ensued from that
height of happiness, the anger of your divine Queen precipitated me. This
letter is not of the same style with that you repeated to me; Nor is your other
then a dream, and this a reality. Hearken Pallantus, and admire what the most
fair and perfect hand of the world has vouchsafed to take the pains to write
to me.

The Queen Alcidiana to the stranger Polexander.
YOu ask my pardon for your taking Arms for me; but it is I that should
demand it from you, since my interests have ^o often made you run the hazard of
your life. But you are too generous to suffer Alcidiana to put her self into
the state of a Petitioner; and she is not so void of reason to condemn a
valor which has made her triumph over her enemies. Enjoy in peace the glory
you have gotten since you have neglected all other advantages; and do not
believe that Alcidiana shall be always so unfortunate, but that she may as
much oblige you as you have her now engaged.

Polexander had no sooner ended the repetition of this letter, but that his
sighs pressing on one another, almost took away his breathing; and if the
particularities which Pallantus had learned him, had not given him some
strength to support that violent fit of love and sorrow, he had infallibly been
suffocated. At last, his sighs made themselves way, and issuing one after
another gave him the liberty of speech. Presently he looked on Pallantus, and
witnessing to him a joy mixed with sadness, and a troubled and unquiet
satisfaction: is it possible said he, Pallantus, that he which has received so
great a testimony of Alcidiana's goodness, can live after the sentence of
death which she has pronounced against him? It must be possible to him,
answered Pallantus, and reserving himself for some unknown happiness, that
he judge of Alcidiana's intentions with the same reverence and fear that a
religious soul should have for the will of heaven. But keep your ward you gave
me Polexander, and suspend your contents and vexations till I have ended that
which I know of the thoughts of my fair Princess. Polexander casting down
his eyes, and even not daring to speak a word, witnessed that he had a perfect
resignation for those things that concerned the honor of Alcidiana. Pallantus
admired this incomparable submission, and thus continued his discourse: The
Queen had no sooner given Amintha the letter you repeated to me, but she
thought she had done an act that was not equivalent with the others of her
life. She sent me to run after her confident with a command to come to her
instantly. Amintha obeyed; but Alcidiana was not satisfied with it, for you had
already received her letter, and witnessed by your answer, that it was a far
greater fortune to you then Sisiphus Principality, Alcidiana not daring to make
show but of one part of her displeasure, she was so much a shamed of what she
had done. I would (said she to Amintha) that I had added the half of my Crown
to the Principality of Sysiphus, so that Polexander had not the letter which
you have made me write to him, I know sufficiently (replied Amintha) the
obedience, that Prince is ready to yield to your Majesty's commands, to assure
you that if you think him not worthy to keep so precious a thing, he will come
and throw himself at your feet to beseech you to take it again, and call
back those favors which you have too liberally communicated to him. The
remedy (answered Alcidiana) which you propose to me may well cure the wound I
have given my self, but it can never take away the scarre. I would say that
you might well get me the Letter which Polexander has received from me, but
it is not in your power to make it so that he has not had it. I fear not his
vanity, but his memory, and whilst that has a being yet should I not be freed
of my fear, though I had that which you might promise me. Let him enjoy then
that acknowledgment of the services he has done me, and hence forward let us
have no more commerce with him, then with Spaniards and other strangers, which
some tempest or chance has sometimes thrown on our Coasts. You were then by
this command, as it were, buried in the memories of those that loved you. But
it was only in show, for in effect you lived there in spite of all Inhibitions.

Alcidiana first violating her Laws, entertained her self with you alone; and
thinking to remove out of her fancy and Idea that discontented her not but in
that it seemed too pleasing to her; perceived not that her thoughts and the
intention of her thought were directly contra^y. At the same (as you know) the
winning Cephalus Prince of the blo^d of Alcidiana, and her public adorer,
proclaimed a Turney, to which your courage and judgment, furnished you with
that admirable means, by which, it was permitted you to fight with Cephalus
without offending Alcidiana. You conserved ^o him the honor, which your
incomparable dexterity, or to speak more conformably to your passion and my
duty, which the weakness of Cephalus might have made him lose. This new
victory brought new disquiets on the Queen, and made her know that it was in
vain for her to essay to acquit her self toward you. The very evening that
the justs ended, she shut her up with Amintha, and beginning anew what a month
of silence had interrupted. See us now (said she) in worse case then before. I
thought Polexander had been in my debt, and I find my self behindehand with
him, more then I am able to pay him. Were I answerable for no more then for my
kingdom and liberty, I have both to give him satisfaction: But since he has
preserved to me the honor which rash Cephalus had hazarded, can I acknowledge
that great service but by the thing it self which he has preserved? And if
that must be, what will become of the wretched Alcidiana? Can thou live
deprived of that glory which thy predecessors left thee, and which thou may
say without boasting, was gotten thee by the practice of all the virtues?
Amintha seeing the Princess grief to be so excessive that it drew tears from
her eyes, was very much moved at it, and forgetting your interests for those of
her good Mistress. Your Majesty (said she) must not any longer suffer a
sickness which insensibly gets on the heart, and may become deadly if in time
there be not applied to it fire and sword. I was the first that neglected it,
since I thought it not considerable, but now I know its greatness, and foresee
what may ensue, I am the first that run for remedies, and throwing my self
at the feet of your Majesty, humbly to beseech you to employ all and not to
reject the most violent.

The honor I have to be entrusted with your secrecies, forbids me to have
other consideration then of you, and I cannot be silent without sinning
against that Sovereign law, which commands me to expose my life for the
safety of your Majesty. The innocent and fair Alcidiana hearing Amintha speak
so seriously, thought her self ill of some ex^reame dangerous sickness; and
fear which commonly accompanies ignorance, bringing on her extraordinary
troubles and disquiets, she fell on Aminthaes neck, wet her face with her
tears, and conjured her by her friendship to give her such advice as might
be most safe for her. Heal said she a malady of which in some sort you have
been the cause. I find it more troublesome then grievous, but you know it
better then I, and I had rather trust my self to your experience then to mine
own feelings. Let us therefore be industrious Amintha in a business so
urgent, and not putting off our cure to the succor that may come with time,
let us try all those means that heaven has put into our power. Amintha
judging, by this discourse, that the Queen knew nothing at all of her
sickness, or to speak more truly that she had no other ill, but that which
was begot by that high and imperious humor in which she was bred, saw well that
it was not necessary to urge your depart, nor to make your stay suspected. She
therefore insensibly diverted Alcidianaes fears and resolutions, and repenting
what her affection had made her say against you, assured the Princess that you
had not undertaken to combat with Cephalus, but with the same intention that he
had done the justs: that was, you had a resolution to make your skill and
gallantrie appear, and not to engage the honor of the Princess. And that you
expected no other repute then that which is gotten by the like exercises.
Cephalus (said she) had published that you were the fairest Princess in the
World. He took arms to maintain it against all those that profess to love
what is fair. Polexander would raise the price upon him more then he. He
therefore maintained against him, his arms in his hand, that you were yet
somewhat more then the other imagined, and the success of the justs has made
it seen that his proposition was true. What do you think Madam, that you owe
him for it? Nothing, but what the Sun owes them that call him the Author of
life, the Father of light, and the fairest of all inannimate Creatures.

If Polexander had been suddenly changed into some other, and become so vain
to look for a reward after this last Combat; it should be then from the truth
which he has defended and not from you that he was to expect it. Set your
mind then at rest, and driving far from your fair Soul those thoughts that
disturb it, hold it for an infallibility that your Majesty cannot be beholding
to any one, since the honor to serve you is so great a recompense to those
that do it, that they are paid for all their services, even before they have
begun them. The Queen whose extreme youth could not afford her those
experiments that Amintha had gathered by the benefit of more years, felt her
self no less peaceful and at rest after the second discourse of her
Confident, then the first had put her out of order. She then rested her mind
in its first seat, and retayning no other thoughts for you then she had for
other Princes, was glad to give you occasion to abide in her Court, and by your
presence, obliege her people to stifle for ever all causes of revolting. After
that resolution two or three months slid away, during which time you had often
the honor to see the Queen, and obtained by your submission and respects, the
liberty to talk with her. This happiness had lasted longer with you, if you
had had the power to conceal yet your design and passion. But this pleasant
commerce broke off by the Petition you made her, to be received into the number
of her slaves. I shall remember as long as I live the speech that the knowing
Radiotez made to the Princess to dispose her to be gracious unto you. He
seemed to love you well, since his clear judgment that made him penetrate
into things the most hidden, being as it were veyled by the excess of his
love; made him not perceive your intention, but did the utmost of his wit and
esoquence to force Alcidiana to put you amongst her flaves. There is no
condition (said he) in Polexander that should obliege your Majesty to deny him
the chains he requesteth. He is young, fair, valiant, and wise: and those
were the four qualities that the late King your father desired in those that
should be chosen to enter into your Majesty's particular service. You will say
he is a Prince, and a stranger: but after the examples of Orantus and
Pallantus, who are Frenchmen of Don Ferdinand a Spanyard, and of the Infant
Cleonida Prince of Portugal, your Majesty cannot with justice refuse the
humble supplication of Polexander, under pretext that he is a Prince and a
stranger. On the contrary these two titles, joined with the considerations that
you have to esteem him, ought to be powerful enough to make you dispense with
the force of Laws, if there were any that should forbid you to receive for
your slaves Princes and Strangers. Think with your self, that all Rebels and
Ambitious are not dead with Syzip^s. That there may occasions arise wherein
your Majesty may have need of personages extremely faithful, and as far
generous; and in whom will you find more loyalty and valor, then in him that
offers himself to enter into your service, and by consequence not to be able
ever to be absent from your person, nor be separated from that which concerns
you?

Alcidiana interrupting Radiotez: Father (said she) I pretend not to overcome
you either by virtue of my Eloquence or reasons. I know too well your abilities
to contest with you; but I may gain by my obstinacy what I cannot by my
persuasions, I believe with you, that all things concur to give Polexander a
place amongst my Slaves; but at the same time I know not what interior motion
forbids me to receive him. Let it suffice that I keep him in my service by his
own worthiness, It is needless that he should be engaged either by his
particular vows, or his public fetters.

The good Radiotez, had nothing to reply to this answer, and was enforced to
carry you the news of this misterious refusal. I know with what grief you
heard it, and the resolutions you took thereupon, but if you had been less
blinded by your passion, you might have seen through that apparent disgrace,
how real and great the favors were that she gave you cause to hope for. This
is but to tell you of things without art or dissembling; Alcidiana had some
particular good will toward you. I have already told you, that men should not
pretend to the glory of her love. I repeat it not to anger you, but for an
advertisement, not to promise your self any other recompense for your service
then the happiness to have done it for the most deserving Princess in the
world. It may be you will ask me how I know that Alcidiana has no inclination
to you, and why I conjecture that her troubles, melancholy, and disquiets
(which are infallible signs of Love in all other women) are not so in that
Princess, you may learn it from the writing tables where of I late spoke to
you. Many months passed after you had lost the hope to be one of the Queens
sl^ves; and the splendor and joy of your justs, your Masks and other matches
had been passed over by the sadness of your thoughts, more black then the
mourning you have taken: When Amintha discovered that Alcidiana had not
altogether blotted you out of her memory. You remember the strange accident
that betided her in the Forest of White-Hindes. Her hunting Chariot was
violently drawn a way by the wildness of her horses, and happily overturned
some twenty paces from a precipice, whither they were running to cast a way
all. You found the Queen as dead, so violent was her fall, and so made her to
be carried to the Palace. Amintha had not so ill fortune; she was hurt, but it
had not taken her senses from her. By chance, as she arose, she found a pair
of writing tables covered with Diamonds, and having never seen them with the
Queen, did not imagine that they were hers. She put them up and car^ied them
to the Palace with her Mistress. After the Princess was come to her self,
and had assured all about her that she had no hurt: Amintha withdrew to her
lodging, and meditating long time on your complaints, on your swounding, and
the desperateness you showed for the death of Alcidiana, she remembered the
table-booke which she had found, and desirous to see if there were nothing
within that might tell her the name of the person that had lost it: She was
informed by the first leaf, finding there a piece of limming representing a
Phoenix which is (as you know) Alcidianaes device. But I shall do better to
show you the very tables, then to tell you the secrets contained in it.

And in saying so, Pallantus drew them out of his pocket, and delivering them
into the hands of our Hero, took a picture of Alcidiana, which he always
carried with him, and kept his eyes fixed on it whilst Polexander abode
consulting with leaves more misterious then those of the ancient Sybills. The
first thing this Lover did after he had received that fatal book, was, to
kiss the rich covering, and to intimate by the respect he bore to the outside
of the Temple, how great the veneration was wherewithal he came near to the
divinity that was therein worshipped. He opened the Tables, and presently met
with the lymming which Pallantus spoke of. He saw that unparrallelld Bird,
that owes not his birth to any but it self, to dispute beauty with the Sun
himself, and oppose to the beams of that star, the golden feathers where
with it was crowned. The Word that was added to so fair a body, had an
exceeding grace in his own language. See how ours has wronged it in the
explication. My life shall exceed my birth. After that Polexander had well
considered this Device, and searched over all, whither there were not some
Cipher or Character from whence he might draw any cause of consolation, he
turned the leaf, and in the three following read the words that follow.

The Disquiet.
What could cause the strange alteration I find in my self? Can I be sick
or mad without knowing it? Within this little while I am ill wheresoever I am.
If I walk I am presently weary. The places I delighted in, I cannot now
endure. Hunting is odious to me, conversation troublesome, and those well
beloved books wherein I have met my content and joy, can do nothing toward
the appeasing my disease. Of what crime can my Conscience accuse me that might
draw on me these too visible and too violent effects of the wrath of heaven?
But suppose I had committed some one that deserved to be punished, must it be
by a punishment so cruel and so unknown? O avenging Angel, that
indifferently executest the commands of thy Master! tell me at least, what is
the torment thou make me suffer. The greatest offenders have in their
tortures the comfort to know them, as they have the misery to feel them. Ixion
is not ignorant of his wheel, nor Syziphus of his Stone. Titius sees the
Vulture that tears out his Bowels, and Tantalus has the content to gaze on
the fruits and the water that flies from him. I alone suffer, without the
knowledge of what I suffer. What help should I implore? What succor can I
expect? if it be impossible to tell my sickness, or to know whether it be
the mind or the body that languisheth. But whilst I speak my griefs
increase. They are enemies to discourse, and yet permit me not to be silent.

Polexander sighed often ere he ended reading, and asking of himself whether
he were cause of these troubles: It Is pride for me to be persuaded so (said
he) and therefore I must believe it a folly to punish my self for it. But
whosoever he be, barbarous, and traitor, which respects not Alcidianaes
peace, he shall find that I am as cruel as invincible, when the business is
to avenge that Princess. After he had ended these threats, which only Love
could justify, he continued his search, and passing over two or three blank
leaves, he met with this that ensues.

The Dream.
Unfortunate that I am; I have lost my breath and strength. I can no more. All
my strivings are in vain. My intents and resistings are to no purpose. Cruel
and pleasing Enemy; Dragon, that have the face of an Infant; fair Monster,
content thee with my tears, and with the blood that thy paws have drawn out
of my breast. Give not over to rende it wider: What, art thou not yet glutted?
Thou pullest out my heart, and thy nails instead of tearing it, covers it over
with wounds that burn it. Continue not thy fury, seek some other prey. Will thou have me die more then once, and not meet in my Grave the repose that all
others find there? Alas! I live, and thou leavest not to kill me; because
thou art not weary of afflicting me. What do thou? thou closest up my
breast, and it is not my heart that thou leave there, but a fire that burns
and does not consume me.

O Love! cried Polexander, in finishing this Dream, how fair would thy
victory be if it were true! Alcidiana gives way to thee when she is a sleep,
but she tryumphs over thee when she is awake. She is a flame when she dreams,
but in verity she is naught but ice. Miserable Polexander what must thou hope,
or what must become of t^ee? Yet comfort thy self, It Is better that fair
Princess should love nothing, then love any other then thee. Pallantus smiled
to himself to hear these exclamations, and continuing his glorious
employment, left our lover to his; who turning over the last leaf of the
Dream saw this that follows.

The awaking.
What is become of that fierce and pleasing dragon which all night tore my
heart? but what said I? I am awake, and I speak as if I yet talked idly. My
imagination is not yet well purged of those illusions that have done it so much
hurt. She makes me carry my hand where I thought I had been wounded; I feel if
my side be not opened, and whether my heart be in his right place. I find no
alteration in my self, and my fears are as false as my griefs. Children of
darkness, little Demons, by what unperceiveable ways slip ye into our
fancyes? Get ye from my bed. Me thinks where ever you go you carry fire, and
would feign new-kindle that which my dream blew in my breast. But you are
vanished, inflamed Atoms, and the day dispelling your lights as it does the
other tapers of night, tells me that you are nothing but the effects of my
Melancholy. Return no more, and you dismal dreams, be ye always the
representers of what is passed, but become not the presagers of what is to come.

If the Tears and Prayers of Lovers (cried Polexander) are as pleasing to you,
o ye Dreams! as the Poppy, Mandragoras and blood of beasts, that made you
lately so favorable, do not hearken to Alcidiana. Her conjurations are
powerful, but resist ye their charms. They will else ruin the Empire of
Love and overthrowe the Altars which are there consecrated to you. But I
blaspheme, and offend a Divinity greater then you. No, no, let Alcidiana be
obeyed, and let her be eternally insensible. It Is fit that all men should be
miserable, rather then to suffer that Alcidiana should be displeased. After he
had said thus, he went on to turn over the leaves, and saw in one page
sometimes half blotted out, 'twas long before he could gather any thing out
of it, at last he read this fragment:

-- er. Why does that name thrust it self more often, and more pleasingly into
my remembrance, then so many others that are more dear unto me? -- Yet 'twere
nothing if -- But I recall it, when he goes hence, and -- has he any charm,
or some harmony that makes him more sweet to the ear then -- I must confess,
others cannot be pronounced with so much pleasure, nor remembered with so much
facility. What say thou fool? -- and since this Stranger is so --
indifferent (...) let his name be so too.

How I hate thee fragment (said Polexander to himself) for not being imperfect
enough. Thou have two Letters too much, and the fair Alcidiana has not left
them, but to intimate that my name is far more blotted out of her memory,
then out of this leaf. I must not doubt of it, but if I should so much flatter
my self, as to imagine it to be some other name then mine which Alcidiana has
written; do I not see by the conclusion of her Sentments -- that I am the
miserable stranger, for whom she is so much indifferent. Yet let us on, and see
to how many tortures her insensibilitie will condemn us. With that he turned
the other leaf, and saw this beginning of a Letter:

To Amintha.
HOw angry are the eyes of your Polexander? All the while I was in the Temple
they were fixed on mine. The presence of those dreadful Mysteries, that hold
the hearts, or at least the eyes of the least devout -- turned to the Altars,
was not powerful enough to draw thither those impious bold ones. I complain
to you of it, because that Stranger consults more religiously with you then
with the gods. Give him more respectfull regards -- and forbid him that he --

You ought (divine Alcidiana) cried Polexander, you ought to forbid me to
live, rather then to impose on me impossible conditions, and command that my
understanding knowing its happiness, should become a Tyrant to it self, even
to enjoyne my will not to desire it. But you have been more just, and
suppressing the bloody Laws which your rigor had invented, you have dispensed
with us for the necessity of observing them. He continued his reading after he
had made this reflection, and met certain words by which Alcidiana had
expressed her thoughts in looking in her glass. They were these:

Do thou know thy self well Alcidiana? These eyes afflicted and languishing;
this complexion, so unlike what it has always been; these pale lips; this
leaden breast; in brief, this dying person which thou see in this glass,
has it any thing of that thou lookst for? Confess that Alcidiana is no more,
but that she lost her self, when she lost the peace of he^ mind. The cruel
Demon that changed her heart, not only altered her countenance, but disfigured
it in such sort, that it is no wonder if thou know it not. Do not accuse the
glass to be less true then it was wont. It is still the same it was, but thou
art not what thou have been: Call again dead Alcidiana, make the two last
years of thy life to return again; in a word, raise thy self (if it be
possible) out of the grave wherein thy errors have buried thee, and by what is
passed thou may judge of the present. But witless as thou art, it seems
thou art pleased in thine ill fortune. Thou inwardly comfortest thy self with
thy losses. Thou find allurements in thy alteration; and since thy glass
does not flatter thee, thou endeavorest to flatter thy self. Break this
charm, unfortunate Princess, and know thy sickness is at the height since
thou art insensible of it.

Polexander, after he had read this, knowing not whether he should complain on
himself or some other, yet neglected not to declare him for Alcidiana, and to
swear inwardly the death of the Author of so many disquiets. He turned then
another leaf and found this:

The Reflection.
TO whom should I attribute the cause of my malady? Shall I accuse the stars
or men, or mine own temper? What ill influence could insensibly ruin the
vigor of my fairest years? Shall I believe that some Sorcerer by the power of
his Characters or venom of his looks, his fascination has impoysoned my
heart, and by little and little draws my life from me? My temper seems not to
me any way altered, though my disposition be changed, and by consequence it is
not the Author of my Sufferings. Shall I say it is my Melancholy? But that being
the very ill I endure, I should then make the effect guilty of the malignity of
the cause. But may it not be Love? If Radiotez have not deceived me, it is
impossible that my disease should come from that passion. How often has he
assured me that Love came from desire? and if it be so, I am not in Love, or
else in Love with all persons in the World. For all fair objects give me the
same desires. I look on the heavens with admiration; I number the Stars with
a ravishment. I delight in the diversity of flowers, of fruits, and all
living creatures. But of all these, there is not any one which I wish to enjoy
more particularly then I now possess it. What is then the cause of my grief?
Alas how can I know it, since I have not this ill but because I am ignorant of
it?

Dye Pol^xander and give over at last to suffer thy self to be deceived by
false hopes (said our Hero): Not only Alcidiana has my love, but the heavens
and the earth, men and beasts, are all to thee as one same object. Grief here
hindered his farther speech. Yet stopped him not from pursuing his farther
inquiry. He was almost at the end of the tables when he found this:

The Anger.
HOw I hate thee, perfidious Amintha, to print again in my thought the name of
thy Polexander. Since these eight days, there has not a moment passed, but
this troublesome name has mixed it self with my meditations. It persecutes
me by day, and in the night it permits me not to take my rest. If I call any
one of my slaves, would I name any other, either Citizen or Stranger, my tongue
following the error of my imagination will pronounce that Polexander. Some
times it speaks it half, and every foot I am forced to stay it, for fear of
continuing in this mistake.

O Name of Polexander (said our Hero) more fortunate then Polexander himself
I have thou not so much charity, to impart some of thy happiness to him
without whom thou can not be? I conceive thy answer dear Name. But my
little merit suffers me not to believe it; nor my respect, to entertayne my
self with it. And with these words turned to the last leaf of the Tables, and
there met with this:

The last Resolution.
IT must be so. I am resolved of it, audacious Stranger. Thou shall out of my
memory as well as of my Territories. The more thou have sought for occasions to
appear amiable, the more cause have thou given me to make thee hated. I hate
thee because I have run the hazard to love thee. I wish that an eternal
punishment avenge me of the crime thou would have committed. The Sentence,
for it is pronounced; Traitor as he is; He shall not vaunt unpunished, to have
essayed by virtue of his submissions and services, to establish his dangerous
Tyrrany.

Thou might well doubt (unhappy Polexander cried our Hero;) that the last
calm, should be followed by a great tempest. Thou have not long time sailed,
but to be ship wracked, and the end of thy Navigation must be that of thy
hopes. Deliberate no longer, after thy condemnation; leave to live in leaving
to hope. Yet not so. Preserve thy life, since thy divine Alcidiana wills, that
thou endure as much as thou art capable to suffer.

When Polexander had shut up the table book, and made a new reflection on his
fortune, he knew but too well that Alcidiana's last Sentments -- had ruined the
little hope which the former had given him. He turned his eyes pitifully on
Pallantus redilivering his book, and would signify unto him the excess of
his despair. But Pallantus prevented him, and said, he wondered infinitely
that he would persevere to afflict himself amidst so many causes of joy. Ah
Pallantus (answered the Prince) I know it is too much honor for me to be
remembered in any way whatsoever by Alcidiana. My Judgment avowes it, but my
passion will not. I have such desires as perpetually struggle with my reason,
and when I would force them not to go beyond the limitts she prescribes them,
they boldly take arms against us both, and their insolencyes go so far, that
they even think to do us a great favor when they use us but as slaves. Teach
me (dear Pallantus) what my reason and I should do to get us the Mastery since
thou will not have us give way to their tyranny. Persever in that fear and
adoration which till now you have witnessed for Alcidiana (answered Pallantus.)
Be not weary of suffering; and leave to your desires that absolute Empire they
have usurped over your reason. They will be of a different nature from ordinary
desires, if time, opposition, and despair do not weaken their impetuosity. Ah!
Remedies more cruel and insupportable then the ill it self (said
Polexander)! Am I brought to that extremity to make use of you? yes insensible
friends, I receive and embrace you, since you are so happy to have the
resentments of Alcidiana for the Authors of your being. Pallantus, here
imposing him silence: Be pleased (said he) that I end the history of your
disfavours, and that finally I banish you from the place wherein is enclosed
all your hopes and happinesses. Polexander replying nothing gave occasion to
the fair slave to continue thus his discourse: Your sorrow, solitude, and your
complaints having too long lasted for your quiet; Amintha resolved to have
pity on you, and to redeem you from you despair by false hopes. You followed
her advice, and suffering your self to be easily persuaded to what you so
extremely desired; you began again your illustrious and magnificent way of
living, whereby you had acquired the affections of the most part of Alcidiana's
subjects. She understood of your return, and wanting sufficient knowledge of
worldly affairs to judge of the ^rue cause of your change; she called for
Amintha to discourse with her about it. I thought (said she) that having
hitherto made a particular profession of friendshipp with Polexander; you are
not ignorant of those causes which he has had heretofore to afflict himself,
and those he has now to rejoice in. I honor Polexander (replied Amintha) but
I have no part in his trust. Yet not so that I am ignorant of that which your
Majesty desires to know. His grief and joy are too public to make a secret of
them. Every one speaks of it, and if it be not known to your Majesty, you are
without doubt the only person in your Kingdom that is ignorant of it. But to
give it you, it behooves (if you please) to think it fit that I pronounce to
you a word which to you is very odious. Alcidiana, confident of Amintha's
discretion told her, that she might speak; since your Majesty commanded me
(replied Amintha) I will tell you that Polexander is in love. The Queen was
surprised with that word, and so surprised that she could not refrain from
blushing. But loath to rest mute on that occasion; is it possible (said she) to
Amintha, that a spirit so strong as Polexander should be capable of so extreme
a weakness? It Is possible Madam, answered Amintha, and your Majesty would have
the pleasure to know the cause as well as the effects of this passion, you will
be confirmd in that true opinion, that love is nothing but blindness and
folly. Stenelica who has nothing left either of youth or beauty is the cause
of Polexanders vexations. He adores her, loves her, burns for her, and is
desperate when he cannot see her: and as his despair comes from the rigours of
Stenelica, his contentments likewise proceed from the favors he receives
thence. But that which is most strange is, there passes not a day but he
w^ites to her, and in such humble and passionate terms, as if he writ to the
fairest Princess in the world. A^cidiana took no pleasure in this jesting,
and you went near to lose the good opinion she had of you, even by that which
you had plotted with Amintha to get you into it. Polexander binds me to
return to my first opinion (said she) to her Confident. Truly Nature and
Radiotez have not deceived me, when they assured me, that men were full of
imperfections, and how those which had been estem'd freest from deserts and
nearest approaching to a divine condition, had by diverse actions of their
lives made it appear they were truly men subject as the meanest to the most
low and ridiculous extravagancies. Amintha saw well that it was nothing to the
purpose to prosecute what she had begun, she therefore put it off to another
time, and applying her self to the Queens humor, did so well by her
colloguing and wit, that in less then eight days wrought in Alcidiana an
extreme desire to see the letters you had written to Stenelica. Presently she
showed her above fifty, and wou^d have given her a great many more, but that
she was wearyed with your supposed extravagancyes. Stenelica punctually
receyved two or three a day and as soon as she had them, had order to bring
them to the Queen. Five or six months slid away, yet the Queen discovered
not the mystery of your Letters, nor of your maskes and tournaments. But by
little and little her understanding coming on with her age, and her
seventeenth year instructing her in that which the former sixteen were
ignorant of; she made long and deep reflections on all that you had done since
you came into her Territories, and by those things conjectured that infallibly
Stenelica was but the pretext and coverture of a more high affection. This
thought engaged her to read all your Letters over again. But scarce had she
read the first, when she saw her self so lively pictured, that she called her
blind for being so long from discovering it. Straight an indignation for being
deceived by Amintha, made her cast by all the eff^ction she bore her, and made
her resolve to punish you both for one crime, whereof she judged you were
equally guilty. And not to defer her vengeance, she called for Stenelica, and
shutting themselves in her own Closet, and accommodating her self to the
weakness of that poor Soul, hardly reasonable; told her, that she
understanding how Polexander writ to her only to pass away his time; she would
not have her to be any longer the object of his sport and jeasting. I command
you therefore (said she) to receive no more of his Letters, nor any more to
endure hiscompany. It Is a shame for one of your age and condition to lose your
time in the fopperies of youth. Break absolutely the commerce you have with
this stranger; burn all his letters, send him back his Jewels, and suffer him
not to talk to you any more; hearken to none that comes from him, and above
all converse with Amintha as with your greatest enemy. The Queen was not thus
contented to cut from that means of expressing your affection: But she would
take from you all others, and punish you and your complic^ for your temerity.
She therefore remo^ved from her ordinary place of abiding, and went to that
stately Castle which the King her Father built on a point of Land that looks
toward your fortunate Islands. All the Court followed her in that Journey, and
Amintha with the rest; though she took notice of a visible diminution in her
favor.

My fair Princess had not been above four or five days in that fair
Palace, when fortune willing to obliege her by your loss, stirred up that
disorder which drew you from the Inaccessible Island.

Amintha (as you know) was stolen away one night by Pirates, which the wind
had driven near to the Queens Palace. As soon as she heard news of this
rape, she showed a great deal of sorrow, though she had great cause to be glad
of it. And I verily believe that (by her self) she gave the heavens and
fortune thanks, that they had evenged her, and she had no hand in it; and that
she was wonderfully well satisfied, to see the offenders punished without her
being forced to any violence. She caused two ships to be made ready, and armed
to pursue the Pirates that had stolen Amintha, and as she would have had them
set sail, it was told her, that in the very instant wherein the Lady was
surprised, you had cast your self into a bark which by chance you found ready
at the foot of the Castle, and that without doubt you had already overtaken
the Pirates. Alcidiana seeing herself so fully and quietly avenged, caused her
two ships to put off, to give to all the Court an opinion contrary to her
meanings, and in this manner, she put a period to all her cares and
perturbations. Be pleased to let me imitate so great an example, and that
finishing my discourse as I begun it, I may tell you, that your despair is
unjust, and you are an ill esteemer of your good fortune, since you acknowlede
not the greatness of it, not only to have obliged the prime Princess of the
world, to except you with that general indifferency which she has for all
men, but to have made it appear by public testimonialls, that you have been
able to make her capable of passion. Flattering Pallantus (cried Polexander in
interrupting him) how thou can abuse thy Eloquence, and disguise by thy
smooth and winning terms a rigor which is insupportable. Tell me not that I
have made thy Queen capable of passion: Say she hates me, and not being able
to endure my presence, has banished me from a place whereto she knows well it
is altogether impossible for me to return. But what do thou abominable and
sacriligious Polexander? Dare thou murmr against that wisdom, that does
nothing but with justice, though it be not according to thy wishes? Respect,
respect the arm that darts the thunder at thee; and receiving Alcidiana's
stripes with a benediction, make all the world know that there are no
felicities like those of suffering much for her. Polexander ended this speech
with sighs, and being risen, began to walk with a great pace without
harkening to any thing that Pallantus advised him for his comfort and ease.
Their converse had not ended but with the day, if Zelmatida by chance had not
met them in their way, and obliged them to return to the Fort. They retired
thither all three together, and gave the rest of the day to Bajazet and
Iphidamantus. Pallantus, that would not stay any longer in that place, took
his leave that same Evening, and promised Polexander that in his return from
Africa, he would pass by the Canaryes. Polexander left him not tell he
embarked, and when he saw he must needs be gone, remember (dear Pallan^s,
s^id t^ Prince, embracing him) that those consolations thou would give me,
have increased my despair; and if ever thy good fortune bring thee back to the
place, where thy divine Mistress reigns: Tell her, thou have seen the
deplorable Polexander at the point to finish by some new kind of death, the
incredible torments, that her absence throws on him. That is not it which you
have promised me (replide Pallantus) neither expect that I will ever speak of
you to my fair Mistress, if you do not persever in the resolution to suffer
for her. I will then (said our Hero) since it is for her glory, and preserving
my self even in the height of my torments. I will hazard nothing but what I
shall be enforced by the just desire of reseeing that incomparable Marvel.
Polexander after he had spoake thus, embraced Pallantus again, and giving him
the last farewell, returned to the three Princes that stayed in the Isle. Much
ado he had to remain the rest of the day with them. He spoake of nothing but
of going away, and asking sometimes Iphidamantus, and otherwhiles Zelmatida,
what they intended to do, would willingly have left them both in the comp^y of
Bajazet. But Zelmatida whose griefs made him as full of anguish as Polexander,
entreated him to be received as a companion of his fortune, and that he would
obtain his liberty from Bajazet; speak no more of liberty, (said the
illustrious Corsary to him) twere to offend the friendship we have begun, to
use terms which are not practiced but amongst enemies. Know then, you are
free, if I be so, and though it be very distasteful to me to lose so dear
company; yet preferring your content before mine own, I yield to your
separation. But (added he) addressing himself to Polexander as well as to
Zelmatida, do not leave me alone in my affliction, and since Iphidamantus has
no passion that presses him, entreat for me that he will vouchsafe to abide
here, that by his presence I may preserve to me a part of your self.
Iphidamantus, who among these so sensible and despairing Lovers, seemed content
and unpassionate: Stood not to be entreated, neither by his brother nor
Zelmatida, to grant Bajazet what he requested: But (said he) since there is
(or ought to be) charity in those that are in health, to be industrious for the
cure of such sick persons, that are not altogether desperate: It Is just, that I
forsake Polexander and Zelmatida to abide with Bajazet. This last has great
wounds, but they are not incurable, and by consequence, time and remedies are
not lost in assisting him. But for you two (said he, turning himself to his
brother and Zelmatida) there is no help at all for you, but in the speedy
losing your selves. Go then, generous, afflicted men, go search for
shipwracks, precipices, poisons, and death. This discourse ended: The four
Princes often embraced one another, and gave so equal thanks, that it had
been very hard to know who were those that had obliged or those that received
the obligation. After these compliments, succeeded the protestations of their
eternal friendship, and reciprocal promises, to let one another know of their
affairs as often as they had means. Polexander and Zelmatida unwilling to
depart without paying their Hosts, sent two chains of Diamonds, and two of
Emeraulds to the Corsaries; and by that Present, left with them a more
advantageous opinion of their merits, then the miracles of their valor had
been able to make them conceive. Bajazet forgot not that he owed his life to
Diceus, but gave him a triangle of three Dimonds which the Portingalls valued
at more then a hundred thousand crowns. These liberalities ended, the four
Princes at last took leave of each other. Iphidamantus aboade with Bajazet,
Polexander and Zelmatida being shipped in one same vessel, began a voyage
wherein they proposed to themselves none other end, but the continuation of
their afflictions.

The End of the first Part of Polexander.
The second Part of POLEXANDER.
The first Book.
THat blind and capricious power which has chosen for the foundation of its
Throne, the instability of the waters, was so cruel to our despairing Lovers,
that from Bajazets Isle till he came within ken of the Coasts of Morocco, would
not oblige them with any appearance of a tempest. Polexander, (vexed, with so
fatal a gratification) made continual prayers against the calm, and his
life. And Zelmatida sending to Heaven a thousand pitiful supplications,
besought it with tears, by a sudaine death to deliver him from the misfortune
of not seeing Isatida. Whilst they thus vainly afflicted one another; their
ship passed from the torrid Zone to the temperate, and leaving behind them the
fearful plains of the Ocean came near the Coasts of Africa. The Mariners
had already descryde the smoking point of that Mountain, (the highest in the
world) which the Spaniards call Pico de Teyda; and Polexander was come out of
his Cabin with the Indian Prince to show him that wonder of the Isle of
Teneriffe, and by consequence a part of his Dominions: When he saw shine among
the waves, I know not what, that sometimes seemed to him glistering as gold,
and otherwhile red as fire. This strange object interrupted his sad
meditations, and holding him fixed by his eyes, gave him such impatiencies and
curiosities where withal a mind so abated as his, in all likelihood was not
capable. After he had been sometime in this contemplation; he that was on the
scuttle, cryde out that he saw a ship on fire. At that noise Polexander turned
away his eyes from the object, which he scarce any longer saw through his long
earnest looking on it, and by this diversion almost recovering his sight, took
notice, that that which had so long amazed him, was the vessel which the
Sentinel had discovered. Presently he commanded his Pilot to bear up to it;
and when he was at a distance proportionable to his sight, he knew that the
ship was not on fire, as the Sentinel imagined, but that it bore sails of the
color of fire, and glittered with gold in diverse places. This vessel said he
to himself is too stately and rich for a ship of war or merchandise. The
Princes of Morocco have none so brave. It cannot be Baj^zets. O heaven! Shall I
believe it (said he? Yes most assuredly it is the sacred ship of Alcidiana. He
stopped at that word, and musing a while on his imagination, doubt not (said he
aloud) in striking Zelmatida on the arm, it is the very same. What? Said
Zelmatida is that there? Our Hero came to himself, and beseeching the Prince
to pardon his transport: Either all likelihood deceives me, or the vessel
which you see is the same, which for the space of two years, I have
unprofitably sought after. Go up to it then replide Zelmatida. I intend it
said Polexander. But we must have a care that she do not escape us as she
has done diverse times. And in finishing these words, he was come so near her
that he noted the Devices that were painted on the sails. You might see shine
again that immortal Bird that seemed to have made her a Crown with the very
Beams of the Sun; and they read in some places some Arabian words which
signified: I am sacred, for I am Alcidiana's. We need doubt no more, (cryde
Polexander) to your arms my Companions; let every one prepare him to do his
best. But let none what ere he be, dare to shoot till I command him.

Whilst he yet spoake the proud vessel presented her right side, and gave him
four valleys of Cannon one after another. He ran the hazard to be taken off by
a bullet, which striking along the ship, from the prowe to the poope, pierced
two of the sails, and carried away a piece of one of the Masts. For all that
Polexander would not have his Artillery discharge; but commanding his Mariners
to clap on all their sails, thought that Lynceus being prepared for fight, had
no desire as at other times to save himself by flight. Whilst he was thus
reasoning with himself, those that were in the rich vessel offended that a
little ship should dare to carry her sails aloft before her, would have
satisf^ction, and to bring her to her duty discharged all her ordinance at her,
which pierced her in three places, and killed Polexander fifteen or twenty of
his men, and two of Zelmatida's. This act of hostility should have obliged
Polexander to repel force by force. Yet he did not. But aboording the proud
ship without shooting, he called for Lynceus diverse times and crying aloud to
make himself understood: We come not up to you (said he) as enemies; we know
that you belong to the most potent and fairest Queen of the world, and that
knowledge obliges us to respect you as sacred persons. Give over then to war
with us, since we are as well as you the slaves and adorers of Alcidiana; and
if you do not please to receive us into your ship, yet at least accept of us
to serve you for direction or convoye: Scarce had Polexander finished these
words, but a man armed with armor of gold, who carried on his buckler the
portraict of a Queen, presented himself on the side of the ship, and lifting
up his sword; I would know (said he) adressing him to Polexander, who are those
that dare take to them the glorious title of Alcidiana's slaves. The Prince
instead of answering stood as fastened on the buckler of the Knight with the
golden armor, because he knew that 'twas Alcidiana who was there pictured, and
adoring that face which could not be seen without admiration: O thou Sun
(cryde he) that only give light to mine eyes, when shall I be permitted to
burn my self in thy divine flames? He had not ended the last word, when the
golden Knight stroke with his sword so weighty a blow on his head, that if it
had not been covered with a very good Casque, he had surely clove^ it in
sunder. This blow awakened him from his ecstasy, and forced him to take his
weapon in his hand. Thy rashness is great (said he presently) to him that
struck him, but if thou be either subject or slave to Alcidiana, I bear her
respect enough to endure this injury. I am sent by Alcidiana (replide
insolently the golden Knight) to correct those bold fellows like thy self,
which dare to vaunt themselves to be the slaves of Alcidiana. To me alone
appertains so illustrious a quallity, and if thou do not throw thy self at
my feet to ask me pardon for being so audacious; Know, the day is come wherein
thou must pay for it with thy life. In ending these threats he stroke
Polexander the second time, and by his language made him well know that he was
mistaken. Our Hero provoked to see himself so far from his hopes, and besides
transported with a just jealousy, cast himself into his enemies ship, and
made that proud one feel the weight of his arm so rudely, that with the
first blow he laid him for dead at his feet. Zelmatida that had been a
spectator of that action, could not sufficiently admire it; and standing in a
posture ready to second his friend, in case he were assailed by the men of the
vanquished party, took off their resolution of undertaking it. Polexander the
while his Rival recovered not from his swound, commanded some of his followers
to help him, and before he left him, desired to know what he was. A venerable
Moore (for his age) therewith spoke thus: Knight (said he) you may well judge
by the costly and pompous train, this man now stretched at your feet goes
withal, that he should be of some eminent condition. Certainly, Africa, and I
say more, Europe, have not any Sovereign that can dispute with him for
greatness. He is borne Prince of Morocco, of Fez, and many other Kingdoms.
It Is the hardy Abdelmelec Son of the puissant Hely. I will not tell you that
the beauty of a Queen, which none can see but in painting, has brought him in
love. You may know it well enough by the words he gave you, by this fatal
portraict (with that he took up from the Deck Abdelmelech's buckler) and by
the Ciphers and Devices, which shine in every part of this ship. Father (said
Polexander interrupting him) you may well make me understand many
particularities whereof I am ignorant; but since it may be that they will not
be very pleasing to me, I shall be glad to know nothing of them. I therefore
leave you at quiet, to the end you may be the more industrious in the
succouring of Abdelmelec; and for fear that this Portraict may run the hazard
to be wronged by the sword of some one that respects it not so much as my
self; I entreat you to give it me; and to tell your Prince when he has
recollected his spirits, that I should have thought to have done an act of
injustice if I had left so fair a thing in the power of a man that knew no
beter how to preserve it. And in saying thus, he took the buckler which the
old man held, and returning into his own ship commanded his Pilot, to steer
again his course for the Island of Alcidiana. Zelmatida received him as a
Conqueror, and highly praised his action. But our Hero, blushing for an honor
that cost him so little: I have done nothing (said he to that Prince) but
taught the poor Abdelmelec, that his strength is not proportioned to his
courage, or rather I have made the unfortunate Polexander to know that as often
as he will promise himself any contentment, he shall take the pleasure to
deceive himself. No, no, he must no more hope, since he hopes so vainly, nor,
that, for whatsoever may be^ide him, he reject the council that despair gives
him. That Is a resolution which I should long since have taken, said (sadly to
him) Zelmatida. But whether I deceive my self, as you do: or whether it be
some unknown power that works me to this error; there is not a moment but I
flatter my self with some new hope; and imagine spite of all reason and
truth, that I shall one day see Izatida victorious over the grave, shine with
the same allurements wherewithal mine eyes have been heretofore so pleasingly
dazeled. Whilst but to speak plainly these two-to-be-lamented Princes knew not
whereon to resolve, their ship driven by an extreme fresh wind arrived at
Polexanders Island; where he was received by his Viceroy and his subjects with
such joy and acclamations as cannot be expressed; and caused Zelmatida to be
entertained with so much pomp, that he could not have been more magnificently
received if he had made his entry into the stately City of Cusco. He was
lodged in the Palace that Periander had caused to be built, and served with
all the abundance and delicates that are seen in the extraordinary feastings of
the prime Kings of Europe. But if Zelmattida were insensible of all the great
entertainment he received; Polexander was not less, of all the delights of his
country and the affection of his people. They sig^ed both continually after
those things which themselves imagined impossible to be attained. The one
desired the life of his dead love, and the other wished to arrive at a place
Inacc^ssible. The one would dye to (...) rejoyned to the beauty which he had
lost; and the other would rather perish then t^ live far from those fair
eyes which had robbed him of his liberty. In a word they were both weary of
every place they came in and principally of rest, and all pleasures; for they
had scarce tasted the delights of the fortunate Islands but they were cloyde
with them. From the first days of their landing, they talked of putting to sea
again, and attempt again either to make themselves happy or to be lost for
ever. One evening as they were talking of it, one came and advertised
Polexander that there was a ship come into the Port, and that a lady of
quallity therein sent to know whether he were returned. Tell her (said
Polexander presently to him that brought the news) what you know, and if she
have need of my Service I will wait on her any where that she shall please to
command me. Scarce had he ended this complyment., but he was told that the Lady
was in the Palace. He therefore entreated Zelmattida to give him leave, to
perform the honor of his lodging, and leaving him with his people went to
meet the Lady: which he did on the great stairs clad and attended like a
person of great quality. He did her all kind of civilities, and asked her
pardon for the pains she had taken. The Lady having rendered him his
Complyments, and signified her joy of meeting him, lifted up a little the veyle
that covered her, and feigning it was to set it higher, discoverd an eye more
sparkling then that star which carries the Name of the Mother of love, and a
complexion so bright that even though it were not white, there leapt from it a
certain luster which on a sudden dazel^d the eyes of the most cleeresighted.
Polexander noted all these beautyes, and renewing his Compliments, lead the
Lady to one of the stateliest apportments of his Palace. There he off^ed all
that he could off^r her, and besought her to make use of his service. I accept
your offers (replied that charming beauty) and receyve the testimonies of your
courtesye, with so much the more satisfaction since by them I am confirmed in
the hatred which I have justly conceived against the most brutish and
perfidious of Princes. I will relate you the history when your are pleased to
hear it; for it is to the end to inform you that twice already I have saild
from Africa, into this Island.

Polexander, told her that he was very unfortunate to be absent as such times
as she took the pains to come thither. But Madam (said he) you have need of
rest. With your permission I will go and give order to your affairs and leave
you at liberty. When you are pleased to see me you need but send the meanest of
your servants, and I shall not fail presently to wait on you. The Lady much
satisfied with these courtesies and having been a long while with her women to
right the disorders of her dressing, she commanded one of her eunuchs to go to
Polexander and ask him the hour when he would please to give her Audience.
The Prince who was returned to Zelmatida made his most particular excuses that
he was so often constraynd to fail of what he ought him, and leaving him with
Alcippus and Garruca, returned into the chamber of his new guest. As Soon as
she saw him, she came to meet him, and made him very pleasing excuses, for the
liberty she took with so great a Prince, and presenting him her hand, lead
him to the innerside of her bed, and set her down on it, that she might so
have her back turned to the light, and that her face naturally sweet, might
receive new graces by that art. Polexander setting himself right against her,
marked all her sweetnesses and allurements, and sat surprised rather then
charmed with that address wherewithal she governed her quick and languishing
eyes: she presently began to speak, and cuting off all kind of preparation: I
am said she the daughter of Muley Hassen King of Thunis. I have a sister elder
then my self, which is called Bencerida Ennoramita. Her adventures are not
much more happy then nine; and if I would cast my disgraces on any other then
their veritable Author, I could say that she is justly punished for giving me
ill council. Yet I will speak no more of it, but shallbe well satisfied to
discharge all my choler against that traitor who feigned not to love me but
only to make me undergo all that might be eff^cted by his cruelty. My Name is
Perselida Amatonta Ennoramita, and that you might not believe I mistake my
self in my discourse, you may please to know that the Name of Ennoramita is a
Name that all the Princesses of my Race are obliged to carry in remembrance of
that famous Queen which delivered the kingdom of Tuns from the tyranie of the
Arabians. The Territories of the King my father are bounded on the west by
those of Fez and Morocco.

I doubt not but you know that Hely who is King of those two Kingdoms has two
sons whereof the one is called Abdelmelec and the other Nephizus. But it may
be you know not, that as the eldest is the most rash and proudest of men, so is
the other the greatest traitor and the most abominable Monster that has ever
dishonored the quality of a Prince. At his return from a voyage he made to
Granada, he came to Tunis, and staying there for some design he had upon
Spain (at least if we may believe an Impostor that never speaks truth) was
near two years in feeding Muley Ha^an with the hope of diverse conquests. He
was but seldom seen, he changed often his place of abiding; and when he was
obliged to any Journey, he never went but under a strange Name and habit. During
his long aboade the disloy all Man cast his eyes on me, and taking pleasure in
the quickness of my wit and dexterity of my actions, became, ere he was aware,
in love with an Infant. At first his affection was but a diversion and a sport;
because not being able to wish for any thing but what he continually enjoyed,
(I would say) to see me and make me talk; he lived without desire or disquiet
during the first two years of this extravagant affection, there happened
strange revolutions in the kingdom of Granada. The kings of Castile set on
them far more power'fully then they had ever don, and after many seiges and
battles, not only won the capital City but compelled the poor Boabdilez
to abandon his Crown and to cross the sea to find a miserable retreat. The
execrable Nephizus no sooner heard of this change, but he took leave of Muly
and returned to Fez, under pretense of off^ing the Country of Hely to the
unfortunate King of Granada. It was above eighteen months ere my father heard
any thing from him, and I think he expected naught any longer when this
miscreant returned to Thunis, not as he came at other times, I mean in the
quality of a Prince, but under the Name of a certain Spanish Lord called Don
Hernandez de Toledo. He discovered himself to Muly, and having invented to him
a thousand dangers, which doubtless he never came near, and as many designs
yet more imaginary he entreated that he might be publicly entertained as
Ambassador from the king of Spain, and permit him to have a galley in the port,
that both by day and night he might put to sea and quickly get to such places
where he should be called by the necessity of his affairs, and the advice of
his associates. The good Muly consented to all that Nephizus desired of him;
and the love he bore to his children being indeed a blind love, he was
overjoyed to be able to contribute any thing to the greatness of a Prince on
whom he already looked as on the husband of one of his daughters: during
Nephizus second aboade, his passion made a great progress.

He had left me a child, and he found me so tall, so well made and so
fair, as he said that his love grew as well as I; and gave over as I may say
the being a child when he saw that I was no more so. He began to speak another
language then he had used to me before. He intymated to me that I was the
object and the end of all his desires; and by a thousand execrable oaths,
would persuade me that to have the honor to be my slave, he intended to
renounce the conquest of all Spain. I was young, and had a good opinion of my
self. Imagine with your self whether it were hard to gain me by flattery. I
must needs confess to you, I believed the traitor, and though I had no great
mind to his person, I yet loved that greanesse of courage, and that
extraordinary ambition that appeard in all his discourses. He was above six
months in intertayning me with his affection; and did what he could to engage
me far in his extravagancies. But treating him oftentimes as he deserved, he
became more discreet, and besought me to let him return to Morocco, to get the
King his fathers permission to ask me in marriage. I consented without much
entreaty to his departure, and endured the length of it without any great
disquiet. At Morocco he stayed well near a year on at Fez; and I have learnt
from diverse persons, how that Monster instead of serving the king his father,
and defending him from his enemies, conspired against his life, and threw
amongst his subjects the seeds of rebellion and parricide. These attempts not
prospering, he was forced to absent himself from Morocco and to fly into
Spayn; where questionless after he had contrived some new treason, and made
himself known what he was, he returned to Fez, and obtaining his too mild
fathers pardon was restord to his former authority. But some new plot begetting
him a powerful enemy he ran the hazard of his life, by an adventure which I
could never come to know, neither from him nor any of his followers. O! how
many innocents had been avenged, and how happily had the world been purged of
so fearful a Monster, if the too generous Knight that fought with Nephizus
had been less pitiful and not so generous as he was. Surely he should not
have been content to have pierced him or have made him beg his life; since he
was bound for the general good of the world to have shed even the last drop of
blood of that traitor. About three months after, as if he had forgotten his
shame, or persuaded himself that the report of his Combat had not passed the
borders of Fez, he showed himself at Tunis; no more under a strange habit and
Name, but as the true son of Hely. His train was answerable to his
condition, and his bravery made such a show that the eyes of Muley and of
Benetrida Ennoramita were equally dazeled. My sister was even ravished to see
the splendour of that Prince, and judging that he came not with so much pomp
but for the dressing he had on me; even enraged with it, looked on me with an
envious eye, and told me often that I was borne the happiest of all our race.
For mine own particular, I had other thoughts. I looked on Nephizus as on a
man without honor and courage, and could not even endure his conversation. The
first time he could speak to me in private he renewed to me the assurances of
his Service, and perceiving that I harkned to him with a great deal of
coldness and negligence. Ennoramita (said he to me) can I be so unfortunate as
to find an alteration in your humor? I replied that I found so much in him
that it was no wonder if he saw some in me. The Barbarian not conceiving what I
would say: Let that Justice (said he) which never pardons the violaters of
oaths, punish me with an eternal chastisement if I be not the same that I
ever was for the fair Ennoramita, and if it be not with as much love and faith
as ever, I beseech that Justice presently to avenge it on my life. It Is not now
in your power (said I) to dispose of your life. It Is no more your own. It Is
that knights of whom you so poorly begd it. Polexander seeming desirous to
speak, Perselida Amatonta was silent, and our Hero began thus: I confess
Madam (said he) that I am very indiscreet to interrupt you but the cause of my
incivility is so just, that I could refrain no longer, nor deny truth that
testimony she exacts from me. The first time that you said Nephizus demanded
his life from his enemy, I believed you spoke of it with the same exasperation
that is usual to injured persons, and that you tie not your self precisely to
make a true narration. But seeing by the continuance of your discourse, that
you are in an error too prejudicious to the honor of a Prince of Fez; I cannot
but for his vo^ours sake, strive to put you out of it, and (setting apart that
complaysancy which your resentments requires from me) assure you very
affirmatively that in the Combat (which you mean) Nephizus was never so poor
spirited as to ask his life from his enemy. I know how all the matter passed
and know it most particularly. In a word Madam it was a Lady that saved the life
of the Prince of Fez, in spite of the obstination of another who would have
had him lose it. But that history is long, and you must give me leave to
defer it to another time. I shall be very glad to understand a business I yet
know, not replied Perselida Amatonta, and to discover some new infidelity in my
Affronter. But to continue those he did me, I say that my reproaches cast so
much shame and confusion in his countenance, that though from that time he
conceived the dressing to be avenged of me; and to make me feel the anger I
had kindled in his soul; for all that he cast himself at my feet, and
besought me with tears in his eyes to tell him the Author of that calumny. I
will make him (said he) confess his lie, nay dye in your presence; and if you
have not quickly pity of those ills that your rigor inflicts on me, I will
soon let you see by the loss of my life, that I have never been so base as to
beg it. You will have all Africa to fight withal, if you intend to purge your
self of that Scandal. 'Twere better for to bury that unfortunate Combat in a
voluntary forgetfullnesse, and that you did employ your courage, to make those
belie themselves that accuse you to have attempted against the life of your
father. This Second Onset was no less piercing to Nephizus then the first. He
was utterly ouerthrown and though he strove to make his offenses pass as some
extravagances and the anger of Hely for the doting of an old man; he could not
for all that hide his disorder and perplexednesse from me, nor his anger for
being so well known. He therefore left me as soon as he could, and without
show of choler or coldness continued to live with the King my father and me as
if he had remembered nothing of what was passed. He would himself, the better
to deceive those that had command to note his actions, make matches at Canes,
and Just with the young Knights of our Court. He entreated the leave of Muley
Hassen, who much loving those kind of youthful sports, since from all times
they have been used amongst the Moors, did not only consent to it, but (being
himself much delighted with them in his youth gave the Deseigne of many
Entrances and lent Nephizus the best horse of his great stable. This
dissembling Prince came to the Justs under a Name far from his intentions and
mine. He called himself the Knight of Perselida Amatonta and obtained from
Muley, that I should bestow on the Knight that had done best, the Prize that I
should think worthy his adresse. The sports of the Canes, and the fight with
the Bulls lasted three days. The fourth the Justs began, and Nephizus after he
had overthrown eight or ten of the readiest Knights of Tunis, grew so proud of
his good fortune that he came oftentimes before my scaffold, to ask if I were
not pleased with his dexterity.

Muly had sent me one of his gentlemen to know what hindered me from giving the
Prize of the Justs to the Prince of Fez; when a Knight armed with an armor
sowed with Crowns entered the Lists, and asked leave to tell me his thought
before he put himself in case to fight with those of Nephizus party. This
favor was granted him by the King, on condition, that if his good fortune gave
him the best of the Maintainer, he should not have the Prize appointed for the
Vanquisher, till he had made himself known. The Knight yielded to that
condition, and coming out of the Lists to my scaffold, made his horse go with
so much artand evennesse, that we both (my sister and my self) confessed
together, that Africa had never seen any thing like it. As soon as he was
near enough to me to be understood, he lifted up his bever, and low inclining,
Madam said he to me, whoever is not of the Prince of Fez his opinion, shows
himself stupid, so far as to have no judgment, or so wicked as to dispute the
most undoubtfull and best known of all truths.

It Is most certain that the defeat of those Knights which have this day come
into the field proceeded from nothing else but the power of your beauty, and I
believe that it is only for the interest of your renown, that fortune has so
constantly held on Nephizus party. But she will not give to your merit all that
justice which it deserves, if (after she had condemned the blindness and
pride of those Knights who have dared to compare to the wonders of your beauty
the common one of their Mistresses) she had not destined some one to correct
the rashness of the Prince of Fez.

It Is she, Madam, that has brought me hither to tell this audacious man, that
it is not for him to ascribe to himself the title of your Knight, and that he
became guilty of a crime not to be forgiven, when he took the boldness to
hazard your renown on the feebleness of his arms. Allow then (if you
please) of so just a resentment as is mine; and give way, that I show this
Assembly, that he only defends a just cause, who maintains that the bravest
man of the world is unworthy to serve you. Thus said the unknown Knight to me,
and presently, either the power of flattery or mine inclination were so
winning, that I felt my self in love without knowing who had kindled the flame.

I strove to suppress this first and indiscreete motion; but in spite of all
my endeavors, and all my reasonings my passion grew the stronger, and suffered
me not to quell those troubles, and inward disorders which perplexed me. I put
them off yet a little to answer the unknown Knight, and to grant him leave to
combat with Nephizus. After he had given me many thanks, he left me, and went
to the place where he was to make it appear that he was a man of his word.

The Prince of Fez who was on horseback, no sooner saw him at one end of the
field, but he went to the other. Presently the trumpets invited them both to
show their valor. They came on with such an extraordinary swiftness, and a
force so equal, they broke each of them two lances without any advantage on
one another. At the third, my Knight put Nephizus out of his saddle, and upon a
dispute that the cunning Prince set on foot to save his honor, the King my
Father, and the Judges of the field put off the decision of the difference to
the next day. Nephizus who in his conscience well knew he had the worst, would
not hazard his reputation at Justing. He therefore demanded that they might be
permitted to regaine by the sword what either had lost by the lance. The
unknown Knight joined with him in that request, and the Judges, to content
both, granted them the combat. I instantly retired with the King and
Ennoramita, and as soon as possibly I could, I went and shut me into my
closet. I was there about two hours musing on this strange adventure, and
asking my self who this generous Knight should be that had so sensibly obliged
her. In this pleasing meditation was I when Nephizus came into my chamber; one
of my slaves came and gave me notice of his coming, and I chid him for it so
earnestly, that took from him for ever the desire of b^inging me the like
news. Nephizus without doubt heard me, for (said he) when he was come into my
closet, I would have taken the boldness to disturb you, if the King had not
expressly commanded me. Impute then (if you please) my importunity to my
obedience, and continue not to show your neglect, if you have not an intention
to deliver me over altogether vanquished to the mercy of mine enemy. I
answered: He is too valiant to have need of a second, and if you would believe
me, you should employ a part of this night to find some invention that might
utterly break off the match that you have deferred. Those words made him almost
desperate.

But the resolution he had taken to make me unfortunate, even to extremity,
wrought him to dissemble is resentment. Our converse was not long, for the King
sent for me; I went to him with Nephizus, and all the supper time, I spoke
almost of nothing but the civility and address of the unknown Knight. I asked
of every one his name, and finding none that could tell me any thing of him: I
owe much (said I, aloud) to the Kings providence, for by the law which he has
imposed on the vanquisher, I shall have the content to know this stranger.
Nephizus could have so much mastry over himself to conceal his choler, nor to
let go without an answer, a speech wherein he thought himself too much injured.
He therefore spoke, and witnessed his anger by the tone of his voice. If the
King (said he to me) had imposed on the vanquished the necessity which he has
on the va^quisher, I doubt not but your curiosity had been satisfied. But the
Conqueror alone being bound to make himself known, I much deceive my self,
if the success of to-morrows combat do not much increase your longing. You
are mistaken (said I eagerly to Nephizus) yet would say my admiration and not
my longing. The King that saw well I had a mind to anger Nephizus, did
something to hinder the continuing of our discourse. And I that knew what the
goodness and indulgence of so affectionate a father required from my respect,
presently changed countenance and voice; and said smilingly to Nephizus, that I
had not that opinion of his enemy as I would have him believe; and that I had
not undertaken him, but to humble him a little on a day wherein the public
voice had raised his valor even to the skies. As crafty as that Prince was,
yet he was caught by this soothing; and according to the humor of those in
love, was so much moved with that favor, though it was no otherwise then all
apparent, that he forgot almost all his anger. The hour to retire being come,
he led me to my chamber, and by the way made me so many protestations of
service, that if I had not known him well, without doubt I had been so silly
as to have believed him. As soon as he left me, I got to bed, and spent almost
all the night in thinking on the good aspect, the activenesse and valor of the
unknown Knight. Scarce was it day but that I awakened my women, and made such
a coil among my servants, that it witnessed well the disorder of my mind. I
handled all my Jewels, and not knowing at last whereon to resolve, commanded a
maid whom I very much trusted, to give me what would best beseem me. When I was
about to coife me, not any one of my women was either handsome or quick
enough. All that they put on was naught. My dressing was sometime too great,
sometimes too flat, and I made my self to be new dressed so often that I was
not ready when one of the Kings Gentlemen came and told me that the Combatants
humbly besought me to repair to my Scaffold. I took not time to eat, but as
one senseless, ran to the field, and was there exceedingly troubled till I
saw the brave Knight. Nephizus enraged with anger, and may be with jealousy,
came fiercely on his rival, and was received by him with an incredible vigor.
At every course the Prince of Fez had some advantage; but at the last, he flew
over his horses crupper, and lay so long time stretched on the sand, that they
believed he would not make use of the permission that he had requested. Yet he
arose by the help of his overthrower, and being remounted on horseback,
insolently called his generous enemy to the combat: long time they fought and
very suriously; and Nephizus questionless resolved rather to dye then to yield
ground; and the other desirous to preserve the honor he had gotten, behaved
him so courageously, that at last the wilfulness of the Prince of F^z being
alone and disarmed, was compelled to yield him self.

As soon as the Judges had declared the Stranger to be the Victor, they
brought him before me to receive the Prize which he had gotten. He besought me
to give it him, with such a grace and submission that they made an end of
losing me. Before I gave satisfaction to so just a request (said I) you ought
(if you please) on your part to fulfill the Law imposed on you. It Is to
favorable (said he) not to obey it. But Madam, it needed not that such an
ordinance should impose a necessity of discovering my self. The honor you do
me to command it, is to me a Law so sweet and powerful, that for what
disadvantage soever it may be to me in making my self known; yet I shall not
fail to give you that small proof of the extraordinary zeal I have to your
service. In ending these civilities he took off his helmet, and thinking
truly that I knew him not: See here (said he to me) Muley Hassen, who has no
other honor nor merit, then to be sprung from the Royal House of Thunis.

I had heard my Father often speak of that young Prince, and esteemed him as
one of the most courageous and accomplished Knights of his time. But I being
but an Infant when he left Africa to travel through Europe, I did not remember
I had ever seen him. Though my love was gotten to such a height, beyond which
there are few others, yet I confess to you, that it grew in such a manner in
knowing whom I loved, that all the persecutions which I have suffered since,
and all the time that has passed since I saw my Lover have not been able to
lessen it.

As soon as I was out of that astonishment which the sight of Muley Hassen had
been the cause of, I presented him a very great Diamond, with three Pearls in
fashion of a pear which I had destined for him, and desirous to answer his
fair speech by some other that might leave in him an opinion he was not
unpleasing to me: Cosen (said I) it is not only as your kinsman that I rejoice
at your victory, but as a good Patryot; since Strangers that shall know how you
have dealt with one of our most remarkable neighbors, will respect our
Frontires, and have no will to invade a Country that may vaunt it self to
have an invincible Defender.

Believe then that both in the one and the other title, I am extremely glad of
your honor, and keep the Present I have made you, as an assurance, that hence
forward I will interest my self in all things where you have any share. Muley
out of his discretion durst not answer me, but went to wait on the King, who
had sent for him by one of his Squires. You may imagine whether he were well
received. Truly he was in such sort, that if my poor brother had been
returned from that dismal enterprise which cost him his life, he could not
have been better welcomed. The King who had given him his own name, held him
a long time in his arms, called him his second Son, and the stay of his age;
and causing him to mount on one of his horses, brought him to the Palace
attended as in triumph. He forgot not Nephizus in his ill fortune, but showed
him by that little time he was with him, and by the little displeasure in his
countenance, that his affection was an affection of state, and that which he
showed to the young Muly, was of blood and nature, that is, how the first was
feigned, and the other true. Nephizus had time to think on his revenge: For he
kept his chamber near a month. In this long solitude, having laid the plot of
what he was to execute, he came after into the Court with so much jollity, as
if he had borne away the Prize of the Justs, and came on to prattle with as
much assiduity and passion, as if he had been yet truly in love with me. But
'twas most vainly that he imployde all his craft, and forced countenances, for
I was not now to be taught. I lived now only in Muley Hassen, and had no ears
nor eyes but for him. I saw him every hour of the day, sometimes with the
King, otherwhiles in my chamber, then in the gardens, afterward in a hunting,
and every where with so much satisfaction on one side and the other, as well of
love as of respect, that I may say that five or six months that I passed thus,
seemed to last nothing at all. But alas! Those things that please are not of
longest continuance.

Nephizus that had an intent to revenge himself extraordinarily of me, thought
he could not do it but in getting the young Muley from Court, and becoming the
absolute Master of my life. See how he went on: He dispatched to Morocco to
oblige the King his Father to send his Ambassadors to mine to treat of his
marriage with me. In the mean while he negotiated so dexterously or rather so
detestably with those that governed the will and estate of good Muley, that
they made him jealous of my Lover, and made them resolve to ruin him. The
weakness of my poor Father exceedingly advanced the plots of that traitor:
For scarce had his Ministers represented to him that for the safety of his
estate, and the conservation of his Authority, 'twas fit that the young Prince
were dismissed the Court, but that he consented to it as easily as if he had
never known nor loved him. For my self that had far less passion for the
State then for my Lover, no sooner heard the news, but I tore my hair,
scratched my face, blasphemed against heaven, and violating all that I owed to
the best Father in the world, accused his Council and himself of treason and
tyranny. But understanding from whence my affliction had his beginning, I
turned all my rage on the perfidious Nephizus, I told him such things, and
spoake to him in such a manner as might well have put him from the desire of
possessing me, if he had not had that desire of obtaining me for no other cause
but to make me prodigiously miserable. Muley Hassen had received commandment to
retire himself to the Town of Mezila which confines with the deserts of
Numidia, and to depart without seeing the King nor my sister nor my self. Yet
he obeyed not the last of these commands. For the same night that he was to be
gone, deceiving his spies and guarde, he came into my closet, where I stayed
for him with my dear Atalida. As soon as he came in he cast himself rather
as dead then alive at my feet, and when I went to raise him I fell a side, and
so on my bed in a swound. Atalida had much ado to make us come to our selves:
At last by virtue of some Essences I came from my fainting, and seeing Muley
stretched as dead, I lay down by him, and did whatsoever my grief and love
advised me.

But what said I? No, no, I did nothing of what they ordained me to do, since
I dyed not with grief for such a separation. When he had recoliected his
spirits, he was ashamed to see himself as he was. He presently arose, and
settling him on his knees, Madam said he, if those that banish me from the
Court, had considered how far unworthy I am of the honor I receive from your
goodness, I should be the first that would approove their sentence, and
receive with a benediction a thing which they had done with so much justice.
But since neither the greatness of your merit, nor the defects in me, have not
been the motives of their condemnation, be pleased that I complain of their
vi^lence, and that seperating the interest of my Lord the King from those of
his enemies, I say aloud, that to deal with me as I am dealt withal, is to
abuse the regal power. O how those jealous and ambitious Officers had obliged
me, if in putting me from the troubles of the State they had not banished me
from you. It Is the loss of the sight of yourfaire eyes, and not my credit that
I lament. I shall see you no more Ennoramita, and in the dreadful Deserts
whereto I am exiled, the fear to be blotted out of your memory, as a fearful
Monster will continually war with me. Let that fear cease with your tears I
replyde weeping, what ever becomes of Ennoramita she will be always yours. O
how advantageous are my disgraces (said he presently) and how happy do my
misfortunes make me, since by their means I have obtained that which I hoped
not to have gotten by the services of all my life. Yes Muley (said I) in
interrupting him, Ennoramita is thine, and believe for certain that she will
never be any others. We parted, after reciprocal protestations of constancy
and fidelity; and whilst my dear Muley got to the Deserts of Numidia, the
Ambassadors of Morocco hastened their Journey and arrived at Thunis. They had
diverse Audiences of the King and his Ministers and after the Declaration that
Heley and Abdelmelec had sent by which Nephizus was put in possession of the
Kingdom of Fez: I was sacrificed to the rage of that Monster, and to the
establishment of the greatness of the elder Sister. I neglected nothing to
deliver me from the miseries prepared for me. I would have killed my self, but
'twas not ni my power. I tried to have fled away, but I was hindered; I fell
sick, even to the loss of my senses, but time took me from the one and the
other malady.

At last my Sister, that never forsook me, representing me, that which duty,
birth, virtu^, and fitness required from me, I endured to be drawn to Fez.
Muley truly postest my mind and heart. Yet I assure you I lived with my
husband as an honest woman should, and unwilling to do any thing unworthy my
spirit, I gave to Nephizus the enci^e disposition of my body. I looked on him
as a Tyrant, but as a Tyrant who by a just title had gotten to be the absolute
Master both of my life and death. I obeyed him therefore punctually, and did
that out of duty which I could not out of love. After I was at home with him he
askd me most unworthily and every day gave me so unreasonable commands that I
believe he did it not but of purpose to make me disobey him and so by
consequence to have cause to abuse me. But I was so ready and obedient, that he
was put to his wits to find a pretext to make me feel his fury. I spoke not
to any one of the Knights of his Court. I was environed with a circle of black
slaves that watched after my shortest treadings. I went not out of my chamber,
and had no diversion but the remembrance of my dear Muley.

Sometimes my hangman would come where I was with a sole design to afflict me,
and then he entertained with slave, infamous, prostitute, and seeing me melt
into tears, I knew (would he say) that one day I should bring down that pride
which has so often abused me, and avenge my self at pleasure of thy impudence
and scorn. Weep wretch, weep, not out of anger to see thy self subjected to
my command, but rather out of grief for rendering thy self unworthy of my
love. One day when he had extraordinarily abused me, what then (said I, enough
resolutely) obliged thee to charge thy self with me? The longing I had to be
avenged on thine insolence, replide he, I desired to reign absolutely over
thee, that so by a long punishment I might chastise thy disdaines and scoffs.
Never hope to regaine that which thou have so brutishly disdained. The time is
past wherein I was so weak as to suffer my self to be caught by thy so little
beauty. I am thy deadly enemy; expect no other usage from me, but that which
hatred and vengeance shall advise me to. Kill me then (said I) and to glut thy
fury fully, exercise thy fire and sword, do thy worst of cruelty on this
miserable body. No, answered the hangman, I will have thee live that thou
may dye often, and that thou may do a long penance for thine offenses.
An excess of choler transporting me at these last threatenings: O Muley Hassen
where art thou now? Cride I. Why see thou not that which she endures whom
thou love so much? You must think, that on the sudden the cruel Nephizus
conceived not that I spoake of my Lover; for he answered me coldly, that Muley
Hassen was too far off to hear me, and that if I hoped for none other help
but from him, I might well prepare my self for a long time of patience. This
horrible converse being thus ended he left me, and was three days before I saw
him again.

But he returned on the fourth, after infallibly he had mused on the name of
Muley Hasten, and entering my chamber with his wonted brutality: Well, tossed one,
(said he) you cannot suppress your ancient laciviousnesse. 'Twas your Gallant
you called on the other day, and not thy Father, I know it, and know more (he
lied falsely in saying so) that thou subornest my slaves to carry news of thee
to that infamous Exile, and that thy servants secretly intertaine the
intelligences which thou had in thy Fathers Court. I will quickly break
this execrable commerce, and make an exemplary punishment on thy impudent
Confidents. As soon as he had ended these reproaches he left me, and five or
six days after sent me word by an old blackmoore woman which he had appointed
for my Governesse, that I should prepare me to leave the City of Fez. I doubt
not but you (as I hear) have traveled through Africa, know very well how
pleasant the Territory of Fez is, as well for the Rivers of Buragrag, Juraven,
and of Suba, which water it on three sides, as for a great number of Cities,
Burgs, and Villages. Toward the South the Champio^ stretches even to the foot
of Mount Atlas and the ancient Kigns of Fez have built for the pleasure of
solitude and hunting many Palaces at the entry of those high mountains. 'Twas
in one of those prisons that my Tyrant resolved to make me end my days. He
brought me thither himself, and coloring this dismal Journey with a very
serious pretext, that he went to drive back some Ara^ians that were descended
from the Mountains, and forraged the plain country, he departed with two
thousand horse. I lived in that house as I did at F^z; that is, reduced to see
none but my slaves, and to be often persecuted by mine enemy. He made me encure
so much that he himself grew weary of my sufferings, and I know no^ upon what
consideration staying his usual cruelties, ^e asked me one day, if I were not
weary of torturing him? You would say, my Lord (I answered) to see my self
tormented. No (said he) I do not (...). I ask thee, if thou can at last
resolve to live as thou ought. I replyde, that I would never be guilty of
any thing that should cast a blemish or shame on so many great Princes as those
from whom I was descended. I will live as a virtuous wi^ should (...), and
though I am unwo^ly used by him that should protect me, I will no^ (...)
violat^ that faith whi^ (...) Hassen by fo^ce made me give you. By force (cryde
Nephizus) A^ proud one I see well thou will never alter, (...) whether by force
or voluntarily it is no matter: Thou art yet mine, and being so, can not
without a crime give thy ^lfe to another.

I had not ^een long in my new Prison, when Abdelmelec sent his brother word
tha^ h^ wa^ a^ ^ez. Without doubt Hely had heard somewhat of the disorders of
our marria^e, and to apply some remedy had commanded his eldest Son to make
that Journey. Nephizus leaving me under safe custody went to meet Abdelmelec,
and would never (...) to see me. That Prince h^ving no inte^ to anger Nephizus,
because he feared him, and knowing by experience, that ^ealousie has no
respect of persons, made show to approove of the manner of his brothers living.
But getting by little and little into him, he did so well represent to him the
wrong he did himself in treating me so ill, that I was left at liberty on my
faith, and delivered from a troop of villains who insteede of giving
testimony of my life, increased by their r^ports the hatred and jealousy of
Nephizus. (...) would not make use of all the privileges I had. I first began
to walk th^gh our (...) retreates, and sometimes visited the Dervises and
Marabous which had retired (...) into the Cavernes of the Mountain A^as; bu^
it was never b^ (...) company of my women, and of seven or eight Eunuques
which Nephizus had (...). Some days after tha^ Abdelmelec had left his (...),
I went to visit the (...) of (...) Des^t, and being persuaded by my dear
A^lida, I went far into the (...) with a Dervis which had the reputation of a
great Prophet. His (...) was dug in and hollowed in a great R^ck, that
looked down a fearful (...), and to come to it you must pass by an
ascending way so strait that a man could not go up (...) ^ideling. In spite
of this incomm^. I came to the Caverne, and ^nding the Entry very dark, I
thought on Nephizus phrensies; and for fear of wake^ing them again, bid my
women call ou^ the Dervis, for I would not enter into a place w^ere I could not
see a jot. The boldest of my Eunuq^ went in, and brought (...) the holy man was
taken with an exceeding grief that he had in one of his (...) and that h^
humbly (...) m^ to pardon him, (...) he could not come forth to (...) ^me.

(...) Madam (said he) ^is not so dark wit^in the Cave as your Majesty
imagines* It (...) t^ several places, and in the little Cave where the (...)
^es, there is a (...) ^ich gives light enough to see one another. Lets go in
the (...) ^o my women: (...) do^ not any o^ you go f^m me. I went therefore so
far as into a second chamber (...) the Dervis lay on Man o^ Datetree, and by
the ^ullen light of his lamp I perceived him* but in such a manner that I
could not possi^ (...) mark the (...) nor color of his face. When I was near
his bed, he told me I was welcome, and I showing the esteem I had of his
virtue and my sorrow for his ill: I should f^are (said I) (...) ^e troublesome
to you, if I kn^w not by a thousand experiences that such as you, are declared
enemies to the world, and all pleasure, to give your selves solely to the
contemplation of things celestial, and the practice of virtues, and never m^re
contented then when you are (...) some occasions to ^xercise either your
pa^ience, learning, or cha^ity. Y^u may find in me cause sufficient to put all
those per^ctions in practice. I am very ignorant in our mysteries, and (...)
yet more unfortunate. The Dervis beginning to speak with the tone of a voice
so weak and trembling, that I thoug^t him to (...) ^ick: The esteem (said he)
which you deigne to make of me, is a proof of your goodness; and though (...)
ingenuously that I dese^ve it not (...) ye^ I (...) that it is an (...) be well
in the opinion o^ so wi^e an^ so generous a Princess. But that which (...)
this good fortune the mo^e dear to me* is that by a happy contin^* (...)
oblige^ you to show some compassion on my grief* (...) (said (...)) (...) so
great (...) heaven i^ self put a hand to the recove^* (...) w^l quickly (...)
incurable. (...) (if you (...)) Madam, that being (...) and day to con^est with
such sensible griefs, I can neither dispose of mine own spirits, (...) yet be
in case to instruct and comfort. I have need my self that some charitable
friend, should not only free me from many doubts, and withdraw me from many
errors, which my malady begets in my mind, but that he should likewise raise
my courage by his consolations, and give me the strength to resist the violence
of my afflictions. It I carry away nothing else (I replyde) by your
communication; yet at least I shall take with me this satisfaction; that it is
not my sex alone that shows so much weakness; since that a man who by the
greatness of his soul could dispose himself of all his affections, and of
himself; could not yet uncloathe him wholly of all humanity, no^ lose the sense
of pain in losing that of pleasure. It seems well Madam (answered he) that I
have not the honor to be well known to you. I am quite otherwise then your
charity imagines. I am a feeble weak man, a man so tide to himself and to
his affections, that to preserve them more pretiously, and to employ his days
and nights in so fair and delightful an occupation, has banished him from
the world, and chasen a retreat, in the horror of these Mountains. But Madam
I should never have done, if I took the boldness to tell you the story of my
infirmities. I have intimated but too much already; and you shall be
exceedingly good, if after the confession that I have made, you will deigne to
take the pains one day to revisit so deplorable a creature. That which you
have now told me, (I answered) makes me desire to know more; but it shall be
for another day. In the mean time get your health, if you can, or at least
have the courage to suffer constantly, and if you need a very rare example to
make you to make you resolve it: study the life of Ennoramita, and you shall
find that though she be a woman, she is able courageously to support fa^
greater afflictions then yours, and to expect without despair, those remedies
that time will afford her. I will strive to follow so generous council,
(replyde the Dervis) but time must quickly bring me that succor it intends me,
if it prepare for me any other then death. My heart begins to fail me with my
hope: and if the eternal wisdom which watches eternally for the good of his
creatu^es, had not by a miracle vouchsafed to signify to me this day that my
life is yet dear to him: I protest to you Madam, that I would not have
preserved it any longer.

The more I heard this Hermet talk, the more my curiosity increased: I thought
that all his words were so many mysteries, and that he concealed from me the
knowledge of something that might be very availeable and pleasing to me. Yet I
took my leave o^ him, and promised in going away, that he should quickly here
from me, or I would come to see him my self. Let it be as soon as may be
Madam* (said he sighing) ^or if your presence renew not again within few
days, the miracle that has been done since you entered into this Caverne,
assuredly you shall not find me living. I returned the (...) the Palace of
the Desert (for so they called my Prison) and meeting there with Nep^zus, (in a
humor, as I may say good; If I compare it with that which was ordi^y with him)
related to him the adventure of my walk. He had presently a desire to v^sit
the desolate Hermit, and appointing it for next day; intimated, that he desired
to go thither with me. The time being come, we got to horsbacke, and in less
(...) hours came to the narrow passage by which only you could clime to the
Dervis his Caverne. He was in the same ca^e that I left him and though Nephizus
had given him notice of his coming, yet was he constrained (if he would see
him) to go to his bedside. He spoake to him with words obliging enough for a
Sovereign* and repr^nting the extreme desire some had given, to g^t to the
knowledge of him; asked (...), what had forced him to make so rigourous a
retirement. The anger of heaven ((...) the Dervis) and my despair, and the
Authors of it. But are you no^ ((...) Nephizus) the same in these Mountains,
that you were in the world? Fee^ (...) your afflictions as you have felt them
heretofore? A^e you more absolutely Master of yo^ passions? Or do you believe
that since you have turned your back to for^* gives over to pursue you? My Lord
(answered the Dervis) I con^e I am in this De^rt (...) same I was in the City.
My griefs are as sha^pe as ever. My passions (...) me as they were wont. But I
must confess to you, that since I ^gan to leave (...) ^ing of ^une, she has
given over to be so averse (...). In the wo^ld (...) pleasure to aff^ct me, but
since I inha^ among (...) Ro^* she seems to have an intent to favor me. I
understand what you would say replyde Nephizus: That fortune since she can take
nothing from you, leaves you somewhat at quiet, and gives over working, since
she finds no more subject whereon to exercise her action. There is something
true (answered the Dervis) in your interpretation, but the favors I receive
from fortune (if to accord with the ordinary manner of speech we must call
that fortune which is a pure effect of the providence which governes in heaven)
are more sensible then you can imagine them. She does only oblige me in ceasing
to afflict me; but she obliges me effectively, and gives me at least the sight
of those felicities which I have heretofore enjoyed. That is (said Nephizus)
because you now not being distracted among these obscure and solitary places,
your imagination so strongly represents you the happiness which you enjoy no
more, that it seems you enjoy them yet. I have far more then that (said the
Dervis) for I recover in this Cave, and really enjoy the good which I lost in
the world. Hereupon I began to speak, and desiring to engage the Hermit to
relate his Story: You must (Father said I) if you please, take the pains to
express your self more plainly, if you desire to give me the satisfaction of
understanding you. I would say, that passing from these general propositions
to circumstances more particular; you would let me know, of what nature was the
happiness you have lost, and of what kind that is which you have recovered in
your solitude. I will obey you (Madam) said the Dervis, though by an express
commandment from the spirit who conducted me into this Desert, if it be
forbidden me to publish the secrets of my solitary retreat. Know then that I am
the Son of a Shepherd, who in times past had great and numerous flocks, and
many strong enclosed pastures in the large Plains of Numidia. The care he had
of his beloved sheep was the cause of his death, for being too wilful in the
pursuit of some wild beasts that would devour them, he himself became a
prey to those savage Monsters. I was left an Orphant by that dismal accident,
and my tender years being not proportionable to the pains that it behooved me
to take for the preservation of my flock; I left them to the mercy of their
enemies, and went wandering and desolate through places and Countries to me
altogether unknown. This miserable and wandering life having brought me to such
an extremity, that I wished for death a hundred times in a day. Our great
Prophet all shining with as many rays as he had when he was carried up into
heaven, appeared to me on the sea strand, and taking me up from where I was
fallen, take heart (said he) and be not weary of living* The superior power is
moved with thy disfavours, and see, his comforts come showring down to
sweeten the bitterness of thy life. When he had said thus, he vanished, and
presently I saw glistring through a thick cloud, an Angel more bright then
the light it self.

He deigned to be the companion and guide of my Journeys, and within a few
days bounding them, by a gift he gave me of an infinite more value then all
the goods I had lost, promised me too that I should enjoy it till my death.

Alas! I dare say, and yet hope I blaspheme not, that truth, is no where but in
Heaven; and that even an Angel is not always to be believed, if he be not in
that unchangeable abode. I held me most certainly assured of the eternity of
my happiness, when my Angel sad and heavy, came and pitifully told me, that a
spirit sent from above, for the chasticement of my offenses, was to constrain
him to forsake me. Ah! My Angel cryde I, do not leave me! And if I have
deserved to be punished, let me yet in my torments have the consolation to
behold thee! I have long resisted this black Angel (replyde mine Angel of
light) but there is power given him to overcome me, and to torment thee.

With this my Angel gave a great shrieke, and by force was compelled to leave
me to the mercy of the most, to be feared by Demons, that the eternal justice
makes use of, for the punishing of mankind. I lost (with my good Angel) all
the happiness and delight that his company gave me, and have lived ever since
so miserable and tormented, that to free me from my persecutor I intended to
have killed my self. A stronger arm then mine stayed that blow, and the voice
of my absent Angel, whispring me sometimes in my ear, said, come into the
Desert, com into the Desert; it is there where thou shall recover what thou have
lost. I believed his promises, and straight forsaking the world, retyrde me
into these Mountains. The Dervis here stopping, and I know not what new
curiosity obliging me to speak: But (said I) since you have been in these
Deserts, has not your Angel performed that which he promised you? He has not
only (replied the Hermit) rendered me the greatest part of the goods I lost; but
in an apparition, said thus himself: Hope, and live. The expiation of thy
offenses is almost accomplished. I shall shortly have the freedom to be with
thee. I am now here but in fear, since for my too much loving thee, I have
gone beyond that which is commanded me from above. That fair Angel flew away
as soon as he had in this manner comforted me.

But in that little time he was with me, he gave me that contentment, that to
finish where I begun, I can assure you, that at this instant, I am
reestablished in the true possession of that good which I lost in the world.
Nephizus taking this Dervis for a fool, and that his melancholy and austerity
made him take these visions for realities, would needs see how far his
extravagancies would extend; and therefore (said he) but if it be so, as you
assure us, how is it possible that in one same time when you suffered so many
afflictions, that at every moment they brought you to the graves brincke, and
yet in the mean while (as you say) you enjoyed such happiness, that you even
dare to compare them with those which our great Prophet prepares for us in
Paradise? You might well have resolved the question your self, (said the
Dervis) if you had looked on me, not by what I seem, but by that which I am.

You believe I differ not from other men, and it is that deceives you. But I am
composed of two different Personages. I have one Nature which is proper to me,
and another which is accidental. There Is a strange substance inseperably knit
to mine. In a word, another my self lives in me, in the same manner as I live
in my self, and as it happens sometimes, that nature thrusts into the world,
bodies, which are so lincked the one to the other, that they cannot be
separated but by their common dissolution, and yet are agitated in one and the
same time with diverse passions: So you see in me a strange concourse, or to
speak as I ought, a miraculous medley of a man, and an Angel; of a man
extremely afflicted, and of another happy. When I speak to you of the
infinite pleasures that I enjoy in this solitary life, I talk to you in the
person of that most happy ^rt of my self; and when I complain of my
sufferings, I speak to you in the name of ^e person afflicted. In full, and not
to hold you longer in this unpleasing discourse; I r^joyce that I am perfectly
happy in my self, and I am afflicted for being extremely unfortunate in
another.

Nephizus, gathering nothing from this intricate discourse, but a confirmation
of the Dervis his folly, left him, and told me that if I took pleasure in the
extravagancyes of a mad man, I had found a means for my often diversion.
Though I was not of the same opinion with the Dervis; yet in show I forgot not
to approve of Nephizus opinion, and to laugh (with him) at the brutishness of
the Mahometans, that hold those for the beloved of God, from whom the ill
disposition of their Organs, or the vapors arising from their spleen have
taken away the use of reason. We came thence late home to the Palace, and
because I found my self much disquieted, I presently retired into my chamber.
There began I deeply to muse on the Dervis his discourse, and finding nothing
in it extravagant, nor ought that seemed to me very mysterious, I resolved to
see him often, and to go thither so fewly accompanied, that he might have the
freedom to discover to me those mysteries which he had yet concealed. Nephizus
gave me the occasion two days after; for he receiving letters from Abdelmelec,
by a Mute who served him in those great employments, he was (of necessity) to
go to Fez, and from Fez to Morocco.

He left me in the custody of an old Ethiopian Eunuque, who was the most
favored of all his Confidents, and the depositary of all his secrets,
commanding him at parting not to let me be out of his sight, nor to suffer me
to go abroad, but very seldom. Narcissus (so was the name of the Ethiopian)
witnessed a great faithfulness to his Master; but he did it with so much
judgment and respect, that he never gave me cause to complain of him, and
still concealed all news that might increase my afflictions. Now, one day
thinking on my Hermit and presently urged with a desire to see him, and to
understand the secret of his adventures: I entreated Narcissus to bring me to
his Grot. He was so confident that I would never undertake any thing, against
that which I ought to Nephizus, that he would not deny me a thing which was not
precisely forbidden him. I went therefore to the Hermit with five or six of my
women, and the Eunuques which guarded me.

As soon as the poor solitary man could speak to me a part: I expected (said
he to me) nothing but death; and seeing my self deprived of that light which
should dissipate the obscurity of this place, I wished even with passion to see
my self inveloped with that darkness which shall never have end. But I know
now that the visible Angel, that has so often given me his assistance is
resolved to continue it to me. Surely (Madam) I promise my self new favors of
his goodness, and confess I have offended in suspecting that divine Essence
to be as mortal creatures, subject to change and forgetfulness. With this the
Hermit held his peace, and I that had an extreme desire to know what was
hidden under his mysterious speech, told him, that if I understood well the
meaning of his discourse, that his fortune was not altered, since he complained
then as he had done other times before. How (replied he) should the effects of
my misfortune cease, since the cause of it still endures. I complain, and
lament far less then I suffer. But since that beyond all hope, my tutelar
Angel, restores to me that light that he has so long hid from me, I make a
vow never to be weary of expecting it, and how long soever his absence be, to
hope still for the end. If my curiosity (said I) may be satisfied, without your
discontent, I entreat you by that which is most dear to us, to let me know
what Angel that is which you mention so often, and what that passion is which
obliges you to draw out so miserably your life among these Rocks, and places
of fearful solitude. At this entreaty the Hermit sighed oftentimes, and being
a while silent; whereto am I brought (said he in Spanish) if my Angel knows
not what I suffer, and does not know it self? He had scarce ended these words,
when I gave so fearful a shreeke, that all my servants came running to me,
and asked what I ailed.

O heaven (said I) how have I been affrighted! Me thought I saw at the foot
of the Hermit, a Lion, who awaking at our discourse, was ready to leap at me.
The old Narcissus began to laugh at my vision, and advised me to take the air
to divert me. I presently arose to put in action that which he proposed; but
the Hermit holding me b^ the skirt of my gown, what (said he in Spanish) fair
Princess, do you believe that by inhabiting these solitary Cavernes I am
become one of the furious beasts of the Wilderness? Those words were so
powerful a charm to stay me, that I stood as unmooveable.

But the Hermit not perceiving it, can it be (said he in the same language)
that you who have been moved with my afflictions when you knew me not, should
leave to be piti^ull in the same instant when you knew me. Consider Ennoramita,
o be pleased to take notice that I am not permitted before so many suspected
persons to beseech and solicit you further to have commiseration on my
miseries. Our common enemies have their eyes over us, and I lose you if I
continue to petition you. Stay yet but a moment, and say what shall become of
me. I can but answer thee to be lamented Muley (said I in Spanish, for indeed
'twas he) I am too much interdicted to take or to give thee any good council;
yet expect in this place to hear from me. Farewell. With that word, the tears
came into mine eyes, and I came out of the Caverne with so extraordinary a
sadness, that Narcissus besought me to seek no more so unpleasing a
diversion. I confess said I to him, there is nothing but discontent in so sad
a conversation. I have my mind filled with horror, and find that my
communication with the afflicted increases my afflictions in lieu of lest'ning
them.

This said, I returned thence speedily to my Prison, and being shut into my
chamber with my faithful Atalida: Ah my friend (said I) what have I heard!
What have I seen this day? Why Madam (she replyde) are you yet in fear of your
imaginary Lion? Why do not thou know (said I) what I do? My astonishment
proceeds from a more just cause. If you should have found (said she) the
unfortunate Muley under the habit of the Hermit, you had not been more
desolate then you are. Thou have divined (cryde I) it is he Atalida, it is Muley
himself. I knew him when he spoke Spanish to me. But who has brought him
into these Deserts? What will he do here? What will become of him? If you
would calm your perturbation (answered Atalida) I will reply to your
questions, and without the preventing your wit with any passionate counsel,
will leave you the liberty to deliberate, your self, in a business so
important. For all that Atalida could say to me, yet my transporting must have
its course. Above an hour was I in admirations; and turning in my disordered
mind a thousand thoughts far more confused: At last I settled my self; and
then, said Atalida, speaking very low for fear of being heard: It Is fit that I
discover that which great considerations have forced me to conceal from you. I
confess, I knew Muley was in the Grott where you met him. For some six months
since, desperate of ever hearing, any more, ought concerning you, he resolved
to take on him the habit of a Dervis, and under that veil to come himself
and know whither you had need of his service, or had absolutely forgotten him.
Presently he understood the inhumane usage you had from Nephizus, and instantly
resolved to revenge you. But letting me know his generous design by his faith
full Acmett (who every day is here, for wearing the same habit of an Hermit as
his Master, and coming to ask alms, he has the liberty to come in when he
list) I forced him to undertake any thing without your permission, and assured
him that I would work things so, that he should have the happiness to see
you. I durst not tell you of this, because [knowing your severity] I imagined
that rather then to suffer Muley so near to you, you would have consented to
his death, nay even to your own. All that I could do, for the consolation of
that miserable man, was to win you insensibly to visit the Hermits of you^
mountains, and by that cunning to bring you to the Caverne of Muley Hassen. My
plot, as I understand, has taken very good effect, and I find that I have
well acquitted my self of that which I ought, for you, to the constancy of
that Prince: It Is now your part to perfect the rest. After Atalida had thus
spoken, I began to be very angry with her, and threatened to write to Nephizus
what dis-service she had done him. The generous Maid, without leaving her
former coolness, answered, and that very sharply, I should be angry for being
angry; and that I was to remember, how in parting from Morocco, I had
absolutely commanded her, not to abandon Muleys interest; but to serve him,
notwithstanding all or any of my commands to the contrary. But it is not enough*
(said she yet) that you know he is here; advise and bethink you what you will
have him do. If you will command him, he will break open your prison, free
you from your Tyrant, and bring you back to Tunis. In a word, he will kill the
Tyrant in the midst of your guards* and in the very arms of his Father. Hold
thee (cried I) execrable Atalida: Have thou no otherwise profited by my
precepts and Example? Do thou not know that the only thought of those crimes
thou proposest, is an offense that cannot be expiated but by death. I am ill
used I confess, but he that treats me so, has right to do it. My prison and
fetters are sacred; If I do but consent to have them broken, I am a miscreant
and jmpious. It Is true Nephizus is a Tyrant, but it is a Tyrant which the Laws
Authorize, and which the Heavens and my honor command me to respect. What
would you have Muley do, then replied (rudely enough) Atalida! Let him return
to Mezila said I, and suffer form, as I do for him. You may well take the
pains [if you please) answered my dear Atalida-to give him that command your
self, and you were best to resolve on it, for he will never obey it, if he
receive it not from your own mout^. I shall have power enough for that, (said
I) and though I shall seem to wrong Nephizus, in seeing him, yet having never
given him ought but my body, I do not think that in speaking with Muley, I
take from him any thing that is his. But this interview must be quickly, that I
may be freed of this miserable man before the return of Nephizus,

This resolution was executed the fifth day after it was taken. I made a match
of hunting with Narcissus, and fortune was so favorable, that the Lion we had
in chase, took the way to Muleys Cavern, and was long fought withal in the
straight way that lead to the Cavern. I found my self almost alone at his
death, and coming then from horsback with Atalida and two of my guard, I told
them that I would go see the Hermit til Narcissus came to us. I found him
indeed rather dead then alive; The manner of my last parting from him, had been
so sensible to him, that he avowed, but for the design he had to free me from
my bondage, he had freed himself of his life. It Is true said he in spanish,
that I have none other will then yours; and that I receive with far more
resolution those afflictions that come from your hand, then those that are sent
me from heaven. But even that which makes you imagine I should suffer all, is it
that obliges Avec bea^coup plus de re^gnation
and commands me more imperiously not to endure those injuryes you receive from
a Tyrant. However banished, persecuted, or miserable I am, yet I have too much
happiness, since I enjoy the felicity of being always in your remembrance.
When I look on my self, on that side, I do not murmr. But when I go out
of the least part of my self to fix my self on the fairest, which is you, [be
pleased fair Ennoramita, that I say so] I presently feel all the displeasures,
and suffer all those torments I told you of, somewhat obscurely, in our passed
conversations.

And to weigh things well, can there be a condition more to be lamented then
that of a Lover, who knows that (for being too much affected) the person that
does him that favor, is exposed to all the outrages of fortune, to the
persecutions of a husband, and the contempt of a father? Surely (Madam) he
which sees so great miseryes, and certainly knows who is the Author of them,
deserves to be the hatred and horror of his age, if he be so cowardly as to
live. Suffer me then to die, and revoke the command you made me to endure, my
shame and your captivity: or at least, give way that I attempt the means that
are left me to witness to you my fidelity. No [Muley said I,] I never revoke
what I have once resolved: and give you no other freedom then that you sigh
for my sufferings, to complain on your fortune, and attend patiently when she
will change either one way or other. O rigorous commands! [said the Prince] to
how many new tortures are you about to expose the unfortunate Muley? Since you
have resolution enough Puis qu. aver asez de resignation.
[said I] not to reject those laws which I my self find to be extremely
cruel; I will give you those which are more mild. Love me ever; despair not to
obtain the recompense your faithfulness deserves; and remember that Ennoramita
is so just, and so acknowledging, that rather then she will fail Muley, she
will be false to her self. Do not promise me an thing [Madam] said he, if you
please it is to through me back into my former afflictions, to signify to me ^his
excess of goodness. The more generous you are, the more weak I acknowledge my
self, and the more obligeing you are, I am the more Ungrateful. O Heaven and
earth! Ennoramita, you heap on me all good, and I am the cause of all your
ill: nay you should be happy, if you could suffer me to be unhappy! Alas! do
not impose on me that cruel necessity of obeying you. What Muley [said I] with
a note of anger] do you think to make your self to be thought on by your
disobedience? I have erred [replyed the Prince, presently faling at my feet) I
disavow all that I have said: I obey with a blind obedience; and put off so
absolutely all that is proper to me, that [already] I feel no more in me any
rebellious motion, nor will, which is not absolutely conformable to yours.
Command then Madam, and prescribe, what you please is fit, I should do. I
would have thee live (said I) but I would not have thee live altogether ^nted,
since I am most unfortunate. Leave then this manner of life, so sad and
obscure, and get you far hence to do such acts, that the report of them may
come even into these Deserts. My honor and faith forbid me to have more
private and particular communications with thee, but they cannot countermand my
rejoyci^g at thy glorious actions. O Virtue without example! (cried the poor
Muley in Spanish) by what prodigy has the miserable Nephizus been able to
resist thy charms? But Madam [said he] coming nearer to me] I make you too
long expect the consent I owe to all that you please. From this day I will quit
this Cave; and if Fortune deigne to second my obedience and courage, you shall
receive that content which you expect from my actions. Go then dear Muley
[said I] and do so, that in spite of my fetters and Tyrant, I may be yet
capable of some happiness. See how we parted: Muley forsook his retirement,
and I returned into mine with a resolution not to come forth again. I was
there near six months, without hearing any thing from the wicked Nephizus.
Yet I understood by the dexterity of Atalida, and knew that that abominable
Prince having corrupted the good nature or rather the vanity of Abdelmelec, had
made him take arms against the mild Hely, and that those 2 unnatural
Children, forgetting what they owed their too indulgent father, were combinde
together, to strive who first should deprive him of his Scepter with his life.
I will not trouble you with the recital of those domestique dissentions. Let
me rather entertain you with the extreme fidelity and brave actions of Muley.
He had not been three months from the solicitudes of Atlas, when I heard by a
Courier which my too-unsensible father had sent to Nephizus, that he was set on
by Land and Sea and invested on all sides, by the forces which the great Turk
had sent into Africa. That his Estate was as a prey, if he were not quickly
assisted: and expecting from day to day to be besieged in Tunis, he entreated
his Allies, and all his neighbors, to prepare a puissant succor, and think
seriously how to deliver all Africa who would meet her train in that of Tunis.
This Messenger came to Nephizus at Morocco: But he took little care to go to
Succor his father in Law that was obstinately busied about the ruin of his
own father. This courier was seconded by many others, who all instantly
pressed for aid, but returned all without obtaining any. And when I thought to
have heard of the taking of Tunis, I understood that it had been miraculously
relieved by the valor of a Man, who with a potent army of Arabians was come
out of Numidia. I asked his name, and was answered that he would never make it
known. But to enhance his actions, they told me that he had cut in pieces the
Turkish Army, burned a great many of his ships, pursued the Runawayes even to
Argier, inhartned the inhabetants of Tunis, and made known to the King my
Father, that he desired no other rewards for so generous an action, then the
honor to have done it. I caused this Messenger very particularly to be
demanded, whither they could know nothing concerning that man, from some one or
other of the Arabians, or whether he had not caused his troops to carry some
Device or mark by which he might be known? The Messenger sent me word that
the generous stranger had so exactly caused his Secret to be observed, that
none of them all had discovered him, and that in all the Ensigns of his army
there was only seen two Arabian words, which signified Love and Obedience.
As Soon as Atalida had told me that paticularity, doubt no more of it said
she, it is Muley. He has kept promise with me, and has kept it so much the
more generously, in that forgetting the indignities he received from my father,
he would by his deliverance begin those brave actions I advised him to These
great news were not alone the cause that confirmed me in the opinion I had of
my Lover: Many more, as good, were brought me in less then four months, and
the King my father being never able to know from whence was come to him so
powerful a defender, nor who he was writ to me oftentimes; that he believed,
it was an Angel which his prophet had sent him, to reproove the Princes of Fez
and Morocco, and his other Allies, and throw an infamy on them for their
perfidies and ingratiude. All this while Nephizus continued his trag^dies: But
the end of them turning to his own misery, he saw himself constrained (as my
old Governor made me believe) to save himself in a vessel, and ^ly from the
coasts of Morocco. These were the last news I heard of him: For since
Narcissus, though much urged by my prayers and tears would never tell me any
thing of the man, but that they knew not what was become of him. A whole year
I continued in this incertainty.

But when I thought on it least, I found my self in full liberty; for my old
Eunuch supposing a command (which I believe was false) told me, that he was
engaged to go to the King my father in Law. I was much surpised at this
Journey, yet imagining that he did it not without order, I thought it was from
Nephizus, By little and little the most of my guard followed their Captain, so
that in less then eight or ten days, I saw my company reduced only to those
servants I had brought with me from Tunis. Atalida was the first that told me
of so incredible a novelty; but to make me believe it, they were forced (as I
might say) to make me touch it with finger. When I was put out of all doubt, I
stood so astonished at it, that (after I had been a long while in re-collecting
my self) I cried out as if I had been in some great danger, and told Atalida
that the liberty they gave me after so extraordinary a fashion, threatened me
with some mischance far greater then that of my prison. Atalida did what she
could to put off this imagination; But I knew too well the pernicious nature of
Nephizus, either to believe him capable of doing good, or to repent himsselfe
of the misc^eife he had already committed. Assure thy self (said I Atalida,)
that Nephizus has not satisfied himself, that ^e could sufficiently be
avenged of me only by death or imprisonment, he has without do^bt fo^n me
(traitor as he is) to, make it belee^'d that I am a Princess witho^ (...); and
to make me double miserable she would deprive me of that sole consolation which
is left to all unfortunate wretches, namely of being pitied by good and
merciful people. Nephizus, answered Atalida, may well have so wicked a design;
But if it be true, that there is an eternal Justice which governs the motions
of mortal minds, it will not suffer for its own interest, that Iniquity
should grow so powerful. Yet [Madam since you will have it so] let us imagine
that all men, following their inclination of doing ill, do already doubt of
your virtue, and deny you those consolations, which your misfortune should
receive from their charity. Have you not in your self a Comforter, that is a
thousand times better then all those which you can expect from the world? The
quiet mind, which the testimony of your conscience gives you, should make you
hear without any feeling, nay with neglect, all that calumny it self can
invent against you. These persuasions took not away all my fears, but (I
confess) they did the greatest part of them. Taking therefore a resolution
that might serve for my justification, I left the Palace, wherein I had been
near three years a prisoner, and went to Fez in an equipage answerable to my
present condition. All the people showed their love to me by their tears, and
their fear by their Silence. Every where as I passed, I met with multitudes of
men and women, which by their actions made me well understand that my
misfortune could not be greater. When I came to the Palace, I found there such
an universal solitude and consternation, that I was feign to look long time
to meet with a man to whom I might speak. At last the Housekeeper appeared,
but to all the questions I proposed him, he gave me no other answer then in
shrugging up his shoulders, and showing by his fear, that he was forbidden to
talk, yet must I (said I then a loud) and will (happen what may) put an end
to this silence, and know what Nephizus intends shall become of me. What by
prayers, urgings, and tears, at last I got one of Nephizus chief Officers to
tell me where his Master was, and the commands he had received from him; and so
he answered me in sighing; that his Master was out of his country, and that
before he parted, he had given an especial command to his subjects, not to
acknowledge me any more for their Queen, but to entertain me in such a manner,
that I should be enforced to return to Tunis. This was all the Officer told me;
But since I knew (by the wit of Atalida,) that the true cause of al these last
wrongs sprung from a furious passion of Nephizus which he had gotten a year
past, for one of the King his fathers women. I stood not to deliberate on what
I had to do, but the thought of Revenge presenting it self, advised me, to
hold no more faith with him that had first violated that toward me, nor to take
into my thought [as my Lord] that man who had used me as his Enemy; but (for
the interest of my birth and Innocence) to pursue, even to the death, that
miscreant who gloryed in the ruin of them both. This Council I followed. Yet
unwilling to make use of those means for that revenge, which might be
condemned of good men, I thought it fit for me to have recourse to the
protection of the King my Father, and to employ noe other assistance then his,
for the obtaining a satisfaction from him that had so much wronged me. I
therefore quickly got to Tunis and throwing my self at the Kings feet, besought
him not so to have compassion of a daughter whom he had made miserable, as to
resent the injuries he received from the Prince of Fez, in the persons of his
children. That Prince, who before my marriage, I had found so jndulgent and
Debonayr, even to an excess, losing in such an occasion, thatfeeling which
nature and honor should have given him, was inexorable to my prayers, and
insensible of the affronts I had received from Nephizus. I confess to you that
his impassibility was insupportable to me, and in the first stirrings of my
grief, there escaped from me some words that were not so respectfull, as became
the duty of a daughter, and my answers put Muley-Hassen into such a fury, that
before all his court he accused me to be the cause of the loss of my husband,
the disorder of two Royal families, and many other offenses. In conclusion, he
not only refused me that assistance and protection which I entreated from him,
but commanded me to depart from Tunis, and get back to find out my Husband,
and regain his favor, if I desired that he should acknowledge me for his
daughter. I see well (said I to him) that I must only expect to have from
heaven that succor which nature denies me. Sir, I will obey your commands, and
since I find my self a stranger in mine own country, and odious even to him
that gave me life, I abandon, without sorrow, both my native soil and my
father, and betake me to the most dreadful Deserts of Africae, to do penance
for those faults which the guilty throw on my Innocence. The same day that I
spoke thus to Muley, I went secretly out of Tunis, and without making use of
that retreat which my Sister in particular offered me, went as far as
Numidia, to hearken after my faithful Muley. There I understood that he was
gone to assist the King of Egypt, and that he had cut in pieces two of the
greatest armies that ever the Turks had sent against the Mummelucs. I sent
diverse Messengers to him to let him know the need I had of him: but not having
the patience to attend their return, I crossed a great part of Numidia and
without making my self known, embarked at the first Port where I found
shipping. I arrived at Alexandria, and from thence going up the Nyle the
nearest I could to Cairo, some days after I came to the Court of Tomombay, and
found all in a great rejoicing for the great advantages they had gotten over
the Turk. The name of my Lover was there in such veneration, that he was
called by the Prince himself, the deliverer of Egypt. This was truly to me a
great comfort in mine adversities, to hear him so worthily spoken of whom I
loved; but it was a redoubling of my grief, when they told me that he was gone
from the Court, without taking his leave of the Prince, and not giving notice
to his most confident friends of the necessity of his departing. Dear Muley,
said I to my self, this sudden departing gives me a rare proof of thy
obedience. The love of me has made thee shut thine eyes to all other
considerations, and thou have believed, that thou should gain far greater
Empires then this, if thou could preserve me. Hoping therefore for no more
in Egypt, I returned to Tunis, and after I had staid there some days unknown,
I re-imbarked me upon the assurance Atalida gave me, that I should not hear
any news of Muley but in Fez or Morocco. I went to Fez and learning nothing of
what I desired, ^passed the Streights, to get sooner and more safely to
Morocco. I came in there so that it had been impossible for the very servants
of Nephizus to know me, and staid there so long as I thought was fitting, to
hear what was become of my unfaithful husband, and my loyal Friend. But for all I could do, my diligences and perquisitions were bootlesse. For Nephizus;
they told me that being desperately in love with the Princess Ennoramita his
wife, and not enduring she should be in the custody of the King her Father, he
had besieged him in one of his Fortresses, to take her. But after the winning
the place, and not finding her, he was near dead for sorrow, and presently put
to Sea to follow her. Imagine if I were amazed or no at these false tales, and
what I was to judge of it.

A^ last, after I had long mused on this Adventure to no purpose, I understood
by Atalida, that Nephizus was gone to the Canaries with that pretended
Ennoramita. I had Learned from Fame, that you were not only King of them, but
the defendor of the oppressed, the Avenger of persecuted virtue, and the
Exterminator of Monsters and Tyrants. And for that reason, I resolved to take
you for the Judge of my cause, and to implore your valor for the exemplary
chastising of Nephizus perfidies and impostures. The Princess of Tunis could
go no further; for Atalida, in clapping her hands and showing an extreme
astonishment, cried out that the old Eunuch Narcissus was come into the court
of the Palace with a great company of Trumpets and Armed men. Ennoramita not
able to believe the astonished Damsel, ran to one of her Chamber windows,
which looked into the Court, and knowing Narcissus; Permit not [if you please,
said she to Polexander] that any wrong be done to me in a place where you are
the Master. Fear nothing Madam, answered Hero: whosoever dares to think of
losing the respect that is due to you, shall not do it unpunished. And not
only here, but wheresoever else you shall please to make use of mine arm, I
shall hinder, as much as in me lies, your enemies from wronging your virtue.

Scarce had he ended these words, but the Captain of his guard came into
Ennoramitas Chamber, and told him that a Herald, sent with a great train from
Abdelmelec Prince of Morocco, to all the Courts of Vrope and Africa, requested
instantly that he might be permitted to acquit himself in the presence of his
Majesty, of that Commission his Prince had given him. Surely said Polexander,
Abdelmelec has known that I have his buckler: We must hear his Herald. In
the mean time addressing himself to the Captain of his Guard, go and
receive [said he] these strangers, and assure them that whatsoever they have to
say to me, they shall not need to fear any thing, more then if they were in
Morocco. Ennoromit^ then speaking: I entreat you a favor (said she to
Polexander; what is that Madam, replied the Prince. It Is [said she] that I may
have some time to speak with Narcissus, before his Masters command has
engaged him to any extravigancy. You shall do what you please, (answered
Polexander) but let his discourse to me be what it will, he shall not want of
receiving as good entertainment at my hands, as if he had brought me the
confirmation of that which Abdelmelec sometime promised me. I know that your
thoughts are not capable of any imbecility, (said the Princess of Tunis;) but
I am sure withal, that the mind of Narcissus is not incapable of fear. As
long as he shall imagine that you know not the cause of his coming, he will be
reasonable enough to tell us, what is become of Nephizus. But as soon as he
has declared his charge, and by consequence, shall believe he has offended
you; he will think of nothing after, but how to get out of your power, and in
his apprehension, and fear of being chastis'd, will not even know where he is.
Polexander Laughing at the good opinion Ennoramita would work in him of
Narcissus courage, commanded he should be brought to him, as soon as he should
be in case to be seen. The Eunuch, holding of his nation a certain proud
severity, refused all that was offered him by Polexanders Officers, and could
never be won to see him alone. Polexander hearing of these things in the
presence of Ennoramita, she entreated him to let Narcissus come to him with
all his train; and told him [smiling,] that before that Ethiopian began his
Oration, she would pesent her self to him in the quality of a Petitioner, and
accusing the other of his ill treating her, would so force him to put by his
gravity. Our Hero approov'd of all that Amatontha desired, and going into the
hall of the Princess lodgings, which was already filled with his Guard and
other Officers, there received the venerable Narcissus. Scarce had the Eunuch
made his reverences and first complements, but Ennoramita appeared in the Hall,
with a most desolate and afflicted countenance, and casting her self at
Polexanders feet, besought him to give her his protection against many Enemies
that did unjustly persecute her. I understood my Lord [said she,] after the
Prince had taken her up] that there was newly arrived in this place, one of the
principal Agents of my Tyrants. I therefore beseech you, by the name you have
gotten of the most Just Prince of the world, to harken to my complaints; and to
believe, that I have gone a hundred and fifty leagues by sea in hope that you
will grant me that, which my Country, my Parents, my Friends, and my Allies
have refused me. In saying so she cast her eyes on Narcissus, who instantly
knew her, and after she had a while looked on him, See [said she to our
Heroe] in taking the Eunuch by the hand, an inreproachable witness of those
verities I am to tell you, and though he has been of the number of those that
have tormented me, yet I have nothing to say to him; for I know how far the
duty and faith of a servant binds him to his Master. He belonged to the Prince
of Fez, and being answerable and obliged to him for a great Fortune, he could
not lawfully consider any thing but his Interests. I acquit him also from all
those miseries he has made me suffer, but yet upon condition that he tell you
before me, why he forsook me under a false pretext, whence it is for these two
years and more, I have neither heard news of him nor of the King his Master,
and for what cause Nephizus has unworthily repudiated me.

The Old Narcissus hearing these last words of Ennoramita, lifted his hands to
his eyes to cope thence his tears; and having often sighed: My Lord (said he
to Polexander) casting himself at his feet) I should be unworthy that Name of a
faithful Servant, which this Princess vouchsafed to give me, if even in that
trouble and astonishment which her presence causes in me, I did not preserve
enough of Judgment, to give to her Innocence that testimony she expects from
my mouth. True Sir, this Princess deserves to be protected, since she is
unjustly prosecuted. But J am deceived in saying so: She has no more need of
protection, for she has not any persecuter. Narcissus, in saying so renewed
his tears, and was a long time ere he could dry them. Ennoramita moved with
the sorrow of that Man who had always mildly treated her, besought Polexander
to retire into his Closset, that Narcissus might tell him in private those
things that were not fit to be published. The Eunuch joined his entreaties to
those of the Princess: and Polexander arising led her into his chamber;
Narcissus followed them, and every one ret^ring to leave them at liberty. The
good old man moistning again his le^n cheeks with a long current of tears, on
this manner began the History of Nephizus Secrets.

That eternal Justice which is not allwaies feared, because it is not always
busied in the punishing of wicked men, has at last made the poor Prince of Fez
to feel, that it chastises with a great severity, when it long time defers
his punishments. That power made him fall into the pit, which himself had
dug, and to make it self re-doubtableto those Princes that live, has
suffered one of the greatest Princes of Africa to dye so miserably, that even
to this hour we can know no other thing of him, but that he is dead. What do
you tell me, cride Perselida?. What Narcissus, is the Prince of Fez dead! He is
dead Madam (replied the Eunuch weeping) and all that I can say of his unhappy
end is, that he has served for food to the Monsters of the Ocean. Ennoramita
made it well appear, on this occasion, that a generous Soul is out of her
Element, when she is constraind, either to resent her of the injuries, or to
deny her compassion to those which are fallen (though justly) into any
misfortune. No sooner was the Princess assured of the death of her greatest
enemy, but she lost the memory both of all the wrong she had received, and the
protestations she had made to be avenged for them. She remained a while
recollected in her self, and casting down her eyes, would have hid the tears
that a true grief drew from her. At last, she declared her self [and after
diverse sighes] I confess (said she, with a marvelous moderation) that I cannot
choose but bewail the unfortunate death of that young Prince. J forgive him,
with all my heart, the wrong he has done me; and beseech the dreadful
Majesty, before whom he is to give an account of the actions of his life, not
to deal with him according to the rigor of his Justice. Polexander admired
this excess of goodness, and praising so fair a change, entreated Perselida
to be pleased that he might be cleard of a thing he had heard in Bajazets
Jsland. The Princess replyde, that he might do all that he thought fit.
Thereupon, Polexander took the old Eunuch by the hand, and entreated him to
tell, why Nephizus had forsaken his country and his wife; and whither it were
on the Mediterranean Sea, or the maine Ocean that they thought he had suffered
shipwreck. I can satisfy your curiosity, replyde Narcissus, and in doing so,
shall acquit my self of that whereto my Sovereign Lady lately engaged me.
Ennoramita having bestowed far more then she owed to the memory of her
marriage, set her near to Polexander, and Narcissus related to them what they
desired to know, in these terms. About a year before I left you in the
Palace of the Desert (said he, addressing him to the Princess of Tunis) my
Lord the King wa^ solicited by Abdelmelec to renew their ancient intelligence,
and by a necessary war to free their country, and even their Father, from the
slavery wherein five or six Tyrants made them to languish: Nephizus, who was
but too facile to be carried to any mischief, met with his brother, and by a
parricidiall resolution, engaged himself to put the kind and meek Hely from
his Throne, and make him renounce by force that authority which he kept too
long. This Attempter had the success he deserved, for Nephizus forces were
discomfited and himself taken prisoner. But the too indulgent Hely, unwilling
to consent either to the death or imprisonment of his rebellious Son;
satisfied himself with keeping him under guard some few days; after which
never remembering what had passed, he showed him more love and more confidence
then before, and utterly to undo him, the too facile and weak Hely, showed him
(I dare not say indiscreetly) a young wonder, of whom [as old as he was] he was
become passionately amorons. I would tell you the story of that fatal beauty,
because it is most strange; but it serving nothing to my purpose, I will content
my self with the relating to you, that she arrived on the coasts of Morrocco
in the midst of the flames of a burning ship, as presaging the fires and flames
that she was to kindle in that country. Nephizus had noe sooner seen that
stranger, but he not only trod under foot the respect he was bound to carry to
the passion of his father, but he forgot that which he lawfully ought to love,
and what he had other times affected. The desire to enjoy this stranger wholly
possessing him and making him to lose all reason, he thought that by cunning
and glosing, it might be easy for him to come to the End of his pretentions;
and being young and fair should without much difficulty get this marvel out
of the hands of the good old man his Father. But after he had employed in it
all his wits, and all his confidents, he found himself far short of his
reckoning. For having to do with an old Man, jealous, suspectfull, and
sensual, and by consequence that was igno rant in nothing that was to be
practisd to win a woman; his wyles were soon discovered, and he (to save his
life) constrained to fly.

At that time he writ to me by one of his Mutes, that I should shut you up
more strictly then before, (and in saying thus, he bowed his head to
Ennoramita's foot) that I should not suffer you to be seen by any body, and on
the penalty of my life, I should not suffer any person whatsoever to come near
the Advenues of your prison. He writ me not the cause of that rigorous command,
but I discovered it, since Abdelmelec took me into his service. I will tell it
you, because it serves for the clearing of many things which may have come to
your knowledge; and besides having oftentimes examined it, I found in it so much
I know not what, of incredible, and so prodigious, that I call it doubt so
often as I think on it, though? have had the confirmation from a thousand
witnesses worthy of faith. See what it was, and Judge whether I have cause to
speak as I do. Nephizus inflamed with love, with Despite, Anger, and Shame,
armed more powerfully and openly then he dared do till then, and having gotten
the principal Towns, to give color to his detestable rebellion, published a
Manifest against Hely, which I Cannot remember; but my hayr rises an end with
the horror thereof. Among the great number of crimes whereof he accused that
poor Prince, he reproached him with the stealing of you away to satisfy his
execrable lust, and maintained that she whom they cunningly called the stranger
Iphidamanta, was the true Perselida, Amatonta, Ennoramita Princess of Tunis.
The people were not the sole, who, suffering themselves to be corrupted by that
malignity which is but too natural to them, gave credit to so prodigious a
calumny, but many of the principal in the state either believed it, or to have
cause to take up arms, made show to believe it. Abdelmelec said in good
Company, that for the manner of all his Fathers living, there was nothing in
matter of love but might be credited of him. And the too-Amorous Hely, hearing
this accusation, was in doubt of the truths which the stranger Iphidamanta had
assured to him. But being again confirmed by her self, in his former belief,
he caused an answer to be made to his Sons Manifest, to justify him from so
black a supposition; and thinking to avenge himself, commanded all his
followers not call the fair stranger by any other name then Ennoramita; and he
observed the same he commanded others, and by this trick of youth made that
name so famous, that the people of Morocco will not in a long time forget it.

So (if it be lawful for me to speak with that boldness) by the folly of
Hely, and the malice of Nephizus, your Name (Madam) and imagination, became as
the fatal firebrand, which the Enemy Demon of our peace put into the hands of
the Father and Children, to make desolate the most flourishing Provinces of all
Africa. In a word, after their writings, they came to blows. The Sons gave
the Father Battle, overcame him, thrice made him fly shamefully from Morocco,
and compelled him to seek for refuge in Guargetssem, to escape from their
fury. Yet could he not be secure, for a little time after he was be^eig'd, and
in spite of all his men's valor and resistance, reduced to the lamentable
necessity of seeing himself, and what he loved more then himself, at the
discretion (since in the power) of Nephizus. The ill advised Prince entered
Victoriously into Guargetssem; Yet gathered he not by so deplorable a Victory,
the fruit he promised himself. As Soon as he was Master of the fortress, he
would needs visit it all. He found his father in a Bed dangerously wounded,
but seeing not Iphidamanta with him, he went to search for her, even to the
bottom of the Casamatts. He was not like to meet her; for she fled by sea with
one Osmin, who within these few years, by means of his excessive favor, had
been the pertext of all the revolts, and all the Wars of the two Brothers.
The flight of that stranger had near been the death of Hely, for Nephizus
enraged at her loss, came with his Cymiterre in his hand, even to the Bed of
that miserable King, and vomiting against him all that his sury filled him with,
he threatened to pass his Weapon through his Body, if he would not restore to
him his wife. Abdelmelec staid that blow, and pulling his Brother thence by
force, forsook him not, til he saw him in a great repentance for the parricide
he would have Committed. But the passion he was in for the fair stranger, and
on the other side the remorse of Conscience not suffering him to stay longer at
Morocco, he got some one to entreat his Father, to give him one of his great
ships of war, and as soon as he had gotten it, he imbarqued himself with
forty of fifty of his Accomplices. To tell you whether he intended, or what
became of him, is not in my Power; for what enquiry soever I have made, I have
not been able to know any thing of him, for a certain. Some have told me that
he was shipwrack'd near the Canaries, and that there were found in the Isle of
Fer certain Arabic Characters engraven on the bark of a tree, which said,
that the miserable Nephizus, after he had lost all, was come to seek his death
in that place; Others averred that he had been taken by Pirates in the same Isle
of Fer, and that after he had in diverse occasions made show of his valor
among them, they had thought him worthy to command them.

However, it is but too true that Nephizus is dead. I thought to have been one of
the first that had heard of it; and as soon as 'twas brought me, I deemed it
fitting to advertize, secretly, Abdelmelec of all; and not to give you any
suspicion of it, I made you believe that Hely commanded me to come to him.
Under this pretext I left you at Liberty, and by great Journeys came to Arsile
where Abdelmelec kept his Court. He knew nothing of the death of his brother,
when I told it him. He gave me great thanks for it, and for many reasons
conjured me to keep this news secret. He in the mean while that would make
his benefit of it, came to the King his father, and made show to him of so
great a grief for his passed offenses, and such a desire to repair them by
his fidelity and obedience; that the mild Hely not only restored him to his
favor, but almost resigned to him all his authority. Those two Princes might
now have named themselves perfectly happy, if the one could have cured himself
of that passion whereof he still languished, and kept for the pretended
Ennoramita, and if the other had heen wise enough to free his mind from a
fantasy, the most unreasonable that love is able to produce. And now, since
that love is the cause of my voyage, it is not from the purpose if I tell you
what is permitted me to publish. Know then, that above four years since,
Abdelmelec is fallen in love with a Princess which he never saw but in Picture,
and which he shall never see otherwise. This Princess is called Alcidiana, and
is Queen of an Island far separated from these here, and [incomparably]
more fair then these are. This little piece of land is called, by some, the
celestial Island, by others the Enchanted Isle, but the most proper name is
that of the Innaccessible Island, because all the Art of Navigation, nor the
best steerage of the most experienced Pilots of the world can bring a vessel
to any Port there, this impossibility does Abdelmelec know, nor is he ignorant
that, to love Alcidiana, is to love far more vainly, then to fall in love
either with the Sun or or some other Star. Yet he perseveers in this
unreasonable affection, and since he was thus bewitched, there has not passed
a year wherein he has not undertaken one or two voyages with an endeavor to
get to a place, which every day he himself calls Inaccessible. It Is not long
since, that [to content his senseless passion] he caused to be built the most
rich and brave vessel that [may be] ever sayld on the main Ocean. But scarce
was he imbarqued, when by an unexpected surprise he was beset by eight or ten
sail of Pirates and enforced (spite of all his valor) to give way to their
number; and after a bloody skirmish got from them, in spite of all their
obstacles, by virtue of his arms: Yet esteeming far less that which he had
saved, then what he had lost, he even thought to have dyed with grief when he
saw himself in safety, because he remembered that one of the Pirates by
craftiness had stolen from him his buckler: and they were feign by violence to
keep him from returning to fight, for he would die or recover that Buckler, and
would do it the more earnestly because he had caused to be painted on it the
Portraict of Alcidiana. Though Polexander thought that Narcissus spoke of him
without knowing him, and noted the truth through the fable which the pride of
the Prince of Morocco had invented to disguise the fight wherein he lost his
buckler; nevertheless he would not make appear to the old Ethiopian that he
had any knowledge of it. He laughed to himself, at the foppery of Abdelmelec
who to hide-the shame of his defeat, had given out that diverse vessels had set
on his, and afterward he listened again to the narration of Narcissus

The King my Master (said the Eunuch) long time pursued the ravishers of his
treasure, but being neither able to come up to them, nor to know whence they
were, He returned to Morocco, with an intent rather to lose him self then
leave the portraict of Alcidiana in the custody of a company of Barbarians. He
had a mind to cause a part of his Navy to be made ready, and to scour along
the seas, from these Isles to that of the Pirates, to fight with all the vessels
he should meet in his course, that by the taking of a great many Rovers, he
might hear news of those that had robbed him. But the famous Abul Ismeron, who
among all the Moors is held for a great Prophet, advised him not to undertake
that voyage. I Know, said he, by the rules of mine art, and See it written in
heaven as a thing infallible, that in this very place, thou shall by the
solemnity of a public feast meet with him that has robbed thee of thy
Buckler. Hasten that day, by the proclamation of some Turney, and send Heralds
through all the courts of Africa, to oblige all Princes to appear here, and to
fight for the Beauty of their Mistress.

Abdelmelec liked of that council, and not to defer the execution of it,
commanded me to go through the Countries nearest to his own, not only to defy
all young Knights in his name, but to publish, before all the World, that he
held for a Thief and a Coward, that man who had taken his Buckler from him,
when he was not in case to defend it, if he came not to Morocco, brought not
the Buckler he had stole, and after he had deposited it, assaied not to gai^e
it by a just combat. But since in that Turney, his principal intent, is not to
defend the Beauty of Alcidiana, for whom he has oftentimes already taken
arms; but to aveng him on the stealer of his Buckler; He Declares too, that no
Knight shall be received to fight, till (in a Place that shall be appointed for
speech) he have first made known, who he is, whence he came, who is his
Mistress, and have purged himself by an oath, that he knows nothing of them
that stole the portraict of Alcidiana.

Narcissus finishing thus his discourse, humbly besought Polexander to be
pleased that he might publicly perform his charge; and that before all his
court he might, at liberty* declare the intention of the prince his Master. Our
Hero witnessing his being pleased with his civility, gave him leave to do and
say what he would; and for fear (said he) least some one of your train may
accuse you for not, punctually enough, observing what you have been commanded,
I will be present at what you do, and receive my self Abdelmelec's
challenges. Narcissus gave him thanks for his Nobleness, and leaving Perselida
Amatonta in an estate, that showed the agitation and mildness of her Spirit,
returned into the hall where his Trumpets and followers staid for him.
Polexander came thither a little after, and his presence commanding silence to
all, and there ranking them in their places, asked aloude of Narcissus what he
had to say to him: Scarce had he pronounced those words, but the Trumpeters got
the windows of the Hall, and with the noise of their sounding deaf^ed all that
were within the palace. After they had done, Narcissus presented himself at
the foot of Polexanders Throne, and holding in his hand a piece of velume,
written on in the Arabic, Spoke thus,

Abdelmelec Prince of Morocco, and of Fez, and Trevisan, Vanquisher of Nations,
and Commander over the one and other Sea, knowing that honor is the sole
price, for which great Princes, as himself, should be industrious, has never
taken arms, not left the quiet of his Court, but for the possession of a thing
so generally desired. He has attained to what he pretended, and his Pains,
Valor, and good Fortune, have acquired him so great a name in the world, that
he cannot with justice expect any thing more signal from the Knowledge of
mankind. And well truly might he repose himself deliciously under the shadow
of his own palms, if Love, jealous of so great a renown, had not robbed him of
his heart, to the intent to make him lose the quality of invincible. Yet he had
recovered both the one and the other, if by a prodigious adventure, Love had
not shut up that Beauty for whom our prince languisheth, in a place which no
mortal can attain unto. This impossibility stirrs up the great heart of
Abdelmelec, but it wearies not his constancy. He first aspires to that which
his reason tells him he can never arrive at. He Loves, he Desires, but he hopes
not to enjoy: and as that Nation which adores the Sun, worship it, because they
believe it to be the portraict of the Divinity which they cannot see So my Lord
the Prince, not being able to hinder the admiration of Pictures, by authority
of his example as much as by that of his Scepter, has caused them even to be
adored, by those to whom the great prophet Mahomet has for bidden the
worshipping of Images. Now it has happened by a Treason, the most base that was
ever committed, that one of those fair pictures, is fallen into the hands of a
miserable Pyrate, who without question, is barbarous enough not to know his
good fortune. Abdelmelec therefore, not enduring that so sanctified a thing
should be exposed to the outrages of the profane, has resolved to purchase it
again with the price of his own blood, and courageously to hazard his life
and estate in a war which his love makes him call Holy. But for as much as he
knows not the abode of those sacriligious persons who have put their execrable
hands on the sacred portraict of her visible divinity he has sent Spies into
all parts to hearken after it; and intreates all Princes and Knights that love
honor, to interest themselves in his quarrel, and come quickly to Morocco to
consult with him of the means he should take to make those Pirates feel a
punishment that may be somewhat answerable to the greatness of their crime.
And in the mean time, if it had chanced that any Prince, Moor or Christian,
were associated with these thieves, to have gotten by treachery what he thought
he could not obtain by a just combat; he gives him to understand, whatsoever
he be, that he holds him for a coward, and a Traitor, if he declare not in the
public place of Morocco, that equally forced by the fear of Abdelmelec, and
the violence of his passion, he craftily made himself Master of Alcidiana's
portraict; But acknowledging his low merit, he repents him of his theft, and
restores the fair picture to his lawful owner. And to the end that no man
find any pretext to fail at this Assignation, My Lord the Prince sends, for
the security of all (Christians and Moors) his Pass-ports and safe conducts in
the best form that they can desire.

In saying thus, he presented to Polexander the velume which he had unfolded at
the beginning of his speech. Our Her^e (having with much constraint refrained
from laughter, for the extravagant titles and insupportable vanities that
filled up almost all the writing) said to the old Narcissus (for all the answer
he was to have there) that if his affairs did not call him to some other
place, he would quickly be at Morocco, and (may be) would bring Abdelmelec
news of his Buckler. After he had thus spoken he arose, and giving leave to
all the company to depart, retired to the Princess of Tunis. When he had been
a while in discourse with her about the extravagancy of Abdelmelec, and seeing
her extremely musing and melancholy: I have not much less cause then you
(said he) to meditate deeply on those strange Adventures which the old
Narcissus has related to us. For if they be all true, I find I am involved in
the follyes of Nephizus, and compeld, in respect of my blood, to declare my
self his Enemy. But what? (said I) Nephizus is dead, and what outrage soever
he has endeavored to have done me, I will by your Example sacrifice all my
choler, and all my resentment on his Tomb. On the other side, I conceive a
thing which astonisheth, and rejoices me together. For if my conjectures
deceive me not, this stranger Iphidamanta, (that Nephizus would have to be
taken for you, that he might so get her from his father) is my Sister the
Princess Cydaria, and twinne Sister of that Prince from whom she has borrowed
the Name of Iphidamant. This being so, as I cannot almost any more doubt of
it, Cydaria is not dead, as I believed hitherto; and he was not well informed
who reported to me that she perished in a ship all on fire, in sight of the
Fortress of Guarguetssem. That which most strongly persuades me, is, the
particularity of the burning of Cydarias ship agrees well with that which
Narcissus has related to us touching the arrival of the false Ennoramita on
the coasts of Morocco. There is this difference that my servants related to me,
how the Sea had swallowed up my Sisters vessel: and I find by Narcissus
reccitall, that that wherein she was, was cast on the coasts of Morocco.
Ennoramita awakening at this, as out of a deep sleep; Have I (said she to
Polexander) dreamed, that she who Nephizus would have to be taken for me,
should be your Sister. I have told you so Madam, (he replyde and added withal)
it can be none but she: and more it is only she that has delivered you from
Nephizus. How could this Miracle be done (asked Ennoramita presently?) It Is hard
for me to tell you (said Polexander) for I do only guess in this business.
Yet I think I do not deceive my self, and therefore mark why I imagime^ it. I
was not long since in Bajazets Island, and there bound to make some stay. A
thousand incomparable qualities justly intitles him the prime man of these
times, won me to the curiosity of knowing who he was. Among al those of whom
I inquired, there was not one that could, or would tell me any thing else, but
that he was a Prince that he was become the protector of the Pirates, to the end
he might find again a young Princess, with whom he was passionately in Love,
and that he was gotte^n to be General of the Rovers, by a way as glorious, as
it was extraordinary. I earnestly pressed him that spoke to me, to tell me what
had happened of Rare, and so much renown n the election of Bajazet. After I
had long time entreated him, he answered me thus. ^Our last General (of whose
Birth or first condition, neither I nor any of my companions, could ever learn
any thing,) being by the suffrages of all elected, and settled in the place of
valiant Abinadac, deceived the hopes we had conceived of his courage, and
ruined the designs we had on the Portugalls, by a resolution he took to make
war with a Kingdom near to this Island, which is called the realm of
Benin. We opposed him awhile, and gave him all the reasons we could to hinder
that voyage. But that headstrong and Wilful Spirit, making use of this
unbounded power we had given him, as we do to all our Generals, constraind us
to follow him in that unhappy expedition. I may well call it unhappy, since we
got nothing but the shame of failing in our enterprise, and the sorrow for the
loss of many of our Captains. Indeed the cause of that journey deserved no
better a success. For it was nothing but a mere extravagancy of a young man,
and a blind desire to enjoy a Christian, called the fair Ennoramita, who, may
be, was no fairer then five or six hundred others that were kept in the Island
for the Generals pleasure. When that Nephizus (I have learnt our Generals
Name was so, before we called him Amurat) was arrived at Benin, and saw
himself compelled to give ground to the Kings son, and by consequence, to
lose the hope of possessing his Mistress, he committed the actions of a mad man.
He accused us of Treason and cowardice, and commanded we should follow, and
perish with him, in the midst of his Enemies. But when he saw that those which
were with him, in Lieu of obeying, brought him back by force into his ships:
turn yet at last (said he) turn your weapons on me, and show me on this
occasion, that it is not falsely, that you have vanted to have an entire and
blind obedience, for those to whom you have given the power to command you.
Why do you stay? No, No, do not deliberate. It Is far more just, that you
should obey me now, then it was when I forced you to follow me into this
country. I would dye, my companions, and if you are not so much my friends to
deliver me from a Life that is troublesome to me, you will enforce me either
to make use of mine own hands to rid me of it, or^ run miserably imploring
those of mine Enemies. Do not think that Ambition or avarice has made me
accept the command, of a company that made vaunt themselves to be Masters of
the Ocean. No, my birth gave me titles and riches enough, to have no need of
those which you so generously granted me. It Was only Love, (I say that Love
which made me find such delights in that Miserable estate wherein you found me
after my shipwreck) which has made me woo your protection, fight for you, and
lastly made me receive with joy, the quality of your General. It likewise made
me hope that by your assistance, I might one day recover the treasures my own
Father had robbed me of; it promised me, if I perseverd in my passion, that even
the fair and Divine Ennoramita, (in spite of all the forces of Benin) should
be the reward of my constancy. In a word, I secured my self, that being
seconded by your valor, I should find no obstacle in my enterprises. And yet
you see in the mean time, that a multitude of naked and fearful people, a
Nation so Barbarous, that they know not the use of arms, shamefully pursues
me, drives me into my vessels, and by a prodigy, which carries no show of
truth, in making me lose the hope of my good fortune, has deprived you of the
fruition, of your Honor: But now I have considered that you and I have been
equal losers; Irevoke the request I made you (my companions) I ask you no
more for Death. I only entreat you to have a care of your reputation, and
returning altogether to the City of Benin, that we avenge our selves alike of
our common Enemies.

This Spee^ch had so great power with all us that were with him, that treading
under foot all fear, and all other consideration, we bid him lead us boldly
on, and he should then confess, that it was not without reason, that he hoped
much of our assistance. Presently we got into our Shallopps, and landed
again. Amurat, ravished with our resolution, put himself in the front of us,
marched right up to his Enemies, charged them, amazd' them, overthrew them, put
them to flight and pressed on them so, that he entered their Town together with
them. We thought we had no more to do, then to gather the fruit of our
Victory, when we saw our selves set on by men far more resolute then those we
had routed. The Prince of Benin made them fight and by his example made them so
valiant, that 'twas then our turn to retire, and to contract all our
pretentions within the only thought of defending our selves. My companions,
desiring rather to dye in their conquest, then to survive to their loss, made
a vow not to abandon their stations, and almost all of them made it good, for
there died above two thirds of them on the place. Amurat perceiving that the
more Blood the fury of the Enemy shed, the more it increased, became instantly
and wholely capable of a passion far more shameful and base then that of Love.
He began to be affraide, and in his terror not only forgot his Mistress, but
himself too; and so leaving the City of Benin, and drawing us after him,
caused us to make as much have to our ships, as he had won us to go from
them. We set Sail that very night, in such a disorder, that we never looked
after any one of our companions. To our Tempest by land, there succeeded
another by Sea; wherein we ran no less hazard. As Soon as it was overblown,
our vessel was assayl'd by an other, which at the first we took for a
Portingall. But when we were grappell'd, we knew it belonged to the King of
Benin, and that the Prince his Son, had imbarqued himself in it to follow
us. The Combat began again with an incredible Fury; and the Prince of Benin,
giving oftentimes the name of Traitor and Ravisher to our General* made him
feel that supernatural valor, which caused us to look on him as a God
descended from heaven to converse with men. He gash'd Amurat with so many
blows, that after he had forced him to fall at his feet, he offered his
Cymiter to his throat, and told him he must either dye, or restore the
Princess whom he had stolen. Amurat witnes'd an extreme Scorn and Anger to see
his Enemy so cruel as to make him his jest, and subject of laughter, after he
had vanquished him. This last outrage gave him his Mortal blow. Yet in that
last instant of life, he had the comfort to be bewailed, even of the person
that killd him.

At that word Polexander, altering his voice, Til now (said he to the Princess
of Tunis) I could never know, whether Amurat-Nephizus was the Prince of
Morocco, or some other, that had taken on him the name of Nephizus. But after
our hearing that which Narcissus has told us, there is left for it no place of
doubting: no truly; (answered him Ennoramita Sighing) and by an effect of that
providence which produces every thing in its due season, I find the end of
Tyranny in the same place where I came to seek for succors against the Tyrant.

Ah cruel and inconstant Nephizus (said she with her eyes full of tears) why
do thou compel me to be inhumane against mine own resentments, and to
rejoice at thy unfortunate end* But I am injurious to the eternal Justice,
which has restored to me that Liberty, whereof by thee I was wickedly
deprived. I do owe that power any due acknowledgements for thy punishments, and
consecrate to it the fetters from which by that virtue, I am miraculously
delivered, Go then, Go, Nephizus, to that place, whither the rigorous Judge of
Souls calls thee. Answer, if thou can possibly, the severe examination of
the black Angel. Find out justifications for thy voluptuousness, for thy
madness and parricide! But above all, think seriously on the actions of my
life, that thou may not go on in accusing me unjustly with thy excess and
offenses. In the mean time, I blot thee out of my memory as an Apparition that
affrights me, and burying under the waves which (may) have swallowed thee, thy
cruelties and thy Name; I re-give me entirely to him alone, to whom heaven and
my will gave me, as soon as I was of discretion. Come dear Muley, receive the
rewards of thy travells and constancy: Hasten to the consolation of Perselida.
Put thy self in possession of what has long been thine own, and make it
known to all obstacles, which thou have surmounted without doing any thing,
either senting the coward or guilty, that our Union was written in heaven, by
that puissant and infallible hand, that gives Order and lasting to all things.
After Ennoramita had thus ended, Polexander continued the discourse, and having
confirmed the princess in the resolution she had taken, left her with Atalida,
and her other Domestique Ser vants, to the end she might the more freely
discharge her self, of all whichthe change of her ^prtune had burden her
mind* Polexander went to Zelmatidas chamber to excuse his leaving him alone,
and relate Ennoramitas Adventures: But he understood by Alcippe, that he was
got on horseback with Garruca, and rid toward the great Wood of Cedars. We
must leave him to his liberty, (said Polexander) and not look after a remedy
for those maladies which are not capable of any. He therefore retired into his
chamber and after he had given some new orders for the safeguard of the Isle of
Tenriff, which was again threatened by the Portingalls, shut him up with Alcippe
to think on the means were left to bring him to the Island of Alcidiana. I am
resolved (said he to his Favorite) to take courses far different from those I
have run hitherto. It has been impossible for us to do any thing (to that
purpose) by force. We must use cunning and (so dexterously deceive Alcidianas
Pilots, that they may conduct us, without knowing whither we intend to go.
Alcippe, seeming to allow his resolution, answered, I imagine that this project
may have a success according to your Majestyes wish. But when you are got to
Alcidianas Island, what good, what content hope you for it? In that equipage
wherewith you will there appear, you will never be taken for your self, but
run a hazard to be punished as an Imposter that would feign make himself pass
for what he is not. Either you should not desire your return to the
Innaccessible Island, or should desire it with all the Marks and advantages
that belong to your condition to the end that Alcidiana who only doubts of
what you are, may by the bravery and state of your attendance, change her
doubts into certainties. I would willingly follow thy council, answered
Polexander, but thou see it is impossible. If I should make ready a fleet of
two or three hundred Ships, If I should put into them all that treasure which
the Queen my mother has left me, If I should get al my Subjects to abandon
their houses, wives, and children, to imbarque with me, all this great
preparation would have so poor a success, that even scarce the noise of it
would be heard in the Innaccessible Island. No, no my friend, this Adventure
must end as it began: Chance brought me with a small company to Alcidiana, and
chance must bring me thither again in the same equipage. But to what will it
serve you to be there in that fashion (replied Alcippus?) Ah my dear friend
(answered Polexander* bring me first to Alcidianas Island, and when we are
there, we will think of resolving thy difficulties. In saying so he arose very
sad, and to omit nothing of that which civility required from him, went again
to the Princess of Tunis. He perceived how, in that little time he had been
absent, she had gone a great way. For she had absolutely forgotten Nephizus,
and with him, all the torments that he had made her endure. She talked now of
nothing but Muley-Hassen, promised her self nothing but roses and delights,
and troubled her self no more with any thing, but about the place where she
might meet her Lover.

Polexander made her, to that purpose, all the offers fitting, and promised to
send even to Alexandria, to inquire what was become of that Prince. I thank
you, (said Ennoramita) The good Angel of Muley assures me that I shall not be
long from meeting him. I will leave that great Affair to so sage a conductor,
and expect from heaven the end of that miracle, to which it has given so fair
a beginning. She had no sooner ended those words, but the weakness of her
nature, appearing by motions out of time, threw her again into her former
fears, renewed her first disgraces, and persuaded sometimes that Nephizus was
not dead, and then again that Muley was not Living. Our Hero noted, with
astonishment, this Ebb and Flood of her mind, and thinking it would be but the
opposing an impetuous torrent to go about to stay the agitation of the
Princess, wisely avoided what he was not able to overcome. He began then to
talk of Abdelmelec's defiance, and declaring to the Princess, the unjustnesse
of the Moors complaints: There is (said he) I know not what Fatality in the
house of Morocco, which inforceth all those that come out if it, to make
themselves remarkable by some great extravagancy. But of late their madness
has altered, and so much for the better changed, that it is grown tame, and of
cruel, is become humane and civil. Ambition, heretofore made them carry fire
in one hand, and the Sword in the other. There was nothing so holy which was
not violated by their impiety, nor so just that could escape their Injustice.
The children stabd the poniard into the bosom of their fathers, The fathers
cut the throats of their Children. The bonds of blood and parentage stood in
no other stead then to bring the unfortunate more surely to execution.

In a word all was permitted to the desire which these new Princes had to
govern. Now that they are got in possession of their Masters Estates, and that
they command every where, who were there wont to obey; they have gone from the
voluptuousness of a Lion to that of a Dog. They have no other object but
infamous pleasures: and the Honor of Ladies runs less hazard amongst the Wild
Arabians and other Robbers of Africa then in the Court of Hely. I Confess I
speak in heat, but I find my self obliged to it, by so many considerations;
that if I were not insensible of the outrages of the Princess of Morocco, I
should be an enemy to virtue and Nature.

Ennoramita, contentedly smiling at the last words of Polexander: it is not (said
she) your own quarrel that you defend, but mine, and it is Perselida that
makes known her just greivances, when Polexander speaks. This discourse went
no farther, for the Kings Officers came to tell him his supper staid for him.
He did with a good grace an action, which a man comes ill off on, when he does
it with too much punctuality. He entreated the Princess of Tunis to go take an
ill repast; and without insisting on irksome complement, had the fitness to
entertain her with Muley-Hassen, til she came into the Hall where they were to
sup. To let you know the greatness of that Feast, it is enough to say, that it
was made at the cost, and by the Order of the most Magnificent and polished
Prince of his time. Ennoramita being set at table, with the thought of
soone-seeing Prince Muley, was extremely plea^ant all the supper time. She
told Polexander that he should remember his good friend Abdelmelec, and send
for the old Narcissus. This discourse produced many Causes of Laughter, even so
far that some of the Courtiers took the Boldness to jest at the Moorish
Prince in his absence, and to exalt his Combats in a manner far more dangerous
then if they had openly mocked at him. But Polexander imposed silence to those
jeerers, but unwilling to have them think that he took the protection of
impertinent Princes, without a reason: it is injustice, said he, to expect in
Princes, those Qualities which are altogether Miraculous; they are men as other
men, and are infinitely more worthy of praise then private ones, when they do
nothing else but make themselves Masters over Ordin^ry vices. This discourse
drew on others during their repast, and furnished them with entertainment all
the Evening. The hours for bed approaching, Polexander took leave of
Ennoramita, and having expected Zelmatida til two hours after midnight, gave
the rest of the night to an enforced repose, and an often interrupted Slumber.

The end of the First Book Of the second Part of POLEXANDER.
THE SECOND PART OF POLEXANDER. The Second Book
POLEXANDER Had but laughed at the insolent Challenges which the old Eunuch had
given him from Abdelmelec, but when he had left Perselida, he reflected on the
vanities and insolences of the Moorish Prince, and thought that since
Alcidiana was wronged, he was bound to be sensible of it, and therefore
presently resolved to return once more to Morocco, and by an exemplary
chastisement, reduce his unworthy Rival to the necessity of being wiser. With
this intention he went to bed, and by means of his musing, entered into such
impatiencies, that he slept as little all night, as if he had layne on thorns.
As Soon as it was day he arose, and scarce allowing himself time to be dressed,
went with Alcippus to Zelmatida's Chamber. He found him in his bed, where
according to his wonted custom, he gave himself a prey to melancholy, and
complained of his surviving the Mexican Princess. After that Polexander had
entreated him to attend that succor which infallibly time would give him, and
entertained him with the adventures of Perselida Amatonta; I can (said he)
relate, to you a novelty that will no less make you wonder, then the fortunes
of this Princess. It Is like, that yet you may remember the enconter? we had in
coming hither, and the Combat wherein we were engaged, by the pride of the
Knight with the golden Armor, know, that the same Knight, who, as you saw,
defended bad enough the portraict of Alcidiana, has now a great desire to
recover it. But not knowing who it was that took it from him, and thinking he
cannot have any news of it by ordinary means, he has published a Turnament,
whereto indifferently he invites all Knights; and promises full safety to
Christians as well as Mahometans. He declares by his Cartells, that he will
receive no man to just with him, til he have made known to the appointed Judges
for the courses, who he is; who is his Mistress; and what pretension he has to
Alcidiana. He adds to it, that every one shall be bound to purg himself by
oath, of the theft he supposes has bin done him, and to name who was the
Author, if there be any that know him. And in conclusion, he calls to Combat
the Pretender Robber, and protests to hold him for a coward and an infamous
person, if he make not his appearance at the Turney, and that (after he has
deposited the portraict of Alcidiana) if he strive not to get it by a just
Combat. It Is bootlesse for me to tell you, to whom this packet addres'd it
self, for you know well, that I am the Theife against whom Abdelmelec makes
his protestations. I see it very well (replied Zelmatida) and would you be
ruled by me, [the witness of your conscience being for you] I would not [were
I in your place] trouble my self about any justification. If there were none
in the world but Zelmatidas [said Polexander] I would do as you advise me But
when I consider, that the greatest number of men is composed of fools and
miscreants; and further, that our reputation is servilely knit to the opinion,
of the multitude; I think that we are engaged to make it appear what we are;
and hold that whoever lives amongst people incapable of the sovereign wisdom,
it is more vicious to go against custom then against virtue.

This Doctrine was not taught in our world (replied Zelmatida) and I know not
whether it be good or bad, therefore you may do as you please. Well then (said
Polexander) since it must needs be so, I will to Morocco; and [without making
my self known) strive to gain, better then I have done, the Buckler of
Abdelmelec. I see well what the matter is, (answered Zelmatida) you would have
none but you that should keep Alcidiana's picture. This design is worthy of
you; but beware that Abdelmelec have not made this match to have you at his
mercy, and avenge himself of the affront he has received, without running the
hazard of receiving another. Abdelmelec is vain (replied Polexander) but yet
generous. The good opinion he has of himself leads him to ridiculous actions,
but it will never make him to do any ill-ones. He thinks himself far more
valiant then he is, and though in his combats he come off with the worst, he
does not therefore think himself overcome. He casts his mishap sometime on
Fortune, sometime on the Sun, and otherwhile on his Horse; and in breife, not
to accuse himself at any time, he ever accuses some innocent. As for my
self, I doubt not but he thinks me the greatest Theife in the world, and
Imagines I have gotten his Buckler by treachery, but that I keep me concealed
for fear he should meet with me. This being so (said Zelmatida) you are
obliged to go to Morocco, to put that Prince in his right wits. But (replied
Polexander) whilst I am in that Journey, who shall keep you company? The
shadow and remembrance of Izatida (said Zelmatida sighing) Those precious
relics of my happiness are my faithful companions. They never forsake me,
and entertain me so sweetly, that (without offense to the incomparable Spirit
of Polexander) I find nothing that pleases me better. But what need you
trouble your self? Do not you know that Zelmatida is a wretch, which should
be no more accounted among the living? Polexander, (unwilling to continue this
conversation) oftentimes embraced the melancholy Zelmatida, and so took leave
of him, after he had given an assurance of his speedy return. As Soon as he
was in his lodging, he sent for an old Knight that had been his Governor, and
since by him made Viceroy of the Canaries. Him he commanded to observe
Zelmatida as himself, and to do nothing without his ordering. His Viceroy
answered that he would not fail in what he had prescribed him, and that he
would endeavor to behave him in such an observance, that he should have no
cause to be discontented.

I entreat you Father, said the King, to perform it, and with that went to the
Princess of Tunis, who had sent to look for him whilst he was with Zelmatida.
He wondered to see her ready so early, and wanting time to employ those obliging
terms which comlacency has made men invent to ^atter the Sloth of women, he
set himself to find fault with the incommodity of her Chamber, and the
illness of the bed whereon she lay. I was never better (said Amatonta) and if
the News I heard last evening had not hindered my rest, I had been yet deeply
in my first slumber. But not to keep from you longer, the resolution I have
taken this night, I will tell you, that I should think my self guilty of an
ingratitude the most base and Signal, ^f I did not destinate all the time and
Liberty which heaven has vouchsafd to give meto the contentment of Muley
Hassen, I therefore [though abruptly] take my leave of you, and converting into
actions of thanks, those prayers and entreaties I intended to make you, I
promise to preserve eternally the memory of your courtesies, and that, if I
ever arrive at any happiness, I will impute it to the felicity of meeting with
you; since in the same instant, I found the end of a part of my misfortunes.
You should ascribe it to the Justice of heaven [answer'd Polexander;] for after
it had tried your constancy by a great many of crosses and persecutions, it was
obliged to give that virtue the Crown it had deserved. Do not doubt Madam: but
that you shall find Muley-Hassen again, overcome the insensibility of the King
your Father, and moving him with the recital of your disgraces, you shall find
even in Tunis, the desired haven, wherein your virtue shall rest safe and free
from al Tempests. Set on-wards then as soon as you can, since that your
happiness attends you on the coasts of Africa, and if you think it fit to
honor me, in waiting on you thither, I promise to my self, that I shall be a
witness of your good fortune. Ah Polexander (answered Ennoramita) I doubt not
but that, if my felicity depended on you, it should be very near and certain.
But when I think on the difficulties that yet oppose it, it is almost
impossible for me to hope for it. It Is above 2 years since Muley has heard
from me, and by consequence knows not whether I be alive or dead. His affection
has certainly persuaded him that I am dead; and imagine to what despair that
belief has carried him. Alas, that poor Prince has done violence to
himself, not to survive me. Quite contrary (replied Polexander) he lives, and
desires to reveng your death, has certainly made him resolve to seek after
Nephizus, even to the end of the world, and not to attempt ought against
himself till he has found his Enemy. But (will you say) if by chance he hear
of his death, he will give over to search and by consequence to live. No such
matter Madam; he will without doubt have heard from some one, how you are gotten
from your prison and (may be) not knowing now where you are, he wanders through
the Kingdom of the King your Father, to Learn what is become of you.

My first thoughts (said Ennoramita) would have me believe you, but when I
advise with my reason, it tells me, that I do but take pleasure in deceiving
my self, to flatter me with these vain hopes. Yet happen what may, I believe
what I Desire, and promise to my self, that after I may, being so long time
unfortunate, I shall be as long again happy. Let us then (Madam) said
Polexander, ship our selves with that good presage, and doubt no more of the
success of our enterprise. If you will do me the honor to be advised by me, I
would have you go to Morocco. It is impossible that amongst the great number
of Africans which are to meet at Abdelmelec's Turney, we should not meet with
some one that knows Muley-Hassen. And who knows whether that Prince, wearied
with so many journeys, which he has so unprofitably taken, should not come to
Movocco, to enquire after you from some of the Domestics of the late Prince of
Fez. Perselida Amatonta, overcome by reasons so conformable to her wishes,
consented to go to Morocco; and understanding that the wind was fit for that
crossing over, would not even give her self the time of a repast. And
Polexander having given command that his great vessel of War should follow
him, with those domestical servants he could not missebrought the Princess of
Tunis to the haven, and shipped himself with her. The first hours of their
imbarquing were employed in diverse employments: Polexander much perplexed for
his taking a course so opposite to that which should conduct him to his
intended happiness, complayn'd [as he was wont] of the Injustice of Fortune,
and [not without reason] reproached her, that there was not a day wherein she
raisd him not up new hindrances and new Enemies. Ennoramita, on the contrary,
made vows to that imaginary Power, and to obtain a happy success to her
designs, besought her to conduct Muley-Hassen to Morocco, or at least to
preserve his life, and take out of his mind the distrust of her not being yet
among the living. She her self granted her own request, and taking on her the
place of fortune, assured her self that all her misfortunes were ended, that
Muley-Hassen was alive, and that her Father, who had so long time forgotten
her, repented him of his obduracye, and sighed for her return. This Princess
having wearied her Imagination with too much troubling it, was enforced to make
an end of her musings. she sent to know what our Hero did; and that Message
being an advertisement to the Prince to go see her, He came from his Cabinet,
and to entertain her with what was most welcome to her I know not (said he)
whence the belief comes to me, but I cannot let it slip out of my fantasy
that you shall meet with Muley at Morocco; and that your content shall begin in
the very same place where your afflictions had their Original. If that bliss
betide me (replied Amatonta) I Will as much bless Morocco, as I have
heretofore cursed it, and that to make it suffer some part of those miseries,
which I have endured unjustly through the cruelty of her Prince, the fire of
Heaven would consume it to ashes. But it is fittest that the memory of what is
passed, should be blotted out, and to bury with Nephizus all causes that have
made me hate him. Your resolution is worthy of your virtue (answered
Polexander,) and when I hear you speak so generously, methinks I hear the
magnanimous Benzaida to accuse the ungrateful Nephizus, and mildly to reproach
him for his inconstancy and violated oaths. What a pleasure have you done me
(said Ennoramita) to bring into my Remembrance that poor abused creature.
Relate to me (I beseech you) the story of her Lover, and why Nephizus made her
come to Fez, Since he had forsaken her. It may be (said Polexander) that
Nephizus never thought on her when he met her at Fez. That meeting was the last
Exigent and misery which that incomparable Lady was brought to by her
constancy. She could not live out of the sight of that disloyal Prince, and
for many years of late, has searched him every where. But it was much to her
mishap that she found him, for then hearing, from his own mouth, how much he
contemned her, she stabd her self, to be avenged on her own person for his
disloyalty and ingratitude. That history Madam is no less strange then
Tragical, and you cannot better employ the remainder of this day, then to
hear, with compassion, the miseries whereof you are the cause, though most
innocently. Ennoramita was astonished at those last words of Polexander. Yet
believing he had not spoken them without a cause, she besought him to tell her
whereof she was guilty. You have made one most miserable (answered our Hero,)
and yet are guiltless of it. After he had made this reply, he came near to a
little bed on which the Princess was seated, and seating himself right against
her; in this manner began the to-be-lamented adventures of Benzaida.

When you did me the Honor to entrust me with the secrecies of your life, I
noted from the beginning of your narration that you were ignorant of the
principal part of Nephizus adventures. I was diverse times tempted to interrupt
you, and to discover that which obliged him to keep himself concealed so long
time; to change so often places, and not to appear in public, but under the
name of a stranger. But not certainly knowing whether he were dead, I thought
it was fit to leave you in your error, and not give you new causes to think
worse of him. But now that I can put you out of trouble, and make you perfectly
know him without any wrong done; I will tell you his first legerities and make
known those secrets which, with a great deal of reason, he has always hid
from you. Even before your Infancy had triumphed over the heart of that Prince,
he had subjected it to two personages far different in humor and condition,
yet both equally fair and alike abused. The first was called Izilia, the
daughtur of an Arabian Knight, very rich and famous for the preserving (alone)
the Province of Temesna, in the obedience of the King of Morocco. The other was
the discreet and generous Benzaida, Princess of Granada. How! said Ennoramita
(all amazed) Benzaida Daughter of the unfortunate King of Granada? The same
(said Polexander,) yet I have oftentimes heard say (replied Amatonta) that she
was stolen away by a Spanish Captain, before the taking of Granada, and since
that time none knew what was become of her. The King her father (answered our
Hero) without doubt was the cause of that brute, to hide from his Subjects the
shame of his family, but it is most certain that she dyed at Fez, and that the
ingratitude of Nephizus was the cause of it. If you love me, said Ennoramita
(interrupting him) relate to me that strange adventure, and without refraining
for fear of renewing my anger, let me know (I beseech you) all things as they
have happened. Nephizus is sufficiently punished by his death, though he had not
been to me as he was; yet were I obliged to pardon the wrong he has done me,
and forget all my sufferings, out of that holy respect which the living should
bear to the dead. If it be so, as I doubt not, Madam (said Polexander) you
shall be absolutely satisfied.

Some few years past Abdelmelec, who is esteemed one of the Expertest Knights
of all Africa, and the stoutest Juster amongst the Moors, published a Turney,
to Maintain against all Knights, both Christian and Mohammedan, that Alcidiana
is the fairest Princess of the world. I was at that Turnament, without any
other design, then to be a spectator of that galentry; for being without
passion, I was likewise unprovided of a cause to quarrel with Abdelmelec. I
wished he had not given me more by his last challenge then he did by his first,
I would then leave him a free possessor of his imaginary prosperities, and not
go trouble those fine dreams which his vanity brings on him waking. I came to
Morocco the second day of the Turney, and knew well by diverse courses, that it is
not without reason that the Moors vaunt to have taught the Christians the art
of giving a blow with a lance with a good grace, and manage and sit a horse
for justs and running with canes, In seeing those excellent Knights, there
kindled a desire in me of trying them, and to put in practice those lessons
they had given me in France. This resolution was not so well taken, but that it
might have bin very easy to have made me change it. But being by chance lodged
with some Arabian Knights, I heard them speak such extraordinary things of the
beauty and virtue of Alcidiana, that I had a great mind to see the Picture,
which I did, on the Buckler of Abdelmelec, and in many other tables which that
Prince had caused to be made, notwithstanding the Remonstrances of his
Marabous, and the forbiddings of the Alcoran. As Soon as I had seen it, I fell
straight into that Error which accompanies young men, and thought Abdelmelec
was not so worthy, as my self, to serve so fair a Princess. The very next day
I took arms against him, and maintained that it was to me only, for whom the
Destinies had reserved the honor to serve Alcidiana. He accepted of me in the
Combat, in the Quality of a Rival, and I, who demeaned my self in it with all
the violence of a man of Sixteen, perpl exed him in such sort, that after
diverse courses, he was reduced to the necessity of giving me place. He was not
only obliged to it by the laws he had imposed on himself, but more, that he
might renounce the title of Alcidiana's knight, he was compelled to have
recourse to the Ax and to the Cymiter; but had no better fate then with the
first; and his misfortune was such, that I enforced him to demand his life of
me, and yield to me that brave title of Alcidiana's Knight. And so by a mere
Caprichio of Fortune, I became master of the field, of the arms, of the
pictures, and the Prize appointed for the victor. I retired with all these
advantages, and ravished with the tables which I had so gloriously won,
returned to my ships, with an intent to get me speedily to the Canaries. But my
voyage was interrupted by the arrival of that fair Arabian, which I named to
you, Azilia: she came one Evening into my ship, and when she was alone with me
she cast her self at my feet, and her Eyes full of tears besought me to
commiserate abused innocence, and avenge her of a Traitor, Who under promise of
Marriage had robbed her of her Honor. I took her up as soon as I could, and
promising to assist her in so just a quarrel; If any thing may hinder me
(said I) it is the opinion I have that your Enemy is in such a place; where it will
be hard to bring him into Question. Questionless he will laugh at my defiance,
as he has been merry with his faith, and will do you (may be) some new
injuries, in Lieu of asking your pardon for the former.

I will hinder him well enough (answered the Lady) from using his former
treasons: He shall feel what it is to be a faith-breaker. But noble Knight I
beseech you to grant me two favors at once. The one is, that you will not deny
me your sword and arm, and the other, that without informing your self by
what way I intend to effect my revenge, you will promise not to leave me till I
be fully satisfied. I granted her all, and taking but one Squire with me,
followed her to a house that was at the Gates of Fez. All our way, she gave not
over entreating me to observe exactly what I had promised, and when I had
overcome her Enemy, not fail to cut off her head.

As Soon as I was in my lodging, she renewed her petitions, and receiving me
with a great deal of civility, besought me to call my self Scander Stianack,
and to take on me the Arabian habit. I agreed to her, and after I had been some
days in that lodging, I knew it was the very same wherein Izilia's Lover was
wont to meet her. Now one morning as I was walking in an Alley of the garden, I
saw a man enter very richly clad. He came right to me, and drawing his Cymiter:
it is at this time (said he) thou Man with heart and faith, that thou shall
undergo the punishment thou have long since deserved. When I give thee thy
life, did not I command thee never to set foot within these doors, nor within
this Kingdom? Yet I see thee returned to perfect the assassinate which thou
began'st the last year, and continue thy cruelties on a person that is dear to
me* but I have prevented thee. Thou must dye Traitor, thou must dye. This
discourse was sufficient to surprise me, yet, from the beginning, and judging
that Izilia had kept her word with me, and deceived her deceiver: I believed it
behooved me to hold on the jest and oblige this ill-advised Man, to give
satisfaction to his beloved. I therefore drew my Cymiter, and answering him in
the language he had used: I can no longer suffer (said I) the shame of mine
house. Izilia through too much loving thee, has wanted that love which she
owes to her self, and kindred; and that blemish, wherewithal she has fullied
her own honor and that of her race, must be washed away either by thy blood of
Alliance.

The Man began to laugh at my threatenings, and using me as a Poltron, or
infamous fellow, let fly at me a furious blow with his Cymiter. I put it by,
and presently gave him another so weighty, that, but for the greatness and
softness of his Turbant, I had without doubt accomplished, whether I would or
no, the will of Izilia. We were in a large Alley and girt on each fide with a
palisado of Orange and Pomegranat trees. No body appeard in the Garden but the
wife and daughter of the Gardener. Izilia was there, but she was hidden and
expected, behind a palisado of Iesemins, what should be the success of her
deceit. Her Enemy, the while, believing that I was Scandar Stianack, promised
himself to bring me quickly to the case of asking him once more for my life.
I, who desired that his business might be ended by kindness, solicited him to
have regard to the ancient fidelity of our house, to remember what he had
promised to Izilia, and not exasperate a whole illustrious and courageous
family. What (answered me fiercely the abused man) thou yet dare to open thy
mouth? Ah miserable fellow thou must perish, and in saying so, let drive a blow
at me with all his strength. I avoided it happily, and entering upon a point with
him sheathed my Cymiter in his thigh: truly he witnessed that he had a good
heart and skill, for he made extraordinary essays to revenge the loss of his
blood, and thinking it best to fight with more caution then he had done,
preserved himself with so much Judgment that I was near a quarter of an
hour in bootelesly, beating the Air and the Iron. But the blood he lost by
his wound taking from him, by little and little, his strength and agility, he
did nothing but feebly ward. I might say to you without Vanity, that it had
been very easy for me to have killed him in that case; but I would not make use
of my advantage. On the contrary being desirous to oblige him to satisfy
Izilia, rather then to satisfy her my self, Iintreated him to acknowledge the
Injustice of his cause by the ill Success of his arms, not to contest any
more against that which was resolved in heaven, and to preserve his life by
keeping his word. Thou shall dye murderer (cried he, instead of answering me)
and with those words cast himself in upon me with all the rest of his
strength. I stood firm for him, and his choler taking away his Judgment, he
fell head long into mine arms; The blow he received, by his own fault, was
great and dangerous. He lost his courage by it, and after he had let fall his
Cymiter, he himself fell too along by the palisado. As I came near to help
him, She that called her self the Gardners daughter; came running cross the
palisado, and catching me fast by the arm cried out: Ah noble Knight take not
away the life of the Prince of Fez. I started at that word, and turning to her,
what? (said I) is this Knight a Prince? It Is Nephizus said she, and unable to
speak further, her sobs and sighs made an end for her. I then perceived well
how Izilia had deceived me as well as Nephizus. She presently appeared in the
Alley, and running with all her speed was presently with me. When she saw
Nephizus stretched on the grass and al bloody: Make an end, make an end (said
she) brave Knight! It Is not enough to have brought the perfidious Nephizus to
the state he is, but you should give his head into my hands; you are engaged to
it and cannot deny it, if you are a man of your word. The fair Gardneresse,
this while, held my arm, though there was no need, and turning on me her sweet
and languishing Eyes; Believe not Izilia (said she) She will be very angry
should you content her fury. Nephizus is very dear to her as disloyal as he
is, and her satisfaction should be far greater in seeing him penitent then
beholding him dead, I have less interest then she, in the preservation of this
Prince, since I have less hope of possessing him; yet I beg his life, and if
my head be worthy to be the price of his, I offer it you with joy, and beseech
you, by that exchange, to satisfy Izilias anger. Yes too-avengefull Izilia
[continued she] turning her to that Arabian, do what thou will on me, execute
all thy sufferings on this Body, and make it a lamentable example of thy
vengeance. Tear out my heart, steep thy hands in my blood, use me worse then
thou would handle Nephizus; I will endure all without complaining, so that
Nephizus have his life I know he is disloyal: I know he takes not an oath but
with intent to break it. But he is still Nephizus. He is the Idol of my Soul,
nay he is my very Soul. Izilia regarding that Heroical Gardneresse with
severity: and since when is it [said she] bold Zaida that you have lost your
respect? What, you love Nephizus? Truly [unfortunate Slave] I shall well
chastise your impudence. Leave (answered the fair Zaida) give over (if you
please) these Injuries and threatenings. If I were as little Mistress of my
passions as you, I would reproach you, justly, far more then you revile me.
You are the cause of my sufferings, you have the good I enjoyed. In a word,
Nephizus was mine before he eversaw you. Izilia became mad at those words and,
had I not held her, she had without doubt, fallen on Zaida. Whilst these two thus
showed the contrariety of their humors Nephizus came to himself; and knowing
Izilia, Well now mistrustful-one (said he) do, thou any more doubt of my
love? Ah Traitor (replied Izilia) thy cunning is no more in season, thou must
dye, and by thy death recover the Honor, which thy false oaths, and disloyal
flatteries have robbed me of: Thou art fallen into the snare thou foresawest not.
Do thou not remember the promises thou made me in going to Morocco? Am I
that Amatonta for whom thou have taken Arms against thy Brother? Thou might
well think (disloyal) that Heaven would not always be deaf to the cries of
the Innocent; and to the end to chastise thee, it would permit, that after thou
had deceived others, thou should deceive thine own self. Know that he
who thou see before thee, is not the miserable Scander-Stianack. It Is the
victorious Knight, that carried away the Honor of the Turney at Morocco. Thus
would she pay me, for the service I had done her.

Polexander said thus with a low voice, and retaking his First tone, went on
thus Scarce had Nephizus known who he was, but that lifting up his head a
little, (whilst the fair and desolate Gardneresse held her hand on his wound)
since (said he) I dye not by the hand of the Traitor Stianack, I dye without
any great deal of sorrow. But tell me I beseech you, by what chance came you
hither? The entreaty (said I) of Izilia brought me hither, and engaged me to
Fight against you unknown. And this is enough of that for the present, it is fit
now to look after the saving of your life, to the end that when you are in
better case, then now you may know from Izilia, with what Dexterity she has
brought to pass this intricate business.

The fair Gardneresse then began speak, having newly torn her Veil to bind
up Nephizus wound. Turn likewise your Eyes on me (said she) and know
Benzaida. She would call her self extremely unhappy, if Fate had not at last
brought her to a place, where she might yield thee some new proofs of her
affection. It may be thou have lost the remembrance of that name, and thy new
love suffers thee not to call to mind thine old: or rather the disasters of our
house, the calamities of Granada, and the deplorable condition of her Princess
makes thee contemn and abhor the Poor Benzaida. Open thine Eyes Nephizus; She
that Speaks to thee in the habit of a slave, and a Gardneresse is that Princess
not long since adored of so many people, and served by so many Princes, who,
for her too much Love to thee, forgot what she owed to her Birth and her self.

Imagine (Madam) said Polexander [applying himsefe to Ennoramita] whether
Izilias and my astonishment were not great, when in an instant we saw a
Gardning maiden become a Princess; but withal [if you please] think in what a
confusion Nephizus was when he found himself convinced of his faithlesnesse by
two so irreprocahable witnesses. Yet instead of repenting him of his crimes, he
preseverd; and not being able to justify himself, believed that in his great
heart, he was bound to be obstinate in his offense, Unworthily therefore
thrusting away the deplorable Benzaida, and plucking aside her hand which was
on his wound; Thou object [said he] more dismal to me, then the black Angels
that wait for me at the entering into my grave, who has made thee outlive thine
Honor, and thy Fortune? Go miserable Exile, accomplish the Fate of thy
Generation; Go finish thy li^e in the fetters of Ferdinand and Elizabeth; or as
thy unspirited Father, go beg thy bread from door to door, and vainly
implore the assistance of all the Princes of Africa.

Izilia hereat, taking the word for Benzaida who dissolved in tears; O
abominable renegado Musulma [cried she] dare thou thus out rage that
innocence which thou have made miserable? Tread'st thou under foot that which
thou sometimes adored'st. Doe'st thou Triumph over the sad Fortune of thy
equals? O Unfortunate that I am, what can I expect from this Barbarian, since
so fair a Princess is so cruelly wronged? I must, I must even instantly tear
out his treacherous heart; and avenge Benzaida, since she is not hardy enough
to avenge her self; And with that, put her self forward to execute her
resolution* but I stopped her, and so did Benzaida, who holding her hands,
suffer (said she) Nephizus to go on with his revilings.

No, no Madam, [said I] it is not fit to give that liberty to Nephizus, in such a
case as permits him not to think on what he says: Anger and pain have
deprived him of reason. Think of bringing that again, and afterward we will
take care for the rest. Presently we called for some of Izilia's Servants, and
in spite of his violences carried him into a chamber that was richly furnished.

Benzaida, who retained the quality of those Kings whence she was descended, of
being very skillful in Physic and Chyrurgery, dressed with her own hands her
unfaithful Lover; and (as you shall hear) received for it a most lamentable
recompense, As Soon as the applications had brought Nephizus from his fainting
(wherein he had still been after they had brought him out of the Garden)
Benzaida came to him, and with a sweetness able to mollify a heart of Diamond,
asked how he did, and entreated him to be pleased that she might serve him, at
least, as a slave; since Fortune had deprived her of the means to serve him as
a Princess. The cruel Nephizus losing all sense of humanity, go, infamous
Princess [said he] go and run after thy Mescenarez and Tyndarache. Thou have
chosen them to glut thy lascivious desires; go find them out, and never show
thy self to him that hates thee more then death. At those words of lascivious
and infamous, Benzaida grew pale as if she had been ready to swoon: and almost
as soon the fire flying into her face and flaming forth her eyes; Monster
(cried she) more dreadful then all those thy Africa ever produced; Hangman,
that inhumanly dashest a poniard into my breast, is this the effect of thy
promises and assurances which thou gave me by Alalita, and Zamaella? O
dismal Names to my remembrance! pernicious counselors, who are the causes of
my afflictions as well as of my faults: Come and see that Nephizus which you
represented to me so generous, and so worthy of the quality of a Prince. But I
accuse you unjustly; you were the first deceived; and the forsworn man, who
would make use of you to throw me headlong where I am, first put out your eyes
before he employed you in that office. Pardon me my reproaches, too-dear and
too-credulous friends. It Is thee alone Nephizus, which I ought to accuse for all
my misfortunes and all my offenses. But show not so much scorn and aversion to
me; I shall not be much longer troublesome to thee. It Is fit only that for my
justification, I make thee know, that I am innocent and guiltless of those
impurities which thy unclean mouth charge me withal, and that the execrable
Mescenarez, and the too-faithfull Tindarache never shared in that which I only
reserved for thee.

Hear then my Innocence; And should thou reject her testimony, thy
vanquisher and thy Love, whom I beseech to receive my deposition, will publish
for the discharge of my memory, the truths I am about to tell them. Know then,
and thou know it but too well, that won by the persuasions of Alalita and
Zamaella, I loved thee, and without regard to my reputation which I hazarded,
made thee absolute Master of the better part of my self. But alas! that joys
are but of a short continuance; and felicities are but ^ll upheld that have no
other foundation but the faith of such traitors as thee.

No sooner had I a Lover, but I found my self exposed to the outrages of an
Enemy; and (mark) that in the same time when I thought my self at the Port, an
unexpected tempest shipwrack'd me. Thy unthought-of departure or rather thy
pre-mediated flight overthrew al my designs and ruined al my hopes. I found
that I was truly robbed of al my former fortune, and that the Tyrants of Castile
triumphed over Benzaida, even before they had set on the miserable Granada. Thy
absence, after it had taken from me my hope and comfort, deprived me of my
Judgment, and after my judgment, of the Love which I had always borne to my
parents, and subjects. I wished the loss both of the one and the other*
Boabdilez himself (good heaven shall I speak it) became odious to me, and
holding for Enemies all the Princes and Knights that served me, I discharged my
choler on them, but particularly on the ambitious and rash Mescenarez.

He returned from the frontiers of Granada, a little after thou had forsaken
me, and would have taken the boldness to entertain me as othertimes he had
done. But becoming almost furious in seeing him, chid him for his impudence and
rashness, and told him, that his impudence should have been long since
corrected. But when he was gone, and I had permission to speak freely, what
said I not against the providence of our great Prophet, against the stars,
against love, against fortune? in brief, against all nature? And that;
Traitor, to the end I might say nothing against thee. Yet I was quickly (in
spite of me compeld to make thee a partner. The terrible object of thy
treason, presented it self before me, and I saw thee so horrible, that I could
not look on thee without hatred, nor to hate, without reviling thee, as thou
had deserved. It may augment thy rage to repeat them: But how excessive
soever I make them by my words, they will never be equal to the miseries which
thy ingratitude has made me suffer. And now Traitor (cried I) thou have left
Africa, and crossed the Sea, only to abuse an Innocent, and betray the facility
of a maid, whose love and age made her capable of believing all. What do
thou hope for, for thy treason? What recompense is there reserved for so
shameful an action? Art thou so much degenerated from thy Ancestors? or is
Africa, that was late the retreat of loyalty and truth, perverted, that thou
can not there keep the place that thy birth gave thee, without making thy
self famous by some extraordinary treason? But is it not some old hatred that
obliges thee to treat me so unworthily? Can not endure that the Race of the
Great Mansor should reign in some corner of the world? Art thou not content
that thy predecessors drove him out of Africa? Art thou leagued with the
Enemies of our Religion, to exterminate the Believers, and ravish from the
Alcoran that power which is left it in Spain? Assure thy self that I never
took part in the quarrels of our houses. As Soon as I saw thee I gave thee my
heart, and made no distinction between the Race of Marin, and that of Mansor.
But I invented reasons to justify thy disloyalty, which can have no other, but
that thou art a man and an African, that is, that thou art doubly disloyal.

Would to Heaven that the ambition and avarice of our Fathers had been confined
within the limits of their Provinces, and that their darings had not violated
the sacred bounds, with which Nature had separated their Regions. The Prince of
Fez had not then ever heard speak of the Princess of Granada, and the honor of
that poor Maiden should not be, as it is now, the sports of thy inconstancy,
and subject of calumnies. But why stick I at these vain considerations? Go
Miscreant, triumph at thy pleasure over my heart, and reputation. Leave nothing
undone to make the horrors of thy life without Example, and vaunt thee in the
presence of thy Africans, who may be, are as simple as I, that 'twas for the
love of them, thou falsifiedst thy faith to a Granadine Lady, and neglected
that which Spain had in most adoration. Without doubt thy vanity brought the
like discourse within thee. But what is that to me, if it were so? Is it not
enough, that I too truly know that thou have betrayed me? Neither the great
Mahomet, on whose Prophesies thou swor'st to be true to me, nor the fear which
the black Angels should imprint in the Souls of the perfidious, nor my
innocence, nor my love, nor in brief, the resentment of my favors, have not
been able to quell thy ill Nature, nor stay thy inconstancy.

Abominable follower of false Prophets, who are risen against the Great
Prophet! Musulman unworthy of thy Circumcision, speak, and tell me who obliged
thee to come under the veil of alliance and friendship, to seduce me even in
the Palace of the King my Father. Thou know, in thy conscience thou know,
that I have contributed nothing at all to my misfortune.

The subtleties that my Sex employ to make themselves Masters of thine, have
been hitherto unknown to me, or at least hateful. I would never yet do that
affront to Nature, as to change the color of my Hair, nor hide the blackness
of my complexion under a strange white. My words and actions have not been
less genuine, nor less natural then my disastrous beauty; and I dare say,
that I oftentimes complained to Heaven, that mine Eyes expressed so ill the
feelings of my Soul. In short, the more I reflect on my self, the more my
conscience assures me, that I am guilty of nothing but of loving thee. And if
that crime deserved to be punished, surely thou ought not for it, either be
the Judge or the Hangman.

If my Love seemed to thee injurious, if my little stock of beauty distasted
thee, if the rudeness of my wit were insupportable to thee; yet my simplicity
should, at least, have wrought some pity from thee; and my goodness was great
enough to oblige thee, not to do me any wrong. Why had thou not rather said,
this Maidens face has somehing dismal in it? My eyes cannot endure to look on
her color, yellow and black. She has not wit; and the best things she speaks,
are but very bad expressions; Yet she is good, she loves me, and if I cannot
affect her, yet must I pity (...) ^cence, and not deprive her of that quiet
which her stupidity affoords her. It Is no^ (...) that ill, which a man may do
without fear of punishment; and if we exercise ^ity in comforting any one that
is miserable, we practice it a great deal more, in not permitting him to become
so. These good thoughts were not likely to possess a Soul so wicked as thine.
And if by chance, some good angel would with them have inspired thee, thy
pernicious inclination would not have suffered to receiv them. Those that
brought thee into the world, underwent the curse of Heaven, and thy parents
should call thee rather the punishment of their offenses, then the blessing of
their marriage. Nor art thou come out of thy Country, but to free it of a
Monster, which was become the cause of terror, and hatred to all. Truly the
successors of the great Mansor have good cause to rejoice, since the usurper of
their Estates has left so abominable a Race. Comfort thy self; Comfort thy
self in thy disgraces.

The Tyrants who drove thy Ancestors out of Africa, have left such heirs, that
they will soon have reason to envy thee. But what said I? No, No Nephizus, who
shall be ever dear to me, I do not believe all this. The Love I bear my self,
hinders me from mine own knowledge, and makes me throw on thy inconstancy, that
change whereof I only am guilty. The audacious Mescenarez having dared to
pretend to that, which Love reserved for thee alone, made thee jealous; and the
little care I took to cure thee of it, compelled thee (without doubt) to leave
me. It may be, thou yet wandrest through the Deserts of thy Numidia and ask
from Love that he should give thee Justice for the faith which I have violated.
If it be so, O too credulous Prince, return where thou have left me! Thou shall
know how I have suffered the wooings and rashness of Mescenarez; and (since thy
departure) whether he or his adherents have been able to get any advantage of
the scorn and neglect thou have made of me. Why saw thou not me as I am now,
discheveld, furious, an enemy to my self, or rather repentant, and desolate?
Thou should have seen me with my knees on the earth and tears in my Eyes
imploring thy mercy, and confessing my self guilty, though I am nothing but a
most miserable creature. But thou, most to be abhorred, neither carest what I
do, not what I suffer. Thy lightness is satisfied in deceiving me, and (may
be) it now glories in my being abused. Go, go whether thou will (the Horror of
thy Sex and mine) I will follow thee as a Fury, and making thee suffer a part of
those torments which I have endured, I will not permit thee to rejoice
(unpunished) of that death which thou have given me. Benzaida stopping at that
word, held her eyes some-while fixed on the planching: at thelast she cast them
on Nephizus, who, with Izilia and my self, hearkened to her without a word
speaking; and changing her voice, it is enough ungrateful man (said she) it is
enough to have reproved thee of thy misdeeds; I am in such an humor, that I am
weary of complaining; I will only tell how long I have sought thee, and by what
chance I heard news of thee, Know therefore that some few days after thy
departure, I found my self so extremely desirous of re-seeing thee, that I
could not possibly stay longer in Granada. I then forsook my Fathers Palace
without the knowledge of any but Zamaella and my Nurse, and commanding them to
take, with them, all that was necessary for me, stole away one night, without
fearing the cruelty of the Spaniards who ransacked our country, or the dangers
of a long Journey; and swore never to sojourne in any place of the world till I
had met with thee. With this resolution I took my way to the Seaside, and as I
was ready to imbarque my self in a vessel that was bound for Africa, the
generous Prince (which thou should never forget, as ungrateful as thou art)
Tindarache I say, being not to be put off neither by my cruelties nor by our
common extravagances, presented himself to me, and casting him at my feet,
besought me I would be pleased that he might accompany me. Benzaida (said he) I
come not here to make you alter your resolution, nor to entreat you to
acknowledge my perseverance. I come to you, because my fidelity commands it,
and because I cannot resolve to dye till I see you happy. These offers much
troubled me, yet knowing of a long time, Tindaraches respect, and doubting that
I might have need of his assistance, I took him into my company. But for fear
he should not observe all that he promised me, I receive you (said I) on
condition that you take no heed neither to my actions nor my words, and look
not on me but as on a person that knows no more what she does.

That young Prince full of love and pity, was so much moved at my speech, that
the tears came into his eyes. He looked upon me, he gazed on heaven, and being
able to endure his fortune without murmuring, What ever thou be (cried he) O
Providence! that watchest for the general good of the world, what have I done
to thee, that I should be the party beloved of Benzaida.

After he had ended this exclamation, he turned himself toward me, and asked
me whither I would go. It Is no matter where [I replied] provided it be there
where I may find the Prince of Fez. Provided that it be where you may find the
Prince of Fez? replied Tindarache! O Too happy Prince if thou knew'st thy
happiness. Let s go, Let Us go [Madam] after that ungrateful Man; Let us
search for that enemy of his own good; Let Us compel him to accept the good
Fortune he refuses, and if there want but my life to make him true, I am
content that you bestow it on your passion. The love and Nobleness of that
Prince touched me so to the heart, that I was forced to impose him silence, for
fear least his speech should make me too sensible. He was no less obedient to
me in that, then in all other things; and I believe that we cros'd the seas
and a part of Fez and Morocco, without any talk above five or six times. I
found thee not in either of the Kingdoms, but I understood that the love thou
barest to Ennoramita, Princess of Tunis, had made thee undertake a voyage on
the Ocean. I therefore left Morocco, and went to imbarque my self at Azafi, to
see if I could meet thee at Sea, or at least to pass the streights, and find
thee at Tunis: but being engaged to stay at Azafi, to attend a Portugal ship,
I was [I know not by what odnesse of Fortune] seen and desired by four
Castilian Knights: who seemed to be very Inquisitive of me? And not contented
to have entertained me in their Inn, shipped themselves with me, and did what
they could, to win me not to forsake their conversation. I avoided it yet as
often as it was possible, and heaven, hearing my prayers, Stirred up so furious
a Tempest, that it gave the Spaniards far other thoughts then those of
prattling to me. After our ship had bin three days and three nights beaten with
the Tempest, it came to shyde on to an Island, which is now famous by the
stately Tomb of a Prince called Almansor. There we went on shore to expect
fairer weather, and give time to the Mariners to trym their ship; and I that
would avoid the sight of the four troublesome Spaniards, I caused me to be
conducted by Tindarache to a village which is not far from the sea. But I
could not keep me from the curiosity of those mad men. They followed me, and
stopping me between a wood and a many rocks, told me that they were come to
serve me, and not to offer me any outrage. We are [said they] four Cozens, who
are equally in love with you, and because our affection is too violent to
endure any companions, we are resolved to fight in your presence, to give an
end to the cause of our jealousy, and leave you the prize for the vanquisher.
Though my mind was busied about nothing but the remembrance of thy
ingratitude, perjured Nephizus, yet the extravagancy of those men was capable
to stay my musings. I gave Heaven thanks that it made me see a folly, which
was not less extraordinary then mine; and told those Lovers, that I found
their loves so unreasonable, and the person, who was the cause of it, so
unworthy the fortune they would run for her, that I advised them to continue
friends, and give over an enterprise that could be no other then, very
unfortunate to them. That must not stay us, if you please (they replied) since,
of four that we be, there will be no mishap but for him that shall survive his
companions; and in ending these words they threw off their doublets, and came
to meet one another with their Swords drawn. The Combat was very short, though
very bloody, and indeed it could not be otherwise, since 'twas done by the
advice and guidance of so murderous and furious a passion as that of love.
Three presently fell down dead, and the fourth (his sword red with the blood of
his Cozens) came and cast himself at my feet to ask me the prize for his
victory. Tindarache, till then had showed so little feeling, that not being
able to doubt of his courage after the proofs that he had given me of it, I
thought that by the remembrance of thy false promises, I was not to give any
more trust to his fair words. But when he saw the Spanyard at my feet: Knight
(said he to him) you make too much have and having not yet done but the half
of your business, you stick not to ask the salary for the whole. Do you
think that I am less Jealous, or not so cleare-sighted as you Spaniards?
Truly (answered the other) you surprise me. Your lean and disfigured
countenance, your reeling, and weak walking, and the feebleness of your arms,
made me believe that you rather looked for some Physician to cure you, then for
an Enemy to cut off some one or two of those days that were yet to live.
Notwithstanding since you beseech me for it, in so good a manner, I am pleased
not to have you to languish any longer, but to kill you a little more speedily
then your melancholy would have done. Tindarache in lieu of replying to that
arrogant answer, did but smile, and taking his Sword in his hand, told his
enemy, that he besought him to make an end of his Cure. The other, whose new
victory had made him more proud then he was by birth, went on very resolutely
to Tindarache. The Prince met him as bravely, and at first gave him such a
dangerous wound, that he forced him to put one knee to the ground. The Spanyard
seeing his strength go away with his blood, furiously rose up to avenge
himself of his vanquisher; but he, who knew how much his preservation imported
me, recoyl'd still in warding, and in that manner let him lose the rest of the
strength and blood that was left him. Atlast that unfortunate Castilian fell
backwards and not being able to speak by reason of the blood which came out of
his mouth, he took a handkercher, which he steeped in his wound, and after he
had kissed it threw it toward me. Tindarache who was not wounded came to me,
and seeing me affrighted: Away Madam said he, let us away from this dismal
Island, wherein* Love has been the cause of shedding so much blood, and let us
go find out the happy Prince of Fez.

I took the advice of that generous Lover; and after I had given order to the
Inhabitants of that Bourg (whereinto I was retired) for the burial of the
Spaniards; I re-imbark'd my self in the same Ship which had brought me
thither. The violence of the tempest had put the Portugull Ship to that
necessity, that they were forced to return to Azafie, and there I left them and
came back to Morocco, where I understood that thou were at Fez. Presently I put
on, with my little and faithful company; but passing through the solitudes of
Mount Atlas, a Lion rushed on my poor Nurse, and carried her away, Tindarache
not being able to rescue her. The loss of one who had been always dear to
me, so transported me, that I would have exposed my self even to the fury of
the Lion. But the faithful Tindarache, who had always his eyes on me, took
notice of my action, and doubting of what I had resolved: Madam (said he) what
mean you to do? Do you not remember now, that there is naught in the world
capable to move you but the Prince of Fez? I must confess it to thy glory, and
my confusion, (perjured man) that thy Name took away my grief, and I often
accused my self for loving any other then thee. Some few days after I came
out of those Deserts, and entered into thy Kingdom. Consider what kind of
passion mine always has been, since, at the only name of Fez and the sole
looking on thy Territories, I was so transported, that my body, too violently
agitated by my mind, was compelled to give way. I fell sick of a malady, which
at first they thought deadly. Shall I relate to thee (insensible man) the care
which Tindarache had of me, the pains he undertook, and the despair whereunto
the obstinacy of my ill, oftentimes threw him? No, I will tell thee nothing of
it. That soul entirely loving, and wholely pure, which now enjoyes the
eternal felicities, will not have me to profane his mysteries. Thou shall
only know that I overcame my Fever by the desire I had to see thee. As Soon as I
could leave my Chamber, I went from the place where I had fallen sick; and
endeavored by little Journeys to make an end of my unfortunate voyage. And I
had almost crossed the large champians of Temesna, when I know not what strange
affrightment seized on me. I turned me toward Tindarache, and looking round
about me, as if I had been pursued: Tindarache (said I without knowing why) we
must shortly part. Madam (replied he) I do no less then you wish for that
happy moment, that must render you to the dearest part of your self. But if my
love could consent to it, I would wish to die, ere I were compeld to that
cruel necessity to lose, with that content I received by your presence, the
remaynder of an imaginary hope which yet flatters my passion. Yet happen what
the Destinies please, Tindarache will without fear see fall that blow which
must deprive him of his life. Those words made me believe that that faithful
Lover feared to meet with thee, not that he thought thee more valiant then
himself, but because he knew by my extravagancies, that thou were better
beloved then He. I would willingly at the same time, have freed him of that
fear, and stopping in the midway to speak more earnestly: Tindarache (said I)
if you believe that I lead you where I am to find my greatest Enemy, to give
you that discontent to see him possessed of that which you think you have
deserved, and to make him triumph on your disgraces: you neither know my
intention nor what is the generousnesse of the unfortunate Benzaida. I am not
of those light minds which may be twice deceived by apparances. I have
committed one fault, but my Spirit and the assistance of our great Prophet, will
hinder me from acting a second. Let us go therefore (Prince as unfortunate as
my self) let us go find the Traitor, At whose very name my Sense and Reason
re-begin their old enmityes. But lets find him quickly, to the end that one
same hour, and one same action may make us all Three equally contented.

I had scarce ended the words, when Zamaella began to cry out, that I should
take heed to my self. I turned my head, and saw ten or twelve men on
horsbacke, who with their swords drawn, ^ere ready to fall on Tindarache.
As Soon as they had beset him, one of them came to me, and presenting me the
point of his Sword: Is it so (said he) infamous and vagabond Izilia, that to
satiate the Lubricities of a Tyrant, thou prostitutest thine honor, and
reputation of thy race? I answered nothing to those revilings, because I
thought they were not addressed to me. In the mean time he that had spoken,
commanded two Negroes, that were of his company, to bind my hands, and guard me
well on pain of their lives, and presently hastened to his accomplices that were
cowardly murdering of Tindarache. I did all I could to withhold him and to make
him know that he was mistaken; but his choler having blinded him, he perceived
not the fault he had done, till after, when it was irreparable. As Soon as,
Tindarache was fallen ^to the Earth, he that had taken me, alighted from his
horse to know him better, but not finding him whom he looked for, O Heaven!
(cried he, to his ^mpanions) how blockishly are we mistaken. He came then
presently to me, and looking long on me, Unfortunate Scander Stianack (said he
striking his breast) what have thou done, and how will thou justify thy
mistake, and ending those words, he took me by the hand, and taking off my
bonds, what service can I do you (said he) that may be sufficent to expiate the
wrong which I have Ignorantly done you? Exact from me what satisfaction you
please (Madam;) you will see by the content I shall have in it, that my intent
was not to offend you. I would have answered him when I heard thevoyce of
Tindarache sounding in mine ears, which made me run to the place where he lay.
I found him all weltring in blood, and extremely wounded in diverse places.
As Soon as he saw me he strove to arise, but not being able, he turned his
dying Eyes on me, and kissing the hand which I had given him Madam said he to
me, I cannot perform what I promised you; but you see it is not my fault. Give me
an assurance that you are satisfied, and I shall go contentedly out of the
world. Those words were so peircing to me, that forcing my weakness, and
forgetting that I was looked on by men who might conceive an ill opinion of my
resentments, I raised up the head of that to-be-lamented Prince, and knowing
not what I said, so much was I troubled, besought him not to forsake me and
leave me all alone in an Enemies Country, It Is that which makes me go to my
grave with sorrow (replied he with a low voice,) but the vows and prayers I
make for the retarding of my death, are vain and to no purpose; spite of me I
must leave you; and I perceive that I have no longer time to live, then
suffices to bid you farewell. Farewell then Benzaida; remember [if you please]
Tindarache, though he deserve it not; and lose not the memory of him in the
contentments which you hope for by the sight of the too much -- He could not
finish what he had begun, for death prevented him. I will not tell thee now the
greifes, the perplexities and despair which have been my constant companions
ever since that Tragical accident. Content thy self in knowing, that if I
could have been believed, the Murderers of Tindarache had not spared me. But
their afflicted Commander returning to me more afflicted then at first; How
unfortunate am I (said he,) I cannot avenge my self on those that have o^ag'd
me, and I kill those that never wronged me. I seek the Traiterous Prince of
Fez, and when I thought I had met him, '^was then I found that he had escaped
from me. But I shall do better to tell you the cause of the accident which is
betided to me as (...) as to you; and if you think me not worthy pardon when
you understand through what Error I have offended you, I submit my self to
that punishment which your just sorrow shall impose upon me, I have a Sister
fair as you, and which resembles you in stature, co^ntenance and action; She
is called I^ia. My Father kept her as a thing not only precious, but weak, and
therefore was not seen, nor come to but by himself and I. Yet could not we be
so careful, but that the infamous Nephizus [so is the perfidious Prince of Fez
called] discovered her. Presently he suffered himself to be transported by his
usual lubricity, and to satiate it, resolved to employ al his strength and
cunning. You know, it may be, what charms and allurement accompany the quality
of that Prince, and how easy young Maidens, chiefly when they are a little
vain and proud, are to be caught in that kind of trap. Izilia flattered with
the hope of being a Sovereign, beguiled the watchfullness of her keepers, and
never thinking of what might come after, gave her self absolutely over to the
discretion of her Enemy. The Tyrant having quenched his brutish hea^, repetted
him of hi^ being entangled with Izilia, and presently bethought him how he
might be rid of her. But fearing ^east his crime might come to my Fathers or to
my hearing, and that we might engage him to give us satisfaction, he resolved
to continue his treason; and to that end flattered still Izilia, promised
again to marry her, and entreated her to put off the consummation of it to
another time. Izilia had patience seven or eight months: but having an
excellent heart and wit, she perceived at last that she was betrayed, and
instantly bethought her of revenge. She therefore discovered to me how she had
been abused, and entreated my help for a remedy without giving notice of it to
my Father.

I thereupon undertook her quarrel, but you may imagine with what hope of
success. I was alone, and had to do with a world: I was a Subject and was to
contest with my my Sovereign. Yet for all this, I gave not over to attempt my
revenge; and my plot failing me, I was feign to forsake my Country, and my
house; and to fly for refuge into the solitudes of Atlas. I was not able to
live there long, but getting the love of those Ar^bians you see, I have wrought
them to undertake with me one desperate attempt. We came all with one same
resolution; but arriving at my home, I understood that Izilia was become more
fool and wanton then ever, and that she was fled away with a woman to run
after the perjured Nephizus. I inquired whither they thought she might be gone,
and I was told, to Morocco. Thither I came without making my self known, the
very day that Abdelmelec's Turney ended.

I went to the Palace to find out mine Enemy, and accosting one of the Kings
Guard, I learned that all the Court was in an uproare, because the night before
Nephizus had stolen away a fair Stranger, and was gone with her accompanied
only with two or three slaves. I presently believed that 'twas Izilia whom he
had met with at Morocco; and to punish them both, I parted from that City, and
with my Arabians took the way of Fez. Some days past I came thither, and
understanding that Nephizus was not yet returned, I retired into a House not
far from hence, and ever since have beaten up and down the country, and day
and night have set Sentinells on the way of Morocco, to be advertised of
Nephizus return. He that was in Guard last night, [without doubt] discovering
you, came to give me intelligence, that Nephizus and Izilia were coming. I got
to horseback with my companions, and seeing you a far off, took you for
Izilia. This Error has made me guilty of the wrong which I have done. I am
infinitely sorry for it, and beseech you even with tears, to pardon me the
death either of your Brother or Husband. If you can resolve on this favor and
endure my presence, I shall testify by my services, that J have as much love
for virtue as J have Enmity for vice. Benzaida, staying at these words, as to
take breath, saw that Nephizus lay insensible to all this narration. Yet she
went on: and addressing her to that cruel Prince: do but reflect (said she)
on all that I have related to thee, and thou shall see that thy perjury is the
cause of all those ills which have betided me; not only in mine own person but
in that of my friends. Yet I reproach thee not for them, for after thy last
injuries, those deserved not to be thought on. Hearken only to the remainder of
my sufferings, and afterward I will leave thee in peace. When Scander Stianack
had made me a recital of thy new disloyalties, and that I had a long time
bewaild the loss of Tindarache, I resolved to accept the offers he had made me:
and, not to err any more, told him; that since he had deprived me of him that
was to me instead of a Father, Brother, and a Husband, I was well pleased to
have recourse to none other then to him that had made me so unfortunate; and
that he would conduct me to some place, where I might live unknown, and have my
Honor in safety, He promised me to take care of me as of his Sister; and
as soon as he had caused Tindarache to be interred, brought me toward this
lodging. As Soon as I came hither, I entreated him to let me live at mine own
wll; and obtaining that favor, I took on me the habit you now see me in,
Zamaella clad her so too, and for these ten or twelve days, we have passed
among the domestiques here for two Christian slaves, which the Father of Izilia
had bought. The next day after our arrival, Scander Stianack came to see me;
and seeing by his action that he was very much troubled: Fair creature (said
he) I am enforced to leave you. The ancient Enemies of our family have besieged
my father in a House which he has in the Province of Temesna, and I must needs
go to assist him: I cannot be back again in less then two months, for I
must have some time to get all My friends together, and that they may be in
case to dis-engage my Father. After he had said thus much, he called for his
Gardner and his Wife, and commanded them, that in public, they should use me
as the other slaves, but in private to serve me as Izilia her self. Hereupon he
took leave of me, and since that time I never heard of him. This true recital
of my misfortunes (without doubt) will not be sufficient to take from thee the
opinion which thy own crimes have laid on mine innocence. But if this
confession serve me for nothing with thee, yet I am well assured 'twill stand,
for mine avayle, with all persons of Honor and virtue. Yet believe not,
miserable Nephizus, that the seeing of thee convicted of so many falsehoods and
perjuries, I have, as thou have done, changed my affection and desire: No, No,
I am still the same Benzaida; Such as thou as known me at Granada, such am I at
Fez. I love thee, because I have been capable to love thee. But since my love
is a fault which has made thee commit many others, I will bear the punishment
of all those offenses; and in revenging my self on my self, avenge all the
Innocents which thou have abused after me. In finishing these words, Benzaida
turned on the other side, and calling Zamaella who had followed her, made a sign
that she should come near her, and when she was come: Have a care (said she)
that when I can no more think on my self, there betide nothing that be
mis-becoming the pudicity of Benzaida. She had no sooner ended these words, but
she drew out a Poniard which she had under her robe, and with it struck her
self a blow to the heart. She staggered presently, and leaning on Zamaella,
had care, even in dying, to preserve that honesty of which the excess of love
could never make her neglectfull. Izilia first of all saw the Poniard, and ran
to stop Benzaida, but neither she nor I were quick enough. All that I could do
was to clap a handkercheif on the wound of that Generous Princess. She gently
thrust away my hand; and her beauty being invisibly increased in this last
moment of her life, she appeared to me so far unworthy of the usage she had
received from Nephizus, that to revenge her I was at the point to perform what
I had promised to Izilia. But that African Lady, almost plucking Nephizus out
of his bed by force of tormenting him, See Tyrant (cried she in his Ears) see
what thou have done! O Barbarous and inhumane wretch, can thou live and see
Benzaida drowned ^n her blood? It behooves, nay it is most fit that I should
execute, my self, what thy vaniquisher will not grant me; and with that she
ran to Benzaidas Poniard, and questionles had plunged it in Nephizus breast, had
I not held her. I got her out of the Chamber, and ^^treating her for recompense
of the service I had done her, to enterprise nothing against that Prince: J saw
well, that if J joined not my force with prayers, it would be impossible for me
to hinder some new mischance. Yet the night following there fell out a very
bloody one. For the House, wherein we were, was broken open by strangers, and
for all the resistance I could make, they took away Izilia and Nephizus, and
left me for dead in the Court of that fatal Lodging. It Is needless to tell you
by what chance I was brought thence, for those particularities will serve
nothing to the clearing of your doubts. Polexander having thus related the
History of Nephizus perjuries; Ennoramita after she had showed her astonishment
by diverse actions spoke thus: I confess (said she) that I have much ado to
imagine that one man has, been capable of so many wickednesses. Heaven is
Heaven (added she after the manner of the Mahometans) and its Justice that
never sleeps, breaks out fearfully when its patience is exhausted. At so
holy and profitable a thought, Polexander bad the Princess goodnight, and
commanding his Pilot to make use of all favor of the Wind, his Vessel made so
good way in two days and two nights, that he came near to the coasts of
Morocco. The wind failed them under the Fortress of Guargetssem, and compelled
Polexander and his Company to make the rest of their Journey by Land.
Ennoramita being very much disguised and her Women too, took Camels, and by
little Journeys, came with their conductor to that famous City which the
follies of the Old Hely, and the Tyrannies of his ridiculous Sons, had made
more desolate then an Army of Christians would have done.

Ten days had the Justs been open when this Troop arrived, and a great number
of Knights had appeared with several Successes, and all had been constrained
by the Laws of the Turney, to declare publicly who they were, and who were
their Mistresses. Polexander, who came expressly to chastise the indiscretion
of Abdelmelec, and avenge Alcidiana of that Princes impudence, had a great
mind to put himself into the lifts, the next day after his arrival. But
Ennoramita entreating him to give her one entire day, as well to see the Combat
as to be informed of the Combatants, he put it off to the second day; and went,
with her, to take up their Lodging in one of the great Innes, wherein strangers
had all kind of freedom. Ennoramita was no sooner lodged, but she sent one of
her Slaves to enquire, through all the Innes, if there were not any Knights of
Tunis. But for all the Slaves diligence in that perquisition, he returned to
his Mistress without learning any thing that might content her. She passed all
the night in much unrest, and as soon as 'twas day, clad her self in the habit
of the Lady of Morocco, that she might be the less noted. A little before
noone she went to the place of the Justs, and taking her seat in the place
appointed for Spectators of quality and chiefly for Ladies, she heard the sound
of many Trumpets. The desire to find Muley-Hassen, turning her all into eyes,
there was not a man entered, were he on Horseback or otherwise, that she
surveyed not from head to foot. The trumpets which she lately heard, came into
the field. They were clad like so many Fames and served as Vant-Courtiers to a
Knight clad according to the ancient Greeks. He came to the place prepared for
the recitalls, and all being silent, he spoke thus.

It Is superfluous that I tell my Name, since so many Fames publish who I am; yet
not to interrupt that Order which many valiant men observed, you shall
understand that my Name is Sidy-Bu-Median, famous by the reputation of the
great Saint from whom I am descended. And more famous yet by the affection
which the Princess of Telensin has always born me in spite of the cruelties
of that Tyrant who possesses her estate. Those who have come in here before
me, have appeared to give a proof of their love and valor and I am come to
publish the virtue and beauty of a great Queen, and to oblige all those in this
Assembly, who are men of courage, to have pity of my misfortune and to employ
their valor for the deliverance of my Princess. Every one being moved with
this preface, gave double attention, and promising to himself to hear
something that should be strange, made known to Median that they had a great
mind to hear him. He thereupon (after he had discovered the Picture of the
Princess of Telinfin that was painted on his Buckler) went on thus. There is
none in this Assembly who knows not the greatness of the Kingdom of
Telensin, and who, in some way, has not heard that the Kings of it have made
themselves redoubtable to their Enemies. He which now raigns What said I? He
which raigns, No he reigns not, for the fury of his Subjects excited by the
Sorceries and predictions of a false Prophet come out of Tefesca has laden
him with Irons, and dispoyld him of his Government. The poor Habdulac-Numen
(so is that Prince called) has one only daughter; of whom I dare say nothing
for fear I should not speak as I ought, This Angel of Light is called
Arzila, and should not have been put amongst the List of mortal things, if the
affection which she bears to the least of men had not cut off somewhat from
the opinion they had conceived of her Divinity. I was that Happy man, though an
unworthy object for Arzila's affection. I received that favor with the respect
that I ought, and not being able to deserve her by any service, I never vaunted
of any thing but that I could not merit her. I was even on the point to be
elevated unto heaven, when a Devil gotten loose from hell (I mean the false
Prophet of whom I have spoken) ruined all my hopes, and buried my felicities
under the ruins of the Royal Progeny. Habat Elmely (so was that cruel
Tyrants Name) covering his ambition and Pride with a fall and pernicious
piety, entered into Telensin with a great company of his Sectaries; and after he
had there preached his Heresies, gained the Brutish and inconstant people, and
made them rise in arms against heir Sovereign. I Joined my self with those
that were loyal, and did my best endeavor. tBut after diverse defeates, and
being left for dead in the field of the last Battle, Abdulac Vmen was taken
prisoner, laden with Irons, and thrown into a horrible Dungeon. The false
Prophet presently took on him the Royal Authority, and since that he had
acused to be published at the beginning of the War, that he was come from
Heaven and the great Prophet Mahomet, to teach the truth to the Telensiens,
and, by the marriage of himself with Arzila, beget them Kings that should
chase all the Christians out of Africa; he commanded that in what place soever
that Princess should be retired, they should bring her to him, and declared,
that not only he, which concealed her should be impaled alive, but also, that
if she came not in within four days, Abdulac Vmen should be flead alive in
the great place of Telensin. At this last news Arzila, (who passionately loved
her Father) left the place where she was in safety, thought it good (in
appearance) not to dis-allow of the false prophets design; came to him to his
Palace, only with two Women, and casting her at his feet: Behold (said she) the
Maiden (for whom thou have testified hitherto so much respect and affection)
reduced to submssions and prayers! If the desire to reign, which has made
thee forget the Loyalty thou owe my Father, has not made thee lose the Love
thou did bear the Daughter, repent thy self for having displeased him, and
setting a period to his misfortune, give him cause to acknowledge so great a
service. I present not my self before thee to make use of that absolute power
which my birth and thy affection gives me over thy will; but I beseech thee as
a Subject, and submit to all thou shall ordeine me; Provided thou restore to me
the King my Father. Ought not the false Emely to have been moved by the
prayers and tears of that fair Princess? He was not a jot, though he feigned
to be so. His infamous brutality seeing it self at the point to be satiated,
made him dissemble his hatred. and advised him to promise Arzila all that she
requested to the end, that she might the more willingly sacrifice her self for
the safety of her Father. He then led her into a place where she could be heard
by no body; and taking her by the hand said, I keep not Abdulac prisoner, not
have I taken on me the title of a King, but to oblige you not to be cruel to
me. Have pity of one that is unfortunate. succor a man desperate, pay with
some small favor so many years services which I have given you (though my
discretion has hindered me from making it appear to you) and dispose, as you
please, of the Crown of Telensin: I restore it you with your Father, and
renounce for ever all other glory but that of enjoying you. He added many other
immodest and lascivious words to those, and seeing himself sweetly refused,
began to be moved, and told the Chaste Arzila that she should not hope to see
again her Father on the throne, if she did not grant him what he had so many
years searched for. The Princess, hiding her just displeasure, threw her
self again at the feet of that abominable wretch, in Lieu of answering him;
and melting into tears My Lord (said she) consider what it is you require of me;
think who I am, and do notmake me believe that thou have ever loved me. The
Tyrant laughed at the Princess virtue, and raising her from the ground, you
(...) me invane (said he) if you havenot a will to fulfill my desire I have a
long time observ^ all the Laws which Love and respect imposed on me; You must
now receive mine, or we must be equally miserable. At those words Ar^ila be
came red as fire, and stepping a pace or two backwards; My honor then (said
she) is the only ransom thou desire for thy Princes liberty? I ever believed
that thou were an in famous fellow and a Traitor: But expect not that the fear
of death, nor the hope of reseeing Abdulac in the throne, shall ever bring me
to lose that which I love more then the Crown or my life. The King my Father
would disavow me for his Daughter; and would be his own executioner, should he
know I had reestablish'd him by so sordid, so shameful, and execrable a
treaty. The false Prophet, enraged to see himself so far from his purpose,
caused Arzila to be taken away by some of his guard, brought her into the
Dungeon where her father lay; and to affright her more, and by other ways,
then by threatenings, commanded her Fathers Nose to be cut off: At which
horrible spectacle, Arzila tore her hair, cast her self into her Fathers
Arms, be-bloodied her face against his; and after some lamentations, able to
make the heart of a common Executioner to relent, besought the King to give her
over for the price of his liberty. My body (said she) is yours; give it then to
that Monster, and make use of that power which Nature has given you; and, with
that, she again embraced her Father, and besmeared her face all over with his
blood. When she thought that she was frightfull enough by that soyling, she
turned her to the Tyrant, and extending her Arms and hands to him: Thou most
infamous and lustful Goat (cried she) why do thou not exact presently from
this Prince, whilst he suffers under thy afflicting torments, that which thy
lust has so long wished for?

Abdulac made his Daughter to be silent, by the most pitiful remonstrances,
that so tragical an occasion could put into the mouth of a Father. But why
should I stand so much on the misfortunes of that incomparable payr? The good
King would never consent to the dishonor of his Daughter; and seeing so great
constancy in so weak a personage, endured, with a great deal of patience, his
ignominious and cruel usage. The inhumane Elmely, grown desperate by the
virtue of those two truly-royall minds, caused Arzila to be put into a Dungeon
apart from her Father, and so went away, after he had assured them that there
should not pass a day, wherein they should not feel how far his choler would
extend. It is (brave Knights) five months now, since these honored personages
have suffered an infinite sort of indignities in these Dungeons, wherein they
are buried alive. Ever since I have been able to carry Arms, I have tried
diverse ways to free the Father and Daughter, but none has succeeded; and if
by your assistance, I see me not quickly in case to pluck the Tyrant from that
Throne, who is no way redoubtable but in words, I here make a vow, never to
review my desolate Country. Abdelmelec, (who was present at this relation)
perceiving that Sidy-Bu-Median had no more to say, fixing his Eyes a while on
the portraict of Arzila, began to speak thus: I see well (said he to the
unfortunate Knight) that you are come hither to make friends, and not to engage
your self in new enmities. As for my self, who alone should have some cause
to refuse the succor you come for, since you are come with an intent to fight
with me: yet I make known to you, that I give my full resentment to the
consideration of Arzila, and will employ, for her deliverance and the King her
Father, all the power that I have in the Kingdoms of Fez and Morocco.

Above five hundred Knights, Christians and Mahometans, presently after,
offered themselves to Sidy, and their offers were prosecuted with so many
actions of valor, that the very year of the Turney the false Prophet was
burned alive in Telensin, Abdulac Vmen reestablished in his Throne, and the
virtuous Arzila married to the constant Sidy-Bu-Median. As Soon as he had given
Abdelmelec thanks for the assistance he promised, he besought him to dispense
with his Iusting against him; for (said he) I cannot without an extravagancy
contest for valor, with that man whose succor I am come to implore. After he
had made this just excuse to the Prince of Morocco, he retired; and left the
field free to a Portugal Knight, the Son of the Governor of Larache, who on
the faith of Abdelmelec's Chartells, feared not to forsake the Banks of Zila,
and to put himself into the hands of his Enemies. He came to the place
appointed for Speech, and said boldly that he was a Christian in Religion, a
Portingall by birth, a sworn Enemy to the Moors by duty and inclination; and
Son of him that had taken from them the town of Larache. But if all these
things (said he) give you cause to look on me with an Eye of of hatred, that
which I have yet to tell you will oblige you to behold me with that of
commiseration and pity. Amongst the Slaves which the Law of Arms gave us, we
met with a Moorish Lady, so fair and so accomplished, that as soon as I saw
her, I became her Vassal. Neither the Antipathy of our Nations, nor the
contrariety of our Beleifes, no not the very contempt which that dear Enemy
made of my service, have been able to cure me of my passion. I daily besought
her to be favorable unto me, and as daily she rejected my prayers. She will
not almost either see me or hear me; and threatens, that if I restore her not
quickly to her father, she will free her self by death from the servitude
wherein she is. I fear to lose her, either one way or other; so that I know
not how to demean my self toward her: I would willingly give her her liberty,
but I fear that she will forsake me as soon as she is free. On the other side,
I doubt, least in keeping her, she carry her self to some desperate action;
and that apprehension presses me to send her to her Parents. At the same of
this Turney I have taken Arms to oblige her; and having promised to maintain
that she is fairer then all the Ladies in Africa, I am now come to perform my
word to her.

After the Portugal had made this recital, he was led about the Lists, and
being left with a very good Lance, expected when the Trumpets should give him a
Signal of the time and order of the Combat. Presently after came Abdelmelec
out of his Pavilion, and being warned to put on, came fiercely on the
Portingall, who made it appear that he was an excellent Horseman, and broke
his Lance on the Princes Caske. At the second Course he made the Challenger
forsake his Saddle; but by his own strength as much as by that of his Enemy,
he was carried over his Horses Crupper. The Officers of the field came and
presently took him up, and giving him his horse again, took his Buckler and
hung it up among many others under the Portraict of Alcidiana. The valiant
Moore Elgazair took the Portugals place: That Knight was the beloved of Ladies
and Warriors, and though he was very inconstant in his Love and Freindship,
yet he had the good luck to acquire many Mistresses, and many Friends. At the
first Turney of Abdelmelec he did Wonders for the proud Moore Abra; at that of
Nephizus at Fez, he maintained that Arais Princess of the Arabians, of the
Mountain Farobe was the most charming beauty of either the one or the other
Mauritania; and now he would make Abdelmelec confess that Alcidiana was not so
fair as the young Elserifa. He came to make his Declaration at the accustomed
place; and made all his Auditors laugh, at the grace wherewithal he published
the perfections of his new and easy Mistress. He desired not though, to be
esteemed more constant then he was, and for that cause he carried both arms,
and a Device that intimated sufficiently the fickleness of his mind. His Arms
were wavy, and wrought with such art, that when the Sun darted his beams on
them, the Colors losing themselves one in another, and producing a fair
effect, resembled the rainbow, or rather those various shadowings which you see
on the necks of pigeons. His Buckler was bordered with Opalls and in the midst
was seen a Fountain like to that marvelous one in Daulphine, which from time
to time casts out flames. This Knight was so renowned for his valor and
courtesy, and so known for the many fair actions he had done, that all the
Spectators promised to themselves an extreme pleasure in the Combat.
Abdelmelec loved him with all his heart and if he could have suffered himself
to be overcome, so that the glory of Alcidiana had not received a diminution by
it, I doubt not but he would himself have contributed to his own deafeat. But
Love being always stronger then freindship, suspended the Princes affection,
and obliged him to satisfy his own passion. And that of the whole Assembly*
and therefore taking his place, and Algazair his, they parted both at once, and
met in the midst of their Cariere with such an extreme force that they lifted
up one another, and sent the splinters of their Lances all about the fields.
The two next courses were not less fair nor unequal to the first, and so
ravished the Spectators that they clapped their hands, and signified by their
acclamations, that they had not yet seen any like it. But the fourth decided
the business, and caused the Picture of the young Elserifa to be placed
immediately under that of Alcidiana.

This fair Encounter was followed by another, which gave no less admiration
to all there present. 'Twas undertaken by a French Prince, that was expressly
come from Naples to be at this Turney. He was the worthy inheritor of his
Predecessors eminent virtues, and from his Infancy had equally made profession
of love and the wars. If they were astonished at the richness of his Armor,
and the pomp of his equipage, they admired not less the novelty which appeard
in the picture of his Lady. She was clad in such a fashion, that they might
easily know the greatness of her condition: But two little Loves which were
painted over her head held a Veyle before her face, and kept her from being
known. Abdelmelec drew near to complain of that slight, and thought he had the
more cause, because looking on the hands of that Lady, and taking them for
Nose-gayes of Lillies and Roses, he told the Prince, that he wronged so
excellent a beauty in not showing her in so famous an Assembly.

The Prince answered him, that he was of the same opinion, and that his Lady
deserved to be seen by the Eyes of all the World, but that he feared the chance
of Arms, and dared not expose the fairest creature of the Universe, to the
extravagancies of fortune. Abdelmelec approved of the brave French-mans just
apprehension, and would not that the veyle of his Lady should retard the
contentment of the Company. They ran at one another, and in their first courses
brake their lances without any advantage; at the fourth, our generous
Frenchman struck and was not touched; at the fifth he made Abdelmelec quit one
of his stirrops, and at the sixth they fell, both men and Horses together.
Presently they got up again, and put their hands to their Swords to decide the
difference, but the Judges of the Field came instantly in to them, and
separating them according to the Laws of the Turney, proclaym'd them both
Victorious. Abdelmelee returned to his Tent, and the French Prince to his
lodging with his veyld Picture. This Just so ended, there entered two Knights
clad as the Ianizaries, which are of the Guard to the great Turk. They were
two Flemish Renegados, who were in great esteem among the Warriors of Argier,
and were no less famous for their valor then for their fantasticalnesse. Of
extraordinary Enemies, which they had been, they were become friends, and their
amity had produced a love, which has for a longtime been the talk of all
Barbary. The one was called Abdear, and the other Raman. Abdear had married a
Moore, who passed among the Ladies of her Nation for a beauty perfectly
accomplished, and yet her extravagant humor and eight or ten days enjoying,
had made her so displeasing to him, that he had much ado with himself to
refrain from repudiating her. Her black hair, her complexion that showed the
Eye a mixture of pure incarnadine, with a brown that had nothing of the Olive,
her stature tall and slender, the quickness of her Eyes and of her wit, were
not sufficient charms to allure him. But on the contrary, the yellow Locks of
Ramans wife, who was a Britain and by him made to deny her faith, the
whiteness which she borrowed as well from art as Nature, and her green Eyes,
which made some believe that she saw not a glimpse, were to Abdear such
miracles and perfections as were not found in all the Sex of Woman besides.
Raman was, (as he said himself in the public place) of his friends humor,
and yet they had different palats. He noted every day some new defects in
white-flaxen hair'd Women, to the end he might find cause to contemn his
own. He called that red, which was but half flaxen, and never called the
extreme white complexions, but relics of Sickness, and Images of Plaster.
For the hairs and black eyebrows, he spoke of them as of the Master-peeces
of Nature; and said they were made to compose of them those powerful bows, by
which Love has got to himself the Empire of the world. The black and
sparkling Eyes in a clear and well-colour'd face, seemed to him more fair
then the brightest Stars in a calm Evening.

In a word Raman was in love with the Wife of Abdear, and Abdear with the Wife
of Raman; and their passion was come to such a point, that after they had made
themselves confident of one another, they were come together to maintain
publicly the beauty of their Mistrisses. Raman came first into the Lists, and
first felt that Abdelmelec had more strength then needed to orethrow him: and
if the Grecian and African beauties had left their defense to him, they had
lost that fame which they had gotten among all the Nations of the world. Abdear
thought that the flaxen should be more beholding to him then the brown had been
to his companion; But he kept his Horse no better then his friend, but
blemishing (as much as he could by his fall) the great luster that subjects us
to the power of the flaxen-hayrd beauty, made all the Assembly say, that Causes
are good or bad, according as they find good or bad Defenders. As Soon as the
noysethat followed the defeat of these two Extravagants. was over, there were
seen appear at the Bars, a Troup very proudly, but very sadly accroutred.
The Trumpetters were clad as those of Europe paint the Phantasms and shadows
of the dead. Their Trumpets were made as t were of bones, and had a sound so
doleful, that many imagined, they were to see some Funeral in Jesus of
Iusting. But they soon changed their opinion: for presently after, they saw
come in diverse foot-boyes, and many horses, which among the black that covered
them, made some show of flames. The Captain of this Brigade, was mounted upon
a Roane horse with Caparisons of black Velvet, imbroider'd with Gold and Silk
of the color of fire. The Arms he bare, by the industry of the Workman,
represented a furnace, wherein the fire was nourished by a little mizling rain
that fell into it. His shield was black in many places, and the rest bloodied
with the long tresse of a Comet. This Devise had for motto to it, these three
Latin words: Vt perdat lucet. Polemander (so was the Knight called so deadly
inflamed; came to the place prescribed, and easily obtaining the Audience, he
desired, said: that he was come out of the Mountains which separate Spain
from France, to give to the fair Infeliciana the last testimony of his love.
Truly his constancy deserves from us extraordinary praises. For though the
object of his passion was, during her life, full of grace and merit, yet we
must confess that there was a miracle in so long a perseverance.

Infeliciana enjoyed in the highest degree, all that which the fairest Ladies,
either Greek or Spanish, had of allurement or fire; yet whoever, di-sinteress'd
should, Judge* will acknowledge the beauty of that Lady to be nothing in
comparison of the wonders of her wit, and the sweetness of her conversation.
This magnanimous Knight, charmed with so many divine qualities, had neither
soul nor life, but what he received from the Eyes or discourse of Infeliciana.
When he was absent from her, he did nothing but languish: His melancholy and
heaviness made both the Court and the light odious to him, and made the King
of Navarre (of whom he was passionatly beloved) to take notice of it. That
Prince, by all manner of offers and favors, would feign have won him to
discover the cause of his disquiet, but all in vain. After he had long time
mused on it, he doubted that the sadness of his favorite came from love; and
himself being then extremely in love with a young Lady called Ismenia, who
wanted no allurements, he imagined that Polemander kept not his love private,
for any other thing, but because it had original from her beauty. Presently
the King grew jealous, and so extremely jealous, that, to free him of all his
suspicions, he made use of all the wit and subtlety wherewith his love could
furnish him. But it was all in vain that he made use of his great promises,
his feined compassion, and his other artifices. The discretion and silence of
Polemander triumphed over all those enemies, and confirmd the King in that
opinion he had too lightly conceived. He secretly looked on Polemander as his
Rival. He forgot what he was to him, He threatens him, and suffering himself
to be transported by his former motions, deliberated already on the execution
of him, which but lately he loved as his own person. On the other side, his
fury made him think strange things of Ismenia. He accused her for being crafty,
to desire more then one Lover, and but to feine as often as she promised him
her affection; some days passed, during which the Prince was able to contain
him, but the excessive torments which his silence added to those his jealousy
made him undergo, compelled, him at last, to make known his sufferings, and
discover to all Navarre the cause of his vexation. He brake out (in the end)
even against Polemander, and not content to revile him for those things whereof
he never thought, told him, that if he gave not over his love, he would make
him feel all that which could be expected from the just indignation of an
offended Monarch. This perfect lover seeing himself thrust at, and tottering
on all sides, would not give place to violence, but abiding in his first
resolution, intended to perish rather then to fail of that secrecy he had
promised to Infeliciana. Whilst all the Court was troubled at the Melancholy
and Ch^'ler of the King, and that the Enemies of POLEXANDER accusd him aloud to
be too indiscreet;

Infeliciana admired the generousnesse of her Lover. She confesses that he
only is worthy to be beloved, and laughed at the blindness of those cowardly
and perfidious minds that have no other light but what they have from Envy and
detraction. Polemander, who well saw how much his discretion made him
miserable, protested to Infeliciana never to forsake her; and rather to lose
the Kings favor then to violate his faith, or those commands which she had
justly imposed on him. He kept his word so truly, that the most crafty and
curious Courtiers of them all, were as well caught as the rest, and made no
difficulty to believe that Ismenia was the true cause of Polemander's passion.
But if their preoccupation had not made them see things far otherwise thenthey
were, it had been very easy for them to have been dis-beguild, when
Infeliciana was taken from the Court to be given to a German Prince to whom she
had been promised by her parents. Truly, death is not so horrible as the
departure of Infeliciana was to Polemander. He failed but little of being lost
to himself, and had infallibly done injury to his own person, if that
beautie's forbiddings, and the hope of re-seeing her had not staid his
Tragical resolution. In spite of himself he therefore gave himself life,
but unwilling to keep it but as an Enemy which he would persecute, he did him
those ills, and went on to such extremities, that none would ever believe it,
but such as have loved so truly as he. The day that Infeliciana parted, he went
out alone from the City, and taking on him the habit of a Beggar, put himself
in the way she was to pass. As far off as He saw her Chariot, he tore his
hair, gave most fearful shriekes, and beating his head against the trees and
stones, lay as dead in the midst of the highway. Those that rid before
Infeliciana pitied him, and taking him; for a man afflicted with some strange
sickness, commanded their Servants to remove him, those that were chosen to
do that work of charity, were so base, that they had almost killed him, in Lieu
of assisting that poor Lover. They did him a many mischiefs in drawing of him,
and with the extremity of their dragging made him recover his senses. Presently
he rose up as a man enraged: and getting out of the hands of those unpitifull
men, ran even to Infeliciana's Chariot. In her presence he renewed his cries
and fury, and spoke such things that the most barbarous minds could not hear
without rele^ting. On an instant he cast himself under the Chariot, which the
Charioteer had stopped; and as he lay there besought them to crush his head in
pieces under the Wheels, to terminate, by so glorious a death, a life that was
odious unto him; in this speech he intermingled the Name of Infeliciana, and
repeated it so often, that she took notice of it, and knowing him, was so
stricken with grief that she fell into a swoon. As Soon as her Women had
brought her again from her fainting, She commanded her Squire to take that
miserable creature from under the Chariot: diverse alighted to obey her, and
taking Polemander by the arms and head, made him by force to let go his hold
on one of the wheels. But as soon as they had pulled him off, he threw himself
on again, and those that would have hindered him, could not do it so well, nor
the Charioteer so fitly take his time to put on; but that one of the wheels ran
over his right leg, which pain he endured so patiently that no body perceived
it; and though he could scarce keep himself up, yet followed her more then a
league on foot, still caling on the Name of Infeliciana, and wishing her a
happy Journey. He remained still in these violent passions, and begged from
Heaven eithera speedy death or the return of that beauty. When he was told that
she had forgotten her promises and given her self to one of the house of the
Palatine; It Is very hard to express the excess of Sorrow; which that
infidelity brought on Polemander. But when he was in the height of his grief,
he heard that Infeliciana was dead with sorrow for having left him for another.

Polemander, after he had related all this, stood a while speechless; at last
surmounting his passions, and wiping off his tears, he addressed him to the
Prince of Morocco, and discovering the Picture of Infeliciana; I come, said he,
to maintain that there is not a beauty in the world which should not give place
to this. Abdelmelec would have made an answer to that speech, conformable to
his peevish humor, but the Judges of the field entreated him to give them
leave to do their charge; and addressing them to Polemander: Your intent (said
they) is praiseworthy, but it is contrary to the Laws of this Turney, the
Prince Abdelmelec has undertaken it, to make all Knights confess that
Alcidiana is the rarest beauty in the World. She, who is pictured on your
Buckler; is dead, and by consequence how fair so ever She has been, she can,
be no more compared with Alcidiana. That beauty which is no more, is as a
beauty that has never been. Judge, after this, If you may be received to the
combat, and whither Abdelmel^c should hazard the glory of Alcidiana to ruinate
that of a Shadow, of a Name, of a Picture, of nothing. Polemander had too much
wit to stand without an answer; He then replied to the Judges: that it was to
wrong that beauty which he adored, to believe that death had been powerful
enough to destroy it; That she Lived, not only in his heart, and in the memory
of men; but in heaven, where she shines fairer then She did on Earth, and where
She was assured of her immortality.

The Judges, who knew how far the gallantry of a Lover mightextend, hearkened
very favorably to Folemander; but answering him in few words, that a dead
beauty could not be set in comparison with a living one, they, entreated him to
retire; and til he had gotten a new Mistress, give place to those that were yet
to run. Polemander, loath to be noted by an unreasonable wilfulness, the very
same day got toward his shipping, and after his setting sail, within few
days (happily) arrived at Beyone.

The while, Abdelmelec seeing the Sun ready to set, promised to himself to go
victorious out of the Turney, and bragged already amongst his Courtiers, that
the Theife, who had stolen from him the Picture of Alcidiana, durst not forsake
his vessel nor appear in so famous an Assembly. But the pretended Thief was
come; and, had it not been for Ennoramita's entreaty, had long before made him
(with his Honor) lose also the boldness of continuing his boastings. Whilst
that Princess sat desperate of seeing him come in, whom her heart and Eyes so
servently longed for: She saw enter a Knight clad after the same manner as are
the Knights of Senega and Thombut; he was followed by six black Slaves, and
mounted on a Black Barbary, caparison'd with Olive-colour Velvet cut into the
fashion of Oake^-leaves: and when he was before the Judges, he asked them leave
to speak and to fight. Abdelmelec, who was gone to meet him, and had received
him with a courtesy that was not natural to him, entreated that before he told
what he was, he would show his Buckler. The Knight took off a taffata of the
color of dead leaves that was upon it and showed him a prodigions shape,
instead of a Lady's picture; 'Twas a living death: He had caused to be painted
a body, which in all parts was half bare to the bone, and half covered with
flesh. One side of her face seemed very fair, and the other showed nothing but
bones Abdelmelec was affrighted at the sight of it; and asked of the Knight;
whither: he had caused that Monster to be pictured in contempt of ALCIDIANA.

Such as she is [said he) she is more fair then your Queen; and could you see
he Original, as you now see but the Copy, you will avow, to the shame of
Alcidiana, that this body so fair in those places by which she seems to be
living, is the sole object whereto all Princes owe their affections and
services. But that I may let nothing stick in your mind to hinder you from
being of my opinion; Know, that picture you see is that of a Princess, who
lately was adored through all Africa She is fair in the highest degree, but
she is more unfortunate: her body, which by a particular privilege preserves
all her beauties in her mseries, is accompanied with a mind that incessantly
dies, and which is equally devoured by love and hatred, by duty and aversion.
If Christians, who have the liberty of re-presenting all things by their
colors, had the Art of painting minds: you should see the fairest body of the
world joined to a mind even like death it self. But what my Painter could not
do one way, he has done in another, and not being able to make the mind seen
with the body he has divided the body it self and painted the one part alive
and the other dead. The Star, under whose aspect I took possession of earth
gave me not life, but to consecrate it to this fair Princess. I loved her,
before I was of fit age to know her, and I adored her as soon as I was capable
of reason. I left Africa to try by the knowledge of strange virtues and manners
to acquire such qualities as were worthy of her, after 3 years: carrying her to
an excess which I had nocause to hope, drew me out of the dirt, to raise me
even to the Skies: My Rivalls were amazed at my good fortune, and their pride
not permitting them to suffer it, they e^ployed forces more to be feared and
more powerful then their own, to compel me from that place of pleasure. I was
stricken by the same hand whence I expected my protection and my miserable
soul exposed to eternal tortures was condemned towander incessantly through
the solitary Deserts of Numidia. Ennoramita could not longer be in quiet (after
the hearing of those last words) without testifying by her cries that she was
that Dead-living-Lady, or rather that dead-one revived who was painted on the
buckler of the desolate Knight: she doubted not, but he that had spoken was
Muley Hassen; and throwing her on the Neck of her confident, who was seated
near her; Atalida [said she] mark that Knight, it is Muley, it is Muley, without
doubt: But let us hear the continuation of his History and mine. Muley, who had
not been interrupted by Ennoramita's agitation, thus continued on his
Narration. Some short time after I was confined to the deserts of Numidia, my
Princess [as if she had been guilty for not loving her Enemy] was delivered
over to his fury, and condemned to a punishment, that was to last as long as
she had either faith or life. It Is even he [said again Ennoramita;] Good
Heaven! How discreet is he to hide what should not be known? She implored not
the mercy of her Judges [said the Knight,] to make them lenify the sentence of
er Condemnation, but seeing that it could not be revoked, she went willingly to
her torture, and in the height of her torments, exceedingly blessed the
Executioners, for giving her so illustrious means to make her virtues the more
renowned. In the mean time I led on a miserable life, among the precipices and
mountains and having no more to hope for in the world, I went out of it by a
voluntary retirement, and sequestered my self into the Caverns of our
Mountain Atlas. O how wife was he in the art of love, who said, that Love is a
just Master; and if so be we would suffer and have patience, we shall
infallibly receive the wages we have deserved! I had not there abandoned the
World six months, with the hopes that had so pleasin gly stayed me there, when
the very voice of my fair Princess called me thence: (O heaven cried out
Ennoramita, he Speaks of that time, when he was a Hermit, and that I visited
him with Nephizus.) That visible Angel [continued Muley] took the pain to
descend into my solitary vault, and by a light derived from her self, to
expel the obscurity of my cavern. I saw that miracle; I spoke to her; I told
her my afflictions. I Petitioned that I might aveng her; and offered to lose my
self for her safety. But unwilling to have any other will then hers, I
entreated, that I might be once, for all, commanded what I should do. I would
have thee live, said she, but not live contented, since I am unfortunate. Give
over then this manner of obscure and dismal life, and get thee far hence,
making the renown of thy actions to sound so far, that the noise of them may
come into my ears. My Honor and faith forbid me, to have any particular
communication with thee: but they forbid me not, to rejoice in thy Fame. O
poor Prince [said Amatonta softly] how well has he concea'ld that which I
spoke, in banishing him from my presence. I obeyed, without resistance
(continued the Knight) a command, that was so glorious for me, and so worthy
the virtue of my Princess. I put my self into the Armies of mine own Enemies;
and, during two years, served them so well, that it was my fault alone, if I
brought no other fruits thence then that of Honor. He lies not [said
Ennoramita] but alas! what has he done since? Whence comes he now? I was on
the point [said the Knight] to put in execution one of the fairest enterprises,
that a faithful Musulman could conceive against the Christians, when they who
were employed in the Secrecies of my affection, gave me intelligence that my
Princess had been taken away from that place wherein her Ty ant had long time
kept her prisoner, and conducted into some other that was not known but to her
Tormentors. Presently I forsook my Arms, and infallible designs, and under
the habit you now see me in, have traviled from the one end of Africa to the
other. Two years now, or rather two ages have I wandered, from Province to
Province, from Sea to Sea, from Isle to Isle, to l^arn news of my fair and
unfortunate Princess, and to Know whether I should live or dye; to the end, to
have the contentment to be near her. But getting nothing that might clear me
of my doubts; I lived, as if my Princess lived yet, and dyed, as if I were sure
of her death Love which usally is accompanied with fear, has changed his
wonted custom, [it ma* be] to make me languish the more; and [in spite of me]
would have me to hope stily It Is that hope, but imperfect hope, which has
brought me hither, and makes me main^taine, that the princess whom I adore, is
the most accomplished, be it for beauty of body or that of the Soul, of all
the Princesses this day living. As Soon as Muley-Hassen (for 'twas he) had
finished his history, there grew a humming or muttering noise from the midst of
the Auditors, and presently after some shouts and talk, which intimated that
he had given satisfaction to all the Company. But if the rumor had not taken
from the fair and constant Amatonta Ennoramita, the liberty of being heard; O
how had the public joy been augmented ^and the shoutes and clapping of the
hands been redoubled! In the mean time, the Heralds imposing silence:
Abdelmelec began to speak, and told Muley, that though in the causing him to
lose his Buckler, there would be nothing gotten to Alcidiana or himself, yet
he was glad that he should make an end of the day by his defeat. Muley answered
nothing to that boasting, but went to take one of the strongest lances that was
in the field, and brought his Horse gently to the end of the Tilt.

The Trumpetters, that were weary with calling so many Knights, sounded for the
last time, and seeing the Sun set, invited by a hasty sounding, our two Princes
to a speedy decision of their difference. At the parting of Muley, Ennoramita
grew pale, and, if she had not leaned on one of her Women, She had infallibly
discovered that she was Interested in the Just. It Is a strange malady, or
rather a pleasant folly this Love. Ennoramita knows how strong her Lover is,
how expert, and how many more redoubtfull Knights then Abdelmelec he has
overthrown, yet she fears least some disgrace betide him, and that the same
Demon which had so many years persecuted her, should enter into the body of
Abdelmelec, or at least-guide his arm and lance, so that Muley might receive
an affront from him. But whilst she was in these fears, the hardy Hassen
astonished his adversary and all the Spectators with his vigor and dexterity.
He had already broken three lances, and, at all the three courses, carried away
the Honor from Abdelmelec. At the fourth; he made him lose his Stirrops; and if
the Moor had not clasped his Arms aabout the neck of his horse, without doubt
he had gone to the ground. Ennoramita saw that brave course, and from thence
conceived such a hope, that her blood, which was all got to her heart, left the
place that had no more need of defense, and spread it self through all those
parts which it had forsaken. The Judges of the field hindered any further
running, and fearing least the success might not be fortunate to their Prince,
for that by reason of ^ight, there might be some false play; put it off to the
next day. Presently every one ra^ished and wearied with the Chances of the Day,
retired to their lodgings. Ennoramita, was no sooner got thither, but she went
to Polexander, and calling him the Prophet of her happiness and the Author of
her true reviving; She told him that she had found Muley, and within a quarter
of an hour she would know where he was lodged. I have (said she) sent my
faithful Slave, with a Charge to follow him, and that as soon as he is ^n his
Lodging, to entreat him, in the Name of a Lady of this City, to take the pains
to walk hither. Polexander had a great share in Ennoramita's content; and
obtaining leave to take (the next day) the place of Muley, staid above an hour
with her, in talking of nothing else but the valor and fidelity of that
Prince. As he ended his discourse, Ennoramita's Slave entered the Chamber, and
at his entrance addressing him to his Mistress, See Madam (said he) the Knight
you sent me to seek Amatonta startled at that news, and was so surpised that
she could not arise from the place where she was seated: Polexander undertook
the entertainment. He went to meet Muley at the Gate, and after he had praised
his Valor, told him, that a Lady of great quality was so ravished ^ith it,
that she would assure him of it her self. I should have purchased that thing
which by me was not desired (answered Muley) If I have acquired any esteem by
this days Action. I have not a long time, pretended any way either to the
Honor or favor of Ladies Yet should it be very hard (replied Polexander) if
you have not a great deal of honor since all the world gives it you. For the
favors of Ladies, I believe there are a great many who are indifferent to you:
but those that are to be offered you, come from a creature ^o rare and lovely,
that I begin to fear you and your ^idelity; and even dare believe, that for a
Widow, you will forget the Oaths* you so solemnly swore to a Married Wife.
Good Sir (replied Muley) do me the favor to bring me quickly to the test: I
will do it (said presently* Polexander) and straight taking him by the hand,
lead him where Amatonta was, still in her former perplexities. The tried out in
seeing Muley coming near, and making her self sufficiently known by that cry,
gave her Lover more then the half of her trouble. He stood presently
immovable, and abode before Amatonta, as if he had been stricken by a
thunderclap. She arose to recall him from that transport, and told him above a
hundred times, with an action full of Sadness and Love, that she was the
unfortunate Perselida-Amatonta-Ennoramita. Is it you Madam, cried Muley-Hassen?
and are you free and alive? Yes Muley (answered the Princess) I live, and
should say that I do but now begin to live, since but of late I have recovered
that life, which Nephizus had deprived me of, in taking from me the liberty of
seeing thee. Thereupon, she related to him the death of the King of Fez, the
long time she had been kept a captive, and the resolution she had at last taken
to get out of her Prison, and to search for some one which might deliver her
from the servitude of him who had forsaken her for the love of another. After
this she made known to him, that being not able to obtain any protection from
the King her Father, she had sailed to the Canaryes, tobeseech the King of
those Islands to put an end to her misfortunes.

In the ending this Speech, she made known to Muley who Polexander was, and
thereby obliging him and our Hero too to new complements, for the conclusion
of this first interview, made them promise to be mutual friends al their
lives. Muley-Hassen was not free for his already Narration of his adventures;
but was forced, after supper, to recite the particulars to Ennoramita. That
relation being ended, the Princess entreated him to think no more of the
Combat he had undertaken against Abdelmelec, and to give himself the pleasure
to see it ended by the valor of Polexander. Muley, who tasted too much of true
content to tie himself to the prosecution of so vain a victory as that which
he might obtain on the Prince of Morocco, very easily consented to
Ennoramita's entreaty, and told Polexander, that he yielded to him his place.

Polexander, that was out of all patience til he had left Africa, accepted his
offer with a great deal of content, and believing 'twas far in night,
conducted Perselida into her Chamber, and gave his own to Muley. As Soon as he
was retired into that of Alcippus, he commanded both him and Diceus, that all
his Equipage should be ready the next day betimes, and that his Ship should be
in case to weigh Anchor the night following. Therewith he went to bed and
as soon as 'twas day sleep, which he had taken but by Intervalls, left him. He
quickly clad himself, and after he had addressed his first thoughts to the
Author of all good Events, went to Muleys chamber. He commanded to be brought
him very rich Clothes, and very near the fashion of the Knights of Morocco,
and the while that Ennoramita was dressing, told him a part of his Adventures.

The Princess was no sooner in case to be seen by a Lover so passionately
desired, but she sent to entreat him to her Chamber. He came thither with
Polexander, and found her so dressed and clad, that he had cause to have a good
opinion of his fortune. These two Lovers renewed the assurances of their
affection, and stood a long time parlying with their Eyes and hands; not daring
(may be) in the presence of Polexander, to express that which the height of
their love filled their minds withal.

Our Hero took notice of it, and knowing that the mysteries of Love desire no
beholders, fitly took leave of them, and went to prepare him for the Justs. At
the hour prescribed by the Laws of the Turney, he rid out of his lodging
accompanied only with Alcippus; and, as an ordinary Moorish Knight, came to the
Gates of the Field. Those who were appointed to give entrance to the
Assailants, looked on him with a great deal of Scorn; and seeing him so ill
followed, Judged (according to the impertinent custom of brutish bred men)
that he was a man of no great value, At last (with much ado) he had leave to
enter, and coming to the place where the Prince of Morocco used to receive and
hear his Rivals, Abdelmelec (said he) it is needless that I should tell thee who
I am. This Picture shall speak for me: and in thus speaking he discovered that
Buckler he had taken from the Prince. Abdelmelec presently knew it, and had not
power enough at his first perturbations, to see, without trouble, the man which
he expected with so much impatiency, He trembled, and, favorably to interpret
that trembling. I will say 'twas out of Joy and fear, at least he made it
seem so. For being recollected from his first agitation; I never hoped to see
thee more (said he audaciously to Polexander') and believed, that the
Cowardice, wherewith all ill actions are accompanied, would not suffer thee to
show thy self in this place of Honor. But since thou have no less impudence
to maintain thy Thefts, then thou had boldness to do them, I find that
Fortune is not all together unjust in making thy rashness happy. Yet see here
a place wherein she has but little Authority; And therefore thou should
fear least she forsake thee at thy need, and leave thee to suffer that
punishment which thou have deserved. Thou art (replied Polexander) either
poorly in Love, or very senceles, to suffer (for so long a time) the Portraict
of Alcidiana in the hands of another, and of such another as has so shamefully
made thee quit it. On, Abdelmelec, Run on to thy revenge, and do not Evaporate
thy Choler in idle Narrations. When our Hero had ended his speech, he turned
his back to Abdelmelec, and rid to attend him at the end of the Li^t. The
Prince of Morocco, re-collecting all his force and all the opinion of his
Courage, came thundering on Polexander, and broke his Lance with a great deal
of strength. Our Hero: struck his on the Princes Casque, and turning him over
on the Crupper of his Horse, astonished him so, that he was carried to the end
of the Cariere, senseless. yet he recovered, and took a second Lance;
Polexander, met him with his first, and so impetuously lifted him above his
Horse, that almost in the very instant of the shock, they saw him extended on
the Gravel. Presently he got up, and on all sides hearing the noise of the
people, and the hand-clappings of all the principal Spectators; he thought
himself lost in his reputation, if he did not hazard his Life to regaine what
he had so lately lost. He called for [and 'twas brought him) a fresh Horse, and
sent two Pole-axes and two Cimyters to Polexander, that he might take his
choice of two. Polexander took the first he met withal under his hand; and
sending the two other to his Rival, bad them tell him, that he was not his
Enemy though his Challenges had extremely offended him, even to the taking
away of his life: that he should look to himself, and undertake nothing beyond
his power. Those words made Abdelmelec lose all the little reason was left him:
He ran on Polexander with the sury, but not with the courage of a Lion.
Polexander presently stopped him, and unwilling to make use of his arms,
because they were dangerous, made it appear to all the Assembly, that he came
to the Turney, rather to reprove Abdelmelec for his daring, then to punish him
for it. The inequality, noted between them, took away all the pleasure the
Spectators promised themselves in seeing the Combat. Even Polexander, (being
ashamed of so much advantage) retired often, and besought Abdelmelec to have a
care of his life. But that weak and wilful Prince, neither being able to
vanquish nor to yield, gave Polexander a great deal more trouble, then if he
had far better defended himself. Whilst our Hero sought a means to be rid
of him without killing him, He heard a great noise of Trumpets at the
principal Gate of the field; and took that occasion to oblige Abdelmelec, at
that time, not to be killed. Let us at least see (said he) before we end our
Combat, who comes so boldly to violate the Laws of the Turney. Abdelmelec,
gave a deaf Ear to these words, but seeing a great many Trumpetters enter the
field, he took off his Casque, and went from Polexander to chastise those that
had contemned his countermands.

A man clad in a long robe, after the Persian manner, covered with Plates of
silver cut and imbroydered in scales, straight appeared mounted on a brave
horse. He was attended by twelve black Slaves, who had all Collars of silver
and long chains of the same mettle! The Knight himself seemed a Slave, for he
had chains on his legs, which (though of Gold) were yet the tokens of his
servitude: Polexander (at first, knew not what to think of that novelty, but
casting his eyes on the Banners which were tied to the trumpets of that
Slave-Knight and noting on them a Phoenix which arose out of its Cradle, (or if
you will it is Tombe] he imagined that 'twas one of Alcidiana's Slaves. His
astonishment was no less then his joy: He grew pale, he trembled, and passing,
in an instant, from one extremity to another, became all on fire. His first
perturbances were followed by other more temperate, and re-collecting his
Spirits, and making use (as he ought) of his reason, persuaded himself that
Alcidiana had not, without some important cause, sent that illustrious Slave,
to the Court of Morocco. Being more nerely approached to see him distinctly, he
knew 'twas the same Pallantus who had pronounced the sentence of his
condemnation in Bajazets Island. He was oftentimes tempted to go and embrace
him; but the considerations of the Just, not permitting his discovery, he
expected with a great deal of impatiency what Pallantus had to say. The
trumpets imposing silence, and the famous Slave being conducted to the place
for the Orations, spoke thus: Alcidiana, Queen of the most happy Island, has
understood, that diverse bold men, have taken to themselves such License as has
been disadvantagious to her honor, and have dared not only to take her for the
object of their diversions, but to style themselves the Knights and defenders
of her beauty.

These Insolences have troubled the peace of her mind, and have made her
capable of choler. After she had long complained of the pride of men she has
pleased to divulge her just indignation, and given me command to be at this
Assembly, to the end that by a public disavowing, I should make known to all
the world, that she holds all those for her enemies, who have the impudence to
name themselves her Lovers. She therefore forbids the continuation of these
Iusts, and her will is, that the Prince himself of Morocco be comprised within
the rigor of her Law. And for as much as she hears how a certain Barbarian
called Phelismond, dares in the Deserts of Denmark to vaunt himself only
worthy of her service; She invites to the ruin of that Monster, all those who
think them interested in her honor. Pallantus, after he had thus ended his
strict and proud Declaration, retired: and left all those who had not heard of
Alcidiana in an extreme astonishment at his high carriage and language, and in
a great desire of knowing him. In the mean time, Abdelmelec far more offended
at Alcidiana's contempt, then with the disgrace of his combat, I will obey,
said he, that which this proud Queen commands; and I will scorn her, since she
makes her self unworthy of my service. And with that he went and plucked down
her Picture which he had hung under a paviiion of Cloth of Gold, and throwing
it on the ground, trampled it under his horses feet. Polexander, beholding that
bruitshnesse, ran to Abdelmelec, and offering his Cymiter at his throat, what
Monster (cried he) more Monster then he of the North, give over the not rendering
the respect thou owe to Alcidiana; and if thou will avenge thy self of thy
shame, do it on thy self, since thou alone art the cause of it. Polexander, in
thus speaking, alighted to take us Alcidiana's picture; When Abdelmelec, who
had lost all knowledge and sense of honor, glad to make use of that advantage,
let drive so weighty a blow with his Axe; on our Hero's helmet, that he had
almost laid him on the ground. Polexander feeling this baseness, got present
on Horseback; and to avenge Alcidiana rather then himself, had quickly brought
Abdelmelec in case to implore that excessive courtesy which he had so basely
offended. Polexander generously gave him his life, and went out of the field
with the Victory and two Pictures of Alcidiana. The Author tells us not how
Abdelmelec came by Alcidiana's Picture, twice, for Polexander took one from him
in the ship, and how got he a second for the Iusts?
In coming from the place of the Iusts; Muley joined to him, and intimating to
him the opinion he had of his valor, made him new protestations of his love.
They went straight to their lodging, and found there Ennoramita, who out of the
impatiency of seeing her Lover, could not stay out the end of the Turney. She
besought him presently to take her out of her Enemies Dominions, and bring her
to some place where she might, with facility, hear from the King her Father,
to treat with him of her return and marriage. Muley related to her, that,
during the time he lay at Mezila and in some other Towns of Numidia, he had
there gotten so many friends and so much credit, that he was little less
absolute there then the King himself: Lett's go thither then, said Ennoramita,
and assure our selves that, in spite of the power of our common Enemies, we
shall quickly see our selves in Muley Hassen's favor. This resolution was not
long from being put into execution: For that very hour Perselida Amatonta
Ennoramita gave to Polexander those thanks which she believed was due to him
from her, and beseeching him to preserve to her and her dear Muley, the
friendship he had promised them, rid out of Morocco to the place where she had
left her ship. Polexander, on his side had no less impatiency. As Soon as he
was alone, he sent Diceus to learn where Pallantus was lodged; and after he had
been a while with Alcippus, silent; we must to Denmark (said he) and avenge
Alcidiana of a Barbarians boldness. Alcippus would have made known to him the
difficulties that were to be met with in that voyage; but Polexander with one
word shut his mouth; and to tell him that his intent could not be altered, we
must (said he) the second time go to Denmark, and part, for it, hence this very
day. In that very instant, Diceus returned, and told the King his Master, that
Pallantus was returned to his ship, and had presently set sail. Let him go
(said he) and let us, on our part, do what is commanded us: In saying so, he
got to Horseback a little before night, and rid to imbarke him at the mouth of
the River of Tensif, where his Mariners had order to come and expect him. When
his Ship was under sail, he cast his Eyes toward his dear Islands, and
sighing at the remembrance of those things he went from, it is not (said he
softly) by the course which I take, that I shall discover the Inaccessible
Island. But I have this comfort, I do that which I ought; and if I have not the
happiness to see Alcidiana, yet I have the glory of obeying her. After these
words, he began to think on the means of fighting with Phelismond, and mused,
a long time, on those he should take hold of to know, who Phelismond was, and
in what Province of the Kingdom of Denmark he might meet him. But he resolved
to free himself of those cares on the dexterity of Alcippus, and not to make
himself known in that Northern Court. After these thoughts, he remembered
Zelmatida; and calling to him Alcippus, what will Zelmatida think (said he) of
our stay? I fear least he will imagine some treason wrought against us by
Abdelmelec; and if once he have that opinion, assuredly nothing can hinder his
coming to Morrocco, to know the certainty himself: I have a mind to send some
one of my servants to him. Alcippus approved of the King's apprehension, but
the difficulty was to find the means. The next day they had it, for a Patache
of a Madera Merchant, passed very near by Polexanders Ship, and she gave her
the rights she ought, and being known, they made her come near. Our Hero,
after he had spoken with the Master, commanded him to carry one of his
followers to the Isle of Lancerotta; and presently went to write to Zelmatida;
and by his letter excusing himself in a good manner, that he was compelled to
break his word with him, was now in no other care but to choose amongst his
company a man that he might send to Zelmatida, of capacity, to tell him by word
of mouth what he could not write to him. Alcippus and Diceus came first into
his mind; but being not able to miss two such imployable and faithful
servants, he was compeld to think of others. He had bred up a Canaryan, a
Prince by birth and great grandchild to the King Guavartemus; and in all his
travells had found him so capable of his service, that he thought he could not
find a man more fit. He therefore called for him, gave him his letters in charge,
and instructing him in what he had to say to Zelmatida, caused him to be
imbarqu'd in the Pinnace of Madera; and commanded that he should attend on the
Indian Prince till he returned. In an instart, the 2. Vessels were far
separated; that of Madera plied right between East and South, and the other,
wherein our Hero was, taking diverse courses, inasmuch as it was to coast part
of the continent of Africa and of Europe, put in practice for a long time the
ability of his Pilot. He ran the hazard of being lost at the Cape Finister in
Spain; He was cast on the Coast of Britany by a terrible tempest; He was
constrained to put into Holland, yet all these misfortunes gave not so great a
hindrance, but that after three months sail, Polexander landed in the Isle
Zeelandia, where the Kings of Denmark have established their principal seat as
being the fairest part of their Dominons.

The end of the second Book of the second part.
THE SECOND PART OF POLEXANDER. The Third Book
WHILST our Hero pursued that Honor which attended him in Denmark, the
Pinnace of Madera crossed the At lantickOc ean and got to the fortunate
Islands. She arrived happily at that of Polexander, and landing there the
Messenger sent by him to Zelmatida, betook her to her former Course. As Soon
as he arrived, he took horse, and, with the most expedition, came to the
Indian Prince, and presented him Polexander's Letters, telling him withal,
that the Prince had given Command he should assure him by word of mouth, that
his Voyage was not (for the most) but a voyage of two or three months.
Zelmatida opened the packet, and therein found a Letter (which I should make a
difficulty in publishing, if that Prince had I remember no man speaks here but
the author nor any else to whom Zel^ ida gave the copy but to the author.
not given me the copy of it.) As Soon as he had read it, he gave it the
Viceroy, who seldom left him, and he over-looking it found it said thus.

Polexander to Zelmatida
IF I make you not an excuse for failing in my promise, 'twas because I was
engaged by the Command of Alcidiana. I know this reason would not be available
with many: But I know withal that Zelmatida, who very highly enjoys the
quality of a brave man and a Lover, will no sooner have looked on it, but will
instantly be satisfied. I came happily off my Journey to Morocco; and then
thought only of returning to you, to re-begin our usual recreations, when one
of Alcidiana's Esquires, expressly sent to make all her Adorers run desperate,
commanded me to a Journey for the exterminating a man, who in the midst of the
Septentrionall darkness has erected Temples to that new Sun: Thus I go where
the light of that fair Star conducts me. I would say nothing of the hopes I
have in the Success of my voyage, if I were not assured that it cannot but be
very fortunate being guided by Alcidiana.

THe Viceroy, who looked on Polexander, as the work of his care, of his
watching, and instructions; and who (according to the weakness of old folks,
believed himself, in some manner, to be the Author of all the Princes fairest
actions,) could not read the Letter without the show of an extraordinary
content. He gave it back to Zelmatida, and putting on a very serious
countenance, I must confess (said he) that there is something (of I know not
what in our Prince) that is seldom seen in other men. O! how much are those
poor Kings of Europe, (who without heart and honor shamefully languish in the
idienesse of their Courts) beholding to that passion, which for these three
years has made Polexander to wander all the quarters of the Ocean. Certainly,
without this obstacle, the King my Master had taught them how to obey, since
they are unworthy to command and had of a thousand little States which tare and
vexed one another, composed a Monarchy equal to the Three Ancient. Zelmatida
answered not to the extollings, and amplification of the good old Man, but only
with a little shrug of his Shoulders* and unwilling he should continue such
censures as might extend even to himself, Father (said he) let us know (I pray)
what the King your Master has done at Morocco. Therewith he addressed himself
to the Canaryan Prince, and with a great deal of civility besought him to
intimate how Polexander came off from the Turney of Abdelmelec. The Canaryan,
who savoured no more of his Ancestors barbarousnesse, related with a great
deal of Ingenuity, all that had passed at Morocco; and to show that he could
do it well, intermingled so neatly the Adv^tures of Ennoramita and Muley-Hassen
with those of his King, that Zelmatida, and even the Viceroy as pensive and
froward as he was, took an extreme contentment in it. That Old Man, permitting
himself to be carried away with the ill custom of those of his age, began to
speak, as soon as the Canaryan had ended; and making a rigorous and
unprofitable inquiry of all which had happened at Morocco, drew-in headlong from
thence this pernicious consequence, that Love is the greatest of all follyes
whereto Nature can possibly bring men in Subjection. Zelmatida Shrugg'd his
shoulders again, in hearing himself so il dealt with in the person of another;
and to silence the Viceroy, put himself on the praising the Valor and good
fortune of Polexander. That which you know of him, (replied the Viceroy
presently) is not to be thought on in comparison of so many other acts of
Judgment and Valor which he has done since he came into the World. I say,
since he came into the world, without wronging those terms which are used in
the Ordinary fashion of speaking: For, from the first years of his Infancy, he
has made it appear that he was not borne but for the astonishment and
felicity of his age.

Zelmatida taking occasion at that hint which fortune gave him, to hear the
Viceroy at full without much entreating, besought him often by the Name of
Father, to relate all the story of Polexanders life. The good old Man, (taken
in his weakness) had no mind to deny, but presently consented to Zelmatida's
Petition, and would instantly have begun the History of the King his Master, if
the Indian Prince had not stopped him at the first word, and said, that so
brave a relation was excellent matter for a walk, and the Viceroy approved of
it. Zelmatida hereupon came out of his Chamber, after many kindnesses done to
the Canaryan, and wishing him to repose himself awhile, came down with the good
old man into the great Garden. The Sun already began to decline to the West,
and the heat of the day, tempered by a little wind, seemed by it is freshness to
extinguish that heat which the Sun, had spread through all the Horizon.
Besides, the Pines, Palms, Cedars, and Orange Trees composed Allies, as
delightsom to the smell as to the sight. Zelmatida went into one of them, so
long and close, that, but for the sweet trouble of an infinite number of
Songsters which gave not over chanting on the trees, he could not have found
out a place more fit for his walk, for to hear the Adventures of Polexander.
The Viceroy, unwilling that such little Chirpers should be of capacity to make
him hold his peace, at the first sign from Zelmatida, began his Narration; and
the more to endeare his Auditor, did it with this Preface.

The History of POLEXANDER KING OF THE CANARIES.
IF your Majesty had not all qualities deserving the Author of your race, the
glorious Surname of Child of the Sun, and the incomparable title of a Deity, I
should fearel east that, in relating to you the actions of a Prince which
infallibly is something more then Man, you might accuse me of falsehood and
flattery. But when I consider that I am to speak to a Prince, who by his own
wonderful acts is bound to believe those of His life; I fear not to relate to
you a Life as miraculous as any of those Heroes, of whom your Forefathers, and
ours have made them their first Gods. Some have bin of opinion that Kings
received from Heaven some advantages which were not granted to other men. I
have known diverse Kings who have made me doubt of the verity of that belief.
But having the honor to know you, and withal Polexander, as I do, I am forced
to confess that, as there are Kings who are always children, there are others
too, who are men in their Infancy. Without giving then ought to my affection,
and without soothing. I dare say that my King is of those last, and that he
came into the world with those excellent qualities, which age, Study, and
experience sell to ordinary men at so dear rates. His Soul, in her descent
from Heaven, preserved and retayn'd al it had received in the (...) of her
original Her descent or fall made her not lose or forget any thing. She was
c^eated full of knowledge, and so entered complete into the habitation appointed
for her; and in spite of all the fetters and vayles of the body, kept still
her prime agility, and fi^t illuminations. But it was very fit, and I dare say
absolutely necessary, that Polexander should be borne with those qualities
which are seen but in very few Princes: for it would have bin a piece of
prodigy, if there had come ought, that was any way vulgar, from Periander the
wonder of his age, and Axiamira the Admiration and glory of her times. The
Prince, which (for good cause) I always call incomparable, was borne in this
Island, and, with his life, received the Crown of almost all the Canaryes: Not
that he had his extraction from those barbarous Kings which heretofore reigned
here: His derivation is more glorious; being descended from two of the greatest
houses that ever flourished in Europ. The one is that of the Kings of France,
and the other of the Emperors of Constantinople. It is but little less then
three hundred years, since the French had, for their King, a Prince, who for
the sanctity of his life, has been thought worthy to be ran^d in the number of
the Semy-Gods: This King had a Brother called Charles of Anjou, The greatness
of whose courage, and renown of his virtues, acquird him the Crowns of the two
Sicylyes and Jerusalem. From that Prince, in a direct line from Father to Son,
is Polexander descended; and if Fortune had not too cruelly exercised, on that
house, that horrible fury wherewithal she uses to break Septers and
over-tumble Thrones, he should be now (as his Predecessors have been) King of
the best part of Italy, Greece, and Thrace. But those of Arragon on the one
side, and the Paleologues on the other, and lastly the Turks have depriv^d him
of the inheritanee of his Ancestors, and left him nothing but most just causes
to be sensible of their common usurpations. But alas! I know not whether I
should wish that Polexander might change the affection he has to Alcidiana for
an inclination to ^evenge. For when I think on the disasters, which are fatally
linck'd to such an enterprise, and reflect on the unfortunate life, and
Tragical death of the great Periander; I fear that which I have most
passionatly desired and requested of Heaven, even that the King my Master might
never think on those Territories which his Predecessors had lost. The famous
Ama^ontus, Father of Periander, seeing that by the remissness of the last
Paleologue, Constantinople fell into the hands of the Turk; and besides, many
times but vainly attempting to make the Easterlings arise in A^es against
their Tyrants, had such a detestation to a people so infamous, that, to lose
their memory with the sight of them, he forsook Greece, desirous to seek, out
in some other end of the world, a place of retirement, where he might live
unknown. But Fortune, who soon repented her of the injustice done to so great a
Prince, brought him into these Seas; and in lieu of the most rich Crown of the
World which she had taken from him, gave him the fairest and most delightful.
I mean, that after she had long time made him wander on the Ocean, she brought
him to cast Anchor and land on this Isle, the very day whereon the Inhabitants
were assembled to choose them a King. He was called to this Little Monarchy by
the consent of all, and in less then three or four years made himself so
much valued amongst those of the neighbor Islands, that in emulation of one
another, they would needs have him for their Commander. After the death of that
Prince, his Son Periander not only succeeded him, but to extend the bounds of
this little Empire, drove the Portugalls out of the Isles they had guarded, and
without doubt might have gotten the Crown of Spain it self, if the desire of
recovering his ancient inheritance had not engaged him in a War with the Turk.
In his first voyage into the Levant, he married with a Grecian Princess called
Axiamira, who by her spirit and virtue made it well appear, that she came from
that Heroic blood which had so often triumphed over the Monarchs of Asia. He
returned hither with that Princess, and within the four or five first years
of his marriage, had on her Polexander, Iphidamantus and Cydaria. As Soon as he
saw himself made happy by so fair a posterity, he thought on the means to
make their condition equal to that of his Predecessors, and to that end
renewing the Treaties wherein the Knights of Rhodes and many other Princes of
Christendom would have before time engaged him, he undertook a business, which
as impossible as it seemed, he had infallibly effected, had it not been for the
treason or cowardice of his Allies. He got him secretly to Rhodes, and not
finding matters there as he had been by some made to hope, would therefore be
himself his own Agent. He traveled alone through all Greece; visited all the
Princes of the Imperial house who were banished into the Islands of the
Mediterranean, passed thence into Syria, to cause the Heirs of the house of
Antioch to take arms; and lastly, disguised like a Turk, came to
Constantinople, where he abode near six months, and dealt with so many
Christians, during that time, by the mediation of the Patriark, that he thought
himself powerful enough to drive thence the Turk. Thence he returned to
Rhodes with that good hope, and having wrought his enterprise to it is
perfection (at least he thought so) he departed from that Island with an army
which should have been invincible. As Soon as he arrived, he made himself
Master of those Castles which shut up the mouth of the Hellespont, and by that
surprise threw so great a terror into Constantinople that Bajazet was on the
point to forsake it. Periander entered into the Propontis and s^iz'd on the
Isles of Marmora and Calomina in spite of all the strength the Turk had at
Sea, Petarded the City of Gallipolis; and entering it by the help of the
Christians, made havoc of the Turks, and receiving intelligence that all the
Fleet of his Allies was at the entry of the Hellespont, resolved, not to give
the I^dels time to bethink themselves, and therefore sayld straight to
Constantinople: and meeting the great Turks Navy a days sail from the Town,
fought with it and put it to flight. His victory was his loss, For all his
Soldiers being laden with the spoils of their Enemies, and masters of many
thousand Slaves, began to lose their first valor and to think of a retreat.
Periander, finding this dangerous a^teration in a second conflict, caused all
the Slaves and booty to be thrown overboord; and to satisfy the covetousness
of the Soldier; told them that he gave in prey to them, all the riches which
the Turks had in Constantinople. This promise pacified not the sedition; he
was forc^d to chastize many o^ ^e m^eers, and defend himself from the rest as
much, or more, then from his very Enemies. The Turk, by his Spies advertised of
this disorder, would make his benefit of it* and thereupon returned on
Periander, and fought with him with six times more forces then the other had.
The Christian Army, in lieu of advancing, recoyl'd* The Traitors, in that
occasion, made themselves known what they were; some yielded to the Turk,
others got the Archi-pelagus; and Periander, after he had fought a day and a
night with a handful of men, was with the blow of a Stone-Engine struck down,
and, half dead as he was, chained and carried to Constantinople. A little time
after this misfortune, there arrived here a Portugal ship, which, without
doubt, was expressly sent hither to search out the state of the Isles, and to
publish the defeat of Periander. As Soon as the Queen, his wife, heard these
most sad news, she stood not to deliberate what she was to do: She commanded
me to stay here with the authority of Viceroy: and taking Polexander,
Iphidamantus and Cydaria, imbarqued in one of her vessels, and, without any
other consideration or advisement then that of running a like fortune with her
husband, came to Constantinople. The day She arrived there, Bajazet, who by the
taking of Periander had dissipated all the designs of his enemies, Celebrated
the feast of his eldest Sons Circumcision, and had caused to be pubilshed
that in acknowledgment of so many prosperities which his Prophet had so
miraculously showered on him, he promised, on the word of a King, to grant to
the first miserable, unfortunate Creature that should present it self before
his Highness, al^ that should be demanded from him. Axiamira, imagining that
this proclamation was made for her, came with her children into the place
appointed for the magnificence of the sports; and as soon as she had seen the
King her Husband pass by amongst an infinite number of slaves, She cleft the
crowd of people, and threw her self, with her two Sons and Daughter, at the
foot of Bajazets Throne. Cast down your eyes great King (said she) on these
three Innocents and their unfortunate Mother. They are come, on the day of thy
triumph, to lay open to thee their calamities, and to implore thy pity. They
have heard that, by an acknowledgment worthy thy Piety, thou have promised to
heaven thou will deny nothing to the first unfortunate and miserable wretch
that shall have recourse to thy clemency. See, O King; behold a Subject, on
whom thou may fully exercise that Queen of Virtues. These three little
Infants do beg of thee to give them their Father; and I the miserable and
wretched Mother, beseech thy Majesty to restore to me my Husband. Before I tell
you the success of her Petition, 'twill be fitting that I relate an action, by
which Polexander, who was then but seven years old, astonished all the
Ottoman Court; and made the first show of those wonders which have made him the
prime Prince of Christendom. As Soon as the Queen his mother had made him kneel
he rose again, and looking on Bajazet, with a boldness more then his age
promised, ascended to the highest steps of the Throne, and took hold of the
Kingly Scepter. The great Turk took pleasure in his action, and, stroaking
Polexander, asked him in Greek whither he likewise came to entreat any thing
of him? The young Prince (that understood the language, because 'twas almost
natural to him) answered Bajazet, yes; and still kept hold of the Scepter: I
ask from thee what the Queen my Mother desires; and do not refuse me, for I
shall not be ever a Child. Bajazet began to laugh at that threatening; and yet
thinking on it, as if it came from some other then a Child, he turned him
toward the Mufti that was on his right hand, and causing him to take notice of
Polexanders speech to him; This Child (said he) makes me call the Traitor
Scanderbeg to my remembrance. The glorious Mahomet, my Lord and Father, whose
Soul reigns now with our Prophet, sometime told me that the Prince of
Albania, being but a child, spoke to him in snch a manner, as he pre-judg'd he
would in time be a man of extraordinary rank and value, and It Is to be feared
least This prove a second Scanderbeg. But let us know what his Mother demands,
and in so saying he commanded Capi-Aga, who was his Favorite, to take
Polexander, and set him again by Axiamira. The little Prince would not descend
but by force, and shaking his head, set his hands on the Aga's Cimyter. The Aga
only laughed at it, and, taking him from near the Turk commanded the Queen his
Mother to keep him with her. In the mean time Bajazet looked on Axiamira with
a kind of pity; and at last, addressing him to the Princess; Thy Petition is
just (said he to her) and our word is inviolable. Tell me who is thy husband,
and I promise to restore him to thee Before I part from this place. Axiamira
(therewith)* showed him Periander; and Bajazet seeing whereto he was engaged,
changed both his action and color. After he had let work his first agitations,
he resumed his Majesty, and touching the head of Axiamira with his Scepter: Thy
husband (said she) shall* be delivered thee, But get thee hence far eenough
from our face most justly incensed, and never dare to be so hardy as to present
thy self again before us. As Soon as this sentence was pronounced, Axiamira
was taken with her Children, by some of the Sultan's Guard conducted back to
her ship, and a little while after, four M^tes brought Periander to the Queen
his Wife; but they brought him strangled. This cruelty was seconded by another.
Those Hang-men questionless had order to take away Polexander, but (mistaking)
instead of him they seized on Iphidamantus, for all the cries and Tears of his
Mother, and gave command, in the name of the great Tutk; to those whom the
Basha of the Sea had put into Axiamiras ship, not to leave her till she were
sayld far into the Mediterranean. They dis-embarqu'd her on the Island Tenedos,
with Polexander and Cydaria; and after they had treated her with all unworthy
usage, returned toward Constantinople. Axiamira, that had no other object, then
the Coffin wherein she her self had enclosed the body of Periander, nor other
thought then that of his death, and the taking away of Iphidamantus, spent the
days and nights in continual tears and lamentations. Polexander, made show
of grief enough, but it was a generous sorrow, and a grief accompanied with
threatenings. Comfort your self said he to his Mother; If I live, the Kings
death shall be revenged, and the Tyrants offending you shall not go unpunished.
Notwithstanding, the desolate Axiamira returned hither, and having promised to
my self, but a mournful success of her Journey; I was not surpised to fee
her come on shore with the body of my dead Master. She swoonded as soon as she
saw me, and in that case was carried to the Palace. As Soon as she came to her
self, she asked where they had done the body of the King her Husband, and
could not be in quiet till they had brought it into her Chamber. When she was a
little recovered and settled; I earnestly besought her to be as well a good
Mother as a good Wife, to divide her love between her Children and her Husbaud;
and not to forsake those that stood in need of her to follow one who was no
more in case to desire the proofs of her affections. Speak not to me (said
she) of any thing in the world, but of perpetually bewayling the irreparable
losses which I have undergone. I know what I owe to Polexander and Cydaria: For
the last, I will have all the care which the weakness of her age, and the
memory of Periander can exact from me* And for Polexander, I put him into your
hands. The King his Father had chosen you to make him worthy that high fortune
to which he is destinated. Let it appear by your care and instructions, that
the love you bare to so good a Master is not dead with bim. Above all, I give
you in charge that Polexander never hear any thing of the Empire of his
Ancestors, and that you never make known to him those unfortunate designs
which have shortened the days of Periander.

I had many things to answer to Axiamira's Propositions, but she stopped me, and
said, that unless I meant to make her run desperate, I should speak to her of
nothing whatsoever but of the Kings death. When I knew her resolution I left
her; and dedicating my self to the good of the charge of Polexander, I applied
my days and nights to so honorable an employment. When his Court was ordered,
I causd an Assembly to be made, wherein the Deputies of all the Islands
acknowledged him for their Prince, And between his hands swore to him their
oath of fidelity. After that, I distributed the Government of the Isles among
the ancient Servants of Periander, and entreating them to continue to the Son
the affection they bare to the Father, dismis'd them with all that was
necessary to hinder all revolts and surprises. In the mean time I confined my
self to the Palace with my young Master; and after I had gotten from France
and Italy, men of most eminency for the instruction of a Prince, began
carefully and diligently to improve so rare a plant.

But I must confess that Prince (as I have already said) had almost neither
need of teaching or Study. And I believe that Nature reveald to him all that
the most able of men acquired not, but in growing old on their books, and in
employments. If his wit were admirable, his body was not much less. At the age
of ten years he was so strong and active, that were it at the race, were it at
wrestling, or any other exercises he was not out-gone by any of his own age,
or of others of some more years. Toward the end of his twelfth year the
Kings of Spain, but especially that of Portugal, made many attempts to drive
him from the Canaries. By the intelligence of some Merchants of Madera, his men
surpised the Isle of Palms, and fortified themselves there so strongly, that
it was impossible for the Governor to make them quit it; After I heard of
these proceedings, and withal, seeing that it was of too dangerous a
consequence to suffer those Spaniards so near ^s: I levied a good Army to
dislodge them; and to the end that the Kings presence should the more hearten
the Soldier, and make them fight the more cagerly; I brought him to the Isle
of Teneriffe, which is next to* that of Palms: Presently webesiegd the
Portugalls in their Forts. The beginning of the War succeeded mavelous well
with us; for in two months, we burnt five and twenty of the Enemies ships,
took nine, won two Forts, and put eight hundred Portugalls in chains. But when
we thought to make our selves Masters of the last Fort, the Navy of Portugal,
strengthened by a great number of men and Vessels, set on the Isle of
Teneriffe; and five or six hundred Portugalls landing in Polexanders Qua^ter,
attempted to it at full day. 'Twas on that occasion the Prince made known he
was a man, and an extraordinary one, though he was but at the beginning of his
thirteenth year. As Soon as he heard news the Enemy came to assault him; my
dear Governor, said he, let us go meet them: I answered, Sir, your Troops have
command to give them good entertainment, but in as much as the chance of war
is always uncertain, it is not unfit that, for the safety* of your Majesty, we
retire into the fortress of Periander, (it is a place which the late King caused
to be raised opposite to that in which the Portugalls would have secured
themselves) what is it you would say (quoth Polexander) my dear Governor? no
no, I will rather perish then my Enemies shall vaunt to have made me fly. You
shall not fly [I repli'd] though you retire. What term soever you give to
that which you would have me do: [answer'd the Prince] yet will it be a business
dishonorable. Come, come, let us fight, it behooves us, and keep, here either by
a fair death or a fair victory. In this [said]] may it please your Majesty,
you are not to be hearkened to, for I am answerable, for your life, to the Queen
your Mother, and to all your Subjects, and if any ilaccident should betide,
'twould be imputed either to my treachery or insufficiency. To what do you then
reserve me said the Prince? Heaven p^eserves your Majesty [I reply'd] for
thousands of brave actions, when you shall make appear the greatness of your
courage, as soon as you shall be of age to put them in execution. What age
[said he] would you wish me to begin those brave exployts? I grant I am young,
but I am strong enough to make use of my sword. Admit it (said I) yet must you
not rashly ^st your self into danger: Kings have another kind of Fate then
their Subjects. The honor of Servents lies in the hazards to which they expose
themselves, for the serv^ce of their Masters; and that of Commanders, ^o
preserve themselves for the safety of the servants that are left them. Never
make me believe a thing so dis-apparent [answer'd Polexander] in choler: For if
Kings [as you your self have often told me] are the souls of their Subjects,
should they not then watch, operate, and continually travel for them? And what
say you, if bodies were not maintained in their being by the operation of their
Souls, would they not become mere lumps of Earth and dirt? Do you think it is
otherwise with our Subjects? truly no. They must, without doubt, perish when
their Kings, like souls sick of a Lethargy, unworthily lie sleeping in their
palaces, and suffer those miserably to perish through their idleness, whom
they should preserve by their (...). Lets on then, lets on my dear governor,
where our duty calls us. Sir (said I) your Majesty is neither of age to do
what you would, nor your people reduced to the extremity of axecting it from
you. Kings ought to be always of years to defend their people, (replied the
Prince) and their condition is such, that neither age nor danger ought to
hinder them from preserving their Estates. You have so often taught me these
truths, that I wonder you will read to me now a new Doctrin^i I have never
told your Majesty any thing (I answered) which in my conscience, I believed not
only to be true, but also worthy of your royal Soul: and this being so, I
intended not to ruin, by a false dictrine, that which I had established by a
true one. All that I desire now is, that your Majesty would turn your thoughts
on your self, and thence carry them through all the histories you have read,
to the end you your self may be Judge of the difference which is now between us.

The Prince presently apprehending, by the quickness of his wit, what I would
say to him; answered me, that he would not have our controversy to be decided
by the examples of former ages. Other Princes have done what they pleased, and
I pretend to have the same privilege, and by consequence will go on, without
any consideration, right to the place where our Enemies are. What after this,
will you oppose me? Ah Sir, (cried I throwing my self at his feet, and
moystning his hands with my tears,) weigh what your great heart would make you
undertake; and think with your self what a disaster it will be, if some
dismal blow should take you hence, in the extremity of your youth.

My dear Governor (replied the Prince coldly,) this consideration proceeds
not from a true affection, but it comes from an ill custom, which those, that
are near to Kings have gotten, to flatter them in all things. It Is true that I
may dye by this occasion, and dying lose a great many years, which by all
likelihood I have to live: but I know from your self, that none ever dyed
before the time Heaven had prescribed him; besides I am persuaded, that a King
never dies too soon^, when he dies for the safety of his Subjects.

Whilst the King my Master, and I, thus contested, the Portingal and our men
made on, and meeting some two leagues from our Quarters, fought with a great
loss on both sides. The Canaryans made the Portingalls give back, and drove
them before them into a valley, where, for want of mistrust, they fell into an
Ambascado. There were they ill handled, and after they had lost more then their
half on the place, saw 'twas then their turn to fly. The Portingalls being all
reunited came furiously on the Canaryans; and their Cavalry making a horrible
massacre of the ^nawaies, drove the rest even to our intrenchments. Polexander
saw the flight of his Soldiers, and was very likely to have thrown himself
down, from the top of a bastion, to go stay them. Ah my Governor (cried he) I
beseech you do not endure I should lose my Honor, and see, my men slain
unsuccored. I renewed my remonstrances, but to no purpose: Of necessity we must
(and did) bring him his Arms, and consent that he should fall on the Enemy. In
the mean time I cause d all the remainder of our Soldiers that were in the
Town, to sally forth, who in spite of the Enemies, forced them to retire. Our
young King, with fifty of his Knights, fell on the reere of the Portingalls,
and thrust himself so far in amongst them, that I was a long time without
knowing what was become of him. His presence and actions gave so much heart
even to those that had lost it, that the Portingalls were hacked in pieces, and
from the Town even to the Sea Side, the high ways were covered with them.

The King should have returned from this conflict with an extreme satisfaction,
for he had done admirably well; and besides, he heard on all hands, applauding?
some of joy, and some of praise. Nevertheless a secret sadness made him
droope the head, and unwilling to hear the acclamations of the people. As I
was about to ask him the cause: My Governor (said he) let me once make trial
of what you have often told me; and whereof Sir (said I?) That the multitude is
never governed by reason. We have done nothing but run after a company of
people, that had as great a desire to fly from us, as we had to overtake them,
and yet to hear the shouts of the Uulgar sort, one would think we had gotten
some important battle against all the force of Spain. I smiled at the Princes
consideration: When presently, putting on a more serious countenance, besides
(said he) I shall never be sat^fied, til I see the King of Portingal with his
sword in his hand. Certainly that King is a very merry man, and very Gamesome,
who, whilst himself lies as it* were buried in all pleasures and delights,
troubles the repose and peace of his neighbors, by such of his subjects as
('it is not unlikely) he would feign be rid of. If I live, I will teach him to
live quietly, or to come and fight himself. But til that happiness betide me
I am resolved to drive the Portingalls from these Islands; and to accompl^sh it
with the more facility, I will over into the Isle of Palms with the rest of my
Troops.

When he had told me his intentions I was more puzzled a great deal then I was
before* I knew well that my Authority and power were not able to hold in that
young Lion; I had therefore recourse to stronger. I writ to the Queen his
mother, who persisted in her tears and solitude, and most humbly besought her,
If she loved the life of the King her son, she would call him back to her. I
intimated all the reasons which obliged me to write so, and made them so
considerable and weighty to her, that for a quarter of an hour, She violated
the vow she had made of thinking no more on worldly business. She thereupon,
writ to the King her son; that she desired to see him for some urging
occasions, and conjured him by her letter, that leaving, for some time, the
business of War, he should make a turn to the place of her retirement: she
writ the same to me, and commanded me to bring back to her the King her son.

The Prince, who was endu'd with all virtues in the highest degree, put it not
in deliberation whether he should obey the Queen, but told me that we were to
retire to his Mother: the Honor we acquire by Arms is worthyly to be
desired, but I believe that to be no less which is gotten by doing what we
ought. It Is true, (said I) and therefore you ought (if you please) to give
[without delay] the Queen your Mother the contentment she expects by your
presence. Come (said he) let us give it her, but before we go hence, try if we
can see our Enemies. He needed not go far to be satisfied: for the day
before our imbarquing, the Portingalls returned on us, and failed little of
surp^izing that port where the Kings ships attended him. There was a furious
conflict, wherein, (without adding any thing to the truth) Polexander secured
the Honor of his Arms, and dis-ingaged, both his men and shipping. The
Enemies Fleet retired to the Isle of Palms* I thought it had been out of
fear, but the next morning I knew 'Twas out of cunning. The Kings departure
was not so secretly kept, but that the news of it came to the Enemy, whereupon
they resolved to fight with him at Sea, and by taking of the King to make an
end of those wars wherewithal he threatened al Spain. For mine one part,
[who daily took care for the conducting the Prince] I left al our vessels in
the road of Tenerif which was opposite to that of the Palms; and one night
crossing one of the Islands, caused the King to imbarpue himself at a port
over, against that of Gomera. At day break we set sail, and in a little
time our vessel had gone by all the Canaries, but entering into a sleeve or
narrow passage, which separated this Is^and from the Fortunate, we discovered
^ve sail, which surely expected us. They made up; and the fear I was in, for
the King my Master, redoubling my foresight, I commanded Presently our ship
should take another course, and to regaine on the South, the Fortunate Island.
These five ships chased us all the rest of the day, and my Pilot was
constrained to go Roomeward to Sea, that they might not know the course he
steered. Two vessels of provision which followed ours, were commanded to bestow
some shot to amaze the Enemy. Polexander was almost enraged that I would not
fight with them. He besought me to fear nothing, and casting himself at my
feet, my dear Governor (said he) if you love my life, give not the advantage
to our Enemies to publish, they have made us fly from them. What will they say
of thee, unfortunate Polexander (he added in sighing) when it shall be known
that five poor ships have enforced thee to fly as a thief, and forsake a Part
of thine own Company to save thy self by their destruction! Ah! let me rather
dye a thousand deaths! And in so saying, like one desperate, he ran through the
ship to oblige the Pilot and Mariners to tack about. But the Command I had
given, could not be changed but by me, and the Prince prevailed not in giving
any new. He took notice of it, and presently drawing one of his Guards Swords,
and turning it on himself, however, (said he) yet will I not have the
dishonor to live after the flight, and diobedience of mine one Subjects. I
stopped him ere he could wrong himself, and casting by all obsequiousness,
told him that If he would not be governed, I should be constrained to make use
of that authority which the Queen his Mother had given me. Do so my good
Governor (said he) do what you will with me, I will endure all, provided that
I run not away. This while Night drew on, and with the Night a wind so
contrary, that I repented me for not landing at the Fortunate Island. We were
forced to strike all our Sails, for fear of being put back to the place from
whence we came. Which when the young Prince perceived, he showed an extreme
joy for it, and told me that Heaven, more exorable then I, had heard his
prayers, and would not permit that I should cau^him to fly any longer. The
night passing over with a furious Tempest; at break of day we saw our vessel
within a Cannon shot of two others. We knew thempresently to be Enemies by
their flaggs. They made up, shot, and pressed on us, so that in spite of us we
must fight. I wish I were able to represent to you the cheerfullnesse,
wherewith the young Prince prepared him to the combat, and the confidence
wherewithal he ordered others. My companions, said he to the Soldiers, see
how the Justice of Heaven favors us, in exposing to your revenge those which
have exposed your families to all that their tyranny had, the most barbarous.
Do not believe that these cruel Pirates give us the chase; They would be glad
to be further from you; But, the winds and the waves, which they would have so
often made confederates in their robberies, bring them to you, whether they will
or no, to the end they might purge themselves, by such a delivery, of those
crimes whereof you might accuse them. Consider besides, that you are not, as
these thieves, two or three hundred leagues apart from him for whom in
particular you are to fight. You have your King not only for a witness of your
actions, but also for a companion in your fortune. And in so saying he took a
half Pike, and went and placed himsel^e in the most eminent part of the ship.

The Artillery played, the best of an hour, on both sides; at last, the two
Portugal Vessels drew near, and being grapled with us, there began a horrible
fight. The Canaryans, seven or eight times repulsed their Enemies, and forced
above fifty into the Sea: Polexander was in the midst of the combatants. Some
he stirred up by his words, others by his actions, and the least resolved ran
into danger, at the sight of their Princes miraculous boldness. Nevertheless,
we were forced to forsake our sides, and (to resist a little longer) fortify
our selves on the poope. One amongst us (in the mean time) resolving a
courageous and determinate act, charged a Culverin on his shoulders, and
placing himself on the highest part of the poope, caused fire to be given to
it. The blow was strange; It killed above twenty Portugalls, and the bullet
striking through one of their ships, without notice taken of it, either by
Soldier or Mariner, they were amazed in the height of the fight, to see that
ship sink right down with all that was in her. The Portugalls were so
infinitely terrified and astonished by that accident, that they utterly lost
that eagerness with which they strove to make themselves Masters of our
Vessel. In this Intervall we regained what we had lost, and knocked our
Enemies in again to the ship that was left them. Polexander* no way appeared
daunted in so great a danger, but always avoiding me, was always amongst his
men, and still promised them the victory. Notwithstanding, their number was so
diminished, that we had left us, both of Mariners and Soldiers, but fifty. The
Portugalls, awakned from their amazement, took notice of our weakness, and
about a hundred or sixscore of them flew into our Vessel. All the Mariners, as
well as Soldiers, thought now on nothing but how to defend themselves.

The fight began afresh, and not a man of ours was slain which had not before
killed, (at least) one of his Enemies. Though Polexander was [as you may
imagine) extremely wearied with so long a toil, yet resisted he courageously
that fatigation; and witnessing the greatness of his heart, ran to assist his
people. As I followed him, and had my Eyes only on him, he saw me fall at his
feet by two thrusts of pikes which I received at once. Ah, my Governor is dead
(cried he!) and in the same instant, preventing a Portingall, who without doubt
came on to dispatch me, thrust his sword through the others body. He fell dead
fast by me, but in falling, with a Mallet at Arms, gave such a blow on the
Princes head, that he fell with him. Though I was sore wounded, yet I arose,
and seeing the King my Master in so ill case, I carried him, all in a trance,
into his Cabin, and disarmd his head, to see whether he had yet any life in
him. Presently he came to himself, and straight asked me what was become of
his Enemies. Alas (said I) what ere is become of them, they have their wish,
and gotten enough by cutting off a Life that was to be so fatal to them. I
spoke it wholly transported with grief, seeing all the Princes hair knotted
with blood, so that I believed he had received so dangerous a blow, that it was
impossible to save him, and so gave him for dead. I laid him along on me, and
carefully searched his head: wherewith, he clapped his hand on it, and seeing at
the drawing it back 'twas all bloody; I perceive now (my good Governor) you
fear I am much hurt, but let it not trouble you, for I feel no pain. After I
had well searched, I saw that he had no wound on his head, but that the Axe,
wherewith he was struck down, sliding along his Helmet, entered into his
shoulder, and from the wound it made there, came that blood, which, after he
was fallen, ran into his hair. I straight disarmed him, and finding the place
where he was wounded, I thought the hurt not mortal, and so went about to
stench the blood, which being done, I told that Hero* it was fit he should
rest a while as he was, whilst I went to see in what estate our business
stood, and would send some of his Servants to attend him. The generous Prince
would have risen, but fainting with Weakness, he grew pale: and striving, for
fear I should perceive how ill he was, since (said he) you think it fitting; I
will stay here. I went presently out of the Cabin, and wondering to hear no
more noise, got quickly up to know the cause of their silence, Truly 'twas
terribly fearful, and it is possible you never yet heard speak of the like
adventure. Our Vessel seemed to me a bloody Scaffold, on which had been
executed a great number of unfortunate and miserable wretches. Of above a
hundred and fifty Canaryans and Portugalls, which I had left fighting, I found
not one standing. Some were dead, others, wounded with mortal blows, with
sighs and groans were giving a period to their lamentable Destiny. The
Portugal Ship too, which was grapled with ours at the beginning of the fight,
had either been forced off ^y some gust of Wind, or unhook'd by some of their
own, who seeing their Companions so ill handled, had thrown themselves into her
for their safety. After I had been a while, as it were, out of my self by so
dismal a spectacle, I re-collected my wits, and perceiving, by this general
defeat, that the King my Master was in some safety, I gave thanks to heaven,
and besought it with all my heart, that it would perfect what was begun, for
the good of Polexander. (...) viewed all the dead and wounded of our party, and
found, amongst the last, a Young Canaryan that served in the Kings Chamber. His
Name was Diceus, and (for his age) he was an excellent Surgeon. The need I
had of him obliged me to see in what plight he was, and whither his wounds were
deadly: I drew him from under many bodies that were fallen on him, and laying him
in a place commodius enough caled him so often and so much tows'd him that he
opened his Eyes a little. I imagined there might be found some Essences about
him, and therefore, rigging in his pockets and finding what I searched for,
made him take the half of a little glass bottle. Presently he retook heart,
and his affection rendering him the memory of his Master, he asked (without
knowing me) what was become of the Prince. He lives (said I) thanks be to
heaven; but Diceus (said I) he is in such a case, that he needs thy assistance.
See what a true affection can do! Scarce had Diceus heard Polexander was
living, and yet wounded, but he arose; and knowing me, my Lord (said he) bring
me speedily to the King. Prithee, (replied I) do thou take the pains to help
me to him, for I cannot keep my self on foot; and feeling a faintness, Diceus
(said I) the King is in his Cabin, Go quickly and help him: So that thou savest
his life, it is no great matter what becomes of the rest. With that I fell, and
lost all perceivance and understanding. Diceus, foreseeing that my swoonding
would be long, left me, after he had commodiously seen me laid, and went to the
King; whom he found in a heavy slumber, whereof he had no good opinion, and
therefore awakened him, and telling who he was; Sir (said he) all your Enemies
are dead. It is fit your Majesty should now relish the sweets of so brave a
Victory. Whilst he spoke thus, he perceived his wound, and having gently
searched it was assured, that not a Ueyne was cut, nor Nerve wronged* and by
diverse actions intimated his exceeding gladness for it, and besought the King
not to fear any ill success of his hurt. I have none, [replied the King] all
that troubles me is, that I find a certain weakness that duls me. Hereupon
Diceus got him to take five or six drops of a Cordial Potion, which so
strengthened him, that after he had closed and bound up his wound, he arose as
cherefulll as if he had not been hurt. But as he was about to ask for me, he
took notice that Diceus was all bloody: Alas! poor Diceus [cried he] thou art
sore hurt. It Is nothing Sir [said I] since we are sure of your life. There Is no
fear that ou^'s will run a hazard. Yet let me tell you, Pimantus is in great
danger, for I left him swoonded on the Hatches: be therefore pleased that I go
to take care of him. Scarce had the Prince heard of my mischance, but he came
where I lay, and finding me senseless, fell into such Lamentations and tears,
as had been able [had I been dead] to have revived me, had he found ^e dead.
Diceus recovered me from my fainting and, not to hold yo^ longer among the many
slain and wounded, let me tell you that the King and his two Servants, by a
mutual assistance, were freed from that Fate wherein so many were involved. In
the mean ^ime, our Ship [governed only by fortune, for our Pilot was slain in
his Cabin] fa^l'd at ^dome two days and nights.

The Third day a tall man of War assailed us, and by consequence took us.
Those that were abord her, were more astonished at their prize, then we were,
of their setting on us. They knew not what to think of so horrible a Massaker,
but they wondered more when they saw appear, a youth of about thirteen years
who with a marvelous confidence demanded who they were, and whither they came,
as Enemies or friends. The Captain of the straingers could not reply to the
Kings question for he understood him not. Addressing himself therefore unto me
(who was crept after Polexander, rather then I would forsak him) Father (said
he) if by chance you understand my language I entreat you to tell me by what
mischance you are falen into the estate I find you. By his speech I knew him
to be a Frenchman, and concealing from him the Name and birth of the King my
Master, related the accident which had lately betided us, and withal presented
to him the King as for my Son; and showing both our wounds, besought him to
conduct us to the Canaries. the Frenchman (who as I understood that same day)
was a Gentleman of Britany, hardly believing what I had spoken touching the
valor of my supposed son, took him into his Arms, a thousand times kis'd
him, and highly praised that wonder of valor and spoke of it as of a most
certain presage, that he should be one day a great warrior. I besought him
again* to bring us to our Islands; and though as it seemed he had another
design, yet for the love of Polexander he promised me to make that voyage, but
fortune had otherways disposed of him. For the Briton who was come into our
Seas only to enrich himself by other men's labors* seeing diverse sails a
far off, with an extreme have got to the coasts of Morocco: and when he
would have put to Sea again, a South wind for fifteen days with such a
violence perplexed him, that after the Tempest he found himself far beyond the
Cape Finister in The Author calls it Fine Terre, I think he means Finister.
Spain. He advised me then to go with him into Britany, and to put by all
difficulties which I named in the voyage, told me, that our Islands as happy as
they were esteemed, were not yet more fotrunate then his Princess Court; and
that I should find there such a repose, and abondance, that I should
infallibly forget the delights of our own country. Seeing there was no remidy,
and I could not do better, besides persuading my self, that Heaven did absent
Polexander from the Canaries, but to save him from the cruelty of the
Portingalls, I resolved to credit the Briton, and to let my king see the most
renowned Courts of Europe, without his being known. Presently therefore
Polexander, Diceus* and my self imbarqued our selves with the Briton, and
taking out of our ship two Coffers wherein were the Kings Jewels, I left our
ship to the disposal of our Guide. We sailed so fortunately; that the fifteenth
day we came into the River of Loire* where the Gentleman Rover told us that for
diverse considerations he thought it fitting to conduct us right to his Princess
Court. But to the end we might be received according to our quality, 'twas
convenient we should put our selves in good equipage, and above all that I
should forget nothing which might set out the gracefulness of my Sone. I
answered him, that our present condition suffered us not to affect that
curiosity, yet on condition that he would (as soon as pissible he could)
reconduct us to our Islands, I would do all that he desired, and withal told
him, that his voyage should not be unprofitable to him for (said I) I have there
such an abundance of al such thing, for which men sail from one World to the
other, exposing themselves t^ all perils of Sea and Land, that if I have the
happiness to see you in my Isle, I engage my self to give you for my ransom
and my sons as much Gold as you can carry thence. The Briton opened his ears
at that promise, and imagining that I was a Prince of some one of the Canaries,
renewed his civilities and pro^e^ations of service. He impledg'd to me, honor
and faith, never to forsake me, til he had brought me again to my own house,
and told me very seriously that he exerciz'd not the trade of a Pirat, but only
to accomplish a vow he had long a gone made* to be al his lifetime an Enemy to
the Spaniards. I thanked him for his generossity, and for fear he might be
tempted to take us for Spaniards* I drew out of my bosom a chain of Diamonds,
which I had taken out of one of the Kings Trunks, and presenting it to him, in
private, see (said I) some earnest of the promise I made you. Keep it for my
sake and assure your self, there has betided you more then all you, could
have gotten from the Spaniards.

The Britain seeing himself so much enriched in so short a time was even ready
to cast himself at my feet to thank me for that excessive liberality, but I
withheld him, and clinging him to my breast; Assure your self (said I softly)
that this present is but the least part of what you are to expect from my
gratitude. But if you love me truly and affect your self, make nothing public
of what you know. The generous Britain, by a thousand oaths confirmed his
promises; and landing us at a very pleasant Town, brought us the next day to
another, which was the ordi^ry residence of the Duchess. Polexander was wholly
cured of his wound, but I was not so well as to get on horseback. Diceus too
was healing but because of his too much pains about the King, 'twas the more
slowly. Our Conductor was therefore feign to get a Coach, for our Journey; and
coming to the place where the Duchess of Brittany kept her Count we were
lodged in a very fair house. There we refreshed our selves some few days and
by the kind entertainment of our Leader* lost all the remembrance of our
forepassed miseries. The King was never in so good health and vigor as he
found himself after his great toil. The pains he had taken had unknit him,
and he seemed to me so much grown, that I was compelled to belie my reason to
give credit to my Eyes. One Evening, our Conductor related he had spoken of us
to his Princess; and though the affairs, of her Estate extraordinaryly took
up her time, yet she would see us the next day. I besought that we might not be
a trouble to him. No, no Father (said he) the hardest business is past* there
is nothing remains for you and your Son, but to be always ready, for to mo^ow
infallibly I will bring you to the Duchess. Hereupon, I employed one part of
the night in instructing Polexander, and teaching him how he should behave
himself toward me, that they might take him for my Son. The next day I put
him in a vesture of cloth of Gold, enriched with Diamond buttons, after the
fashion of the Canaries. His Buskins were of the same stuff, and fastened
before with buttons of Rubies. He wore a Cap of cloth of Silver, from whence,
under its Band of great pearl, there hung a plume of the fairest Feathers
which are brought us from Africa. To make an end of decking him, and to raise
words of his value; I put on him a rich Scarf which the Queen his Mother had
wrought herself before she was a Widow and in this habit he was presented to
the young Duchess of Britany. That Princess who was not much elder then He,
and who, for her age, was the most discreet and accomplished personage I ever
saw, gave her self not respit to hear or consider me. At the first sight she
was so strooken with the comeliness and beauty of Polexander, that she kn^ not
how to make an expression. He, presently, coming up slowly near the Chair
where she sat, kneeld on one knee, and kissing her Garment, told her in his
own language, that he wanted one thing to make him perfectly happy, and 'twas,
to be able to speak himself to her, understanding how much he was her servant.
The young Princess, after she had commanded his complement to be interpreted
replied with so much wit, that I instantly wished there might issue some great
affection from the interview of those two young Princes. But it was not so
ordained by Heaven. All the Ladies of Britany came thronging to see my pretended
son, and Judging of his quality by his richness and, actions said; among
(...), that I was a Prince, who for some important consideration; had given
over, and abandoned my estate and Country. In a very instant all Britany* was
filled with the news of our arrival: The Beauty and worthiness of my King,
was the discourse of all men. They said that at the age of twelve years, he
had at the height of a great fight slain two Portingal with his own hand; and
everyone adding wonder to wonder, they published all those fables, in venred by
the Ancients, to make of our Isles the abode of the Heroes, and men most
fortunate.

Whilst we lived thus, the talk and admiration of so many, the marriage of
the Duchess of Britany with the King of France was concluded. The Ambassadors
of that Prince came to conduct her, in an equipage proportionable to the
greatness of their Master and was so brought to the place for her e^powsall;
and to have somewhat wherewithal to astonish all the French Court, she had,
with her the Canaryan Prince for so she would have him called, If the Brittons
admired him, the French came no* short of them; and being an extreme obliging
Nation, and great Lovers of Novelties* you cannot imagine the kindnesses and
humanity Polexander received from them. The French King; a Prince of two or
three and twenty years, at first sight affected my King; and, as if Nature by
some secrer instinct, had told him he was of his blood, he entertained him not
as a stranger Prince, but as his own Brother.

The Solemnity of his Nuptials being seconded by the Coronation of his Queen
and his entry into the Capital City of his Realm, Polexander had the
convenience to see all those magnificences; and, to be one, himself, of their
principal Ornaments. All that while he studied and observed the manners,
quaintness and tongue of the French; and profited so well, that in less then
three years he became an absolute Frenchman. At the entrance into his
sixteenth year the French King made a Progress to one of his Cities caled
Lions and whilst he stayed there, the Princes and Lords of his Court, made
generally appear and break out, their Honor, Spirit and Dexterity. The first
Prince of the blood (who is now King of France) and some others, were Actors in
some Tournaments and Iusts, like those so frequent amongst the Moors. There was
not a cross street, or eminent place in Lions, wherein you saw not an Arch or
Base of stone or metal, which no Knight could pass till he had made trial
of it is adventures. The King my Master having learned from the best Ryders of
the World, all that Art has invented to manage a horse well, yet found out
(himself) a part of it, which appeared so rare and stately, that It darkened
the repute of all the others. I remember well too, that, to furnish all things
fitting for this expense, I sold to the Merchan^s of Lions about a hundred
crownes-worth of Iewells-Such persons as were of most Eminence taking notice of
those expenses, and seeing the courage, address, and courtesy of Polexander,
doubted no more of his quality for all believed him to be a Prince. But some
filly brains began to prattle 'that I was a Sorcerer, and how, by my
enchantments I made things appear that were not; or to make them real, I used
the Power of the Devil. During these Iusts, Diceus (whom we had secretly sent
to the Canaries) returned, with the best news we could Wish. He told us, that
the Queen was alive, and how, by the succor she had procured from Spimantus
Prince of Scotland, and the incomparable Valor of one Alcippus a Canaryan
Knight, the Portugalls had been beaten at Sea and in the Islands, and
constrained to abandon the Forts of Palms, Gomera, and Teneriffe. That all men
passionately wished for the Kings return, and to make it the more safe and
glorious, Alcippus was coming with a Fleet of above a hundred sails of ships.
Within a few days after Posts came to the French King, advertising him that a
powerful naval Army was seen on the coasts of Britany. Those Messengers were
seconded by others which confirmed it for truth, and by their news put the
Court into such an apprehension, that they were ready to part from Lions, and
run hastily to the succor of Britanny. But the Arrival of Alcippus taking
away all cause of fear, made the effect of it to cease to^. The King and Queen
understood from him that he was the Admiral of the Fleet which they feared;
that he was born a Subject to the King of the Canaries, and understanding His
Master was in their Court, he came from the Queen his Mother and all his
Subjects, to entreat and suplicate him to give a period to their fears and
greifes by his speedy return. This speech renewed the astonishments of France:
King Charles was pleased to take the pains to visit me, and to treat me as
the Father of Polexander, and by consequence as King of the Canaries. I, who
already heard of Alcippus arrival, presently thought he had discovered that
which I had kept so long concealed: and therefore throwing my self at the
King's feet, I humbly besought his pardon for so long time concealing the truth
of my condition from him, and told him: I was but the Princes Governor, whom I
had made to ^e held for my Son. That it was he who was truly King of the
Canaries and to knit strictly a perfect amity between those two Kings, I told
him of Polexander's extract^. on and his Predecessors Fortunes.

That Monarch was even ravished to find so wo^hy a Ki^smar: and unable to give
limits to his Joy, made it break* forth before all his Courtiers, He oftentimes
embraced Polexander, and made him many excuses for not entertaining him as a
Prince of his condition: And thereupon re-embracing him, and calling him his
dear Cosen and his dear Brother, brought him to the Queen. Alcippus was yet
in the Privy-Chamber when both the Kings came in: Instantly he knew his own:
and un-accustomed to the respects and circumspections which are to be observed
before the Princes of Europe, went and cast himself at Polexander's feet. In
the first interveiw he gave him so many proofs of his Zeal and fidelity, that
the Prince, by virtue of his inclination as well as by his sensibility of the
great Services he had received from him, loved him at first sight, and ever
since has so particularly honored him with his favor, that he has concealed
nothing from him. That very day he put off the Personage which he had acted for
three years; and although he was obliged to take on him with the Name of a
Sovereign, all that stately preparation and decking, by which Kings imprint a
reverence and terror in the hearts of their people, yet did he carry himself
amongst those which were not of his condition, as courteously and familiarly as
he had done, when he went for a private man. I pressed him continually to take
his leave of the French King and, Queen: but He, who had other thoughts, put
off his departure from day to day, and seeing himself importuned by my
solicitations, My dear Governor (said he) I know my duty to the Queen my
Mother, and I understand whereto the quality of a King obliges me. I will give
full satisfaction to these two duties: but I will first repay the obligations I
owe to France. I see the King my Brother on the point of a great Enterprise: He
intends shortly to fall on Italy and force from the Spaniards the kingdom of
Naples, which they have usurped from my Predecessors: Judge you whither I
should leave him in such an occasion. No, I will pass the Alps with him, and
will, at least, have the comfort of seeing the Sepulchers of those great Kings
from whom I have my being. The very same day, He, (who had no other design
then to give contentment to his generous humor, and return the favors he had
received from France) offered himself to King CHARLES, and entreated him to
make use of his Navall Army. Those who ruled the King; after long consideration
on Polexanders offers, imagined they were but artificial and cunning, and
that, infallibly, he was advised to go to the conquest of Naples, to make his
own use of that occasion. If this Young Prince (said an Officer) see that
things go fair for him, he will set the pretensions of his house on Foot, and,
in declaring himself the next heir to Charles of Anjou, may possibly turn to
his side the Neapolitan affections, That indeed his age, virtue, and want of
strength might take away these suspicions; but the reasons of State advise to
live always in distrust, and the ill was rather to be believed then the good.
This ground laid: they thought it surest to give most civil thanks to the
young Prince, and to send him home to his own Islands the most honorably they
could. The advice was followed, and the French King employed all the fairest
words were dictated to him to re-mercy Polexander: and being the Son of a
Father, who had never taught him any other thing then this: that, He knew not
how to reign, that knew not how to dissemble, he so well practiced his Fathers
Doctrine, that Polexander no way doubted of his cunning and dissimulation. When
he saw himself absolutely dis-engaged, he told me, that being acquitted from
what he thought due from him to the French King, he was resolved to follow my
advice, and to render to the Queen his Mother, and to his Subjects, that which
they expected from him. But (said he) we must handsomely bid farewell to
France, and since it has given us so many Examples of Gallantry, it is fitting
we should let them see that we are able to imitate them. He resolved therefore
to entertain all the Court the Eve of his departure, and to join to his great
feast, a Ball after the French manner, and a Mask after the fashion of his
own country. I should be too troublesome* should I tell you the particulars of
that magnificence, for it would take a whole day to make you a description of
the Halls where the Ball was kept, the feast made, and the Mask danced. Never
were more Engines and inventions seen in one place: Art there surmounted
Nature, and the day was imitated by the infinite Number of Lights which were
not seen. But the most admired, was a Mask of twelve natural Canaryans,
whereof Polexander was the Leader, all clad and dancing after the manner of
their own Country. When these sports were ended Polexander accompanied the King
and Queen to their lodging, and took this leave of them both with so much
spirit and grace, that he appeared no less in that Adieu, then in his great
entertainment. The Duke of Orleans, who had particularly considered him as one
of the greatest lights of his house, staid to lie with him, to have the more
time to give him the Farewell. The other Princes visited him, with great
demonstration of Esteem, and amity. Even the Princesses and Ladies suspended
their custom, to give him the departing complements. But among all those
beauties, who had not, or at least made no show to have any other then a simple
wellwishing to so brave a Prince, there was one either more sensible or less
discreet then the rest. She was both of great birth and beauty, and of little
more age then Polexander. During the Prince's abode at Lions, she had diverse
times written to him without making her self known: but receiving no answer,
she thought she must hazard somewhat more then a few letters without
subscription and signature. She therefore advised to employ a confident in this
Amorous negotiation; and to make her self known by that mediation. Polexander
hearkened to that Embassadresse, and understanding all that she had in charge,
so generously treated her that she returned much contented, though he had not
engaged himself. She first deceived her self, that she might the better
deceive her who set her on work; and so firmly believed the King would yield
to her prosecution, that she made no difficulty to assure her Mistrisse, she
should have an entire satisfaction: But that assurance was found false by the
sudden departure of Polexander. As Soon as he had rendered all the complements
he had received, he took Post, and came to lie at a Town where usually they
embarque that descend by the River of Loire. He found his lodging as richly
furnished as that at Lions; and was there served by the French Kings Officers,
with a profusion that well witnessed the wealth of that Monarch. The next day,
as he was ready to put him on the River, he was staid by the Duke of Orleans,
and many other young Lords, who were come post, to give him that last
testimony of their affection. He received them with such courtesies as wholly
won them, and so quaintly made use of that grace which he principally had in
giving, that even the Duke of Orleans could not refuse a box of Rubies which he
entreated him to accept as a token of his friendship. As soon as this brave
Troop was separated, Polexander thanked, even to the meanest, all King Charles
his Officers; and bestowing on them gifts proportionable to his quality and not
to theirs, put himself into a great Boat, of purpose provided for him to
descend into Britany. The Boat was fairly painted and guilt; there was in it a
Hall, a Chamber, and a Cabinet, whose hangings, and other furniture was of
China Satin with great braydes of Gold and Silver. Most of the Boat-men were
clad in the same Satin, enriched with Silver lace, and rowed with Oars
painted with the colors of their Liveries. At the first stroke, they began a
Song, which they had accorded among themselves, and though 'twas none of the
most charming, yet it pleased my Master the King, since it was a testimony of
the affection which the French bare him; They rowed till toward two or three
hours of night, with all the pleasure so pleasant a way of traveling could be
accompanied; and if Polexander could have had his will he had made no stop. But
order being given, all along from Lions, for his Geasts, two Stewards of the
French Kings, who attended him, got him be pleased to land where his lodging
was provided. It was on the side of the River; and though 'twas but an Inn,
they had so orderly disposed it, that it might have passed for a very fair
Castle. The King presently after his arrival, set him at Table, and ravished
with the sweetness of the air and calmness of the night, showed he had a
great desire to ^eimbarque after Supper. He had but begun to eat, when a most
curious, clear, and extreme sweet voice, coming from the river, struck his
Ears, and so pleasingly touched them, that he arose from Table and ran to the
Chamber window to lose nothing of so excellent a Music. The person that sung
was set on the banck of Loire, and intimated to be jealous of the Nymphs of
the River, accusing them for ravishing a treasure which the Singers
incomparable love was only worthy to possess. Polexander stood as enchanted
with so delicate a voice, and when she had made an end of her ravishing
complaints; he turned toward them that were behind him, and asked, if there
were no means to hear it again: your Majesty needs but show that you desire
it, said one of the Frenchmen. He; whom you please to honor with your
commands, will not fail to bring that Musician to you. It Is not fit (replied
Polexander) for me to abuse the French courtesy; this Musician would be alone,
and we must leave him at his liberty; and not oblige him to a troublesome
complying; Yet presently, a Frenchman by a slight, usual to that Nation, went
to the Musician, and telling, into what admiration the Song had brought the
King and his desire to see him, besought, that he would not deny that content
to so great a Prince. The Musician, receiving very civilly the French man's
proposition; My voice (said he) pays me with too much use for the little care.
I have taken in improving it. I expected from it no other recompense, but its
assisting me in bewayling my misfortunes, and behold it has acquired me the
favor of a King, which I may term the prime in all the world, if I were not
borne French. I will go wheresoever you please to lead me; But if the Prince,
who sent for me, so much love Music, try to bring him hither. There is an
Echo in the Island which lies before us, which is more worth then a whole
consort. The French man getting the Musician to promise that he would stay
still there, returned to Polexander, and relating what he had done, assured
him, the Musician expected only his command to come to him. It Is better to go
to him and follow his conncell, replied the King. Presently he arose from
table, and went with Alcippus the Frenchman and my self, where he was to find
that excellent voice. The night being very clear by reason of the Moon, being
almost at full, the Musician perceived him* a far off; and coming to meet
him, did (as all Musicians do, whether good or bad) excuse himself for his ill
singing, through fault of a rheum, which he could not be rid of. The Prince
gave him many fair words, for fear he should believe he came expressly to make
him sing, and asked him whence he was, and whither he was going. My fortunes
(said he) are not worthy to be known by your Majesty. Yet you will do me a
favor to tell them me replied the King; and if I do not deceive my self, it
will not be a small contentment to me. You are too generous (answered the
Musician) to take any pleasure in a thing that is so worthy of compassion. Be
pleased Sir, rather to put by that curiosity, for it can bring you naught but
trouble, and but serve to add to my afflictions. I am not come (replied
Polexander, to molest you, yet (at least) you may tell me what your design is.
It Is in that (said the Musician) I shall be most pestred. I confess I have
one, but to tell you what a one it is, is a thing to me impossible, for I change
my resolution every moment; and without adding any thing to the truth, I swear
to your Majesty, that even now since I had the honor to be near you: I think
I have had above twenty, and all different. These riddles (replied Polexand^r)
need an explication: but since you would not speak so obscurely, but that it is
your desire; not to be understood, I will not oblige you to an unfolding. Only
tell me what way you mean to take. The very worst I can [answerd the Musitian]
at least, the fear that bears me company wishes me to it. But to testify to
your Majesty, how far my intention is to please you, I will reveal what I
never spoke to any: I am going to see whether I shall be happier in Britany,
then I was at Lions; and in uttering these last words, the Musician sighed, and
sighed so amourously, that it touched the King my Master even to the heart, yet
withal, it overjoyed, him to have the occasion of not leaving the young man.
He therefore promised to bring him into Britany, and to employ all his credit,
to give him the contentment he went to look for in those parts. I have often
heard (said the Musician) that it is for the greatness of Kings to promise all,
and for their wisdoms to perform only what is most advantageous to them and I
extremely fear, least in that nature you assure me of your protection. But
what said I? pardon me (great Prince) an impudence deserving punishment, did it
proceed from a sound brain. Truly, of late I have not been Master of mine own
wits, and my reason is so darkened with an extraordinary passion, that I see
but at halfes.

The King had too quick an apprehension not to comprehend the mysteryes of
those words. He imagined the Musician to be some man of indifferent condition,
fallen in love with a Person of very high quality; and by consequence believed,
his design would have good success. This imagination made him promise the
Musician again, to assist him with all his credit; and by his offers won him
to imbarque with them. The Musician, desirous to pay the Kings affection with
some air that might please him, lead him to the place where he had sung, and
repeated a Song, whose notes were so fitted to the words, that they distinctly
marked in it both joy and sadness, hope and fear. That done, Polexander
returned to his lodging and took the Musician with him. He looked on him by
torchlight, and seeing him so young, so fair and well made; I confess [said he
to the Frenchman that followed him] France produces things extraordinarily
rare. The musician (...) to see how earnestly Polexander eyed him, drew back to
a corner of the Chamber where there was not so much light; and taking a Lute
from a Page that was by him, (played on it all the Evening, rather to hide
himself some way from the curiosity of those who had their Eyes fixed on him,
then to have the quickness of his hand or cleanliness of his touch to be
admired. A part of the night being thus plesantly overpast, the rest they gave
to their repose.

The Musician retired with his Servants, and the next day came to the arising
of the King my Master. He behaved himself so respectfully toward the Prince,
and showed such a fear as often as he was engaged to answer him, that the King
knew not which to praise in him most; whither his extreme beauty, or infinite
discretion. After diverse discourse, he entreated him along, and so took boat,
As Soon as he was in, he called for the Musician, and bringing him into his
Cabin; if you love me, said he, you will tell me who you are, and what it is that
troubles you. And to witness I have not this curiosity but to assist you, I
renew the promises I made you Yesterday at Even: and if it be in my power to
make you happy, I engage my Honor, that I will lose all I have in the world,
rather then fail of my word.

The young Musician (whom I will call Hippolitus, since he told Polexander that
his name was so) cast himself at the King's feet, and embracing his legs, Sir
(said he) I am much greiv'd, that I cannot make appear by some more humble and
respectfull action, the sensibility I have of those assurances your Majesty
vouchsafes to give me. I dare not doubt any longer of my good fortune, since
your generousnesse has determined of it: and were it not for some remainder of
fear which holds my happiness suspended, I confess, that I can wish for
nothing more. But to the end, your Majesty may know what the cause is of my
sufferings, and by that knowledge apply a remedy which may free me from them, I
will tell you, all my miseries came from my loving too much: He blushed in
making that Declaration, and his bashfullnesse hindered him from going* on in
his discourse. Polexander, to give him time to recollect himself, told him,
that considering the age, beauty and other graces he was endowed with, he could
not without an extraordinary diffidence to avoid the trap whereinto he was
fallen. For (said he) I have learned from those who have taught me, that youth
and beauty, be it of the body or the mind, are dangerous company; and usally
betraying those they love most, deliver them over into the hands of the most
cruel of all the Tyrants, wherewithal our humane condition is persecuted.

Hearing you speak thus of love (replied Hyppolitus) it is easy to be imagined
that you know it well. I know not (answered Polexander) what it is, and speak
only by hear say. How! (said Hyppolitus) speak you of love but on the belief
you have of your Tutors? no truly (replied the King,) and even thinking
oftentimes on that which they have taught me of it, I imagine with my self,
that it is with love as with so many other fables invented for delight and
instruction, and that indeed there was nothing which in spite of us, could
make it self Master of our liberties, and force us to love what we ought to
hate.

Ah Sir! what say you? cried Hyppolitus with a sight You are in an opinion
exploded by all ages and Nations: Repent you quickly for being fallen into this
Error; and hold your self for a lost-man, if you persever in it. Polexander
began to laugh at the fear Hyppolitus would have put him in, and told him, he
spoke according to his understanding; and truly (said he) I find nothing in me
that teaches I should give place to love. What (replied Hyppolitus presently)
do you then love nothing? Yes marry do I, answered Polexander: I love all that
is lovely, but my love is an untroubled, a calm love, an obedient love, a love
that passes not the bounds I prescribe it. Certainly (said Hyppolitus) those
shall be worthy a great deal of pity, who fall in love with you. Whoever
shall love me (replied Polexander) shall never repent him of his affection, for
I will prefer my friends before my self. Their interests should be my
interests, their joys my joys, and their griefs, mine own: in brief, I
will live more for them then for my self. It Is more then I expected (quoth
Hyppolitus) from a mind which faines to be ignorant of love. Do not believe I
dissemble (continued Polexander) I know no other love, then a judicious and
just desire to do good actions; to render to every one what is his due; to
acquire a Noble reputation by legitimate ways, and, by a wise contempt of a
life of few years continuance, to a^chieve that which shall be everlasting.

By hearing you make this distinction ((...) Hyppolitus) it seems you
comprehend not that which is properly to be called love. I say, that violent
and imperious passion, which proceeds either from inclination or knowledge, and
reigns ^o imperiously over our understanding, that it ^braceth the object
presented as it were its sovereign felicity. I mean not to admit of that
love, (said the King) for I have condemned it from the beginning of my
discourse. This may be (added Hyppolitus) because you fear the troubles and
disquiets which accompany it. But you would not be sorry to see some young
beauty passionately in love with you, and to give to another that passion you
would not entertain your self. I have as little intention (answered
Polexander) to give as to receive any love; and since it falls fitly now to be
spoken of, I will tell you truly, that if, by any fantasticalnesse of Fortune,
it should betide me to be beloved, as you would have me understand it, there is
nothing I would not do, either to dis-beguile her that had made so ill a
choice, or to hinder me from seeing her. And I [said Hyppolitus sighing alowd]
would leave nothing undone to be never separated from such a person as you, who
knows not so much as the name of love, and would fly from me as if I were his
Mortal Enemy. I pity you [repli'd the King*] and advise you to what a
generous man should do. If you cannot cure your self by any remedy, may
please you, try those which seem to you the most dis-agreeable, and yet, which
by their hidden virtue may be extremely profitable unto you. I mean, if you
cannot be helped by the enjoying, cure your self by contempt, absence, or
oblivion. Ah! Cruel and bunexperienc'd Councellor, cried Hyppolitus] O
remedies more painful then the disease it self! I am in the wrong [repli'd
Polexander] it is true I should have stayed the prescribing you those last
remedies, till you had lost all hope. Forget them till there be need [deare
Hippolitus] an in the mean time go on to relate to me your fortune. I have
told it you all [repli'd Hyppolitus.] What have you told me [repli'd
Polexander?] That I loved [added Hyppolitus] and loved a personage as
insensible and as great an Enemy to love as your Majesty. I am very glad
[continued Polexander] for having that conformity with your Mistress: since
without it, I know well you would leave me as some Barbarian, that could not
polish or civilize himself in the abode of politenesse and civility it self.

Thus ended the first converse of Polexander and Hyppolitus; and all the time
of ou^ voyage, they had at every foot the like; and Polexander, always
desirous to oblige Hyppolitus to relate his story to him could never draw other
thing from him but that he Knew it as well as himself, and how it consisted in
this only, that he loved an insensible beauty. In the mean time, Hyppolitus
visibly lost that luster and freshness which made him admired at the first
meeting. He did seldom sleep or eat; He never sung but when Polexander pres'd
him to it, and toward the end he sung so weakly, that we judged him entering
into some dangerous disease. Polexander strove to comfort and cheer him; and
to draw him from this depth of sadness, made him hope his Mistress would not be
so insensible as he imagined.

To make me hope with reason [answered Hyppolitus] it behooves your Majesty to
make trial on your self, and acknowledge whither you may be capable of being
sensible. No, no, Sir, do not make a proof so difficult. It Is done already,
and in saying so he held his peace, and after he had some while mused: Dye, dye
[said he] unfortunate Hyppolitus] and by death find that which thou could
not get, either by neglect, absence, or oblivion.

At last we came to Nantes, where Polexander was received yet with a great
Magnificence then he had been in any of the other Towns on the River of Loire*
Hyppolitus was the one cause of his disquiet: But he was too generous to
abandon him in the State he was. He besought him to think on his cure, and call
his courage and Fortune to second his love. I would feign make use of your
council; said the languishing Hyppolitus, but my own weakness opposes it;
and the more I endeavor to bring my passion to obedience, the more rebellious
I find it. It Is your virtue Sir, it is that alone which I call to the relief of
my infirmity: Have pity on a wretch who implores your assistance. Lend your
hand to one, from whom you have taken the strength of upholdding him self! Be
sensible by commiseration, if you cannot be so by love! and if you will not
heal a heart which you have covered with wounds, yet give a testimonial at
least, that you have a feeling, and participate of his misery.

I speak to your Majesty in this manner, because I see so great a resembiance
betwixt you and the Saint I adore, that I continually persuade my self, if I
could but see you once touched with my afflictions, my Mistress would at last
become exorable. Polexander, who was exceedingly astonished at the beginning of
this speech, came out of it by the artificial conclusion. And to content
Hyppolitus, he protested to him, he was extremely sensible of his
miss-fortunes, and wished he knew the means to overcome them. These promises
brought back a little courage to Hyppolitus, and in a moment He regained new
strength and, beseeching Polexander to stay for him at Nantes two days, he
parted thence with two Squires and a Page, and was a day and a half in his
Journey. He returned not more merry, but more resolute then when he parted, and
then assured Polexander, he had an intention to follow his first advice, and to
overcome by absence and forgetfullnesse, what he could not otherwise subdue.
He told him more, that having vainly attempted diverse means to mollify his
Mistress obdurate heart, he intenended to forsake France, and in His company to
seek the recovery from his malady. Polexander was so good, that without
thinking on what he was, He oftentimes embraced Hyppolitus, promisd to make him
happy, and to confirm him in his design, I will (said he) propose to you an
exchange, of which it is possible you may approve: Leave an ungrateful Mistress
for an acknowledging friend. Let friendship take the place of Love; and to give
your mind an object worthy it, make it amorous of honor and immortality. Take
the Exercise of Arms for a counterpoyson to that melancholy which devours you,
and in lieu of shedding tears, pour forth the blood of your Enemies. Surely
it is far more honorable to command men then to serve a Child; and to acquire
a name through perilous adventures, then to ruinate your virtue by womanish
employments, or rather effeminate idleness. Let Us leave Hyppolitus, let us
leave to women what is proper to women; and since we are believed to be men,
let us try to do such actions as may not belie the opinion is had of us. The
painting which becomes us best, is the dust, sweat, and blood wherewith we are
covered in fight* and the wounds we receive then, are the beauties and charms
which should winn all generous hearts. I perceive well that you condemn this
my opinion: but I know not how to help it, thus far I am rude. Though there
be a great difference (replied Hyppolitus) betwixt your Majesty's humor and
mine, yet shall there be no contrariety in our wills: I submit absolutely all
my reason to yours. I condemn all you approve not, and how sweet soever Love
exercises his Empire over my heart, since you profess your self his Enemy, I
will no more brag in being one of his slaves. Polexander replying not, but with
a ^mile, at this gallant talk, told Hyppolitus, he loved him far more a
Soldier, then he had done being an Amorist. The very day of this Declaration,
Potexander departed from Nantes, and with Sails and Oars hastened to his
fleet. It would be trouble some to tell you all the Canaryans did to testify
to their King, the joy they had in reviewing him. He went into all the
Vessels, praised the love and fidelity of the Captains and Soldiers, told
them he had not forsaken them, but to make himself more worthy their
affection, and embracing the most eminent, assured them he was ready to be
their follower to the end of the world. By such an obliging and humane fashion
of expressing his mind, Polexander made his Subjects know he would feign have
already been at the Canaryes. The Vessel prepared to carry him, cannot be
compared but to the statelynesse of that, in which you crossed the Ocean.
As Soon as Hyppolitus, Alcippus, Diceus and my self were come aboard him, all
the fleet was warned, by a Canon shot, to set sail. Every one performed his
charge in a marvelous good order, and with a very favorable wind we left the
Coasts of France. When we were in sight of the Spanish shores, Polexander would
needs make it appear to his Enemies, that he was sufficiently powerful and
courageous to set on them in their own Houses. He therefore sent six of his
lightest men of War, and himself entering into one of the Ports of Galicia,
burnt many ships, landed, forced a Town extremely rich, took four or five
hundred prisoners, and so set sail again after he had left in Spain so
glorious tokens of his sensibility. After that the Portugalls felt what a
dangerous thing 'twas to get th^mselves powerful Enemies: For Polexander
abandoned and gave in prey, as by right of reprisall to the Canaryans, all they
could meet with in Portugal. He himself cast Anchor before Lisbone walls; and
to terrify the Inhabitants, discharged, in three days, above four thousand
Cannon shot on the Town. Their King received that affront, without the means
of repelling it, because he was surprised, and the King my Master before he
would withdraw, sent and told him by a Herald, that he would hold him for a
heartlesse Prince, if he himself did not presently take arms, and be sensible
of the injury had been done him, and so we presently set Sail and steerd on
our course. He thought no more on Portugal or Spaniard, when his Sentinells
discovered many Sails at the entry of the Streights This Fleet, composed of
many great Gallyons, and other vessels of War; put room* ward to Sea,
as soon as they had descried us, and getting the wind of us, made it appear
they had command to fight with us. Polexander, unwilling to lose so fair an
occasion, put his Army in Batalia, and animating his Soldiers by a short and
powerful Oration, went the first himself to assault the Enemy. The fight was
indeed very long and furious, and though the Spaniards showed spirit enough,
yet had they all been lost there, but that the night favored their flying. The
King seeing himself victorious, sent a squadron of his ships after the
run-awayes, which gave them a sprightfull chase, and himself the while having
taken a view of his gayn and loss, retired to take a little rest after so long
a toil, But he was much hindered by a lamentable spectacle which presented it
self to his Eyes, at his entrance into his Cabin. He saw there the fair
Hyppolitus all in blood, and wounded in diverse dangerous places. Imagine with
your self (if you please) how great his affright was, and how much his Sorrow,
to see in so sad a plight, a person that was so dear to him. He cried out as
loud as he could, and being scarce able to stand, failed little of falling
quite backwards. Hyppolitus who gazed on him with dying Eyes, (Imagined he
would recover) and in that opinion, putting forth his right hand to him with
such an action as was capable to pierce to a feeling even insensibly it self?
Sir (said he) with a weak voice, fly not the miserable Hyppolitus. She is as
she ought to be, to be pleasing in your Eyes Polexander, at these words, melted
into tears, and coming nearer Hyppolitus, Unfortunate that I am, (said he to
himself) what have I gotten that is to be compared to my loss? But dear
Hyppolitus (he added stooping to see his wounds) do not despair of life. your
wounds, may be, are not so dangerous. At that speech Hyppolitus smyl'd, and
taking the King by the hand, No, no Sir (said he) they are not dangerous,
Nevertheles, since it is not in your power to undertake for what is to come,
command (if you please) your people to retire, that I may discover to you a
secret which ought not to be known by any but your self. Hereupon, Polexander,
bid all withdraw except the two Squires and Hyppolitus Page. He raised himself
a little by their help, and casting his eyes downwards as ashamed: Look on me
well [said he to Polexander] and take notice of the unfortunate Princess de
Foix, who, to overcome your contempt and cruelty, has been compelled by her too
violent passion, to take the habit of a man, and the name of Hypolitus. But I
ought not to complain of my change, since I am obliged to it, for the pity you
have had of me. Yea Polexander [said she in another tone,] it is to this habit
only that I ow thy compassion, for thou would never have had any, if my
disguize had not hindered thee from knowing me. I am now dying [ingrateful man]
but I dye contented, since my life was not pleasing to you. But I deceive my
self, or you are not to be believed. Now I please you, for I am covered with
blood and wounds. Look on me well therefore, and preserve that cruelty which I
have so long contented withal. I now love it, when it is* advantageous to me.
Polexander was so surprised to hear all this, and so lively touched with
Hypolitus amorous and pitiful words, that he could not retain his sighs nor
tears. He kneeled down by this dying Princess, and taking her by the hand
Madam [said he] by what indignation of heaven do I see my self guilty of the
most horrible crime it ever punished: Hyppolitus, showing the joy she received
from Polexander's grief, Dear Polexander [said she, interrupting him] I give
thanks to my wounds, since they have purchased me far more then J hoped; and
I wish they were not mortal. Your compassion renders me my first hopes; and
seeing you so good as to suffer me, curse my destiny that plucks me from the
World. But what [said (...)?] No, No, I have lived long enough, and believe
certainly, that some great obstacle opposing my possesing you, my precipitated
end is an evidence that Heaven would not have me long time unfortunate. I have
almost a desire to accuse death for being too slow, for I fear least having
but a moment to live, it be wronged by some new disaster. But if my blood, if
my wounds* and my approaching death do truly touch you, and that you spend no
feigned tears, if you feel that sorrow you make show of; promise me, that my
memory shall be dear to you, and that you will not suffer any, in your
presence, to blame the Love of the weak Princess De Foix* Polexander, who was
well nigh dissolved in tears during the Princess speech, forced his just
resentment to answer to it, and holding her hands between his own; I swear
(said he) by what is most holy, to do^ for your contentment, all that you can
wish; and I would to Heaven, my life were precious enough to redeem yours! You
might then be secured of a long life.

The Princess shutting her eyes, and scarce being able to form a word, Since
I know you in that resolution [said she] I have lived long enough; Farewell,
dear Polexander* And with that word she dye^ The King gave such a shri^k in
seeing her depart* that we all ran to him, to know what was betided him. When
the Squires of the de^ Lady had related to us her adventures, we were no more
constant then they: Every one bewailed that loss, and Polexander, in
particular, was so (...) sensible of it, that it went near to cost him his
life. Diceus, in the mean ti^e, embalmed the body of the Princess, and, at the
request of her Page which was a disguised Maiden, and her to Sq^es, she was
carried into another Ship. They i^treated ^kewise Polexander to be pleased that
they might return into Fr^ with the body of their Mistress. At first he denied
that leave, because he would have brought them to the Canaries: Yet at last,
importuned by their reasons, he permitted them to return homewards. He, on the
other side, after his being three or four days in-exorable to the Petitions of
his servants, suffered himself to be persuaded to the finishing his voyage.

All his Ships then being returned with a great many prisoners, he stood for
the Canaries: But the King's grief ceased not by the absence of the object
which had caused it. He lamented the fair Hyppolitus as she had been his own
Sister, or to say better; as if effectively he had guilty been of her death.
His grief spread into his followers, and made them lose all sense of joy for
their victory. Those who considered Polexander, far more then they did the
King, went a great deal farther: for they found fault with their own good
Fortune, and detested such happy success as had been bought by the tears of
their Master, and the blood of so rare a Princess. But time, which to this day
never found malady which it could not cure, by little and little, gave remedy
to our Master; and presented him so many new employments, that he was forced
[spight of himselfe] to forget those which sorrow had made so dear to him.
When he was near the coasts of Morocco, he learnt of certain Merchants that
were sailing into Scotland, how the Prince Abdelmelec, eldest Son to the King
of Morocco, had proclaimed the most glorious Turney, that had ever been seen in
Europe, or Africa. Our young Prince seemed he would be glad to see this Moorish
bravery, and break a lance in memory of the Princess De foix. To dash the
business I exhibited to him the great necessity of his presence with his
Subjects, and how much a delaying might be advantageous to his Enemies. We came
from beating them [said he smiling] and I think they will not be able, in have,
to put themselves in case again to assault us But Governor, [added h^] how
long do you think I intend to be on this Voyage? Within eight days, at most, I
shall have seen all that I desire. It Is so little a time, that the least calm,
or weakest Tempest, may make us lose more. After thus much spoken, he called for
all the Officers of his Army; and making a fair Oration, by which he
immortalized their valor and fidelity, entreated them to intimate to the Queen
his Mother and his Subjects, the news of his returning; and when [said he] you
arrive at the Canaries, divide equally al you have gotten from the Portingall
and Spanyard.

His Commanders threw themselves at his feet, to beseech him to lead them
whither he was going; but when he had made known, that his absence would be
only but for three or four days, and desired not to be known in Morocco, they
took their leave, and with all their vessels got to the happy end of their
navigation. In the mean time, the King my Master, causing all the badges, and
other things of markabout his ship, to be taken off, and his Servants to be
clad in the French Fashion, entered with two little vessels that followed him
into the River of Tansif. He landed as soon as he could, and commanding me to
wait for him in his Ship, took no other followers with him, then Alcippus,
Diceus and ten or twelve Slaves. At his taking Horse, he commanded them
expressly, to name him for a Frenchman; and began a journey, which instead of
eight days lasted near six Months. I confess yet, that as long as I live, I
shall repent me for not following him; for as I understood by Alcippus and
Diceus, there will never beseen any thing equal to the wonders of readiness,
valor, and courtesy, which Polexander showed in Abdelmelec's Turney. 'Twas
there the Wicked Angel, jealous of the greatnesses which were infallibly
promised, made him see that dangerous picture which troubled his reason, dazzled
his eyes, and made him lose the fairest of his time, under a deceiptfull hope
of an imaginary happiness. But to tell you, in few words, what passed at
Morocco; Polexander there overthrew Abdelmelec, and after two different
Combats, compelled him to renounce [at least publiquely] all the love which he
seemed to bear to Alcidiana Queen of the Inaccessible Island; he came after
back to me laden with that princesse's Pictures; and to hear him speak, it
seemed those painted tables where treasures incomparably more precious then all
the Diamonds, pearls, and other riches which he had lately gotten from the
Portingall. He had yet one of those portraicts in his hands* and made me take
notice of all the strokes of the Pensil and beauties of it, when a young African
Lady, very fair and desolate, cast her self at his feet, and besought him, by
the honor he had won at Morocco, rather by that compassion to which his
extreme Nobleness obliged him in the behalf of afflicted persons, to take her
into his protection, and aveng her of the most ^sereant and wicked man that
Africa ever brought forth.

The young Prince looked not to be twice entreated, neither suffering my
Remonstrances nor entreaties returned with that Lady, [called Izilia, if I be
not deceived,] and to accompany him, would have none but Alcippus and Diceus. I
will neither tell you whither he went, or what he did no^ how he came back; for
notwithstanding a^ the entreaties I could make to one and the other of those
his two faith^l servants; I have not been able to get from them any thing, but
that Polexander most expressly forbad them to speak of that Journey. But whither
his adventures were good or bad; so it was, that he returned so weak and pale,
after more then five months absence, that I might easily judge he had been
extremely wounded, or extremely sick. I acknowledge now, that I abused his
goodness much in the speech I had with him about that Journey: But his Heroic
Soul, incapable to receive any alteration, endured my liberty without show of
being moved; and never opposed but his own natural sweetness, to the
sharpness of al my reprehensions. I must confess, my dear Master, (said he)
I have done amiss, and have not taken enough into my consideration, the Queen
my Mother nor you. But you have so often taught me, that there is no voice
which ought so sweetly to touch the ears of a virtuous Man, as that of a
miserable creature which reclaimes his assistnce, and I made so certain an
experience of that truth, when the unfortunat Izilia related to me her
afflictions, that I could not resist the violence wherewithal her complaints
drew me to the place where she had need of my courage. But I wrong your
instructions, to go about to justify my action: I have done that which
humanity commanded me. It Is fit now I should do what Nature, obligation, and
Regality expect from me. Let us go then to my dear Master, wipe off [if it be
possible] the ^eares of the best Mother in the world. Let Us go, and acknowledge
the cares and ^ravells she has taken for us; and essay to give ^o so many
people which love us, some proofs of our sensibility. As Soon as this was said,
he commanded to hoyse sails* and after a long and furious tempest, cast Anchor
in one of the Ports of this Island. But O Heaven! what strange alterations
found he in his Court! How much did he repent the deferr^g his return! 'Twas
told him at his arrival, the Queen his Mother was more afflicted then ever,
since some ten or twelve days before, the Princess Cydaria had been by a
great number of strangers carried away. Polexander, afflicted as much as
possibly the best natured man in the world could be, came to his Mother,
witnessed, by his unfeigned grief, an extreme sorrow for her affliction,
besought her to preserve her self for his and the Subjects good; and promised
he would never be at rest till he had restored to her the Princess her
Daughter. You may well believe that Good Queen had received an extreme content
in reviewing so worthy an Heir of the great Periander, if the death of that
Prince, and the rape of her Daughter had not made her incapable of all kind of
pleasure. On the contrary, it was to her a redoubling of her vexation, in the
estate wherein she was. For the presence of so accomplished a Son, renewed the
loss of a Father that was no less so; renewed likewise her ancient sorrows,
and reduced her to the incapacity of giving any thing to the return of the
Prince, but tears. Yet dared she not discover to him the true cause of them,
but, by a wisdom worthy her self, had rather Polexander should suspect it to
be for her too much affection to her Daughter, then that he should know, her
extraordinary affliction was from the want of power to avenge the murder of the
great Periander. The King my Master made the same construction of her tears as
She desired; and thinking that the loss of Cydaria was the sole cause, He, by
consequence, believed* he might give her an ample testimony of his love, in
forgetting his own interests for the safety of his Sister. He understood the
Prince of Scotland was gone after the Ravishers; and that news made him the
more impatient, till he was shipped. The very same day he set sail, and
steering again his course toward Africa, met with many of his ships, which
after a long vain chase, were returning to the Canaryes. Some of them He sent
back to the Quee^ his Mother, and commanding the rest to stand off at Sea, yet
some twelve or fifteen days, made along to the West, with an intent to sail
to the Pirates Island. But the next day after that resolution, his
Vice Admiral came to him, and said; that the Prince of Scotland, after he had
given chase to those that stole away Cydaria, at last fetched them up in sight
of the fortress of Guargetssem; and after a furious combat, the Ravishers,
finding themselves the weakest, had put fire to their powder, and involved, in
one same flame, the vanquished and the vanquishers. Unfortunate that I am,
cried Polexander* must my return be remembered by the loss of the Daughter, and
desolation of the Mother? Deplorable Polexander! have thou the heart to carry
these sad news to a person whose griefs should be more sensible to thee, then
thine own? No, no, be not the sad bringer of so Tragical an accident: Present
not thy self before Axiamira, since thou can not do it without increasing
her afflictions. Whilst he was thus lamenting, I came into his Cabin, and
seeing Alcippus durst not speak a word to qualify his passion, I made use of
the authority which my age and condition gave me. Harkening therefore to him a
little while: If (said I at last) I should condemn your complaints, I should
find fault with the most just sensiblenesse that is in nature. When we lose
those whom blood or affection makes dear unto us, we lose a part of our
selves, and by cosequence, should seem to be our own Enemies, if we, for
their loss, should make of show of lamentation. But Sir, this sorrow must have
its rules and bounds, and must not imitate the grief of Children, who fallen
into the dirt content themselves with crying, and never strive to get out.
Besides these reasons, and others, which concern your condition, you ought to
take into consideration the Queen your Mother; you ought to give her the
Example of comforting her self; and by your constancy, facilitate the means
of supporting her misfortunes: All things sort well with you, to go render her
this necessary proof of your good disposition. She now bewayls your absence,
as well as your Sisters. Go and ease her of one part of her fears and
disquiet; and since it is impossible for you to give her all she desires, give
her yet (at least) all which she desires with reason. I know it is vexatious and
irksome to you, to signify to her the death of your Sister: But it is not of
necessity, that you should, your self, bring her that unwelcome and heavy
news. Besides, Axiamira's virtue is no common virtue; She is of proof against
the greatest Accidents; and Fortune, who has often violently justled her, has
not been able to stir her. At that word, Polexander interrupting me, Governor
(said he) I yield to so many reasons, and will not be ^pbrayded, that for being
too nice, I forsook one sick, who might have received comfort by my care and
diligence. Presently the Pilot had command to return to the Canaryes: and, as
if the wind had been governed by that Prince, it shifted in a moment from East
to West, and so fresh a gale, that the second day we discry'd the prodigious
Mountain of the Isle of Teneriffe. There we met with an obstacle, which was as
the presage of those hind'rances, where withal Fortune went about to oppose
the prosperities of Polexander. Four-Pyrate^hips, which domineered in those
Seas, discharged all at once on our two Vessels; and not thinking to meet with
any great resistance, came close up to us, without any more. My generous
Master, finding in this occasion wherewithal to exercise his great courage,
made it appear to the Rovers they had been very ill advised. He so affrighted
them by the terror of his blows, but particularly by the death of their
Captain, that they gave over the fight, and contented themselves with the
losses they had sustained. Polexander was more hard to be pleased, and would
not overcome by halfes: He hotly pursued the Run-awayes, sunck two of their
ships, and, but for the ill weather which seemed to envy his victory, it had
not been unperfected. But of this I intended not to accuse Fortune, if by a
pernicious sequel, that Jealous-one had not made it appear, she had a
design, not to save the Prince's Enemies, but to ruin the Prince himself. To
bring it to pass, she armed the Sea and the Winds, and commanded them to wage
War with him: and after she had held him many days and nights without hope of
safety, cast him into a Port wherein he made a more dangerous shipwreck, then
if his Vessel had been split upon some Rock. His ship then open and leaking in
many places, and unfurnished in her principal parts* hazardously entered the
mouth of a little River, which our Pilots knew not, and not finding water
enough, insensibly ran in on the owze. The generous Polexander presently came
to assist Alcippus, Diceus, and my self, that could no more; and assuring us,
we were out of all danger, said, that if we had yet but a little courage, we
might instantly enjoy our good fortune. Get out my friends, let us get out of
this sad abode; and let us see whether the Land will be more kind to us then the
water; and whilst our Mariners resume their Spirits, let us take the benefit of
that rest which an extreme pleasant shore presents us. Alcippus overcame his
sickness to follow Polexander, went a land with him; Diceus followed presently
after; and I, who had rather dye then be from my Prince, caused my self to be
carried on shore by four of our slaves. The air of the Land streightwayes
dissipating a part of our sickness, we found our selves comforted and ^as'd in
less then nothing. Polexander and Alcippus climbed to the top of a Rock not
far from us, to see whether we were arrived in a place that was inhabited.
But seeing neither men nor houses, and the night too approaching, they returned
where they had left me, and told me, we must set up Tents on the shore, to
pass the coming night better then we had done the eight or ten precedent.
Diceus receiving this order from me, went back into the ship, and commanded the
Officers of the Kings Cabin, to go set up the Kings pavillion in the most
commodious place they could find. All which was don with so much diligence,
that, in less then an hour, we found our selves very well lodged. When every
one had eaten, we set Sentinells on the parts that lead to us, for fear of
being surprised, and gave them express order not to disperse themselves for
what cause soever. This done, we went to Bed; Scarce had the Sun begun to
whiten the top of the Rock, at whose feet we had pitched our Tent, when
Polexander called Alcippus and my self, and told ^s we slept as profoundly as
if we were in a friends Country. We straight clad us, and that while the Prince
went to relieve the Sentinells, and put some little Court of Guard about his
Tents, to make some little resistance, in case we were set on; and forbad us on
pain of death, to observe him as a King before any person whatsoever that
should hap to come near him. This being thus ordered, he commanded his horses
to be landed, but they had been so Sea-beaten* they could hardly uphold
themselves. Yet there was a Barbary, white as Snow, which Polexander had bought
to combat with Abdelmelec, that took heart as soon as he was landed, and
refreshing himself on the Grass, seemed by his neighing to assure the King
his Master, that he might make use of him. The Prince, after he had taken a
little repast amongst all his followers, took horse and Alcippus and Diceus
following him a foot, traversed a plain which stretched it self along by the
River, and grew broader in other Lands, as far off as the eye could extend.
After he had ridden three or four miles, he descended by a pleasant slope
hanging of a hill, into so delight some valleys were it for the little Brooks
which divided them, for the Fountains which slid from the top of the little
hills, for the meadow, coverd with a thousand several kinds of flowers, or
for the little woods which invirond them so that oftentimes considering them, I
have said to my self, that the ancient Grecians had good cause to choose the
abode of their Heroes Souls in the Islands of the Atlantic Sea. If Polexander
were ravished at so fair a Site. he was far more, in meeting with those
that inhabited it. They were Shepherds so handsome, and Shepheardesses so
fair and neatly clad, that in seeing them Polexander thought on the Knights
and Ladies of the French Court, and believed he saw them represent and act some
Pastoral in their rural habits. The first he met withal not a jot wondered to
see him so richly clad and so proudly mounted. On the contrary they came to him
with the grace and civility of Courtiers, and questionless said many neat and
witty things to him, but the Prince could not understand them, and by
consequence, make no answer.

He made them speak oftentimes, to comprehend somewhat of their Language, and
retaining some of their words: thought it had somewhat of the Arabic. He
therefore spoke to them in that Language, but they understood him not, so that,
to express himself, he was constraind to make use of Signs, instead of
Words. The Shepherds supplying by the quickness of their wit, the obscurity
of the Language by which Polexander strove to make himself understood,
apprehended, that he asked the Name of their Island and the place where
Strangers used to be received. They forthwith offered themselves to accompany
him thither, and told him the Name of their Isle, But he could not divine what
they said, two Young Shepherds leaving their flocks in the custody of their
Companions, put themselves before Polexander, and making a sign he should
follow them, lead him from those Vallyes, by the most pleasant way that can be
imagined. Al cippus and Diceus were ravished with their Adventure, and
following merrily their Master and his guides, quickly got to the top of those
Hills which kept them from the Mid-daies Sun. There they saw Plains. but
covered with Flowers, and cut cross by many ways, which outwent the fairest
Garden-alleyes and parks of Europ, As they came near to a Wood of Palms and
Cedars, they saw leap out of it, a Hind more white then snow. She was wounded
above her right shoulder: The Arrow which had given the wound yet stuck in, it,
and paind her so much that she fell on her legs at every ten paces, and ran her
nose to the ground. The Shepherds staid to see the fall of the dear, and well
deeming by whom she was hunted, made signs to Polexander, that would have said
something of great importance. He soon knew it, for as he had his eyes fixed on
the Hind he heard a horn, and turning his head toward the Wood, saw come out
of it, amongst many Lad^es on horsback, a Chariot, drawn by fonre horses as
white as his own. The Chariot was uncovered, and for shape almost like a
throne. A very fair Maiden, clad like a Nymph, was the Conductresse, and to
guide the Horses, was set at the feet of another Nymph so richly clad, that
'twill be hard for me to describe it to you. She held a Bow in one hand, an
Arrow in the other, and wore a Quiver cross her shoulders. As soon as the
Shepherds saw her, they gave a great shout in flying, and forgot (to our
mishap) to make sign to Polexander, that he should follow them: He stood
firm, and desired to have the whole content. But as he was intentively
beholding the Troop of Ladies, and noting her that was mounted on the Chariot,
the Hind came and fell almost between his Horses legs, and by that
unlook'd-for fall, so affrighted him, that flying from under Polexander, he had
almost given him a most sensible affront. But the Prince, who was the best and
bravest Hors-man of his age, corrected him with so much art, and knew so
readily to tame his fury, that the fair huntresses, and especially She that
sat highest in the Chariot, making a stand, stood still awhile to behold the
strangers readiness. After he had made himself admired on Hors-back, he
alighted, and delivering his horse to Alcippus, drew near to the Chariot of the
fair, and fatal huntresse. She cast her eyes on him, and judging him a
stranger by his habit, spoke to two Ladies that were near her, and withal
commanded the driver of the Chariot to put on. The Horses, stirred by the whip,
fell to their gallop, and the fair Troop riding with full speed, got out of
sight, as if it had been a dream or an enchantment. Polexander, on the
contrary, stood fixed, as if he had been trans formed into a stone, and grew
pale on the sudden, as if he had been ready to have swoonded; Alcippus
perceived it, and ran to him. Ah my friend (said Polexander, what have I seen?
The two Shepherds, who had left him, returned as soon as the Ladies were gone,
and seeing Polexander so wan, imagined his horse had hurt him; and in that
opinion entreated him, by their signs, to rest himself in one of their
Cottages. Polexander, understanding by their gestures the courteous offers they
made him, and besides desirous wholly to gain them, yielded to return with
them. He would not get again on horseback, but leaning on Alcippus, began to
walk gently, and in going, asked him whither he had not noted (among so many
fair huntresses) her, which stood up-right in the Chariot, and whither he did
not remember whom she was like. Alcippus answering him, that he had not so much
time; it is most certain (said he) that either all we have seen is a mere
illusion, or that admirable huntresse must be Alcidiana.

The Shepherds turned their heads at that Name, and many times repeated it, by
which the King my Master was assured of what he imagined, and by that lost
himself. Zelmatida, Smiling at the pleasant conclusion of the Viceroy; 'twas
then truly Alcidiana (said he?) The very same, answered the good old man; and
mark how Polexander had it manifested.. When the Shepherds had brought him to
their Cottages, and entertained him there, not with all the magnifience, but
with all the Gentilenesse of a Palace; One of them thought on somewhat which
might contribute very much to the Princes contentment, and letting him know he
went to fetch it, assured him that he would be back again within two days at
the latest. Polexander signified to him an extreme sensibility of his
courtesy, and to omit nothing of that which might acquire him the favor of
his hosts, passed over a part of the day in doing what they proposed to him.
At evening, he retired with Alcippus and Diceus, and giving the Later
instructions of all he would have me know, sent him to me all night; and he
finding me where I was left, made me know the Kings pleasure, and to have it
executed staid all the next day with me. We unloaded our Ship, and transported
to the next Town all that was in her: Which done, Diceus returned to receive
new commands, but at his arrival meeting the King in an estate far differing
from that he had left him in, forgot all he had to say to him from me, and
thought of nothing but the means to help his sick Master. Polexander might well
be termed so, for since the fatal meeting with that divine huntresse, he was
fallen into such a deep melancholy, that even Alcippus had much ado to draw a
word from him. He sighed thrice and four times in uttering a word; and rather
answering his own thoughts then Alcippus questions. It Is true (said he)
Abdelmelec is as generous as he is rash; and since he had a mind to lose
himself, he could not do it in a more high enterprise. But how I pity him
for not having seen but through a very obscure veyle, this so shining and
lively a light, which makes him contemn all others. Certainly those pictures of
Alcidiana which he has are the works of ignorance or envy; and I may say,
after what I have seen, that Prince adores a Divinity to him unknown. Alcippus,
desirous to qualify the disquiet of this new Lover, Me thinks (said he) that
instead of lamenting Abdelmelecs fortune, you ought to extol your own, and
give thanks to Love, that since he has inspired you with a desire to serve*
ALCIDIANA, He has not only made you worthy of her, but by a singular
privilege has conducted you, as by the hand, where your service may receive
their reward. Ah, flat^erer, replied Polexander; dare thou, who have seen that
Princess, make me believe I am worthy to serve her? The love thou bear me,
suffers the not well to consider me. Thou represente^t to thy self all things
to my advantage, and I doubt not but thou beleev'st thou do it justly. But
I, who am freed from the love of my self, and can be a good Judge in mine own
cause; I look on my fortune on that side it ought to be regarded, and am not
dazzled, as thou art, with I know not what luster, which a false light casts on
it. Know my friend, that I am absolutely unworthy of Alcidiana's chains; that
the least of her slaves has those qualities to which I can never pretend, and
that fortune has thrown me on these inaccessible coasts for no other end, but
to engage me in a despair, which surpasses the despair of all that have been
unfortunate from the beginning of the world. Would thou have more palpable,
or more visible proofs o^ this truth, then the contempt wherewith Alcidiana
cast her eyes on me? Think on the circumstances of her meeting. Examine al^
that passed in that little time she permitted me to see her. Weigh seriously
her precipitated departure; and thou will confess with me, that her eyes and
silence have declared me unworthy of the honor to be reckned amongst her
slaves. I intend to contest with your Majesty (replied Alcippus; For having not
your light and knowledge I stop at things which sense makes me see, and cannot
as you penetrate into souls and discover the secrets of thoughts. And not to
lie to you, if your discourse had not taken off somewhat, which hood-winkd mine
eyes without perceiving it, I should yet have drawn very advantageous
consequences from the meeting with Alcidiana and maintain stiffly my belief of
your giving her more cause of admiration then contempt. All her Nymphs,
forgetting the chase, and even not seeing the Hynde which fell at their feet,
pressed to come near you, and pointing with their fingers, seemd to say to one
another, that they had never seen your equal. As you love me Alcippus (said
Polexander, interrupting him) make an end of this discourse. Thou make me
mad in thinking to comfort me. I know what my destiny is, but as sad as
it is, it is to me dear, it is to me glorious, since it is perfected by the hands of
Alcidiana. By this answer, he imposed silence on Alcippus, and beginning to
walk in his Chamber, was about an hour in that exercise: At last he remembered
himself, and calling Diceus askd him whether he had brought Abdelmelec's
bucklers. They are in your Majesty's trun^kes replied Diceus. I would feign have
them, said the Prince. We must go for them then replied Diceus. The place where
I have left them is not so far hence, but that I can be quickly back again.
But Sir (said he) if the Viceroy press me upon your staying, what shall I say
to him? Thou shall tell him (replied the Prince all that thou think fittest
to keep him where he is. Diceus presently took one of his hosts Horses, and in
full speed came to the Town where I was retired. I was wonderfully astonished
at so quick a return, and askd him the cause. It Is nothing (said he) nor no
other then the curiosity of a great Lord of this Isle: He desires to see
Abdelmelecs bucklers, and I have ridden all last night that he might not long
expect his desired contentment. After he had told me this tale, he took the two
bucklers, and returned with as much speed as he came. Polexander, seeing him
come back, commended his love and diligence, and with an excess of joy,
forgetting what he was embraced him a long time in his arms. Then he set
Alcidiana's Pictures in their best light, and considering them well: I am
confirmed (said he to Alcippus) in my first opinion; These Pictures are nothing
like Alcidiana. I saw the Princess so little (replied Alcippus) that my memory
represents her not to me, but very confusedly. Yet, if that Idea of her which I
retain hathany conformity with the Original, I find not these Coppies any way
do resemble her. Assuredly (said Polexander with a little passion) they are
nothing at all like her. Where find you that sweet and majesticall liveliness,
which sparkles in her eyes? or that fresh and clear witness of her
complexion and breast? No, no, there is naught here of Alcidiana. Only a man may
see by some strokes, that it is the portraict of some excellently fair creature.
In this discussion was the Prince, when the Shepherd who two days before had
left him, entered his Chamber, and presenting to him another Shepherd, of a very
good aspect for an old man, made him understand by signs, that, that was it
which he had promised him. The old Shepherd presently beginning to speak,
saluted Polexender in Arabian, and by that language, made him sufficiently
conceive the good office done him by the young Shepherd. The Prince went and
embraced him to signify how sensible he was of that obligation. After that
satisfaction* he straight did the like to the old man, and told him in
Arabicke, that he was too happy in meeting with one to whom he might make
himself understood. This venerable old man answered him, his joy was not
less; and should he reap no other fruit of his travells, then the tafting the
sweetness of his conversation, he would (all the rest of his life) bless that
curiosity which at first made him to undertake them. It Is for me Father (replied
Polexander) to give thanks to fortune for shipwracking me on this Island. Scarce
had I set foot on this Land, but that I was (...) of the happiness it enjoyes,
as one of its natural proprieties. In three days I met with a thousand causes
of conten^ment but there are few of them, on which I set so high a price, as on
the happiness of your acquaintance. The old Shepherd thinking in his opinion
he had not words good enough to answer these, replied, by the tears which joy
drew from his eyes; and to make an end of all Compliments, besought Polexander
to believe, that if he could do him any notable service, he would make more
esteem of that litt^e time he had yet to live, then of his forepassed
threescore and ten years. But (my Lord said he) I beseech you to believe my
Protestation, without obliging me to persuade you by any Rhetoric. Father, I
believe you replied (...), and without de^ay, to put my self in possession of
that good you so free^y give me, I desire (if you please) to entertain you to
my full content, and at leisure the remainder of this day. The old Shepherd
bowed, to intimate his readiness to obey Polexander's commands. Alcippus and
Diceus straight took the young Shepherd, and proposing to him some other
diversion, to win him cut of the King's Chamber, left their master with the
old man. Polexander made him sit down by him for all his civilities and
excuses, and told him he was a neighbor to that Island, a Canaryan by birth,
and somewhat considerable amongst those of his own Country. That some two
months since he shipped himself for Afric* but cross winds putting him
from his cou^e had for^'d ^s Vessel into a little River of that Island, the
name whereof he k^w no^. That he Entreated him to know what the Isle was called
under what kind of Government the people lived and whither there might be
acce^e got ten for them near any of the Princes or Magistrates. The old
Shepherd w^o ^ad been very attentive to all Polexander's demands, seeing he
went no^ one ^pake to him thus: I have known by many experiments* that person
equally credible have not been equally beleev'^, and that Truth has had need
o^ an unusual assistance to make an impression in our minds. If two men report
one same thing, and the one of them is of a condition more (...), or of greater
merit then the other, the testimony of that person of eminence, shall be far
otherwise accepted, then the same from a person of a vulgar quality. The
thought of this has made me piuck out of my Ancestors Graves an o^d Nobility,
which I had there intombd together with my hopes; and to tell you that the
habit I wear, is not a sign of my births meane^esse* but of the benefit I
have received by the study of Philosophy. I was borne in the ^plendour of a
very ancient Family, bred up in the Court of the Kings of this Island; and
growing old in the service of the last deceased, I retired me into a very fair
Village* a days journey hence, to recover among those Shepherds which inhabit
there that innocence and quiet whereof the ^te of Court had dep^iv'd me. I
think this to be sufficient to gain credit to (...) course, and to free you
from wondering a^ the hearing my relation of such things as come not within the
verge of a Shepherds knowledge. I will first therefore tell you, this I^e is
called the happy Island and that it is so, and with a great deal of Justice
our Ancestors have given it that proud Name. It Is besides ca^ld the wonderful,
and the inaccessible I^and because, by a particular favor from Heaven and
Nature, one might say, it privily withdrawes, and hides it self from the
curiosity of those which search after it: And indeed, never any stranger
arrived here, but as you have done I mean either by chance or tempest.

This I^e is far greater then it seems, because it extends not in length as
others do, but properly resembles a Pomegranet. It is waterd with a great many
Rivers, Brooks and fountains. It has Lakes, Ponds and Forests of an
extraordinary greatness. They have harvest twice a year; and at all times may
be seen on our T^ees, fruit appearing in the midst of blossoms, some ripening,
and others already ^pe: We have Mines of all metalls, but the most abundan^ are
those of Gold and Silver. Toward the South we have a plain Strand o^ above
thirty m^es long, environd wit^ Rocks* whence are drawn very fair Diamonds*
and Emeralds. Toward the East, the Sea ingulphs it self in the Land, and
receives the Tribute of many little Rivers, which all breed an infinite
quantity of fish, within whose shells are found as great and orient Pearls, as
those which are fishd in the Eastern Indies. But why do I number our riches to
you. Your curiosity is too generous to be delighted among the excrements of the
Land and Sea. I shall do better in entertaining you with the manner of our
government, with our Laws and Manors. This Island has been governed from all
times by Kings or Queens, for, both the one and the other Sex may indifferently
reign there. For our Laws they have been established, rather to put us in
mind of those virtues which are natural to us, then to refrain us from Vices.
But I pass by particular Laws to speak of those of State* The first commands
us to believe but one God in Heaven, and by consequence to adore but one on
Earth. The second forbid our Kings, to take any Stranger Princesses to their
Wives; and declares, that if any one undertake to travel against the
fundamental Law of the State; and happens to marry with a stranger, the
Children proceeding from that marriage, cannot succeed their Father in any
inheritance, if they be not borne in this Island. This old Law has been exactly
kept even to this day, or to say better, no occasion has called on a necessity
of putting it in practice. Yet the last deceass'd King, my good Master gave
birth to one; but the Eternal wisdom, which works all for the best, strangled
it almost as soon as it was borne. That great Prince (by name Alcidus) leaving
the Isle to have the knowledge of other people and Countries then his own,
saves himself reduced to the extremity, of either violating this fundamental
Law, or to leave among the number of the vulgar and private persons, a precious
gage which he had received from the love of one of the fairest Princesses of
the world. I will sincerely relate to you the History, since thereby I shall
make answer to all your questions. To take it then from the beginning; you may
please to know there is in this Kingdom, a third fundamental Law, which
ordaines, that every year the King choose one of his Sons, or some other
person of eminent virtue to the end, that as Sovereign Priest, he make a
voyage to an Island not far from this, to pay the tribute of Love, and
celebrate the Sacrifice of alliance, whereto our Predecessors, have engaged us
toward the true God which is adored in this Island, under the form of the
Sun. The King Cleonidas, Father of the late King my Master, commanded that
his son with an extraordinary stately preparation and equipage, should g^e and
present to that Deity, the testimony of his public acknowledgement. The Prince
went that voyage, but came not back as he set forth. For transported with a
desire to see the world, he crossed the Ocean, and arrived in England, where he
became desperately in love with a Princess the Sister of King Edward. She was
called Phelismonda, and it is to be confessed, her charms were so powerful, her
wit so admirable, and her virtues so extraordinary, that when the King my
Master disclosed to me his love to her; I was compelled to tell him he could
not have a more just affection. In that passion he made me his Confident, and
Phelismonda chose for here is, an English Lady cal^'d Thamiris. Our negotiation
pro^perd to the contentment of those that imployd us. But alas! the joys which
men gather from the satiating their passions, are pleasures very short and
deceitful. Phelismonda was no sooner married but she saw her self persecuted
by the King of England, and forced to expose her self with us, to the mercy of
an enraged Sea. O^r vessel after it had been long time beaten by the Tempest,
was driven to the furthest end of Scotland, where the King my Master caused the
Queen his Wife to land, for she was extremely sick, and under^anding some days
after that she was with Child, made an Oath, that he would not re-imbarke till
Phelismonda were delivered. We were near six months among the Savages of that
Country, expecting when the Princess should be brought to bed. But as I have
told you, the Eternal wisdom who fore-sees even the least of our actions, had
resolved the unfortunate Phelismonda should give no Kings to this Island; for
after the Princess had undergone many terrible throws, she died (undelivered)
in the arms of the King her Husband. As soon as Alcidus saw her expire, he
did what he could to follow her, and seeing himself hindered by all us that
were near him, he made show of being comforted, the more freely to put in
execution his tragical design. But seeing, at last he was at liberty, he came
out of his Cottage where we had got him to retire, and whilst he saw us busied
in preparing his Ship, he threw himself into the Sea. I by chance was come to
the very place whence he cast him headlong down, and flung me after, either to
save, or not to survive him. I was so fortunate, that being destined by
providence to preserve so worthy a Prince to this Island, I met him at his
rising out of the water, and catching him by the hair, drew him to shore,
deprived of all sense or understanding. All his Officers running thither, did
all they thought fitting to recover him. The wisest of the company judging it
convenient to make use of an occasion, so answerable to their intentions,
carried him into his Ship, and commanding all his followers to come aboard,
presently left Scotland, and the body of Phelismonde. We had lost sight of that
Countries high cli^fs, before the unhappy Alcidus came to himself. At last he
recovered, and perceiving he was in a place so differing from that where he
thought to have been; asked as by what miracle this alteration was betyded. We
told him what we had done; and he presently accusing us of Treason and
ingratitude, would needs make us guilty of Phelismonde's death. It Is your malice
(cried he) or may be your poison that has thrown her into the Grave. And
barbarous as you are, not contented to have pluck^d her so cruelly from my
embraces, you have forced me to leave her dear and precious relics to the
mercy of wild beasts! Many other words speak he to move us to compassion, and
to oblige us to bring him back again to Scotland. But we opposed our reasons to
his, and told him, that if he returned thither, he would find (in lieu of the
fair Phelismonde) but a diffigur'd and frightfull Corpse, that would rather
terrify him, then renew the memory of his former love. At last he consented to
return hither. We had a Pilot, who yet lives, his name is Lynceus, and I will
say thus much in his praise, that never man knew better the Sea, and the
winds, no^ was like him, capable of a long voyage.

As soon as we had made known the Kings pleasure to him, he took his course
far from Land, and after two and twenty days sailing, cast Anchor in the
Isle of Madera. From thence he would have steered hither, but having vainly
employed his Art, and the flight of certain birds, whose brood has from all
times been curiously preserved by our Priests for the conducting those Vessels
which return from the Island of the Sun: he thought he might do best to go
and land there, and attend the arrival of those which should be sent for the
solemnity of the yearly sacrifice, whereof I have told you. Alcidus was of his
opinion, and thereupon our Ship bore right to that holy Island, and the fourth
day entered the Port which carries the name of the Sun. The High Priest
received the King our Master, with tears of joy* and gazed on him as on a
Prince, who after he had been long dead, was miraculously raised again. Alcidus
related his adventures to him, and thinking he had not sufficiently acquitted
himself of the Commission the King his Father had given him in charge, began
the sacrifices anew, and after he had satisfied the Obligations of his estate,
he would likewise perfect his own particular. He presented many rich offerings
to the invisible Sun; and for an eternal of his voyage, caused great tables
of Gold to be cast, whereon his principal adventures were represented. We had
been now almost five months in that Island, when the Vessels of Cleonidas
arrived there. Never was there seen so sad and doleful a preparation. All his
Vessels were painted black, the sails were black, and all those within them
witnessed by their mourning, the extraordinary desolation that was in their
Country. But this Funeral, solemnity, and s^ate had scarce time to show it
self, for Alcidus presenting himself to the first that came on shore, and
being known of them, tur^'d their sadness into joy* their habits of sorrow
into robes of triumph, and their lamentations into songs o^ mirth and jollity,
The Sacrifices were performed with an incomparable Zeal, and the Altars
besides the ordinary presents and offerings were laden with other gifts and
ob^ations for Alcidus return. We betook our selves presently after to (...)
Sails, and the sacred birds, the second day being let out of their Cages,
guided us so well, that on the fourth we entered into a River, on whose bancks
is built the Capital City of this Kingdom.

I should be to tedious to relate the contentment Alcidus return gave to the
whole Island, and the ravishing joy the King his Father received. The Feast for
it lasted many months, and to make it more accomplished, Cleonidas married
the Prince, to a Princess of his blood, called Diana, (with more Justice then
she among the Greeks.) The second year after this happy marriage, but of small
continuance, Alcidus mounted the Throne by the death of his Father, and the
next year he had by his Queen a Daughter, who without flattery, ought to be
placed among things celestial. It Is not to say what She is, to say that she is
fair, that she is witty, that she is virtuous. I shall not have said enough
of her; when I have told you that she is beauty it self, that she is the
highest of the created Intelligences, and in short, should be taken for that
extraordinary virtue to which the ancient Philosophers gave the Surname
Heroical.

This Princess to have nothing equalize her on Earth, lost the Queen her
Mother as soon as she was borne, To preserve the memory of his marriage,
Alcidus, out of his own Name and his Wives, composed that of the Young
Princess, and called her Alcidiana, At that Name Polexander sighed, but
fearing least the old Shepherd might discover the cause, he stifled within him
more then the half of his Sigh. The Old Man taking no ^eed to it, thus went on
with his discourse. Some few days after this Princess birth, the Riner
Arzilea overflowed his banckes, and rising hie, even to some old buildings
which were called the Tombs of the Prophets, cast down a piece of a wall
which enclosed the Vaults where the bodies of the Prophets had been buried.
When the River was retired into his Channel, some body marked that* ruin, and
his curiosity leading him into those Caves, He saw a great Tomb covered with
plates of Gold. Presently he published this wonder through the City, and the
King being advertised of it, sent thither a guard, A little after, (thrust on
no doubt by some divine inspiration) he went himself to those Sepulchers, made
the plates of them to be cleans'd, and thereon found very ancient characters,
by which he understood, 'twas near three hundred years since the death of
those Prophets. He had patience to read all that was there written, and happened
(on a plate separated from the rest) to meet with certain predictions which
gave him matter enough to meditate and ponder on. There was one, whereon it was
manifestly spoken of his reign, and of his House. I cannot relate to you the
proper terms, but I will tell you the Substance. The Prophesiy spoke of
Alcidus Voyage, of the short continuance of those two marriages, of a Son
which he was to have by the first, which should be one day one of the most
valiant Princes of the World, and King of a very great Kingdom, if he could be
taken alive out of the Womb of his dead Mother. It added further how of a
second marriage, Alcidus should have a Daughter, of so much perfection and
rarity, thar she should be esteemed the miracle of her age, and be passionately
desired by many Strange Princes. But that it behoved them to have a wonderful
care for the guard of that Princess, because she was threatened by many
Accidents: and among others to be stolen away and forced in her own Palace,
and to be one day the Wife of a Slave, sprung from the most barbarous of all
the Nations of Africa, To this prophecy there was joined another, in which
the Prophet seemed to see that African Slave arrive in (...) Kingdom. He
solicites him for his undertaking the defense thereof against the enterprises
of many Strangers that would have lain it desolate, and promises the Queen (in
the name of the Deity) that if she could resolve to take that to her Husband,
the felicities of her Reign should be far more great then those of the
precedent Governments. Hitherto we have seen nothing of all that which the
Prophecy presageth us, except the death of our two Queens, that of the King
(who was taken from us at his age of five and forty, and (if the speech be
true) the design which a Prince of this country called Siziphus had on
Alcidiana. But the late King who naturally was devout even to superstition,
gave such credit to these prophesies, that he caused the Princess his daughter
to be nursed in a Palace whereto no person could approach; and when she was
past the breast, he chose many young Gentlemen of his Court to be o^ her guard.
Of them he composed an order of Knighthood, obliged them by an irrevocable oath
to die for the defense of his daughter, and appointed them to wear great chayns
of gold, to the end rhey might show themselves to be the Slaves of Alcidiana

This Company has almost still subsisted, and during the life of the King my
Master some French and other Strangers, driven by tempests on our coasts, by
their brave actions obtaind to be put in the number of Alcidianas Slaves. Some
time, and not long after the death of Alcidus, the Princess sequestered her
self wholly from the conversation of men; and besides her public Court which
is composed of the Grandys of her Kingdom, and the Officers of the Crown, She
constituted a particular one, whereinto only Maids and Women are admitted. The
Queen is never seen of men but when she is obliged to do some public action,
be it as a Princess or a Prelatesse. Sometimes to recreate her, She betakes
her to the country, and there enjoyes the pleasure of Hunting. The rest of her
time She remains shut up in her palace amongst her Women. Thus the Old
Shepherd instructed Polexander in all the State secrets he knew, and so fully
satisfied all his curiositie^, that he gave him not place to ask him any one
Question. Seeing himself then so well informed, he took hold of, and went
over again with the Shepherds discourse, and to content his passion, he began
to exaggerate the Majesty of Alcidiana, and the happiness of her subjects, and
ended his speech with new thanks and new Offers to the Old man, and to oblige
him to stay yet, drew from his little finger a very great Diamond, and with a
good grace presented it to him. The good Old man very civily refused it, and
told him, that when he took on the Habit of a Shepherd, he had put off not
only the Hope, but the desire of riches, That he wanted nothing, because he
could content himself with a little, and that if he found any one that would
disburthen him of a part of the means his Ancestors had left him, he should
walk on to his Gr^ve with a merrier heart then he did. Polexander, admiring so
solid a virtue, would not atake the pains again, or try new ways to incline
it. Contrarily, he thought it amiss done in putting it to that trial, and
employed all the best words he had, to crown it as worthily as it deserved.

The old Shepherd was a little tempted by the Ears, as had he been by his
Eyes. The Prince his praises put him into a confusion, and made him resolve to
put somewhat in action that might oblige the Prince not to continue them. He
therefore arose and making avery low reverence to the Prince, humbly besought
him he might know whither he could be any further useful to him, you will be
extremely so always replied the Prince, but for the present I entreat you one
favor, and it is, if your affairs can permit it, you will do me the Honor to
let me enjoy your company* till you have given me some knowledge in this
Countries Languages The Shepherd (who had the generousnesse of a King)
answered that his business should never be taken into his consideration, when
his good Fortune would present him, the occasion of doing him Service. That he
should absolutely dispose of him, and ever find a readiness to give proof of
his obedience. After Polexander had received those civilities according to his
wonted courtesies, he gave a period to their first conversation, and lead the
Shepherd to walk. The old man made show of enjoying the strength of one of
far younger years; for though he was come that very day from a village near
twelve miles distant from that where Polexander lay, yet stuck he not to walk
till it was far in the night, and made the Prince confess his legs were the
worst of the two. When they were returned to their lodging, they tal^ed of the
quaintness and bravery of many remarkable Nations of Europe, and concurred in
opinion, that even the French or neater English, had no advantage over the
Subjects of Alcidiana. From thence they passed to the richness of the tongues,
and the Old Shepherd made it appear to Polexander by (...) great number of
Examples, that his Language had all the graces and copiousnesse of the Greek.
It is very likely (said he) that we have got thence a part of our words. For
the most of our Names of men, of Towns, of floods, of Beasts, of Plants, are
all Greek. Another part is Arabic, and the rest which we may properly call our
own, is of so sweet and facile a pronuntiation, that it seems Heaven desirous
to treat us more favorably then the rest of men, has caused as care and* love
to appear even in the Composition of our Language. Polexander, said he would
learn without further defer^ing; and Alcippus noted the first word, he asked
the old Shepherd, was that of Love. For a whole month he gave all his time to
that study, and i^ his growing passion had not diverted his imagination, and
robbed the best hours he employed in that exercise, he had drawn dry all the
old Shepherds knowledge. His disquiets plucked him at last from this idle
life, and the desire to see Alcidiana, again exercising and stirring him day
and night, he was constrained to leave the Hamlet, where he had been so long,
and to go pass some days in that of the old Shepherd, where he met with all
that imagination could conceive might conduce to make up a pleasant life. But
he, who had confined all his felicity in the sight of Alcidiana, converted
into bitterness, the sweets of his aboade, and nourished his melancholy, even
with such things as should make an end of it. But Love, who had given the
wound, would bring a remedy: for twelve, or fifteen days after Polexanders
arrival to the C^te of the old Shepherd, Alcidiana came to a Palace, which
her Predecessors had built at the Entry of a Forest, which was full of
Stagges, and wild Boares. As soon as Polexander heard of her coming, he gave
thanks to the Author of his passion, and not to lose the happiness which he
presented him, resolved not to put off the enjoying it till another season.

He therefore caused a Shepherds habit to be made for him, that under such a
digguise he might come near Alcidiana's Palace, and see her as often as she
went to, or came from hunting. He departed with Alcippus, disguised as himself
and driving a flock before them, got to a Land of many Leagues, by which they
went to the Palace. The very same day, he saw the Princess, and that second
sight, gave the fatal blow, whereof he will never be cured. The Princess in
passing looked on him, and marking through his habit, the Majesty which he had
as it were hidden there, made the Ladies, which accompanied her to take notice
of it. He the while, that would possess as much as he could a happiness so
pationately desired, left his flock to the keeping of Alcippus, and shuffling
himself among a company of servants, that looked to the Hounds, made so good
of that little knowledge he had of their tongue, that they not only received
him into their company, as they were wont to do other Shepherds that came,
but also lent him what ever he wanted fit ^or a Hunter. When the whole Troop
was in the Forest, the Hunts-men did their charge, and first sever^d the
Hounds.

Polexander was sent with six to a stand for a relay far within the Wood. The
desire he had to be alone, hindered him from saying he knew not the place
whither they sent him. He therefore went on at all adventures, and when he
thought himself well placed, got him into a bush with his dogs, and lay down
at the foot of a green Oak. T^s not hard for you to imagine the brave
meditations he had in this attending and expectation. Sometime he made a
comparison betwixt himself and the wounded Dear. Sometimes he accused the
Stagge of more than a brutish stupidity, to fly the glory of being pierced by
one of Alcidiana's shafts, and oftentimes wished him in his place. With how
much joy (said he) would I receive the death thou flyest from, and how happy
would I esteem my Fate, if, being wounded as I am by Alcidiana's darts, I
durst promise my self to dye, as thou must, at the feet of that Princess.
Surely if in that desirable moment I were seen to shed any tears, they should
be tears of joy, and my sobs should be so many thanksgivings to that fair
hand, which should take me from among the living. After some two hours almost
of his thus intertaining himself, he heard a noise, and turning his head the
way whence it came, saw a great Stag in a rutt way, that went quite cross the
Forest from one end to the other. There were neither Huntse-men, nor Hounds
that followed the beast, and yet he saw well he had been very sore ^ayd to. For
every foot he bowed down his head, held his nose to the Earth, and instead of
running, made many great slydings. When the Stagge was some ten or twelve pa^es
from the bush, wherein Polexander lay, he heard the Prince stir, whereat
straight he lifted up his head, and shut his angles to make it believed he went
with confidence, and was yet vigorous enough. In that instant Alcidiana
(mounted on a Horse as white as snow) came out of a thicke^ on the other side
o^ Polexanders b^sh. The Horse fierce and proud, ^ut fearful, surpised with
the meeting of the Stag, cast himself hast^ly into our Lovers covert, and the
Dear in the same instant giving two bounds, (...) Alcidiana had not (...)
extre^mely nimble to cast her self a ground, she had run the hazard of her
li^e. Her horse paid for it, for with two thrusts of his brow-ancklers, he was
laid flat on the sand. At the shreeck Alcidiana gave (seeing her self at the
mercy of the incensed beast) Polexander (without thought of uncoupling his
Hounds) cast himself, his sword in his hand between the Princess and the
Stag, who not to be revenged at halfes) came running with full bent, head at
her. He setledly expected him, and by a happy rashness, stopped him with one blow
of his Sword. The beast wounded to death fell stumblingly on the dust; and
Alcidiana who thought her self dead fell some twenty paces from Polexander.
The Prince a thousand times more fortunate then he hoped to have been, ran to
the succor of this new Diana, and coming near, with a great deal of respect,
besought her to tell him what service he might do her. You have given me the
most important (she replied) that you can ever render me. But who are you (said
she) for it seems you are not of my followers? Polexander twice or thrice, had
a desire to tell her, she knew not all that were hers. But his discretion not
suffering him to take that boldness, he answered, that he was a stranger, and
not long since by a happy shipwreck thrown a shore on her Island. At those
words, Alcidiana considering him better then she had done: I think (said she
much surpised) I have already seen you, but under another habit, then that you
were now. Polexander was much troubled at it, because he durst not avow that
truth, and yet feared to wrong himself, if he did not confess it. But many of
Alcidiana's Ladies, and some Huntsemen, (at that instant) coming in, redeemed
him from that trouble. Hereupon the Queen arose, and all the rest alighting:
thank this Shepherd (said she to her Ladies) but for his courage, you had
found Alcidiana as ill handled as her Paifray. With that, the Nymphs environed
Polexander, and after they had given him thanks proportionable to the merit of
his action, began to praise him; this his good aspect, another his advantageous
stature, this, his beauty, that his youth; and all were of opinion, he had
nothing of the Shepherd but the Clothes, and apparent simplicity.

The Vice Roy had no intent to break off his discourse here, and Zelmatida
ravished with this beginning expected the sequel with a great deal of
impatiency. But suddenly there fell such a violent rain, that to obtain a
satisfaction; He was obliged to return to the Palace with the Vice Roy.

The end of the third Book of the second Part of Polexander.
The second Part of POLEXANDER. The fourth Book.
ZElmatida staid not till he came to his lodgings, that the Viceroy might the
sooner go on with his discourse which the storm had interrupted. And meeting
Garruca as he entered his chamber; my friend (said he) thou may well repent
thee for not walking with us. Thou have lost the bravest relation in the world;
for Pimantus has recounted to me a part of the wonders of Polexanders life.
Truly, imagination how inventive soever, can find out nothing beyond the
prodigies of valor and judgment, which have accompanied the tendrest years of
that Prince. I will relate them to thee at leisure, and to make thee more
desire it, I would have thee hear the sequel of the bravest adventure in the
world. After he had thus spoke he entered into his privy chamber with Pimantus
and Garruca, and seating them near him, Father (said he) turning to the
Viceroy, let me know I beseech you, with what recompense did Alcidiana
acknowledge the great service Polexander did her. It was incomparable (said the
Viceroy) at least if the King my Master may be believed. Alcidiana calling him
to her, asked m^re particularly then she had done at first, whence he was, what
was his condition, and whether he had an intent to abide in her Territories? He
answered the Princess, he was borne in one of the fortunate Islands, that the
condition of his Predecessors was not without eminency, and had always made
profession of arms. For himself, he had been naturally inclined to follow
their example; and though he found in the mediocrity of his fortune sufficient
not to envy the greatest: Yet an ardent desire to attain to honor by
difficult ways, had made him leave his Country, and to search among the
perrills of war, and the sea, somewhat that might satisfy his ambitious
humor. That at first he had not found things as he imagined, and by an
impetuosi^y of youth had often murmured against providence. But being
miraculously conducted by her to that honor he had always desired, he
condemned his guilty impatiences, and by a just repentance turned into acts of
thanksgiving at his distrusts and repinings. For to what greater honor (said
he) could that infinite power which governes our adventures raise me, then that
I receive this day, to hear my self praised by the sweetest tongue of the
world? At those words Alcidiana smiled, and turning to one of her Ladies called
Amintha: Confess (said she) that all the politnesse and civility is not
confind to our Island: Since I have been convicted both by mine eyes and
ears; I must needs give over the being too Idolatrous of mine own Country,
and stripping my self of part of that love I bear it, confess that this
stranger is able to impose a great deal of envy on the bravest men of your
Kingdom. Alcidiana breaking that discourse, began again what she had left,
and addressing her to Polexander. Let us know your resolution (said she) and
whether we can oblige you to make any stay in this Isle? Madam (replide the
King my Master) I have learnt being ^red up near the persons of Kings from my
infancy, that it is for those sacred person^ges, soveraignely to determine of
the fortune of private men, and for those of a mean degree, not to propose to
themselves any thing but the glory of obeying them. This being granted, (Madam)
it belongs to your Majesty to pronounce (if you please) what you have resolved
of my fortune, and to me, to receive the commands you shall please to impose on
me, as Laws written in heaven it self. If I were your lawful Princess
(replied Alcidiana) you have reason to speak as you do; but having no other
power over you then what you give me your self, I cannot with justice exercise
any Sovereign Authority over you.

Polexander with a great reverence, making appear to the Princess he knew all
that obsequiousness and respect obliged him to: I humbly beseech your Majesty
(said he) to be pleased that I contradict your opinion, and remember you how
particular men cannot lessen, nor suspend the right of Kings, and by
consequence that they are always invested with that absolute power which the
Laws both divine and humane have inseperably fastened to their condition: And
in what liberty soever nature gives us birth, we lose that privilege of
birthright, as soon as we are out of that limits of our native soil, and
dare enter on that which is subject to the sweet authority of Kings.

It Is to no purpose (replied Alcidiana) to take arms against your self; and
denounce so cruel a war against your freedom; for I accept not the evidence
you produce to your own prejudice, and cannot do less then preserve that
liberty which has protected my life. Yes, you are free, and a liberty so
privileged, that it is at your choice to abide here, or return to your own
Country. But if you have an intent to live in this Kingdom, you may promise
to your self from our just sensibility, all that the greatness of your
service has cause to hope for. Our Palace shall be open to you, no audience
shall be denied you, and by a very particular exemption, it shall be even
permitted you to be sometimes of our association, and to our sports. The
Princess Chariot coming, as she ended her speech, she went into it, and
losing the memory of the hazard she had run, returned to the Palace, I know
not with what joy, more quick and lively then that she was accustomed to show.

That Lady amongst the rest which I named Amintha, made a particular compliment
to our shepherd, and told him that if he had need of her, he should know she
could be and was a good friend. Polexander gave her many humble thanks, and
very proud of his good fortune, returned to find Alcippus. He related to him
what had betided, but it was done so disturbedly, and out of order: so many
interrogations nothing to the purpose, and so much distraction, that Alcippus
perceived the Prince not to be at all where he was.

My friend (said he to him) sighing from the bottom of his heart; why were not
thou spectator of my glory? O Heaven! How fair is Alcidiana! What a grace,
what a Majesty, what a height of courage! If thou had seen her in the danger
I beheld her, thou would confess she has nothing of her sex, but what it
has of rare and beautiful. Certainly she is incomparable, and whosoever can
resist her charms may brag (but to his shame) that instead of a heart, he
carries within him a cold and insensible stone. I see well now (answered
Alcippus) that it is not less difficult to get out of this Island then to come
into it: It Is far worse, replide Polexander, and especially for me, for I
swear to thee, nothing but death shall be able to make me get from it. But
(said Alcippus) what shall become of your followers? What shall the Queen you
Mother do? A^ cruel Alcippus, replied Polexander, why throwest thou again
into my remembrance such things, which in the case I am cannot be prese^ed ^ut
to increase my affl^ctions. Yet I tell thee Alcippus, that that which is
alrea^y passed furnishes me sufficiently for not fearing what may happen
hereafter. My good mother has preserved my estate during my first absence, and
I hope she will do it as well during my second. And if to assist her she have
need of a new Alcippus, I hope she may yet find some one in my Kingdom. I
hope no less then your Majesty (said Alcippus) and besides promise to my
self, that if you will make good use of your fortune, you will not repent you
for loving the fairest creature of the world. How easily (replied the Prince)
do thou pass from one extremity to another. But lately thou made me fear
even to the least accidents of life; for so I call the disorders that may
happen in my fortune, and now thou would have me promise my self such
greatness and heights, that it would trouble the most disordered and unbridled
ambition to imagine. But without flattring my self with any hope, without
proposing any end to what I undertake: Know Alcippus, that I will right on,
where ^ve and reason, inclination and merit, equally call me. The Prince and
his Fav^urite thus discoursing drove their flock before them, and were so
earnest in their talk, that they came to the entrance of their Hamlet, when
they least thought of it. Their Host, from whom familiarity had no way taken
any thing of his first courtesy* came to meet them with a countenance that
openly witnessed the content he received in their aboade, and asked whether
they had well acquitted themselves in their pre^ship of being shepherds?
Polexander, unwilling to have his passion known, answered the old man, that
Alcippus was sloathfull enough to please himself in the case of a pastoral
life. But for himself, his blood was too hot, and he too ^uch affected noise
and action, to put on a resolution of sleeping or meditating all day long. The
old shepherd laughed heartily at that answer, and ^mbracing Polexander. You
are in the right said he, it is for gray hairs, and chill bloods to (...)
themselves to solitariness.

As he had spoake thus, he saw enter the Court of his lodging a very proper
man, whom he knew by his chains to be one of Alcidiana's sl^ves. He met him
with a great respect, and ask^d whether he had need of his service. Father
said the slave, one of the Queens foo^men assuring her the shepherd who saved
her life, was to be heard of here, has commanded me on her behalf to visit
him. The old shepherd replied, he had not heard of that accident, and
entreated the slave to relate to him something of it. The slave presently
satisfied him, and the shepherd straight thought Polexander had concealed from
him the best adventure of his journey. He then led him to the valiant
shepherd, and the slave shew^ng by his submission the credit our Prince had
with Alcidianas Stranger (said he) the Queen wills, you should wear a badge
whereby her Subjects may know what you have done for her and them. She has
therefore sent you this box, which by the whole extent of her Territories, will
cause that honor to be given you, which your action has deserved; and the^e
with he presented him a box of Diamo^ds, which was not less costly for the
graving then for the greatness of the stones. You might see on it that in the
midst a Phoenix on her funeral pile, and the workman had so wittily made use
of the fair luster of that Diamond, that it seemed, the bird was not only in
midst of the fl^mes, but that it self was all on fire. Polexander received the
Present, after a protestation of his being unworthy of i^, and tha^ he accepted
it only to testify his o^ edience, He then opened the box, but found nothing
in it, save a piece of limming which represented a Phoenix rising a new out of
her ashes, and about it some Arabic words, which said, that her li^ should be
more miraculous then her birth. The slave thinking Polexander sought for
somewhat else there: A Lady (said he) of the Queens, called Amintha, gave me
this box, and in delivering it, charged me to tell you there wanted the
principal ornament, which was the Princess picture; but it was a
gratification you ought not to demand, since the Queen for some reason or
scruple, only known to her self, would never suffer her picture to be taken.
After this discourse, the King my Master, having naught else to do but his
humble thanksgiving put in use all that he knew of the Country language, and
taking from his finger the great Diamond he would have given his Host, with a
great many excuses put it on one of the slaves.

The man never thought Polexander had been of a condition able to give
Presents of importance. He therefore took his Diamond as a thing of small
value, and returned with a resolution to make Alcidiana merry at sight of the
shepherds liberality. But when he was returned to the Palace, and had at
leisure considered his Diamond, he could not believe what he saw, but imagined
there was either some illusion or (...) in Polexanders liberality. He came and
gave an account to Amintha of his Commission, and to make her laughe, told her
in showing the Ring, that he had been paid for his pains in shepherds coin.
The Lady took the Ring, and the luster of it straight striking her sight; what
(said she all amazed) has the stranger given you this Diamond? Yes Madam, said
the slave smiling. Do not laughe replide Amintha, for assure your self, you
have the fairest Diamond in the Kingdom. This Stranger must needs be more
then he seems. It Is the present of a King, and no ordinary person; and I tell
you plainly betwix^ us two, the Queens box is not worth much more then this
Ring. She went presently to the Princess, and related to her at large all the
civilities and submissions whereby Polexander received her Present. Besides,
(said she) I am to acquaint your Majesty with one thing, which may no less
astonish you, then the Strangers valor.

What is it said Alcidiana? See (replide Amintha) and withal showed her the
slaves Diamond, and told her 'twas Polexanders gift. The Queen stood amazed,
and after some silence; I see (said she) we have not to do with a man that
contents himself with a little: I^ we consider what he has bestowed on
Pallantus, 'twill be a shame for us to offer him less then a Crown. Whilst
the Princess talked thus of Polexander; he by his extraordinary joy made
known he was not so hard to be contented as she imagined. As he had been tide
by the eyes, he stood gazing on the present, and deceived by an amarous
illusion, found shut up in a little box, all the greatness and treasure of
the Universe.

He invited his Host to take part in his glory. He called Alcippus, sent for
Diceus, and thinking himself unable to express alone, what he felt, commanded
them never to give over publishing his most happy fortune. Their fulness of
joy was not silent in so fair an occasion of speech. They extold the Princes
happiness beyond it self, and spoake wonders of Alcidiana's beauty and
magnificence. But when they would have gone from her praises to Polexanders,
and make it appear that if his fortune were good, his merit was no less; he
called them flatterers, imposed them silence, and said, that the most
extraordinary desert could not without impudence have any value, or to be
thought on near Alcidiana. He so much forgot himself in this discourse, that
his Host, who had been one of the finest Courtiers of his time, imagined the
Prince was not moved to speak as he did by the sole motive of Alcidiana's
liberality. And Polexander as soon caught himself in his fault, but 'twas too
late: For when he would feign have shifted it from his Host, and made him
believe Alcidiana's presence had been cause of all these praises: I believe
(replied the wise old man) that ^e Queens liberality does not displease you;
but I am much deceived, if her beauty does not more nearly touch you. It
happened to Polexander that which usually betides all Lovers, which are
discovered in their subtleties. He blushed, and but for the darkness of the
place where he was, he had confirmed his Host in the opinion he had of him. In
this manner ended a day that had been so favorable to Polexander. The very
next morrow he cast off his shepherds habit, and as he was ready to go to the
Queens Palace, he understood she had suddenly left the Country, on the
receipt of most important news, and was returned to the City of Arzilea, which
is the Capital of her Kingdom, that her presence might strangle a revolte
that was ready to break forth. Polexanders first motions were such as you may
fancy in a young Prince, amorous and extremely valiant. But they were moderated
by the second, and all that reason permitted him to wish; was that there might
chance some great occasion wherein he might make show how much he affected the
Queen. This prayer or wish was just, and it was heard. For a small time after,
one of the greatest Lords of the Kingdom, called Siziphus, who had before
been convicted of an attempt against the Queens own person, put himself
into the field with a mighty Army, and coloring his rebellion under a pretext
that the State was not governed according to the ancient manner, made all good
men see he openly aspired to a Tyranny.

Alcidiana looking on his rebellion as on a Monster never before seen in her
State, accused her indulgency and mercy as the causes of it, and by
consequence, judged, that to cut it from any further life, she was to make use
of her utmost justice. She called together the Officers of her Crown, and in
their presence, gave command to the General of her arms, to go meet the
Rebels, and hinder her people from suffering any violence. These orders were
executed with so much speed and trust, that before Syziphus was come out of
his Province, he saw him stopped by an Army half as strong again as his. He
showed in that occasion, he knew how to make war, for instead of
precipitating himself inconsiderately to a fight, he entrenched his Army in a
very advantageous place, and secured his back with the Town, whose name he
carried, and because he could draw thence all he needed for the sustenance of
his Troops, those of Alcidiana's party, saw themselves enforced to stay a long
time encamped before the Enemy.

Polexander was no sooner assured of this war, but he sent for me from the
place where I had so long attended him, and putting himself into an equipage
far exceeding a private man rode toward the Army. He had learnt of many the
affection Siziphus ^ore to Alcidiana, and the refuse he had from her in an
Assembly of the general Estates of the Kingdom; the resolution that insolent
man had taken to steal and force her away to avenge himself of that ref^sall,
the ill success of that enterprice; and lastly the pardon Alcidiana gave him,
after his being condemned to dye, as guilty of high treason. All this made him
think on Syziphus, not only as a Traitor, and ungrateful; But as a Rival.
He therefore thought, that if he could by the way of honor make an end of that,
he should all at once, get the good liking of Alcidiana's Subjects, save the
Princess a second time, and gloriously give satisfaction both to his love and
jealousy. As soon as he came into the Army, he went to the General, and
making himself known by the badges Alcidiana had given him, engaged the
Grandies to intertaine him as a personage of extraordinary and high estimation.
Some days after, he communicated his design to the General, and getting his
approbation, obtained permission to challenge Syziphus. The King at Arms was
commanded to go to the Camp of the Rebel and his Companions, and not to
neglect any thing that might add to the reputation of Polexanders defiance. I
yet remember the challenge he sent by the Herald. It Was thus:

The Stranger Polexander, to Syziphus thrice a Rebel.
AMbition is always guilty, but not ever modest. All Laws condemn Tyrants;
yet there have been many of them seen who by their dangerous magnanimity have
exempted themselves from that condemnation. This Syziphus tells thee, that when
any has violated the Law, and trodden Justice under foot, it behooves him by a
famous death, or some great event to deliver himself both from the power of
Law and justice: In the mean time, poor ambitious man, in lieu of following
those proud tyrannical Maxims, thou have imitated the proceedings of common
Thieves. Thou have lost thy courage with thy hopes; thou have shamefully begged
pardon for a crime thou were not able to perpetrate, and thy infamy is come to
that height, thou have been seen to implore with tears, her pity whose
justice thou had (newly) most brutishly provoked. After this unmanlinesse, I
do not believe there is left thee any sense of honor. Yet I will adventure
this challenge, to see whether I am deceived, and if thou have not lost all thy
courage with thy integrity, thou will come with thy arms to justify thy self
of those crimes this State accuses thee by my Pen.

Syziphus received the challenge with a fury unworthy a man of courage, and yet
to testify he had enough, he accepted it, and told the Herald that the next
morning he would be in the Meadow between the two Armies, to make known by
the death of one of his enemies, what he had prepared for the rest. The ensuing
morn at break of the day, there was proclaimed a truce on both sides for six
hours only, and yet both sides for fear of being surprised stood on their
gards.

At the hour of combat, the two Rivalls came out of their quarters, and
presented themselves in the field with such arms as Cavaliers were wont to
make use of in the like duels. Polexander after his invocation of Alcidiana and
love, came amain on Syziphus, and incountered him with such a force, that it
seemed the power of those Divinities he had called on, had with their power
effectively assisted him. Syziphus returning from his amazement, took him to
his sword, and came up to Polexander with all the resolution of a man of
courage. The victory was a while doubtful, but at last it inclined to the just
side. Syziphus covered with wounds grown desperate at ^is ill fortune, and
tortured by the remorse of conscience, let himself fall at the feet of his
Conqueror, to oblige him to give him his life; and confessed (with weakness
enough) the crimes whereof he had long since been convicted. Polexander
bounded his revenge within the confession of that timorous ambitious man; but
he strove in vain to preserve his life, for he dyed on the place, and by a
fickleness too ordinary in Armies, that of Syziphus no sooner saw him dye, but
renouncing any other party then Alcidiana's, sent Deputies to treat with the
General. The accord was not hard to be made, since they demanded nothing, but
that all might be forgotten which was past, and every man might return to his
own home, without fear of being inquired after. As soon as the Treaty was
signed, the intrenchments which separated the two Armies were slighted, and
before 'twas night, it had been a hard matter to meet with any of those that
were of Syziphus party.

This important news was sent to Alcidiana, and with so much diligence, that
the next morning as she went to the Temple, the Post presented the Generals
letter to her; she looked earnestly on the Messenger before she opened them,
and reading in his countenance the good news he brought. What, Syziphus is
beaten, said she to the Gentleman? Yes Madam (he replied) but an extraordinary
way. The Queen her self broke open the packet, and according to her manner,
would read the letters without referring her self to the fidelity of her
Secretaries of State. She heard of the Kings challenge, the combat he had with
Syziphus, and in brief, all that I have related. After she had ended her
delightsome reading: All powerful and all good Diety (cried she) into whose
hands I have committed the fortune both of my State and my self, well may I
call the day wherein the stranger Polexander landed in this Kingdom, the day
of thy love and blessing! What act of thanks, Invisible Sun, what offerings can
acquit me from that miracle which thy goodness has pleased to show f^r the
safety of my people, and mine own particular preservation? This ejaculation of
her heart ended, she turned to those which followed her, and without
discovering any excessive joy, come (said she) let us go and give thanks to
heaven for the victory we have obtained. It is the more admirable, since it
has cost no man's life, but that of the public enemy. At those words there
was a kind of a humming noise, declaring the joy every one b^d of so happy an
event, and the desire to know the particularities, which were published, as
soon as Alcidiana had done her devotion, and were entertained with so general
a contentment, that all shops were shut up, and all the Temples open as on some
solemn festival day.

Polexander, who had not been known but by some persons of quallity for his
first service done to the Queen, by this second made himself to be taken
notice of the meanest of the people. His name was in the mouth of every one.
They called him the tutelare Angel of their Queen and State, and some even
proclaimed that he was the powerful Protector, which the prophesies promised
the Kingdom under the name of a slave. Whilst these rumors ran among the
people, Alcidiana, (retired with Amintha) was assaulted by many different
thoughts. You judged well (said she to her Confident) when you t^ought this
stranger was more then he seemed. For mine own part, when I call to mind the
Majesty which shines in his face, the discretion and courtesy that have made
him so well esteemed by us, and those two actions he has undertaken by an
absolute effect of his generosity; I certainly believe him to be some great
Prince, who to gain renown to his valor, and fill the world with the report
of his wonders, thus travells through strange Countries. What think you of it
Amintha? Your Majesty knows well enough (replied the Lady) that it was my
first opinion. That which he has done against Syziphus adds nothing to the
conceit I had of him. I believed him at first sight as courageous as he is,
and if your Majesty permit me to extend my self a little beyond what is
fitting, I will take the boldness to tell you, that heaven in retribution of
your good deeds, has sent you this man, who possibly is the sole man on earth
that is worthy to serve you. See, (said Alcidiana blushing) one of the
pleasants fantasies that Amintha shall have in her life time. You are a fool,
believe me, and thank Syziphus for my pardoning your idle digression. I know
how far you were his enemy, and by consequence should understand that the news
of his death is able to make you lose a part of your discretion. But let us
talk of somewhat else. In your judgment, how should I behave my self toward
our Liberator, and what fortune can I offer him, which may acquit my debt? One
word from your Majesty (answered Amintha) may with usury pay all that the
stranger has done for you and your State. You are (may be) more in the right
then you are aware of, replied the Queen; for I see not how any can pay
otherwise then by words and actions of thanks, a man who makes a profusion of
riches, and contemnes what others adore. After many the like words used by
Alcidiana, she went to dispatch the Post which came from the Army, and by her
answer to the Lieutenant General, not only commanded him to treat Polexander
as her own person, but also to bring him to her as soon as business would
permit it.

The Courtier returned with as much speed as he came, and by his return
obliged Polexander to prepare himself for the receiving the reward of his
victory from Alcidiana's own hands. The Lieutenant General after the
performance of all his charge, thought wholely of giving the King my Master all
the honor prescribed him by the Queens letters. They marched off with part of
the Army, and I may truly tell you, that at that journey was a continual
triumph. The Country people came to meet us, that they might have the content
of seeing their Redeemer. The Inhabitants of Towns far distant from their
highway, came thither with presents, and he thought himself unfortunate, that
had not the happiness to be looked on by Polexander. In diverse places we meet
with erected Altars, and sacrifices prepared to do our Prince the more honor,
and some more free, and daring then the rest, said aloud, that to prevent the
disastrous alliance where withal Alcidiana was threatened by the prophesies,
she ought to resolve to marry with Polexander. After eight or ten days in this
manner, we came to Arzilea. Never did the King my Master show himself as he
did that day. His presence, his beauty, accompanied with the richness of his
habit, made him admired of all, and (as we knew a long while after) Alcidiana
could not refrain from saying to Amintha, that the stranger would never have
what he deserved, if he had not one day on his head one of the fairest Crowns
in the world. In that (replide Amintha) you may either perfect what fortune
has begun, or do Polexander that justice which she enviously denies him.

At those words, Alcidiana could not refrain from blushing, and intimating she
took no pleasure in Amintha's freedom, she forbad her to talk to her any
more of Polexander but when she gave her leave. This rigourous Law being thus
established, Alcidiana went out of the chamber where she had seen Polexander
pass, and retired to be fitly dressed to receive him. At the hour appointed
by her for that Ceremony*, her great Chamberlain, and the Captain of her
slaves, attended by all that were under their command, came to the place where
our King alighted, and the complements being passed, told him they came from
the Queen to accompany him to his audience. This was done with a great deal
of order and ceremony. But when Polexander was come to the foot of Alcidiana's
Throne, and that he saw her fairer, and of more luster then all the jewels
that even covered her, all his boldness, courage, and reason forsook him. He
blushed, he grew pale, and as if his victory had been a matter of reproach and
shame, he was seized on by a confusion, and moved with such a trembling as all
the Court marked it; so did the Queen as well as others; but faining not to
take notice of it, she witnessed by a well studied speech, the obligation all
her people had to Polexanders courage, and at last addressing her to himself,
told him that knowing not how to reward an action that was beyond all
ballancing, she entreated him to give her the means not to live ungrateful.
Amintha, that by chance was hard by Polexander, without doubt was afraid lest
his disturbance should last; and therefore speaking, for most commonly 'twas by
her that Alcidiana made known her pleasure, she thanked the King my Master for
the death of Syziphus, and suppressing the insurrection, and so far extended
her self in his praise, that she threw him again into his former confusion.
Yet he spoke, and though he said very little, and that fearfully, he came
(notwithstanding) off that action to the good liking of those who wished to see
him pestered.

That public audience was seconded by a private one, wherein Polexander had
received an incomparable content, had he been powerful enough to have
mastered his passion. But such a temper was not to be expected from a mind
that suffered under the extremest intemperancy. The cause of it increased by
the addition of Alcidiana's favors; and it is no wonder if the effects
redouble. Nevertheless they hindered not this passionate Lover from holding his
part well in his conversation with Alcidiana and Amintha. He made the third,
and so readily disintricated himself from that Laborinth, where all things
combinde to lose him, that Alcidiana had no cause to lessen the good opinion
she had conceived of him. The next day she sent him by the same slave who
brought him the Diamond box, the expeditions of the Principality which
Syziphus formerly possessed. But he refused them with such excuses and modesty
as might have satisfied the Queen: But yet she was not, and absolutely would
have Polexander receive her present, that she might not always remain obliged
to him. Amintha was imployde to get him to accept it, and she made so good use
of her eloquence, that the King my Master consented, and took the
gratification. But he never made use of it, for as long as ^e was in the Island
he never would be known by any other title or name then that of the stranger
Polexander. A pretty while had he been in this height of happiness, I mean
in discou^sing with Alcidiana at his pleasure; when a new adventure drew him
from the midst of all his contents to expose his life to new dangers. Syziphus
had a brother called ^antalus, as vain and ambitious as himself; but one w^o
by Court hypocrisy counterfeited the hum^le and disinterrested, but attended
rili Syziphus had tried the hazard, and overcome the difficulties, to the end,
that arriving after the battle won, he might be at no more pain then in
gathering the best part of the spoils. But when he saw his brother dead, he
changed his resolution, and desperately casting away his vizard of
dissimulution, concluded he would be talked of. To this end he thought no
better pretext was to be chosen, then the avenging his brothers death. Very
privately he sent a Gentleman of his to Polexander, and giving him to
understand to what sensibility the death of his brother obliged him, laid
before him his own generousnesse, that should not refuse any content to those
whom had offended. Polexander no sooner received the challenge, but he prepared
to give it a satisfaction. He (...) Alcippus, and giving him order for what was
necessary for the com^at, went forth secretly with the Gentle man,

Alcippus came to them at the place Polexander appointed, and without
distrusting one another came all three where Tantalus expected them. At first
sight he made show of a great courage and much hope, and spoake so loftily, and
altogether with so much falcity of his brothers death, that Polexander
forgetting his usual patience, told him in heat, that he wondered how he had
so long time lingered, and not sooner been sensible of this pretended murder,
and with that drew his sword, and engaged Tantalus to give over his revilings.
As soon as Alcippus, saw them ready, he told the Gentleman who brought the
challenge, that 'twas not honorable for them to be idle, whilst their Masters
were so busied. The words stirred the generousnesse of the Gentleman, which by
a dangerous consequence cost him his life. Polexander and Tantalus were the
while hard at it, and because they fought on horseback, they had not so soon
done as their seconds. Yet had Tantalus received three wounds, and Polexander
thinking himself too much satisfied, entreated him to think on his safety,
and to believe there was no ^oule play in the death of his brother. But
Tantalus had done too much to stop till he had ended. He passed furiously on
Polexander, and in passing gave him a wound which he thought would have ended
the combat. Indeed the wound was great, for it went quite through the Kings
arm, but 'twas neither mortal nor dangerous. The generous Prince finding
himself wounded, renewed his strength and courage, and sheathing his sword in
Tantalus side, let out from his heart at once both his pride and life. The
unfortunate man was not fallen from his horse, when Alcidiana's Lieutenant
General, her great Chamberlain, and many other Lords came to their place of
combat. They blamed Tantalus unjust resentment, and bewailed his misfortune.
But those two things not much troubled them, they rejoiced with Polexander for
his last victory. As he gave them thanks for their affection, they saw his
arm all bloody, and thinking him sore hurt, made show of all the forwardness,
and double diligence that Courtiers use when there is any service to be done to
a man in the Princes favor. Polexander assured them 'twas nothing, and though
he would gladly have returned to the City without so much company, yet for
fear of offending any, he was forced to undergo that punishment. Before he
came to a great causeway which crosses the Lake in which Arzilea is built,
there were assembled so many people to see him pass, that he could scarce get
into the Town. Every one called him the invincible, the Exterminator of
Rebels; and mothers with their fingers showing him to their children, told
them, that for all their happiness they were obliged to that Prince his
valor. At last he got to his lodging, and all a voyding, to leave him at
liberty: Diceus unclad him, looked on his wound, and having stopped the blood,
applied the first dressing. With much a do he got him to his bed; but as soon
as he was laid, pondering on his action, and fearing lest Alcidiana might
think he sought occasions to be talked of, would needs excuse it to her by a
letter.

Presently he writ, and giving it to Alcippus, commanded him to deliver it to
Amintha, and be seech her in his name to do those good offices for him to the
Queen, which he expexted from her nobleness. Alcippus performed his
Commission, and earnestly pressing the Lady to tell him what his Master might
hope: All (replied she) provided he mistrust his good fortune. Alcippus was
wary enough of relating her speech to his Master, for fear his explaining it
to his own disadvantage, might give him more dangerous wounds then that which
made him keep his chamber. In the mean time Amintha did her best endeavor
for the Princes contentment. The very next day she gave him a proof of it,
which raised him to the height of happiness and glory, if the follies of
Lovers deserve to unfold them, the use of terms so noble and serious. For
that Lady came to him from Alcidiana. In the name of the Princess, she made
proffers to him a thousand times more considerable then the Principality she
had given, and entreating him to hasten his cure, that he might himself be
Judge of the recompense his virtue deserved, delivered into his hands
Alcidiana's answer to his letter. You may imagine whether so special a remedy
did not extraordinarily operate on our Patient. Had every word been as
powerful as the Magicians most mysterious spells, and all the Characters
equalized the virtue of those which force dead bodies from their graves, and
call souls out of hell, they could not have wrought greater prodigies, nor
produced more wonderful alterations, by the hidden virtue of five or six
lines, Polexander had lost all memory of himself. He not only thought he was
invulnerable, but immortal, and in that ecstasy, promised no less to absent
Alcidiana, then the laying of all the Crowns of the earth at her feet.

Amintha; leaving him in this amourous heat, went questionless to tell the
Queen, what miracles she had done by her answer. The Princess continued them
by her continual sending to visit her Defender; and Diceus noted it in the
supernatural healing his Masters wound. One day he told him, that indeed his
hand dressed the wound, but certainly (said he) it is cured by the secret
virtue of Alcidiana's. Polexander was pleased with Diceus fancy, and confessed
to his Chyrurgion that the honor he received from the Queen did sensibly
forward his health. As soon as he left his chamber, he went to the Palace,
and being permitted the entrance to Alcidiana's Sanctuary (if I may speak as
foolishly as amorous people use to do) ne found her in that fashion, which (by
his only relation to me) I thought capable to touch even insensibility. She had
laid by her habit and dress of Ceremony, and in putting it off, disrobed her
self of that stately and awefull Majesty which made all to cast down their
looks that gazed on her. Love, sweetness, delicacy, and the graces had taken
her place, and seemed to be expressly met together to sport themselves about the
Princess. Her habit less jealous of her beauties then that was wont, laid
open to Polexander those treasures which till then he could not see, but by the
help of imagination. Her neck was bare, and if for form it passed all the
study and examination of the most famous Statuaries, for whiteness it obscured
the very pearls, and cast rays of light, and such shining flashes, that
Polexander confessed he stood dazeled with it. He cast down his sight to
recover it, but love maliciously stopped it, now on an arm, and then on her
hand, which by their beauties and allurements seemed to dispute with the other
parts of that wonder the power of blinding all beholders. At last confessing
himself absolutely overcome, and laying his arms at the Princess feet, she
gave him his life, and to make it appear that she took care of his
preservation, asked him whether he were cured of his wound. The King answered,
that though it had been mortal, the experiments of her excessive goodness
had been of power to have healed him. I should be very ungrateful (said she)
if my service drawing you so often to the hazarding your life, I should not be
careful for its preservation. Yes, I am, and would have the world know, that I
have a particular vigilance over it, and that my obligations to you are so
great, that I think not my self of ability enough to acquit my self worthily
of them. The more I consider what you have done for my people, and my self;
the more am I in doubt whether my debt be greater to you as Queen, or as
Alcidiana. Madam, you, both as Queen, and as Alcidiana so confound and
disorder me (replied Polexander) that I can hardly reserve a little judgment
to clear ^e from those clouds and mists which are raised and got together by
vanity, to make me almost unacquainted with my self. But your Majesty (Madam)
participating with the nature of that All Sufficiency, whereof you are the
lively Image, with a bountiful hand spread you favors indifferently on all,
and pouring them with prodigality on the worthy and unworthy, you hold it a
thing far below your Magnificence to weigh the merit in the distribution of
your bounties. If you have a mind (said the Princess) to conquer Alcidiana,
as you have others, she instantly gives you all her honors.

B^ if you desire she should enjoy that liberty you have preserved her, suffer
her withal to make use of her understanding, and that in speaking of things as
she apprehend them she yet once more may confess, that she is infinitely
engaged to you. Polexander fearing he might run into some incivility, if he too
much continued his Cour^ship, made her no answer, but with a low reverence,
showed, that respect had imposed on him an eternal silence. I should be too
long, did I relate to you all their converse after this, and the Justs, Balls,
Maskes, and other braveries, wherein Polexander made that passion break forth
which hedurst not discover, no not to his trusted Amintha. I will on^y tell
you, that at one meeting where the Queen was, he had opportunity to have her
picture taken without her knowledge, by an Italian painter, which he had
brought from Lions. I believe you have seen that fatal portraict which cost
the valiant Almanzor his life, and many other Knights. The King my Master
possessing that piece, and knowing nothing else to desire but the possession of
Alcidiana her self; so far forgot him in his good fortune, that he was often
tempted to present him to the Queen, and to make known his affection to her.
Amintha kept him from that fault, and assured him, that as soon as the
Princess should know his design, she would command him out of her Kingdom.

To alter his determination, she proposed to him the petitioning her permission
to be one of her slaves. He had long time before a desire to it, and was even
ravished that he could please her: Y^r Amintha thinking it unfit for her to
make the proposition, Polexander went to the chief Priest called Radiotez, who
was particularly favored of the Queen, and so absolutely won him, that he
became engaged to serve him in that (...). He did it, but without success; for
Alcidiana would never consent to that (...) of the King my Master. When he
heard of the denial, he fell into so deep a (...), (...) we all feared he
would at last endanger the loss of reason. He put on (...), and in this
sadness continued, till Amintha expressly commanded him to (...) i^, to take
him to his former fashion of life, not to hazard what was passed, and to handle
very gently a thing which could never be knit again, if it came once to ^e
broken. Polexander was advised by her, and getting by little and little from
that extremity* whereinto his impatiency, and the excess of his good fortune
had plunged him, he began to appear again in company, and to the Court. The
Queen at that time had made a progress to the most distant Provice of her
Kingdom, and at her return came to one of her houses, built in a Forest,
which they call the Forest of white Hyndes. Whilst she abode there, Polexander
had once more the happiness to save her life; for the Princess being gone a
hunting, and Amintha desirous to drive her Chariot, the horses either
affrighted, or ill guided, took their bits in their teeths, hurryed the
Chariot clean cross the fields, and if Polexander had not happily arrived,
and turned them by his voice and clamor, they were even running headlong down
a precipice, where all must needs have been torn in pieces. The Chariot was
overturned very near the downfall, and what with the bruise and the fear,
Alcidiana and Amintha lay as dead in the field. The King ran presently to them,
and being not able to succor but one at once, took Alcidiana, and carried her
all in a swounde to her Palace. For Amintha she quickly came to her self, and
returned without need of any assistance. When the Queens Physicians had by
their gentle remedies, recalled those spirits which her fall and fear had
dispersed, she seemed not to remember any more the accident that was betided
her, and desirous to know all the particulars of that, engaged Amintha to
relate them.

Since (said she) I had my part in the mischance and affright, I can only tell
your Majesty, your horses were stronger then I, and not being used to my voice
and guidance, they would obey neither; but fling away with me in spite of my
resistance, and without Polexanders help they were hurrying your Majesty down
the precipice of the Cedars.

O stranger! (cried the Queen) fatal for my preservation, will fortune never
leave furnishing thee with occasions to oblige me? She commanded they would
leave her to her rest, and retaining none but Amintha with her, she kept her
bed two or three days, and would see none but her women. When she thought her
self as perfectly well as before her fall, she sent for Polexander, and with a
becoming grace accusing him of all the accidents had betided her; I cannot
doubt any longer (said she) after so many strange events, but that you hold
intelligence with fortune, and that from time to time you command her to throw
me into new dangers, to the end you may have the contentment of freeing me.
Polexander answered very respectively to so pleasant and nice a speech, and
after was with the Princess as he had lived before his retreat and melancholy.

Alcidiana being returned to Arzilea, our Prince was stricken with such a
dullness of spirit, or bewitched by the philters and magical practices of an
old woman called Stenelica, that he forgot his affection to Alcidiana, and
seemed to desire no other happiness then the enjoying that Sorceresse. He
gloried in that prodigious change, he spoke of nothing but Stenelica, he talked
daily and hourly of that old woman's virtues, writ to her twice or thrice a
day, satiated her with presents, and sometimes making use of Alcippus, and then
of me to continue that commerce, imposed on us a rigourous silence, whenever
we offered to speak to him according to our wonted liberty. This extravagancy
(or if you will have it so) this false and mystical show beguiled us five or
six months, and we thought we had Stenelica sure, and reduced her to
satisfy Polexander, she broake with him, sent back his jewels, and some of
his letters, forbad him her house, and threatened to avenge her self of his
mockery. At that time Alcidiana went from Arzilea, to a stately Castle built on
a point of Land, opposite to the fortunate Islands. At the foot of it is an
unwalled Town, and because there inhabit a great many fishers, and other
seafaring men, I had caused our ship to be brought about thither, to trim and
fit her well again for a voyage. When we came thither, I went down to the
haven to see what was done to her, and found her very well rigged and repaired.
Our Mariners that had kept still with her, were overjoyed to see me, and
though they wanted nothing whatsoever; yet they made a show to me of a great
desire they had that Polexander would bring them back again to their Islands.
To put them in some hope, I said, the King would surely part ere long, and
charged them to keep their ship in readiness.

Certainly we must believe we have domestical spirits which continually
watch about us, who drawing from the very fountain that truth which is hidden
from us, make it glide into us by some unperceivable channel. For if it were
not so, how came it into my mind to give our Mariners such unlikely
assurances, and against my own belief, talk to them of Polexander's going
away as of a thing resolved on? In the mean time there happened a strange
adventure, for two days after Amintha was stolen away by a Portugal Pirate,
driven by a furious tempest on the inaccessible Island, and so cunningly taken
away, that her rape was not heard on till she was far at sea. Polexander no
sooner heard of the accident, but he ran to the sea, and finding an armed bark
at the Castles foot, got into it with Alcippus. His affection and
generousnesse were very fatal to him; for they took from him the thought of
the place he went from, and hindered him from considering that in losing sight
of the inaccessible Island, he instantly lost the means of returning thither
again.

Diceus and I, thought the Prince might have need of his men and ships, and
therefore we got aboard her, and commanded to set sail. The wind was
extreme favorable to us, and quickly brought us up to Polexanders bark.
Alcippus knowing us as far as he could kenne, and causing us to come near,
advised his Master to leave the bark, which he did, and coming aboard his
own vessel, spent all the rest of the day in chasing the Pirate, whom he had
infallibly taken, i^ the night had come on two hours later. But the darkness
taking him from our sight, he so absolutely stole away from our finding, that
the nex^ morning we found our selves in full sea without sight of land or
vessel. Polexander meditated long on what he should do, at last the secret
Adamant of Alcidiana's charms drawing him to the inaccessible Island, he
commanded his Pilot to return thither. 'Twas easier for him to command it,
then for the Pilot to obey it.

He took his Elevation, curiously consulted with his Card and Needle, he would
have returned by the same course he came forth, and thought surely that for
this time Alcidiana's Isle should neither be enchanted or inaccessible. Yet for
all this, after he had sailed all day, and kept him fast to his way all the
following night, and so on till next noone, he found his art and pains
unserviceable against the enchantments of Alcidiana's Island. It failed but
little when Polexander knew his misfortune that he had not thrown himself
over board; but seeing himself withheld by our reasons; Well (said he) since
you will have it so, I will live; but it shall not be for my self, for I never
hope to see Alcidiana again; it shall be only for Amintha. We were three or
four days in doing nothing but whirling round that tempestuous sea, and
attempting new ways to get sight of our inaccessible Island. The very wind
was moved with the tears, and despair of Polexander, and willing to moderate
his grief by some diversions that might wholely take him up, cast him into
such places where he met wherewithal to exercise both his cholor and his
valor. Some six days sail from Alcidiana's Isle, if my supputation be right,
there is in the way to those Isles which the Ancients called Hesperides,
another sufficiently great and fertile, out inhabited by people so barbarous,
or rather so unreasonable, that of all Nations I have seen there is none so
differing as they from the nature of man. The wind having driven us on the
Coast of that savage Country; Polexander landed with fifteen or twenty of his
men, but he was no sooner on shore, when he saw a great company of those
furious brutes. They never inquired his intention, they would not give him
leave to speak, nor would they suffer him to retire peaceable back again;
but on the contrary, making the air resound with their dreadful shreeks and
shouts, they camefuriously on our small company, and after they had given a
volley of flints and arrows, made Polexander suspend his usual humanity, and
repel force by force. He came up to them, his sword drawn, and with it laid
four or five on the earth. When he saw we imitated his example without
winning ought on those savages: retire (said he to us) and do not imbrew your
swords in the blood of these wretches. He had no sooner given that command, but
he saw a young Maiden, who running and stretching out her hands, besought him to
take her into his protection, and save her from the fury of those mad men. His
nobleness made him straight alter his command. He made again on those beasts
in a humane shape, and in spite of all their resistance, took from them the
Maiden, whom they had overtaken and stayed in the midst of her course. He put
her in my custody, and commanding me to see her a shipboard, stayed with
Alcippus, Diceus, and ten or twelve others to resist the enemy. By little and
little he got to the sea, and gave command to his Canoneers to shoot among
those savages. He was no sooner obeyed, but the Cannon scattred half of them
in pieces about the strand, and the rest, to fly the more nimbly threw away
their stones and arrows, and hid themselves in great woods that came down to
the very shore: As soon as the Prince was shipped again, and had well
laughed at our pleasant adventure, he desired to see the person he had given me
in guard. I told him not who she was, but bringing her, he at first sight knew
her, though she was disfigured with Sunburning, travel, hunger, and the
outrages she received from those Barbarians. He showed how joyful he was for
her deliverance; alas poor Elida (said he) by what accident fell'st thou into
the hands of these Monsters? Is not thy Mistress there? Tell me (I prithee)
where I may find her, and what I may do for her service.

'Twas Amintha's Maid, and had been forced away with her. As soon as she saw
Polexander, she was like to have ^lne to the ground, and being not able to
speak, but after a long time: Ah my Lord (said she) how does my good fortune
amaze me! and how unable am I to tell you what you desire to know? Amintha did
ever verily believe you would lose your self in striving to relieve her, and
when her Ravisher gave her leave to be alone with me; the sole thing (would she
say) of which I am most sensible, and chiefest to be thought lamented in my
misfortune, is, that Polexander out of his generousnesse will not fail to
engage himself in my disaster. He will leave our Isle to follow me, and never
considering, that there is no returning when once he has lost sight of it,
will bootelesly add his own loss to mine. If thou love me (replied
Polexander) kill me not by these new proofs of Amintha's generous affection.
Tell me who was her Ravisher, and whether he has carried her? My Lord
(answered Elida) my Mistress is in the hands of a Portugal Pirate, who is no
less mad then those you now came from.

Ambition and love have deprived him of more then half his reason, and yet
has enough left to keep him from being carried to the utmost violence against
Amintha. A tempest throwing him upon the Isle of these enraged brutes, and
necessity compelling him to land there, he went on shore, and was received in
the same manner as you. He lost many of his men, and was forced to put to sea
again in the height of the tempest. The aversion or ^islike I had to him, and
the shows I made him every moment of it, put him on to rid me away. He
therefore by force plucking me out of my Mistress arms, barbarously exposed me
to the fury of these incensed savages. I must needs relate to you the strange
accidents which have bet^ded me among these fools. Thou shall do that another
time, replied the King; but tell me now what is become of Amintha? That which I
have told you (said she) may make you imagine I can certify you nothing of my
Mistress. Can thou not at least (added Polexander) show me as near as can be,
the way the Rover took? Even this same (replied she) and if I forget not, he
is going to meet with other Pirates which have their place of refuge and
retreat in an Isle of this sea. I know where '^is (said the Prince) and
presently commanded his Pilot to stand for the Islands of Cape Vert.

He was obeyed, and so happily that within few days after we discovered the
continent of Africa, to which he was forced against his will by the wind and
the currents, and stayed there longer then he desired; for they were so much
becalmed right against the flourishing shoares of the Kingdom of Senega, that
for three days together his ship was as settled as it had been turned into a
rock. The remembrance of the happiness he had lost, and the vexations that
continually followed him, fed then extraordinarily on him. He disclosed those
anxieties, impatiences and distasts, to which he had never been known to be
subject. He found fault with all, the calm was more insupportable to him then
the tempest, he would not even see Elida; and scarce could Alcippus and I draw
him for a few moments out of this melancholy humor. There was but one thing
that set him at rights, and 'twas the picture of Alcidiana. They talk of me^
who (being possessed by some ill spirits, and others distract of their reason) by
the power of music have been freed from those ill Demons, and cured of their
madness; and I believe it to be true, since I saw Polexander above a hundred
times get out of that fury which visibly possessed him at the only aspect of
Alcidiana's picture, and to take on his former wisdom, and usual temper. But
to the common misfortune of us all, that powerful charm, that admirable
counterpoyson, that Talismon more virtuous then all that are sold at Tunis and
Morrocco: in a word, that picture (which is hard to believe) was taken out of
Polexander's hands. During the calm whereof I have told you, he being much
disquieted, and growing weary of his ship, made himself be rowed ashoare, and
not desiring any company, no not Alcippus, there entertained his thoughts near
a Fountain in the contemplation of the Queens picture. 'Twas the last day of
the calm, he came on shore, and the sight of that ^aire portraict, and his
reading of some Arabian verses composed by him for the Princess, brought him
into a sleep, and whilst he lay so at rest, a young Prince called Almanzor (as
long after we learnt) by a fatal fortune was unluckily led to the place where
the King my Master lay sleeping.

From a far off he perceived his guilt armor, and knowing not what it might
be, his curiosity drew him to approach as softly as he could. The King slept
still, and the other perceiving that famous box which Alcidiana had given him,
stayed to look on the picture within it. He admired, was stricken, and became
in love with it. Then taking up the paper wherein the Arabian verses were writ,
and retiring without awakening the King, got on his horse, and fled away as
fast as he could spur. Polexander (informed by his Guardian Angel) awakened
in the very instant that Almanzor was on horseback, and heard the noise he made
in flying, but his understanding and memory being not yet well cleared of those
vapors which cause sleep, had not the liberty, the one of reasoning on the
present, and the other of what was passed. Yet remained he not long in this
kind of darkness. His soul opened her eyes as soon as those of his body
were unshut. He remembered his box and his verses, and put his hand where he
thought to find them. But deceived in what he attempted, ^e arose all
startled, he searched upon and about him, he turned whence he came, his eyes
are fixed on the sands, he tosseth and turns all the leaves and flints, and
scratcheth and removes the least leaf of grass.

Then he be thought him of the noise he had heard, and said to himself, that
what he had taken for the flight of a Lion or some other beast, was that of the
Thief, which had carried away all the remainder of his treasure. He would
feign have followed, but knew not what way to take. Yet he ran to the
Mountain, and being got very hye, whether go I? (said he to himself) what
do I look after? Will these deserts and forests tell me news of it?
Presently he returned to the sea side, got into his shalloppe, and commanded
the Mariners to carry him aboard his ship. As soon as he was there, he entered
his Cabin without speaking to any of us, and casting him on his bed: Thou
could do me no other outrage; (said he) But cruel Fate, thou ruinest ^hine
own power, in destroying those Subjects over whom thou exercisest it, and in
depriving me of that only thing (...) desired to preserve, thou ^akest from me
all that fear which has so often made me have recourse to thy protection.
Alcippus imagining by these words, that his Master had received some new
displeasure, came near and besought him to make known the cause of his
affliction. O friend (said Polexander) some one has stolen from me Alcidiana's
picture! Do but reflect on that disaster, and oblige me no^ to unfold it to
thee.

Alcippus, at first thought his Master talked idely; but hearing him a midst
his sighs to cast forth the word of Thief, of portraict, of Alcidiana, he
thought (doubtlesly) the Prince had lost his box, and that the robbery of
which he newely spoke was true indeed. He told it me, and I relating it to
Diceus, it went quickly through the ship. One of our Mariners (at the same
instant) saw a ship coming out of the River of Senega, and ignorant whether he
spoke true or false, or whether he should speak it or no; cried out the thief
was running away, and 'twas fit they should make after him. The ship was
thereupon made ready for the wind began to rise, and the sea men who look
after nothing but confusion and prey agreeing with their companion, cried out
with him that 'twas not fit to suffer the thief to escape. Alcippus hearing
these clamours, came out of his Masters Cabin, and being told the cause of the
noise, presently ran into Polexander to advertise him of it, and by that news,
false or true, drew him from his deadly melancholy.

Hereupon he left his Cabin, came on the deck, and understanding from whence
the other ship came. Be confident (said he) that is the Thief, follow him, and
(if you love me) endeavor he may not escape us. We gave the ship chase three
days and three nights, and coming up to her the fourth, engaged her to strike
sail, and yield ^o our discretion. Polexander first boorded her, and offering
his sword at the Commanders throat, told him there was no other way to save his
life, but by restoring what he had stolen. I am ready to obey you said the
prisoner; but remember (if you please) that I have but lent my hands, and an
absolute power has commanded me to undertake the theft.

Well, well (replied Polexander) restore it, it is no matter by whom it was
commanded or acted, so I have restitution, and with that urged his prisoner to
perform quickly what was required of him. The poor man, all pale and
trembling, drew out of his bosom a ring and a letter, and presenting the first
to Polexander; see (said he) my Kings high prized Seal, and then giving him
the letter: This is that (he added) which has cost the death of the writer,
and had we not been met withal, and interrupted by you, was going to be the
instrument o^ a more execrable Massacre. Polexander amazed at these things, and
full of choler to see himself so far from his hopes; keep thy letter and thy
ring, said he to his prisoner, and give me the box thou stolest from me. The
box which I have stolen, replied the prisoner? Ah, noble Sir, if it be your
pleasure that I shall perish, do not search for that pretext. I am guilty
enough already, without the imputation of a crime whereof I am innocent. What
(said Polexander exceedingly angry) did thou not steal it whilst I sleept on
the banckes of Senega? I perceive now, said the prisoner, that you take me for
another, and truly it is an admirable act of the eternal Providence, which
continually watches for the preservation of Innocents.

Do then, (my Lord) do what that commands you! Punish a traitor and
assassinate, who to satisfy his ambition, has exiled from his breast all
sense of honor and p^obity, and made himself the executioner of a Monsters
cruelties, who has but the appearance of a woman. Polexander thought then he
was certainly mistaken, and was at the point of setting the man at liberty; but
considering that such a freedom might be the cause of some great wickedness,
he took the ring and letter which till then he had left in the hand of his
prisoner, and made him come with him into his own ship, where not knowing
what to do further, bid his Pilot steer whither he pleased, for all courses
were alike to him. Whilst Alcippus, the Pilot, and my self were consulting of
the speediest way for our quick return to the Canaries: Polexande passed the
time with his prisoner, and required from him an (...) of his former speeches.
The African knowing he had spoken too much ^o hide the rest, and the fear of
death besides, having brought him to a repentance of his ^ormer life, he made
no scruple of discovering such secrets as he intended no more to make gain on.
I am (said he) a Subject to the King of Senega. The g^ddy humors of that
Prince, have many times thrown me from the top of all prosperity to the botome
of all disgrace, and then again raised me to the height of all greatness.
This inconstancy made me fear some blow that would prove mortal to me at
last, and to avoid it, I thought it best to betray what most concerned him, to
advance the interests of that famous (...), whom he has set in the place of
the virtuous Almanzaira. This new Queen is called Zelopa, who extremely
politic, knowing that Zabaim was not possibly long to be held in without a
great many bonds, has fettered him with such strong ones, that she ^eares no^
his flitting from her. She has got him to proclaim his Queen guilty of high
treason, and to condemn her to a prison unlimitable, but by the ends of her
life. Nay she had wo^ him to have strangled with his own hands the Son (...)
had by that unfortunate Princess; but that Almaid a Lord of Senega hindered
the murder, and plucked the (...) from the blind fury of the Father, and the
sharp sighted rage of his stepmother, who for a long time knew not what was
become of the Child; but her spies were so industrious that at last they
discovered he was bred up in King Benin's Court. As soon as she heard it, she
resolved his death, and choosing me for the executioner, or at least the
prosecutor, she put in practice all that she knew might conduce to the
perfecting of her damnable design. She forced Zabaim to write to Benin for the
delivering his Son into my hands, and in case he should refuse it, forced to
denounce war against him.

You may easily see all this wickedness proved when you please to read the
letter I gave you. But in as much as the African Kings never make denuntiation
of wars; but they send the Ring which is the principal note of their dignity,
I found a way to steal it from Zabaim. Now, to tell you, after so many
villainies, that which has been the cause of my being now your prisoner; know,
I parted from Senega expressly on a message to King Benin, and if that Prince
had delivered into my hands the lawful heir of Senega, for certain (blinded
as I was with ambition) I had executed Zelopa's command, and sheathed the sword
I wear in the breast of that Innocent. Polexander affrighted at so horrible a
relation, told his prisoner he gave thanks to heaven for his being mistaken,
and that in his misfortunes he found a great deal of consolation; since the
divine goodness had vouchsafed to make use of his error for the hindering the
death of the Prince of Senega. It belongs to me, answered the prisoner,
(throwing himself at our Princes feet) to give thanks to the fountain of all
mercy, for the enlightening my soul with the rays of his love in spite of my
obduratnesse. I therefore make a vow not to abuse it any more, nor ever to
return into my Country till it be freed from Zelopa's tyranny. You shall do
very well, replied Polexander, and to quit you from the sorrowing for the loss
of your fortunes by this resolution, I engage my self to restore them to you.

The Prince infallibly had been better then his word to him, but heaven seeing
the holy and rigorous penitence of that sinner, was willing to recompense him
more liberally then Polexander: For it took him out of this world, the very
same day that we arrived at the Canaries. I will not relate to you the sundry
fights Polexander had with the Pirates, whilst we strove to bring him back
into his Kingdom. I will only tell you he was there no more happy then he was
at sea. At his arrival he heard of the death of the incomparable Axiamira. He
bewailed her loss as much as it deserved, and after some months of mourning,
from one part of piety ^ell to another. He bestowed all his time in hearing the
complaints of his Subjects, to reconcile their differences, and to free them
from all fear of the Spanish forces. After all this, he deigned to cast his
eyes on me, declared me his Viceroy in all his Isles, and establishing me in
that authority before his departure, commanded that in his absence, I should be
obeyed as himself. Scarce took he any time of repose after so many travells
and disquiets. Amintha's Confident, whom he had brought from the Islands of mad
men, seeing him still to grieve for the loss of the picture, strive said she
one day to get the thing it self, rather then the shadow. That thought
(answered the Prince) comes on me a hundred times in a day, but I give no ear
to it, because it proposes to me a thing impossible. It Is so indeed (replied
Elida) by ordinary means, but you must have recourse to such as are not so.

Alas! and what are those asked the Prince? I imagine to my self one (added
Elida) that seems to me infallible. I prithee tell that me, said the King. It
behooves you then (added Elida) either under pretext of religion or otherwise,
to get entrance into the Isle of the Sun, and when you are permitted to abide
there, stay for the coming of Lynceus or some other of Alcidiana's Pilots. I
intend so much (sadly answered Polexander) but when I have attempted it, what
will be the issue for my consolation. I make it no difficulty to get into the
Isle of the Sun, since it is never denied to such as come thither to sacrifice.
And I may too stay there, nay and meet with those that come from Alcidiana's
Island; but all this is nothing, for I am certain, the Queens Pilots will
never receive me into their vessel. What ground have you for that fear, said
Elida to him? From some what you have spoaken to me unawarres, replied
Polexander. I think I know what you would say, answered Elida. Yet fail not
to do all that lies in your power, and leave the rest to fortune. If you
gat^er thence no other satisfaction, yet you shall at least have thus much,
that you have not neglected any means of making your self happy. Well I Will
believe you, dear Elida, said the Prince, and indeed followed her advice so
absolutely, that the very next day he put to Sea, and took with him that
Maiden, Alcippus, and Diceus, and though his Pilot knew not the situation of
the Island of the Sun, yet he promised to find it, provided it were not
enchanted as that of Alcidiana. But the season being extremely ill, and the
difficulty which the Pilot thought to overcome, greater then he imagined, he was
above two months contesting with his ignorance, and the frequent storms. At
last he drew near to that Island, and Polexander being where he might discover
a far off, perceived a vessel which came away from the Isle. He made up to
her, he carefully marked her, and finding by assured tokens that she belonged
to Alcidiana, followed her, but in such a manner as he believed he made them
not jealous of him.

Yet Lynceus (for it was he) perceived the Kings design, and winding up and
down all the rest of the day, thrust himself into the Haven of the Sun, as
soon as the obscurity of the night had made him lose sight of the Princes
vessel. The next morning he sought for her, he pursued her, he got with all
the sails he could make away from the place where he might have found her; in
short, by often turning and traversing that sea, Polexander returned to the
place from whence he set sail. Here he spent a part of the winter, for all
his impatiences. At last his strength being by little and little ore come by
the weakness of his mind, he fell sick of a languishing disease. Oftentimes
we thought him dead, but his good temper having wrestled near six months with
his disquiet thoughts and melancholy he recovered, I may say from the grave.
Yet was he above six months more wherein he could not put himself to the
least effect, but he fell again into his former malady. After so many
relapses, he at last got strength whether he would or no, and recovering by the
return of the Sun a health more vigourous and settled then that which he had
lost, he would sacrifice it as the other, to his passion, disquiets, and new
voyages.

And now seeing the season approach, wherein Alcidiana's ships used to set
sail for the Island of the Sun, he did what he had so often done before,
without any other design then to end his life in quest of that happiness he
had lost. Whether it were that Alcidiana's ships were already gone, or that she
had altered the time of sacrifices; so it happened, that Polexander found
naught of what he searched on the coast of the Isle of the Sun. Whilst he was
in this perplexity, one of Bajazets Rovers fell into his hands. He used him
with a great deal of courtesy, and won him to stay sometime with him.
During which, talking of diverse things, he understood how valiant Bajazet was,
how generous and magnificent, and of his being passionately in love with a
great Princes^, whose picture he carried in a box of Diamonds. At the news of
this imagine you see Polexander troubled, all in disquiet, and transported with
the desire of revenge.

He certainly believes it to be the box that was stolen from him: And to be
certain, describes to the Pirate the form of the box, makes to him a picture
of Alcidiana's picture, and forgets not the least stroke in it. The Pirate,
who may be only spoke by hearesay, or but confusedly, remembered what he had
seen, answered Polexander to his own desire, and could so well persuade him
that Bajazets box was the same he described, that he presently put on to
assault him in his Island in the very midst of all his forces. But his good
fortune was he found him not there. He was gone a roving with his f^eete; and
the Governor of the Isle understanding Polexanders design by the Pirate he
had let go, would have stayed him, not only as an enemy of his Governor, but
as a man for whose redemption there might be paid a great ransom. Polexander,
was therefore set on in his vessel, by all those the Pirates reserved for the
guard of the Isle: Imagine now the Princes resolution when he saw himself in
the midst of fifteen or twenty Pinnaces and Galleys. He made a fight that can
never be worthily enough related, no not by the most eloquent pen in the world.
He fought two days and two nights without intermission, and as a generous Lion
not only tears in pieces the toiles that invirone him, but the hunters also
that oppose his passage; so did this Hero, either sincke force from fight part
of the enemies vessels, and making a great slaughter of the Pirates,
gloriously returned by the same way he came thither. The third day after this
victorious retreat he discovered a ship, and thinking it belonged to the
Rovers that had so traytrously dealt with him, he commanded them in it to
strike sail. The Master not obeying, there began a fight with the Cannon, and
was continued by handy blows. Polexander in that encounter met with a hardy
enemy, and 'twas that valiant Prince, the Son of Zabaim and Zelop^, who as I
have told you took away Polexanders box. The fight was equally maintained by
the valor of those two Princes for the space of ^ven or eight hours.

Now was Polexander in Almanzor's vessel, and anon after was Almanzor in
Polexander's. They were imitated by their Soldiers, who came on or retreated,
as they had more or less good fortune. That was the cause, when the tempest
had separated them, some of Almanzor's Soldiers were in Polexanders ship, and
the Prince wanted of his, and amongst others that famous Italian Painter, who
had drawn for him Alcidiana's picture. The storm taking him after the
combat, he was very violently beaten by it for five or six days, but at last
his Pilot knew, that the ill weather had been very favorable to him, since in
a small time with an extreme swiftness it had made him cross a long space of
the sea. The first day of the calm he discried the top of the prodigious hye
Pike of Teneriffe, and advising Polexander of it, he was commanded to get in
and cast anchor there. At his landing, all the Inhabitants of the Isle showed
so much joy for his return, and so great a desire to enjoy him longer, that he
resolved to give them that satisfaction. In the mean time he sent Diceus into
the other Islands to make choice of the best ships in the Havens, and to cause
ten or twelve to be made ready at all points for him.

His providence may be termed prophetical, for Diceus was no sooner returned
with the ships, but the Portugalls appeared about the Isles. Their confederates
they had yet among the Canarians, had without doubt given them advice of the
loss of Polexander, of the Queen his Mothers death, and the desire which many
witnessed of returning into the Portugal subjection. They therefore believing
they needed but to show themselves, and so enter in possession of the Isles,
drew near without doing any act of hostility, and sent news of their coming
to those who had called them thither. The answer they received was not such as
they expected. Word being sent how Polexander was safely returned.
Nevertheless they were advised to land in the very Isle of Tene^ffe, to set on
their enemy whilst he was weakest, and not to give him time to collect his
Troops. This counsel was followed, and 'twas so, but for the King my Masters
greater honor. I dare say, that the forepassed times whatever they talk to us
of their H^roes and Conquerors, have left us nothing that may be compared with
that which Polexander did for the safety of his Subjects. Greece vauntes she
had a Prince so magnanimous, that he alone cast himself into an enemies City,
and alone sustained all the assau^s and sha^s of a Nation who wished his death.
But Polexander did that by the greatness of his courage, which the other did
by necessity. Instead of standing as simply defensive, he went on alone to
encounter a great number of the worlds most valiant Soldiers; and what passes
all belief, in opposing his only sword and courage, to the ^ury and power of a
whole Navall Army, disputed with it two days and two nights their entry of the
port of Tene^iffe, and gave time to his ships to come and partake in so
wonderful a victory.

The Portugalls perceiving well there was nothing but blows to be gotten, fled
after a short fight, and seeing themselves chased by our vessels, retired into
the ports they have on the coast of Africa. Polexander had begu^ to take breath
after all these turmoiles, when a new enemy as much to be feared as all the
Portugals together, engaged him to exercise once more his valor. It Was the
generous Almanzor Prince of Senega. I have told you he found Polexander
sleeping near the sea shore, and how he took away his box, and Alcidiana's
picture. 'Twas a fatal theft to him. He saw himself taken as soon as he had
taken; for Alcidiana's admirable beauty communicating to her picturs some beam
of her light, and a part of her power stroke those with love that had never
seen her, and flashed forth flames from a cold piece of copper, and a few dead
colors. As soon as Almanzor had made trial of that prodigious adventure, he
coveted nothing, no not life, but for Alcidiana, and turned all his youthful
valor, against a Rival whom he thought to be more graced then himself. Nor
was he tormented with that sole Demon, for those of honor and renown did not
less afflict him. His generous disposition upbraided him with his these, and
represented to him his poorness of spirit which could not sufficiently be
condemned, for stealing and robbing a man that was a sleep. These two motives
with his jealousy and repentance, made him leave his own Territories the very
day of his Coronation, and forced him to cross an unknown sea in quest of
Alcidiana and Polexander.

The last he met withal, as I told you, and fought with him unknown. But
after they were separated by the tempest, he knew it from out Italian Painter
which was left in his ship, and then he thought of nothing else but of finding
him again. As soon as he was in the road of Teneiffe, he sent back the
Italian to Polexander, and by him a letter so full of excuses for his fault
committed, and so many testimonies of his repentance, that by the accusation
and humiliation, the King my Master knew the magnanimity of that Prince. At the
end of his letter he spoake to him of the greatness of his love, and said, his
passion had reduced him to that point, that he could not without death restore
a thing which he himself confessed could not be detained without the loss of
his honor.

Polexander, sent Alcippus to him with the Italian, to assure him of the
estimation he held of his courage and intention, to entreat from him the
honor, to enter his Territories, and assure him he would contribute to his
contentment all that did not oppose the service he owed to Alcidiana. Almanzor
grew almost desperate to hear all these generosities, and made show of an
extreme sensibility of what his Rival had offered him, called himself a most
unfortunate man to have to contest with so high a virtue, and at last told
Alcippus, he most humbly besought Polexander to give him the happiness to make
an end on Land, of that fight which they began at Sea. Alcippus set all his
wits on work to alter that Princes resolution; but seeing 'twas all in vain:
I will (said he) go, and make known to my Master the King the true cause of
my voyage. I beseech you do so (replied Almanzor) and after his imbracie would
have laden him with jewels. But Alcippus very civilly refusing them, got
himself to be landed, and so went to give an account to his Master of what he
had done with Almanzor. That brave and great King sent him back with new
complements to his enemy, and till the day of fight treated him as if he had
been Zelmatida or Iphidamantus. The Indian Prince smiled at the old Pimantus
address, and entreated him to relate the combat between those two
illustrious Rivalls. The particulars (answered the Viceroy) deserve your
curiosity.

Those two Princes met at one instant on the place of combat, armed at all
points, and mounted on two of the best horses in all Africa. They threw away
their spears after the first course, and with their swords beg^n so furious a
comba^e that I cannot express it to you; but in saying. it was the dreadful
effect of a prodigious cause. That fury and rage which young men call love, in
arming those two youthful Princes dispoyled them of all judgment and
humanity. Think after that, what they were capable to act. They contented not
themselves in covering the earth with the bloody pi^ces of their broaken
armor, but made rivers of their own blood, and becoming far different and
unresembling the men they had been till then, confinde all their former
generous ambitions in the fearful desire of each others destruction. At last
Polexanders invincible Angel compelled Alma^zot's to contend no more against
his fate, and to humble himself before a power that mastred his. Almanzor,
covered with blood and wounds fell down under his horse legs: Polexander was
as quickly alighted, and to him with his sword in his hand; you desired (said
he) to be overcome, confess now, that you are so. That Prince seeing himself
near the loss of his life, contemning the threats of his enemy, cast his
thoughts on Alcidiana, and addressing himself to her, made to that Queen a
resignation of his life in such terms as drew tears from the eyes of his
Conqueror. What said I, his Conqueror? No, the King my Master, in hearing
them, confessed himself vanquished, presented his sword to Almanzor, begged
him his life, and avowing that he was only worthy to serve Alcidiana: he added;
yes certainly you deserve that honor, and you are too sole vanquisher; for
our combat having for object nothing but Alcidiana's service, he alone may
justly be termed victor, who has given the best testimony of his love and
constancy. Polexander yet went further, for seeing Almanzor desperate of life,
he left him his sword, and going away, as if afraid, strove to make it believed
he had had no advantage ore Almanzor. That poor Prince would feign have died
where he fell, but his Servants carried him back into his ship, and finding his
wounds not mortal, omitting nothing to hinder despair from doing more then
the sword of Polexander. But all their labor was in vain, for Almanzor would
absolutely dye, and after a languishing of many months perceiving he began to
amend, he caused himself to be carried into that stately Tomb which is to be
seen in one of our Isles, and unmercifully turned on himself a weapon more
cruel then that of his Rival.

The King my Master heard not of his death till a long time after, by means of
his forsaking his Realm, as soon as his wounds were healed, and rebeginning
his errant life, to lose the sorrow for his victory, as also to tempt fortune
again, and meet some Angel, or some star that might reconduct him to the
Inaccessible Island. But neither on the waters, nor in the skies found he
ought, but what had conspired his ruin. Nevertheless he returned to the Isle
of the Sun, and had long conference with some Priests whom he had wone by his
gifts.

From them he got all that might advance his intention, and yet ran two months
more up and down the sea to try his fortune. He put in execution all that love
advised, he observed all that the Priests of the Sun had prescribed him, and
notwithstanding did nothing but increase his afflictions, and ruinate the
remainder of his hopes. In this vain travel having spent almost all the
year, which was the fourth since he came out of Alcidiana's Island, he came to
winter in this Island, and in the beginning of the spring put to sea with
seven good ships of consort. In this last voyage he perceived that
perseverance might overcome the malignity of fortune and the stars; for being
a days sail from the Island of the Sun, he discovered three great vessels,
and for fear of terrifying them commanded his Pilot to steer a contrary
course to theirs till the beginning of the night, which was executed with so
much art, that the three ships sailed without any suspicion.

At sun set, Polexander hoysed up all his sails, and was so fortunate, that at
day break he was come up so close to them, as he knew them to be of the
Inaccessible Island. He saw Alcidiana's new arising Phoenix painted on the
sails of the tallest, and judging thereby it was the sacred vessel:
Companions (said he) at last we have found that we have sought for these
four years; but that we may not perish in the Haven, we must join wisdom to
valor, and ability to affection. Let every one of you therefore contribute to
my contentment, and make it appear in this occasion the same obedience they
have testified in all those that have preceded. I particularly desire from you
this obedience (said he) because by it I will suspense with your valor, hold
your hands, and take from you that wonted fervency wherewithal you were
accustomed to assail mine enemies.

You know these are none, and it is only the reverence they bear to their Laws
of their Country, and their Queens command, which makes them turn their
arms against us. After he had thus spoaken, he caused five of his ships to
make up, and commanded the Pilots to get the wind. Himself with two other
made right to those of Alcidiana. They instantly severed, one took toward the
South, another toward the East, and the last Northerly. This stratagem angered
Polexander, and made him afraid of losing them, either in following them
severally, or if he should give chase but to one. He deliberated a while what
to do, and thought it best to get his ships together, and follow all that
which took her course to the North. It was the greatest, and therefore he
thought her to be that wherein Lynceus was. Well after her he made; but the
first and second day he could not come up within reach of the Canon. The third
day he got to her, but that the night made him lose sight of her, and was the
cause why all the next day she could not be seen of them. The fifth, he
discovered his Canaries, and a Mariner which was in the scuttle of the Mast,
cried out, he discried Alcidiana's ship. This news infused new life into
Polexander and his followers. They hasted all after the cunning Lynceus, and
having singled and found him out among so many turnings the sea makes by reason
of the Islands, laid him aboard in sight of that of Iron. He could no more have
escaped us, but must be taken. Polexander was now (as he thought) the Master of
fortune, when a great vessel which lay in the road of the foresaid Isle, came
out, met with him, and stayed him, and withal gave testimony that the
inequallity of their forces should not binder him from fighting. Polexander
cried out to his men, that they should not amuse themselves about that new
enemy, but closely follow Lynceus. But the Turks in the great vessel forced
them to fight for their passage. The King enraged at this obstacle, laid the
Turks aboard, and being unable to compel them to a retreat, came to handy
strokes with their Captain. I will relate to you an admirable adventure: In
the heat of the fight, some of our people crying out, that Polexander had the
victory; scarce had the Captain of the Turks heard that name, but he came and
threw himself at the feet of the King my Master, presented him his arms,
petitioned to be chastised for his insolency, and in a word, made himself
known to be the same Iphidamantus whom the Sultan Bajazet forced away the same
day he caused Periander to be strangled.

Polexander astonished at the adventure, witnessed how much he rejoiced in
seeing him again, but remembering he lost Lynceus, entreated him to go and
expect his return at the Canaries, and suffer him to follow the ship wherein
his fortunes were enclosed. Iphidamantus after he had craved pardon for his
error, would repair it in assisting him to take Lynceus. They did all they
could to fetch him up again, but in vain, and in lieu of it found themselves
pestred between two Navall Armies, which were ready to give battle. The one
was Spanish, and the other made up of part Turks, and part Moors.

The Viceroy of Argier commanded in chief, who having passed the streights at
the request of Abdelmelec and other Africans to make an enterprise on the
Portugal, saw himself compelled after a bloody fight, to return into the
Mediterranean, and dispute no more for the Empire of the Ocean with a Nation,
who by their late discoveries, and mighty fleet were gotten Masters of it.
It Is fit before I proceed further, that I relate to you Iphidamantus life, as
he himself told it his brother Polexander whilst they were together. Do not
put your self to that trouble, Father, replied Zelmatida; I know it all. He
himself made it known to me in the Pirates Island. I know how he was bred by the
Basha Achomat under the name of Soliman, that Melicerta and Histeria daughters
of the Basha fell in love with him, and am not ignorant how the insensibility
of Achomat caused the death of the one, and the banishment of the other. In
brief I know all that has ^ided him to the very day he was taken by our dear
Bajazet. Since it is so, replied the Viceroy, I have no more to tell you, but
that Polexander (after the battle betwixt the Turks and Spaniards) finding
again the pretended ship of Lyncens, did what he could to win her by fair
means. But that being bootelesse, he followed her to the Pirates Island, fought
with her, and at last understood he had taken all that pains only for an
apparition and Chymera. For in effect 'twas not Lynceus, but a Rover called Cid
Hamet, which scoured through the seas in a ship which a little before he had
taken from one of Alcidiana's Pilots.

Judge now, great Prince if love be not a dangerous thing, or rather a
malediction which heaven in its anger powers down to chastise the sins of
the earth. Certainly it is the greatest scourg it can inflict upon us. O Sorceror
which empoysonest by thy fateries? O Basiliske which murdrest whomsoever thou
beholdest! Accursed love, which whilst I live shall be the object of my hatred
and imprecations. By thee, the most valiant and generous of all Kings has lost
the use of reason, the fairest time of his life, the desire of honor, and the
hope of a thousand conquests. Through thee he goes like a mad man to assail
all alone a whole Nation, and expose himself to the fury and derision of a
hundred thousand Barbarians. Through thee he has altered the order of nature,
the necessity of his condition, and of a great Prince as he was borne, he is
become a new Monster of the Ocean, the playing toy of the winds and waves, the
outcast of the rocks, and the prey of Pirates. It may be at this hour I speak
he is tossed by some surious tempest, sees all the elements animated aginst his
temerity, and finds himself at the point of paying by a sad shipwreck the
contempt he has had of that absolute power, which with an equal justice
disposes both of the calmes and tempest. The Viceroy's fear was not only
provident, but prophetical, for at the very time he spoke, Polexander
expected, (but constantly) the shipwreck which threatened him. Yet he escaped
it, and after the surmounting many perrills, landed in a little Bourg, which is
but two days journey from Copenhagen. He came on shore in that place to
think advisedly on what he was to do for his clothing himself after the
Danish fashion, to avoid the exposing his person in strange habits to the
fight of the vulgar people of Copenhagen.

He had not much Danish, but he had enough for not being a stranger among that
rude Nation. When he had put all things in order, he got on horseback with
Alcippus and Diceus, and took the next way to the chief City. He lodged
(first night) in a great Town a little days journey from it, and rising about
break of day, which was then about ten of the cloack, he rid a great way
before he baited, and having not past five hours of way more to ride, he
entered into a great wood of fur trees, and had scarce gone two hundred paces,
but he was engaged to stay and read in a copper table fixed to a tree the way
he was to take. Whilst he made that inquisition, he heard a great noice, and
making a stand, lent his ear, and judged there were some thieves robbing of
passengers, his innate goodness soliciting for their succor, he rid toward
them, and leaving his way, took another far narrower, which seemed to lead to
an old Castle which he saw on the knap of a mountain. When he was come to some
ruins which he saw in a little open bottom, he perceived a man with his sword
drawn defending himself against five who would either have taken or murdered
him: Wounded he was in many places; yet did not his wounds deprive him of
strength or courage. The King made in to second him, and instantly mingled
amongst the murderers, made them feel the weight of his blows, and gave them
not time to perpetrate that crime they had begun.

The Dane perceiving the assistance which was as 'twere miraculously betided
him, took breath, joining with his defender, felled on the earth the last of
his enemies. He thought the combat done, when Alcippus and Diceus cried out,
and he looking about, saw ten new cut throats came to charge him, who
questionless had surprised him without their advertisement. With that
Polexander alighted, so did Alcippus, Diceus who was a Soldier followed them,
and the Dane showing himself more resolute, and untoyled then before, went
foremost to meet those traitors, and no less terrified them by his threats
then his blows. Alcippus valiant even to rashness, flew on one of the
thieves, but whilst he laid him in the dust, was charged behind, and so pressed
that he could not turn head. He received so unfortunate a blow, that he lost
the motion of his right arm, and by consequence the means of using his sword.
He was even compelled to sit down, and leave to others the taking of revenge
which he was desperate of being able to perform himself.

Polexander no sooner saw him unfit for further combat, but he ran to him, and
so manfully sustained the stroke of the enemy, that he deprived them of their
obstinacy of fighting. The Dane had a great part in this defeat, and Diceus
was not without acqu^ing a great deal of honor there. The combat being
ended, Polexander went again to see in what case Alcippus was, and thought him
dead, when he saw him bleed so exceedingly.

But Diceus assured him, he had no other hurt then a vein cut, and that 'twas
nothing. They quickly saw he spoake truth, for he stopped the blood by the
first swathband. Presently the Dane came to Polexander, and seeming almost
nothing weakened by his wounds: I cannot (said he) render you service, that
may any way equalize the obligations I owe you. Did I owe you but my life, I
could be in hope of acquitting my self by offering you that little of it which
I have remaining. But being engaged to you for my honor and my life, I can
neither find words sufficient to express my gratitude, nor what to do to
return a satisfaction. Nevertheless let me know who you are, and what
fortune, so favorable for me, conducted you to this wood. That little of life
which my wounds have left me, beseeches you not to retard that favor for
which I petition.

Polexander, would have answered him so, as he might have been contented; but
some twenty paces from him he saw a woman of a very good countenance, though
she seemed not young, who was mightily affrighted. As soon as the Dane saw
her, he thought no more of what he had asked Polexander, nor may be on his
wounds. He opened his lips to speak, but his strength failing he fell down
as dead: O! Heaven, cried the Lady, seeing him fall, must I needs be so
miserable? And therewithal coming near to one of the slain, and a while
considering him perfidious Adolphus (said she) have thou thus betrayed me? Or
rather see how thou have betrayed thy self. Heaven is just, and its wisdom
permits not rancor and malice to have always the upper hand of innocence.
Which done, she ran to succor the Dane, whom Polexander had so well assisted,
and after she had oftentimes called him her Son and her hope, commanded a
Maiden that followed her, to run quickly to fetch her Essence, and call some of
her servants.

The Maiden hastened and quickly returned with all she was sent for. The Lady
then powered some drops of a very clear water into the Danes mouth, and
presently he came from his swound. Wherewith the Ladies servants lifted him
into a coppered chair, and would have carried him away; but he commanded to
stay, and entreating Polexander to come near, yielded him thousands of
thanks, then giving him a picture box, covered with Diamonds with a great
deal of civillity: Be pleased said he to accept this box, for a remembrance
of our meeting. But do not imagine, I am so ignorant of the value of things,
that I think my self acquitted of the debt I owe you by the worth of the
stones on it; if I entreat you to accept it, it is for no other consideration
but that you may know if you come to the Court, the name of the man whom you
have obliged. I dare not stay longer with you, Thamiris command, which calls me
other where is too just to be obeyed. At first Polexander was somewhat nice to
take the box, but perceiving by the Danes speech, what a discontent that might
have been to him had he refused it, and besides conjecturing that token might
be advantageous to him in his design, he took it, and told him, that going to
the Court, he would not fail to bring it him back aga he. After this promise,
many great compliments passed, and assurd him, that if any other then the Lady
who had so well assisted him, had commanded his carrying thence, he would
hardly have resolved to part with him. The Dane besought him not to be troubled
for him and said, that whither he went he ra^ no hazard. Polexander expounded
his words in the sense a Lover might give them, and for fear of disobliging,
took his leave of him and the Lady, and so with Alcippus and Dic^us went
straight to horse, and recovering the highway, got quickly into a great
Village at the end of the wood, wherein he had met that bloody adventure. Of
necessity he was to alight there, for Alcippus was so weak that he could ride
no further. He had him to be brought into the best Inn, and commanded Diceus
to treat him as himself. It happened as fate would, that the Host was an old
Soldier, who after his bearing arms many years without bettering his
fortune, had retired himself thither, and married an old Hostess very well
accommodated.

Polexander, desirous to free the mind of his Host from the astonishment he
had to see Alcippus in so ill an estate, told him, how in passing by the
neighboring forest, they had been set on by thieves. You are not the first
(said he) who have fallen into their hands. There is none that passes that
way, but he loses his life or his money if he be not well accompanied. Those
are the inconveniences the wars usually leave behind them, and the disorders
which happen through the negligence, or purloining of such as are appointed the
Soldiers pay masters. This man's discourse made Polexander believe that he
might inform him of what he so much longed to know. He therefore in a small
time grew to a great familiarity with him, and to win him absolutely, put
himself to the trouble of inventing a thousand tales, under whose probabillity
he was got to be of his ancient acquaintance. Some fifteen days he was in
that Inn, for Alcippus cure, and one of them being wonderful desirous to know
who he might be whom he had aided, and finding his Host in a good humor,
asked him whether he went not sometimes to the Court? He made answer, he had
been there but too often, and how after his unfortunately living there five
and twenty years, he was constrained to retire to get his bread, and play the
beggar no longer. If so (said Polexander) there are then but few persons of
quallity whose faces you know not? 'T were happy for me, said he, if I knew
them less then I do, and that their false semblances had not vainly abused
my expectation, and worn out the prime of my youth. Whilst he was talking
thus, Polexander opened the box which the Dane gave him, and taking out the
picture showed it to his Host. Scarce had he fully seen it, but he cried out,
and clapping Polexander on the shoulder, whence come you said he, that you know
not this face? I come (replied Polexander) from wandering through most of
Europe, and am but newly come into Denmark. By chance found I this picture,
and imagining it belongs to some great Lord, I would feign restore it, and that
bred my curiosity to know him. You have good cause to prosecute your intention
(answered the Host) for it is the portraict of one who is likely to enrich you
for the least service you can do him; his name is Phelismond, our Kings Heir
and Favorite, or to speak more freely, he is indeed the very King of Denmark.

At the name of Phelismond, Polexander was so supprised, that he changed
color, and was feign to sit down to resettle himself. His Host took notice
of it, and asked whether he were not well? He replied, it was the remains of a
late sickness, and so cast himself on a bed, as well to dismiss the man, as
to ponder seriously on so wonderful an accident. After a long times musing, he
rising, addressed himself to his (...) and told him he must participate of his
astonishment, and know who 'twas whom they had (...) from among the thieves.
It Is (said he) Phelismond; surely I know by this ^at reaven delights in the
confounding the judgments of men, and laughing at (...) deliberations, will
they nill they, brings on them all which it had decreed from all eternity.

I came of purpose into this Kingdom to kill that Phelismond, whom for
Alcidiana's sake I have prosecuted as the chiefest of mine enemies, and yet the
first adventure which presented it self here, engaged me to hazard mine own
life to preserve his. After this miracle, I bow my head, and see clearly that
heaven cannot suffer our rash thoughts to oppose themselves against the secrets
of its providence. My passion presented to me Phelismond as one of those happy
Monsters, whom fortune takes pleasure to raise aloft, to show how far pride
and license to do any thing dare go. But I know quite contrary, that this
Prince is adorned with excellent quallities, and his courtesy is no less
winning then his valor is redoubtable, without whose approbation there is not
a virtue, but is a vice, nor courage, but is unmanlinesse. I am no less guilty
then Phelismond, since I have received other Laws then those thou gave me.
Tushe, tushe, I renounc^e all these unlawful motions, for since thou have
resolved it, Phelismond must perish.

When Polexander had ended, Alcippus began, and confessed there was something
of he knew not what extraordinary good in this adventure; nevertheless (said
he to his Master) I admire naught at all these strange accidents which betide
in what you have undertaken. You should not be the man you are if things did
not befall you otherwise then to other men. Well, well, (said Polexander
interrupting him) it is enough; once, either Phelismond or I must dye. The
sentence of our deaths has been given by the mouth of a Judge, from whom it is
neither lawful for him or I to appeal. Come let us see whether he have as much
courage against love as we have been witnesses he had against other enemies.
Two or three days after this last resolution of the King, Diceus assured him
Alcippus might get on horseback, and they all three departed from their Inn,
and the same day betimes arrived at Copenhagen. They lodged near the Palace,
and understood the very next day, Phelismond was by the Kings command brought
into the City, and being absolutely out of danger, was seen and visited by
every one. This news exceedingly pleased Polexander; yet resolved to attend
his certain health before he would make known to Phelismond the cause of his
voyage, and thought it fit withal to restore him his box, and disclose
himself, that so at his return he might intimate to him that which lay on his
heart. One morning therefore, taking Alcippus with him he went straight to the
Favorites lodging, as soon as he came in, he noted there was nothing in that
man but savoured of the greatness of his courage. His house was open to all
men. No person hindered the entrance into his chamber, no not of his withdrawing
room. It Is true, he was so generally beloved, and the respect the whole Court
had always borne him was so strong a guard to him, that neither great nor
less came to disturb him but upon some very just cause. The first to whom
Polexander addressed himself to know whether that Prince was to be spoken with,
offered to conduct him into his chamber, and Polexander accepting his courtesy,
followed him. He went through great Halls very stately furnished, through
chambers, and anti-chambers far more magnificent, wherein he saw none but
Phelismonds domestical servants. This sollitude so much ravished him, that he
could not hold from telling his Conductor, the Courtiers of Denmark, were
either very negligent or little ambitious, since they gave so much ease and
quiet to the man, who only next the King might make them a fortune.

You see (answered his Guide) that our Po^ters have no great employment, and
there is no great crouding in our chambers. Yet it is not because our Couriers
are not the most diligent, and ambitious of all men; but the Prince long since
told them once for all, that he pretended not to be the most unfortunate in all
Denmark, because his Master did him the honor to love him more particulaly
then others: That he engaged himself to serve them as often as his credit
could add any thing to their merit, or their Princes will; but he would not
promise it but on condition they would suffer him to live at liberty. Truly
replied Polexander, I understand daily there are most eminent virtues in
Phelismond, though he be of their number, with whom they have been thought
(even till this day) to be incompatible. The mind^s of the multitude must
needs be very bad, since some of them have been to wicked as to find fault
with the actions of so great a personage., It may be (said the guide) some one
may have cause to complain of the Prince; yet I entreat you to believe they
are much in the wrong who make him the cause of their public miseries. He
daily toiles to put a period to them, and when he thinks to be at the point of
relieving the people, some spirits borne for their ages affliction, alter those
good designs, and enforce him whether he will or no to raise the charges and
impositions, to deter the entire desolation of the Kingdom. But let it
suffice, I have not in command to justify his actions, nor condemn other
men's, and see, we are at the chamber door.

I entreat you then (said Polexander) to see what the Prince does, and if you
think it fitting, to tell him, that the Gentleman to whom he gave a picture
box, is come to restore it to him. At that word, the Guide smiling, left him,
and presently returning, said, that Paelismond entreated him to come in. At his
first step into the chamber, diverse Gentlemen came and saluted him, and all
with a great deal of civility, led him to the Prince his bed side.

He raised himself half to embrace him, and received him with so great
expressions of joy and sensibility, that Polexander had not been worthy to have
lived, had ^e not been moved with his courtesy. He began his compliments by
the box he presented him, and often besought his pardon for the long
unacquitting himself of what he owed him. Phelismond, embracing him again,
took him from the continuing those civilities, and wringing his hand, I see
well (said he) that you have no better an opinion of me, then of custom men
have of such who are in the same degree of fortune with me. Every one believes,
that no man can be a Favorite, but he must instantly forget himself. But if I
might have the happiness of seeing you often, I hope you would change your
opinion, and find, that I left not to be rational when I came to be a
Favorite. I ask your pardon for this ill discourse; but I am so much afraid
to be taken for another, that by this declaration I begin my acquaintance and
friendship. To this Polexander answered with so much freedom and gentleness,
as if he had not been Polexander, or the other Phelismond; he felt within him
an extraordinary deba^e, and his virtue opperating her accustomed effect,
compelled him to love his Rival, and Alcidiana's enemy. At last his passion,
and that Princesses command got the upper hand. Hereupon he resolved his own
ruin, or to avenge both, and for that cause would be but a little with
Phelismond, who did all he could possibly to stay him: But Polexander came off
so gently, that without any incivility he had the liberty he wished. When he
was returned to his lodging, he began to muse on his fortune, and passing and
repassing through his memory all P^elismonds endowments; I am (said he to
himself) reduced to two extremities, far differing from one another. If I put
not in execution what Alcidiana commands me, I am a coward, a traitor, and
ought to think no more on the means to find the Inaccessible Island. On the
other side, has any man seen an example of brutallity equ^ll with mine, if I
yield not my self captivated by all those generous actions wherewithal
P^elismond obliges me to love him? But what of this? Alcidiana shall not then
have satisfaction? Instead of excuting her commands, I shall become the
censurer of her will, and have the impudence to accuse her of injustice when it
accords not with my opinion?

No, no, she must be obeyed. Let those who know not how to love aright, reprove
my ingratitude. Let them convince me of extravagancy, and take me either for
some in^m us person, that cannot endure the luster of extraordinary virtues, or
for an execrable fellow, who would make himself immortal by some signal
villainy. Alcidiana is more to be feared then all these accusers. I will act
what I ought; Phelismond cannot blame me for it, and whosoever is truly
generous, shall (at the same instant he deplores the misfortune of so
accomplished a Prince) set down among his first examples of Loyalty, the
excess of my blind obedience. After this discourse with himself he began to
think on the means of bringing his resolution to a good issue, and after a
long meditating on it, came forth with Alcippus to revisit Phelismond, and met
with his first Conductor, who assured him his Master was impatient till he saw
him again, and that all the afternoon he had entertained his visitants with
naught but his ingenuity and cou^age.

Polexander, answered as he ought, and so ascended to Phelismonds Chamber. He
found him up, and was received with a great deal of joy and gentleness,
behaviors ra^e, in men of that condition. Long time the Prince embraced him,
speaking, as he had known the secrets of his soul. When (said he) shall I
have the happiness to see you as really my friend as I wish it? Polexander,
who could not betray his conscience, nor indiscreetly offend so generous a
Prince, studied an answer that might satisfy him, and yet be no prevarication
in what concerned Alcidiana: The sole cause (replied he) which deters me from
receiving the honor you do me, is a fear that when I shall be more
particularly known to you then I am, you will be enforced to cut off a great
deal from those favors you do me.

Phelismond, at that word stopping him; assure your self (said he) that
neither you nor all men breathing can by any action whatsoever take from me my
intention and will to be entirely yours. But fearing least you may imagine that
rather some other consideration then that of your virtue has obliged me to woe
your friendship; I asked it you, without the knowledge of what you are, not
what you can do. These courtesies of Phelismond, so distracted Polexander,
that but with a great deal of trouble could he frame an answer to so many
noble speeches. In the mean time, Phelismond, who had a design to gain him
absolutely, smiled to see him at a nonplus, and thus came on again. Be^ide
what may, yet must I have what I entreat for. Do you not know, that Love has
the privilege to be resisted by nothing? See then what you intend to do. If
you be so good a husband of your friendship, as you will sell it, either it is
inestimable, or I have that which will buy it. Or if you ^e so liberal as to
give it; I am ready to be wholly oblige^ to you for it. Polexander confounded
with these new charg^s, was even desperate of ever contenting P^elismond, and
admiring his generosity, (s^id to himself) Alcidiana was unjust in desiring
the death of so perfect a Prince. At last he overcame the agitations of his
mind, and resolved not to discover himself, but to declare to P^elismond the
cause of his journey, and by consequence what 'twas which hindered him from
accepting his friendship. See how he came off from so difficult a strait, and
under what terms he hid the truth of his life: Since (said he to Phelismond)
you will have me absolutely accept the honor you do me, or give you reason
for my refusal, I will make use of the liberty you give me, and freely tell
you, I cannot receive your offers, how advantageous soever they may be to me,
nor yet promise you my service, till I am disingaged from an affair wherein
your self is in some sort interrested. Of what nature soever that business
be, (replied Phelismond) I swear to you, if you please to do me the favor to
trust me, I will ever conform my self to what shall be most agreeable to you.
This protestation full of candor and affection, obliged Polexander to trifle
the time no longer, but thus to go on with his Declaration; I am a French man
(said he) and my birth good enough for satisfaction. I have been bred up among
the troubles wherein my Country has labored within these few years, and
fortune has been so favorable to me, that I have had thence more then I
expected. But when I adapted me to taste the fruits of my labors, she has
raised me a fearful enemy, and would have put him in possession of all that
good I promised my self.

Yet when she was in hand to put him the enjoying, she found her self too
weak to perform it. That Favorite has met with more obstacles in that he
would deprive me of, then the greatness of his quallity could imagine. He has
seen his hopes, as well as mine, take their end when they should have had their
beginning, and when I should have complained of his violence, he obliged
himself to give me satisfaction by ways that were not honorable. Pardon me
if you please (continued Polexander) if I name not my Usurper, for he is so
well known in this Court, and you have so much cause to affect him (as I have
been told) that I fear for his sake you will forget all your promises to me.
Believe it not (replied Phelismond) I here again engage my self to make good
what I have promised.

Since you are so generous (said Polexander) I will lay open the sum of all
my business: My enemy unwilling to have our quarrel decided otherwhere then
before the King your Master, sent that he would meet me here to give me full
satisfaction, and that at farthest I should hear of him within a Month. See
Phelismond my fortune, the cause of my voyage, and wherefore I dare not believe
you can love me. You may perceive by this that I am come into Denmark to fight
by the Kings permission; and to petition him that in his presence, I may force
satisfaction for an injury which will not suffer me to live without its
resentment. After this last overture, if you have yet remaining disposition to
oblige me, suffer me not to have made an idle journey. My Adversary is not now
in case to make a joint petition with me to the King, but he is a person so
noble, that he would not for any thing fail of his word. If I therefore dare
to hope ought from your goodness, or rather if my fantastical design has
made no change in your opinion, I conjure you once more by that virtue which is
so habitual to you, to free me from my continual molestation, and to employ a
part of that power you have with the King in getting me his permission for a
combat. Phelismond, observing in all Polexanders discourse the mildness, and
well temperature of his speech, answered him thus; I will make you see how much
I value this your greatness of courage, which no less apeares in your
resentment, then in all the rest of your actions; I therefore promise to serve
you at what hazard soever, and either to lose all my reputation, or give you
that content which you hope for by your combat. But (if you please) it shall
be on condition, that you finding nothing in this which may hinder your being
my friend, you will grant me that which I have often sued for. When Polexander
saw his business go on beyond expectation: I should (said he) be unworthy of
the honor you do me, did I not confess that my desire to be your servant is
equivalent with that of overcomming my enemy.

Notwithstanding, since it is very likely you would not treat a friend to lose
him presently; let, (if you please) our inclinations rest in suspense, till the
day which may by chance finish them, and besides thereto add so much as may
last us the rest of our lives. There must (replied Phelismond) needs be some
hidden mystery in your reservednesse in a business which seems to me so just,
but I content my self with what you think fit; and will have so much command
on my self, as to regulate my will by yours. In the mean time I assure you
that even to morrow the King shall know what he ought of your business, and
that I may serve you effectually: I will take my time for it, when he pleases
to do me the honor to have me retired with him to treat of matters which
concern his service. How infinite is your nobleness (replied Polexander) and
how much more ought I to acknowledge what you have done for me, and otherwise
then I have yet performed! Do not speak so (said Phelismond) the respect I
bear you is sufficient to make me perform impossibilities, and (if need were)
to proclaim me an enemy to my self.

O valor! (cried Polexander, interrupting him) before whom all other things
have naught but of what is base; why should a cruel and powerful necessity
bereave me of the means of acting what I ough^? After this stirring, which in
truth was not seasonable, Polexander recalled himself, and besought Phelismond
not to acquaint the King to hastily with his business, since he was certain
his enemy could not be in case to answer him for a month. He fained this
excuse to give Phelismond the more time for his strength. The Prince paused a
while before he answered him, at last he took him by the hand, and wringing it
as if he knew his design; I will do whatever you please (said he) and till
you command me, I will speak nothing of your affair. Till that happy hour be
(replied Polexander) with your leave I will take a view of this great Kingdom,
and satisfy my curiosity with the infinite number of rarities wherewithal
your Seas and Islands are replenished. I could wish (replied Phelismond, you
had no such intention, and would try to make you spend the time with more ease
and pleasure; but since you desire to travel, I will not deprive you of that
contentment, but on the contrary give you a guide, for whose fidelity I will be
answerable both for your person, and the success of your voyage. Polexander
thanked him for that new favor, and the next day having made himself ready
for his journey, took his leave of the Favorite. I should transgress the
liberty I allowed my self, if I related all the honor they gave our King, and
his worthy intertainments in all Towns where he came. It Is enough to say he saw
many strange things, and particularly all those varieties where withal nature
pleases to disport her in that end of the world. After his being near three
months at sea, he landed again at Copenhagen; where he found the Court, and
was welcomed by Phelismond with such embraces and excessive favors, that he
was a hundred times about to confine himself to some corner of Norway, to
leave him the liberty of serving Alcidiana. But what cannot a true love do?
The remembrance of the most accomplished Princess of the worlds beauty, soon
made him alter his resolution.

The very next day he betook himself in earnest to his business, and to
stick constant to the execution of Alcidiana's commands, stopped his ear to
all that reason, and devoyre could persuade him. He went to Phelismond at his
arising, and assured him of his enemies arrival, besought him to perfect his
affair. Phelismond promised he would, and that very day obtained all he
desired. Presently he advertised our King of it, and demanded if there were any
thing else to be done? Yes my Lord (replied Polexander) it is not enough that we
have leave to fight, but that we have the time and place assigned us.

Phel^smond assured him how that very evening he would try to get the Kings
consent it might be in his presence, and in the great place of Copenhagen. For
the day (said he) it is fit we leave him the liberty of appointing it you at his
pleasure. Yet this one thing I will promise you, that you shall not be long in
expectation. Herewith Polexander left the Favorite to take order about his
affair, and returned to him again toward his bed time to know the Kings
pleasure. He was told that the King put off the combat to the last day of the
month, and that term is very short, for it is the day after to morrow. See, at
last you have your desire; but believe me, that with grief enough I have
served you in this occasion; but since 'twas your will, I thought on nothing
out your contentment. Polexander thanked him for the continuance of his favor,
and besought him to believe that nothing grieved him, but his being constrained
^o engage the Favorite in his follies. As soon as he was retired to his
lodging, he sent amongst all the Armorers of Copenhagen, for the choice of the
best arms. He had two of the best horses in Denmark, and was troubled at
nothing, but how he might become the Conqueror, and yet not afflict or disgrace
Phelismond. At last the the day for the combat being come, Polexander went
very early to Phelismond, and finding him ready, ^treated him to make a turn
in the Garden. Phelismond agreed, and imagining Polexander requested it not
without some design, commanded none should follow him. When he was descended
into a walk of Pines, Yewes, and Cypres, he stopped, and entreated Polexander
to speak freely to him. Our Hero kept constant, and making no show of any
emotion or tartness, thus bespoake him: The first thing I have to say to you
Phelismond is, that I am extraordinarily in love, and with the fairest
Princess of the world.

After this Declaration, I do not only believe you already have excused me for
all past faults committed in your presence; but that you will like wise approve
of all my offenses hereafter. I would not promise my self this grace from you,
if you had never loved; but when I call to mind the power Thamiris has over
you, I find wherewithal to justify the most remarkable crimes which love can
possibly make me perpetrate. Is it not true Phelismond, that Thamiris beauty,
and admired graces are by you held in that esteem, that there is no man
living, nay I say even the King your Master, whose enemy you would not declare
your self, had he an intention to rob you of them? Here he stopped, and did
it of purpose to give Phelismond time to answer. Though I see not well whereto
you tend (said that Prince) yet I freely confess to you, I am of your opinion,
and I love with so much fervency, that I would (^f 'twere possible for me) set
all Europe in a conflagration, rather then to make a cessio^ of whom I serve to
the greatest of Kings, or dearest of all my friends. I have well perceived
(said Polexander) your love to Thamiris is very violent, and it is by that
example, which I would prepare you to judge favorably of such things as love
commands me to put in execution. I will make known to you here on what
terms I am with Thamiris, nor what the cause is which makes me so much affect
her. It shall suffice me, that you know, I love in so high a place, that all
the virtues and beauties of the world have conspired together to compose the
object of my love: Let the Reader imagine whether Polexander were sensible of
these words or no, whether the jealousy they imprinted, were not power^ull
enough to make him forget all his Rivalls courtesies. He could not endure he
should go further, and had not reason assisted him, 'twas to be feared, that
conversation had not ended as it began.

Polexander suppressed his first agitation, and returning into cold blood, thus
went on again. There Is no more time left to conceal my self, and ^ide from
you a business which you must necessarily know. I am Polexander, the servant
of Alcidiana, and Phelismond is the enemy, I come (by her command) to seek in
Denmark. After this short Declaration, he related to him at large the humors
of that proud Queen, and told him word by word the terms she made use of,
when she let him understand by one of her sl^ves, her aversion to his su^te and
himself. As soon as he had begun this discourse, Phelismond lo^t both his
color and countenance, and looked on Polexander, as if he had been no more the
man, to whom he had vowed so much amity. At last coming to himself, he very
distinctly spoake thus to the King; I shall never be capapable of contradicting
Alcidiana's commands. Since you come from her, I am ready to bring you into the
field to him, whom so great a Princess holds to be so uncivil and barbarous.

Come Sir, you that are happy in all things, let us hasten her revenge, and
satisfy her justice by the death of this Northern Monster. This new proof of
Phelismonds generousnesse, so cooled Polexanders blood, that it neither left
him the power, nor the desire to do what he had so often resolved.
Nevertheless after he had a long time contested with himself, it seemed to
him that Alcidiana upbraided him with his thoughts of pity, and accused him of
private correspondence with her enemy. This made him give Phelismond this
answer. If our Princess could be won by merit, or rather if the distance of
places, had not been so ex^reamely disadvantagious to you, I doubt not, but
being one of the prime Princes of the world, you might have prevailed as much
ore the affection of that fair Queen, as you have done ore the minds of all
the North. Questionless I should be that Barbarian, which she has a will to
destroy, and you had received (in my place) the command which I am resolved to
put in execution. But let us not amuse our selves (if you please) in condemning
the disorder we find in our adventures; but since that great Princess will is
the sole Law we ought to keep; let us on where her absolute power calls us.
Can I take arms (replied Phelismond) without adding rebellion to rashness?
No, there is nothing left for me to do but to dye. Too sweet a tongue has
pronounced my sentence of death that I should desire life.

P^lexander strove to bring him from this ecstasy, and perceiving how
insupportable Alcidiana's disestimation was to him, he repented his naming the
terms of Monster, and barbarous. After Phelismond had mu^ed a while, in
fixing his eyes on the earth, he at last cast them on Pole^ander, and told him
he would go to the King, to dispose so well of all things, that Alcidiana
should have cause to hold her self sa^isfied, and after he had thus spoke he
embraced him, and besought him to do nothing till he came back from the
Palace. Polexander promised to obey his command, and accompanied him to his
chamber, where they discoursed a while of ind^fferent things, but as soon as
he was adver^sed of the Kings being awake, he left Polexander in the company of
five or six of his particular f^iends. H^ stated above two hours with the
King, and when he saw him ready to go to the place of the combat, he returned
to Polexander, and told him, he had n^w nothing to fear, and how he had
obtained all that was fitting for his safety. Polexander thanked his for all
his fav^s, and said aloud, he thought himself the most unfortunate man of the
world, in putting him to so many troubles. Hereupon he took his leave, because
it was late, and returned to his lodging to put things in order. After he had
been there an hour, there came a Gentleman from Phelismond to entreat him to
come and arm himself in his lodgings, where he should meet with five or six
Lords whom the King had sent to conduct him to the field. Polexander went to
him, and after more then an hours being with the Prince, caused himself to be
armed.

The King sent to tell Phelismond he was risen from table, whereupon Polexander,
and his conductors got to horse, and came to the Justing place. The Windows,
the Terras^s, and the Scaffolds were filled with men and women of the Court and
the City, and the Kings guard stood about the railes. he had not been long
there, when Phelismond recompanied with five or six of his friends rid round
about the field, and then placed himself right against his Rival. As soon as
the King was at the window of his pavillion, the Judges of the field sent to
search the Combatants, and dividing the Sun betwixt them, set them one opposite
to the other. Presently the trumpers ^ounded, and the word of letting go
together, the good Knight was given by the Danes King at Arms. Phelismond came
on with his lance in his rest as if he would have (...) Polexander through and
through. Yet he made his intention appear to be clean contrary. For
Polexander, he had resolved to over come him without lance or sword. When they
were in the midst of their careere they lifted up their spears, and so passed
without touching one another.

All the Assembly gave a great sh^ute, and seemed to ask the reason of this
novelty. In the m^ne time the two Rivalls ran the sec^d ^ime, and d^ as a^
first. Indeed their horses (who were ignorant of their intentions) i^countred
so furi^usly, tha^ P^lexanders failed but little of being overthrown. The
other's was fo^ced back to the earth on his crupper, and so broke his harness,
that Phelism^ fell ^n tge ground. This disorder put him into choler, and made
him change his resolution. When they had brought him another horse and that he
was in c^se to fight, he told P^lexander, that it was not ^me to pacify
Alcidiana, and satisfy the spectators expectation. I am glad (said Polexander)
to hear you of that m^de. Let us on then (in good time) to alter the opinion
which our first courses have given all the Assembly. With that they withdrew
from one another, and when they were at the end of the list, they turned head,
and expected when the Judges would command the trumpets to make them start. As
soon as they heard the signal, they ran against one another with an
impetuosity, that made all the Spectators think their complements had now
given place to their resentments. At their encounter, the lances flew in
shivers. When that was done without advantage on either part, they took new
spears, and met with more vigor then in the preceding course. They broke
their spears to their very gantlets, and held on with so much equallity to the
eight course, that the people ravished with their mighty brants, could not make
show of their astonishment, but by their silence. The King ^f Denmark, and his
Courtiers (who for the most part are excellent Tilters) confessed, they had
never seen better performance, and asked one another, who that Knight might be,
which had so ^ong time resisted him, that Phelismond by his relation made them
conjecture to be the most valiant of the times. Whilst all were in these
thoughts, the two Rivalls came on their eight course, but it had an event far
differing from the other.

Polexanders victorions destiny unhor^ed Phelismond. As soon as he was on
ground, Polexander alighted, and putting not his hand to h^s sword till he had
seen Phelismond do so, came toward him, but would not give the first blow.
Phelismond took no heed to that complement; but made (...) feel the weight of
his arm, who straight imitated him, and pressed him very near. If these two
Rivalls had made show in their courses of their dexterity and strength, they
declared their const^t foot fight, that their courage and vigor surpassed the
belief even of those who saw the proofs of them. In a thousand places were
their arms slashed and broaken, and their b^ood which distained all the dust,
had already converted into horror and comp^ssion the admiration of all the
Spect^tors. This combat continued from one of the clock till seven at
evening. At last the Danish Prince staggered and fell through weakness. When
he perceived himself unable to rise he presented his sword to Polexander, and
uttring his words with a great deal of pain, I confess (said he) (...) is
just, and only you of all the world d^serve to serve her. Return then to (...)
(^appy Polexander) and assure her, that death was welcome to me, since I knew
it was the sole means to content her. But stay no longer here, rather g^ (...)
of this Kingdom the soonest you may, you shall not be pursued whilst I am
^eere. Pol^xander came near to his generous ^my to comfort him, and to ask
his pardon ^r w^t had passed; but as he was stooping, both his sight and
understanding failing him, he f^ll ^s dead some three paces from P^elismond,

The King of Denmark pitted to see two so valiant men in that estate, and said
to those who were about him, he repented of what he had granted ^o Paelismond,
withal sent to see where he was, and thinking he was one o^ P^lexanders
Conductors, caused him to (...) for among that Troop, but they were ^re enough
from finding ^im th^re. W^ ^ey brought the King word of his not ^ing there, he
commanded some Officers of ^is guard to inq^ire what was ^come o^ hi^. They
went to all the hou^ (...) ^ked in^o ^he p^ace, then into (...), and l^ft no
place unsearched ^o (...) ^m, ^t (...) in (...). At l^st they re^ned to the
King and assured him that no man c^uld tell ^m what was ^ecome of Phelismond.
How Is this said he? Phelismond was not ^ont to forget himself in things that
concern me. The night comes, and let it as fast as 'twill; yet should I stay
he^ (...) ^omorrow, I will keep my word.

After he had thus s^d, he commanded torches to be lighted, and as soon as
those of his pavillion were* presently all the windows throughout the place
were full o^ (...), Amidst the new pay which the infinite number o^ ^ches m^de,
the Spectat^ began to clap their hands, and were abov^ two hours showing
(...), (...) by their silence, and then by their shoutes. The King (...) to
(...) we^ (...) ^ing Phelismond, when from among the ^ sudden all those which
had been even ^ ^ly there was s^ene to enter the field twenty o^ (...) men, ^
in his hand: Behind which Troop ^ four others, and seemed to be
extraordinarily ^ where Phelismond and (...) say (...) out as dead; (...) ^er
own h^s she took off the Favorites helmet, and commanded on^ ^f her ^ much to
Polexander. He was free from his ^ing, when (...) Lady came, and ^ner felt the
air but he came to himself, So could not Phelismond, for he had lost almost
all his blood, and was in so ill a case that they believed him dead. No body
was seen so much grieved as the Lady, who so happily arrived; long wept she,
and at last, said, it was not fit the death of so generous a Prince should be
left unpunished. After she had much vexed her self, she came to Polexander,
and gazing on him as if she knew him, she called one of her women, and giving
her a paper; go (said she) show this to the King, and tell him that Phelismond
has deceived him. The Damsel went, and was presently with the King. In the
mean time the noise which was begun by the veiled Ladies arrival, increased
with clapping of hands, and unusual clamours. During this tumult, the King
came into this place, and drew to Phelismond. Polexander was risen before he
came, and as soon as he saw the King, stood still (as well as his weakness
could suffer him) and perceived he was no less afflicted then angry. He cast
himself on the body of his Favorite, wept long, and on a sudden rising up
in a rage: He shall dye for it (said he) that miscreant, who came to murder me
in the person of Phelismond.

In saying so, he turned him to Polexander, and full of rage, thou shall not
have the honor, said he, to perish by so glorious a hand as that of
Phelismond, and when he had thus threatened, he looked on the Captain of his
Guard, and commanded him to lay hold of Polexander, but before he had time to
execute his charge, Polexander came to the King, presented him his sword, and
in offering it spoke thus: I know what respect is due to Kings. Since your very
Subjects protract time in obeying you, so much fear have they lest you should
be accused of perjury. I will act what they dare not. Take here (if you please)
this sword, the cause of your displeasure, and assure your self, that your
just grief shall advise you to nothing which I will not undergo without a
murmr.

These words surprised the King, and cooled his choler. Yet his love not
permitting him to make use of his judgment; you imagine (said he) that your
courage can find nothing, which it cannot overcome; but since you have
contemned my friendship, I will make you see what my power is. Polexander could
not answer him, for he had lost so much blood since he got up, that all his
strength failing him again, he fell so, as the King was feign to prop him, or
he had run the hazard to have fallen with him. He therefore commanded five or
six of his guard to take and carry him into the great Tower of the City, which
was instantly performed whilst he was in his swound. The King of Denmark freed
from the object of his choler, cast his eyes on his dear Phelismond; While he
thought of nothing but to have him carried away. Alcippus and Diceus rushing
out of the croude, where they concealed themselves, came and fell at his feet,
and besought his ear. What are you, said the King? We are (replied Alcippus)
servants to that Prince whom you treat not conformably to the Covenant,
whereby you permitted him the combat.

But in the name of Heaven Sir, hearken to reason how just soever your
resentment be, and call to mind what you have sworn! The keeping of your word
ought to be no less dear to you then the preserving your Authority. But if
you think you have no cause on this occasion to stick to it, reflect on the
greatness of your prisoner, and decree nothing against him: till you have well
pondered who Polexander is. I know what I have to do, answered the King. In
the mean time, I command you to get out of my Court within these four and
twenty hours, if you will not run the fortune of a man who within these two
days was but a mean Gentleman, and now forsooth must be taken for one of the
prime P^inces of the world. But I swear to make of him an example, and at once
give condign punishment for the imposture, and the murder. Alas! Sir (replied
Alcippus) I beseech you humbly not to suffer your self to be transported by
your indignation. Your Majesty shall pardon me if you please, should I say you
would lose the respect I owe you. The King justly offended at Alcippus
indiscreet zeal, grew more in rage then ever, and commanded him with Diceus to
be carried to prison. Both of them thanked him for that favor, and
(uncompelled) went whither they would lead them. They were shut up in the same
Tower where their Master was, and presently after they sent him Physicians and
Chyrurgions to see his wounds, which they found to be great and dangerous. But
Diceus was not of their opinion, and desired he might dress his Master. Those
good people that were no more cunning then they should be, thought this request
was not to be denied, and therefore gave way he should look to him, which he
did, and neglected nothing that might prevent those accidents which cause
wounds to become mortal. In the mean time the King of Denmark was much
troubled for Phelismond. He had commanded six of his Gentlemen to take and
carry him, and not only went with him to the Palace, but had him laid in his
own bed, where he was visited by all the Court Physicians, and looked too for
all things necessary, as Heir to the Crown.

Nevertheless, for all they could do to his hurts, they were so dangerous
that till day break, all thought them incurable. His Master went not to bed
that night, and swore, if Phelismond died, he would instantly command
Polexanders head to be stroke from his shoulders. After 'twas day Phelismond
grew sensible, and (as soon as he could open his mouth) ^asked where his King
was, and what was become of his enemy. The King kissed him often, and shedding
tears for joy to heat him speak, my Phelismond (said he) take heart, and
ask after nothing but thy cure. He for whom thou inquirest is where he wants
nothing, since I saw by the letter thou writtest to Thamiris, thy desire he
should be treated as thy self. Ten or twelve days slid away, during which
time, the two Rivalls wounds, threw forth part of their fire, and cast them
into such violent Fevers, that their youth was the best preserver of their
lives. Phelismond now grew to be out of danger as well as Polexander, when he
called to mind he was not to fail of his word given him. That consideration
moved him to supplicate the King his Master, he would be pleased he might be
carried to the place where Polexander was: Phelismond (replied the King) whilst
the greatness of your wounds, made me fear what would become of you, I
dissembled my resentment, and would not think of your offending me; but now
you are out of danger, I will tell you my mind, and command you, as I am your
Master and Father, to invent no pretext for having any cause to contradict me.
I have so much affected you Phelismond, that in my life time I would have
settled the Crown of Denmark on your head. This extraordinary token of my
love, should intimate how dear your safety is to me, and indeed it is so much,
that there is nothing which I would not do to give you all the satisfaction
you can desire. Yet there is one thing I receive to my self, and for which I
will neither lend lend ear to my affection, nor your entreaties. It Is the life
of that stranger, who without doubt has bewitched you, since you love him even
after he has declared himself your enemy, and without regarding so many
generosities which should persuade him, has done what in him lay to deprive
you of your life. Phelismond the most noble of men, answered so advantagiously
for his Rival, that his Master imposed him silence.

I will hold my peace, Sir, (replied he) since your Majesty commands me; but I
must submi^ly beseech you to believe that my life is inseparably knit with that
of the King of the Canaries, and had rather dye, then be the cause so great a
King as you should not fulfill what he has promised. Verily Phelism^nd,
replied the King, it is too much, anger me no more, and call to mind that my
crown and amity deserve your care of pleasing me. Phelismond would no longer
exasperate his Master; but put off further discourse of that business till
another time. Polexander was this while in prison very well treated, and served
with as much care as if he had been even in the Island of Alcidiana.

Besides, Phelismond who was not able to be wearied with showing his
generousnesse toward him, solicited his deliverance, but his Master grew
obstinate in refusal. One day, when the Favorite had but two or three wounds
yet open, he would needs try his last endeavor, and utmost power, to see
whether his Kings mind might be changed, and to that end made to him a long
and well labored Oration, desirous to remonstrate by all ways of reason, as
well of State, as of what was seemly and behoofull, that he ought very
honorably to send home Polexander. The King answered according to his custom,
and Phelismond replied according to his own, so that at last they grew both so
hot, that they were long time in contestation. But when the King saw his
reasons were too obstinately disputed and opposed by those of Phelismond, he
arose all in choler, and being unable to contain himself any longer: Content
your self (said he to him) that you have displeased me, and never speak to me
more of a man who shall feel how heavy that Kings arm is, who will not be
wronged without a just punishment. Phelismond then growing calmer, and more
humble, as his Master waxt hotter: Sir (said he) it is most just, you be obeyed,
and most of all that I receive an infliction for my loss of respect; I
therefore here vow never to supplicate for ought that may displease you. This
humility of Phelismonds met with the King so much transported from himself,
that it won nothing of him. He walked with hasty strides in the chamber,
without turning his eyes toward Phelismond, and on the sudden thrusting open
a window which looked into the Palace great garden, he leaned there about a
quarter of an hour, musing and disgesting his choler. Longer had he been
there, but for the shriecks which on the sudden were heard behind him. He
turned his head, and saw that Phelismond servants and Chyrurgions were round
about his bed, and held him for dead.

He ran thither, and found that poor Prince in the most pitiful posture could
be imagined. He was fallen in a swound, or to say better, as it were drowned in
his own blood. His wounds were all open and the blood which came not out but
drop by drop, was a certain sign there was not much more behind in his
veins. His body was half out of the bed, and his arms and head almost
touched the floor. They judged he had done himself that violence, because he
held yet one of his swathes which because it was knit about his arm, fell not
with the rest. The King yet took no heed to it, for he was so transported,
that he could not utter a word. When the first astonishment was over, he
commanded the Chyrurgions to use all their art for Phelismonds safety, who
poor Prince lay all that day without any sign of life. The King in the mean
time was extremely afflicted, and asked every one the cause of this new
disaster, but no body could satisfy him. The Chyrurgions, and servants told
him, that coming into the Chamber to dress Phelismond, they found him in that
deplorable manner. The King began to weigh what might cause this affliction,
and could attribute it to nothing but his own generousnesse.

I will (said he then) save Phelismond, though I never receive satisfaction,
nor contentment. After these words, he set himself at his beds head, and
stirred not thence till he heard him sign, and thereby gave hope he had some
life in him. Half of the night was spent ere the King retired, and yet slept
not, but sent hourly to know in what estate Phelismond was. He was at the
extremity the first three days, nor was he much better the four following,
and so lay betwixt life and death till the seventh. As soon as he began to
speak ought at all, the King asked him the cause of his violence on himself.
'Twas the fear of displeasing you (said he) and if your Majesty think it not
fit that I importune you again, it is in vain for you to endeavor the saving
my life. He so often repeated the same discourse, that he made it appear he
was earnestly resolved to dye or to free Polexander. And the King howsoever,
fearing to lose so incomparable a Successor, resolved absolutely to give him
that satisfaction, without which he saw there was no means of curing him. He
came then in person to visit Polexander, and could with much dexterity color
his rashness, that our Hero confessed he deserved to be far worse dealt
withal then he was. The King embracing, and calling him his Son, said a
hundred times that he rep^ted of what had passed; but that the circumspection
of his authority, and the ordinary mutining of his Subjects permitted him not
to do otherwise. That he was not ignorant how far the promises of Kings should
be inviolable, and principally when they were made to Princes. But that he knew
withal, that the Law of Nations gave no security, nor exempted from any rigor
in strange Countries, the greatest Princes of the Universe, when they came
thither concealed, and would not be esteemed for what they were. This being so
(said he) you will grant with me we are both equally in fault. You for not
making known your quallity, and I for being too quick with you. After
Polexander had heard him speak so judiciously, he replied, 'twas he alone that
was in fault, and therefore asked his pardon, and humbly besought him to
believe, that had he not been compelled by a necessity more urgent then all
kinds of considerations to fight against Phelismond, he had not so slightly
come to disturb the Court of so great a King: The Prince replied, he would not
dive into his secrets, nor engage him to discover them: But (said he) we trifle
too long, let us go visit Phelismond, and get him from that passion wherein he
lies, and render to him that quietness he enjoyed at the very time he knew you
were a prisoner.

With this he took Polexander by the hand, and lead him to the Palace.
Alcippus and Diceus went out with him. When the King of Denmark was returned
to his Court, he retooke Polexander, and leading him to Phelismonds bed side;
see here (said he to him) your friend, whom I have (my self) been to fetch to
you. I will not relate to you the apparent alteration Polexanders presence
wrought in the incomparable Phelismond. He wept for joy, and found not words
enough to express his exportation. His Rival he called the second cause of
his life and his honor, acknowledged by an excess of humility that all the
honor of the combat was due to him, asked his pardon for his ill treating
since, and assured him, his King had been forced by very great reasons to cause
him to be stayed. Whilst Phelismond was thus talking to him, the King made
diverse turns in the chamber, and after he had long mused, he came to
Phelismond, and asked if there were any thing else to be done to content him.
Phelismond took hold of his hands, and transported with joy, raised himself
half way up in his bed to thank him.

Phelismond (said the King) take heed your joy bring you not into the same case
your grief had reduced you. That which is to be done by you and your friend,
is to consider how you will live your selves hereafter. For my part, I promise
you both that I will follow your intentions, and in all you desire there shall
neither be found difficulty, nor delay. The two Rivalls thanked him with an
equal resentment, and Polexander for his particular entreated him to be
pleased he might speedily return to the Canaries. The King replied, he was at
his own liberty to do what he pleased, and when he had a mind to depart he
would furnish him with men and shipping. Sir (said Polexander) since your
Majesty will so much favor me, I beseech you humbly to do it entirely. I came
into Denmark with a Gentleman and a servant, and I desire (if it please you)
to return so.

You shall do as you list, replied the King, and find in Denmark as many
friends, and as much observance as in your own Territories. These complements
ended, Polexander resolved to be gone as soon as he could, to the end he might
return again to his wonted and unprofitable inquiry. Phelismond showed an
extremity of grief to see him so near leaving him, and did all he could
possibly not only to retain him, but to persuade him that his Master bore him
a great deal of affection. Phelismond (said Polexander) I will not contradict
those reasons, whereby the King your Master may justify his act, nor I assure
you will I ever complain of it. For your self, believe it, you never have had
a servant or a friend, whose love has been more true then mine. Alcidiana
shall know (if I can possibly) your value, and her aversion cannot be of that
force but it may be surmounted by the infinite number of your virtues, when
they shall once be made known to her.

When Phelismond heard his Rival speak thus, he raised himself to embrace
him, and when he was as it were glued to him, made this answer. I know what I
owe you, and am not so much an enemy to true honor, to fancy to my self I can
partake with you of any in our combat. It is entirely due to you Polexander.
Go then and gather the fruits of it, and (if you please) assure Alcidiana, that
the fortune of arms having confirmed the sentence of death she has pronounced
against me, I will not fail to execute it my self. If I took time to do this
execution, it is for no other cause but to serve her in that person, which of all
the world should be most dear unto her, and to undergo the longer time the
penance for my offense committed, in daring to adore her without being first
worthy. Phelismond (replied Polexander) if the greatness of your courage, were
not known to me as it is, I should hardly suffer a discourse that wrongs the
wonderful actions of your life. Live happily, and do not so great an injury
to our great Princess judgment, as not to expect from it a recompense
proportionable to your deserts. Hitherto you have not been so well treated
only because you were not known. But when Alcidiana shall understand what
Phelismond is, and hear it even from the mouths of such whom she cannot
suspect, assure your self she will change her opinion. Grant me then the
request I am to make you before your separation, and it is that you intend you
recovery, and be not transported to any despair, till you have received a new
command from Alcidiana; it you do otherwise, I denounce on her behalf, you
shall not only offend her virtue, but demonstrated by your own disobedience
you never truly loved her. To how many new Tortures (answered Phelismond) does
your request engage me? But I refuse nothing (said he) raising his voice, since
it is for the honor of Alcidiana, and the increase of her renown. Yes, you most
generous man on earth, I will punctually observe what you p^escribe me. Yet (if
you please) it shall be on condition that I may enjoy your company yet for
three days. Polexander granted it, and unable to be wearied in the admiration
of his valor, continued with him the time he desired: During which, they
almost spoke of noth^ng but the virtue and beauty of Alcidiana, of the
impossibillity of getting to her Island, and the number of Lovers her pictures
had acquired her in all parts of the world. This intertaining had not ceased,
but that by the King of Denmarkes presence it was often interrupted.

At last the three days being expired, the business was of taking of leave.
Phelismond, though ex^reamely weak, went out of his chamber to do his Rival
the more honor, and wished a happy succe^e as well to his love as in his
voyage. The King came betwixt this Farewell, and showing a great deal of grief
for the departure of his second P^elismond (for so he called Polexander)
promised to preserve preciously in his memory the voyage he had made into
Denmark, but principally, because of his happy success. This said, the three
P^inces made mutual promises, and reciprocal presents, and the two Danes
accompanied the Canarian to his ship. The Pilot unwilling to lose a North wind
that was so good for him, left the Coast of Zeland, and in a little time got
into the Germane Sea.

The End of the fourth Book of the Second Part.
THE SECOND PART OF POLEXANDER. The fifth Book.
OUR Hero, over-joyed at his happy fullfilling of Alcidiana's command, sailed
through the vast extention of the Germane sea, and driven by a wind, which
Love seemed to fan with his own wings, forsook the unhappy climates of the
North, to return to the delicious countries of the South: and, seeing himself
so much smiled on by Fortune, he conceived no thing less then the infallible
hope of quickly finding the inaccessible Island, and in his complacency with
himself, durst even promise to him the possession of Alcidiana. This
contentment, though imaginary, too pleasingly deceived him for not incensing
the Demon which had resolved to cross all his happiness. He was therefore
troubled from the first days of his navigation, for as he entered the Sleeve
which separates France from England, he was like to have been lost, by meeting
with an adventure extremely tragical. A contrary wind stopping him right
against Calice, he was forced to aleere up and down a whole night, to avoid his
returning back again: As he was in this troublesome exercise, a ship, driven
by the fury of the wind, struck against his, yet so fortunatly, as he
received no other hurt then the bruising the side of his ship. This shock,
awaking the most sleepy, made all think on more then was betided: Polexander
would needs know who 'twas that so secretly assayl'd him, and therefore
commanded his Pilot to make after. At daybreak they descryed the adverse ship,
and presently came up and laid her aboard. Our Hero was the first that leapt
into her; but he was amazed when he saw naught there but an horrible solitude.
Never was there presented on the sea, though it be the theater of prodigies and
novelties, any thing so strange as the spectacle which astonished him. When he
was come so far as the maine mast, he saw a most fair Lady, richly clad, tied
to it by the hands and the feet; before her were four posts, on which were
nailed the heads of four men, so fresh, that it might easily be guessed, they
had not been long severed from their bodies. The miserable spectatresse on
these dreadful objects, pitifully turned her eyes now on one, and then on
another of them; and though Polexander presented himself before her, she
interrupted not her mournful exercise. The Prince, noting her admirable
beauty, even through her afflictions and tears, was extremely moved to see her
in so deplorable an estate; and imagining, because of the neernesse to France,
she might understand him if he spoke French; told her in that tongue, that
he was come to offer her all his utmost ability, either for her consolation,
or revenge. The poor distressed Lady made no show of hearing him, but kept
still her eyes fixed on the distruncked heads. This attention and fixednesse
doubled Polexander's astonishment, and commanded some of his followers to go
into the Cabines and descend under hatches, to see if there were any that might
understand him. Alcippus and Diceus searched every where, and neither finding
any one dead or alive, returned, and assured the King their Master, he should
learn nothing of that adventure, if he had it not from the mouth of the bound
Lady. He therefore came again to her, and employing the best words his desire
to make her speak could furnish him with; besought her to take heart, to think
of avenging her on the cruelty of her enemies, to make use for that revenge of
the assistance which heaven had sent her, and promise to her self from his
arm a part of the satisfaction which the resentment of her griefs ought to
make him wish for. He added many other considerations to these, and so pressed
the miserable woman that she cast her eyes on him, but in such a manner, that
a man might say, she saw him not: and after she had often sighed, Why (said
she sadly) come you again to fore-slow the end of my miseries? Are you sent by
that pernicious enemy, who has brought me to the extremity I am in, to the end
she may glut her malice in making me die often? Madam, (replied Polexander) I
know not the monster of whom you speak; and would your grief give you leave
to hear me, you should know, I come not hither for any other cause then to
free you from all your torments. Your generosity is great, (replied the Lady)
but it can avail me nothing, unless you could give back again the lives of
those unfortunate wretches whose heads you see here. I wish them their lives,
because I have been the cause of their deaths; and desire it, because they
would disapprove my most cruel enemy, and justify my innocence before a
Prince too credulous and too easy to be deceived. Polexander would feign have
insensibly drawn her on, and engaged her to relate him her fortunes, had he
not been hindered by the approach of a tall ship, which straight denounced war
against him: Our Hero therefore went back into his own vessel, (but kept
still the desolate Lady's grapled with his own) and made answer to the enemies
signs, by others, which stayed the fury of those which would have assaulted
him. Initantly they sent him one of theirs in a shalop, who coming up to them,
asked who he was, and for what end he had stayed the English ship. Polexander
made reply by Alcippus, he was a French man, and an enemy to those that would
not join with him in the avenging a Lady whom some accursed miscreants had
exposed to the mercy of the sea. When the Messenger heard that answer, he
replied with a great many injuries, and after diverse threatenings, he returned
toward his companions. No sooner was he got on board again, but they fell on
Polexander, and quickly repented them of their rashness; for our Hero, giving
them at two vollyes an hundred Cannon shot, brought them to implore his mercy.
Polexander, promising their lives, commanded the conquered vessel to come
near, and entering her, found there so few soldiers, that he was near to put
them to the sword, for daring to assail him; but at last his clemency getting
the upper hand of his resentment, he pardoned all; and seeing one of a better
aspect and presence then the rest, called him aboard his own ship: He asked
him in particular, why he would not accept of friendship when he had offered
it him, and what interest he claimed in the bark that floted before them. The
other humbly besought, that, before he replied, he would do him the honor
to make known whether the Lady in the other ship were yet alive: our Hero
assured him she was when he left her. Try then (said he) to get to her
again, that you may the second time preserve her life; for had you not broken
the design for which we set to sea, she had been, by this time, at the
bottom of the Ocean. Go then, go (if you please) and finish what you have
begun; and do not think, in succouring that unfortunate Lady, you do only an
act of Charity, for you execute likewise another of Justice. You will protect
innocence against Calumny; and a wretched, and disarmed goodness, against a
powerful, and redoubtable villainy. Polexander, unwilling to hear any more of
that discourse, till he had freed from danger the persecuted Lady, got her
bark again, which had but turned, and by consequence, was not gone far off.
As soon as he had her, he went aboard, and his prisoner with him, who
presently ran to the Lady, and making himself known, Be of good heart, Madam,
(said he) your innocence is acknowledged; the accusations of your stepmother
are found untrue, and the Prince, your husband, is even desperate for not
knowing how fortune has disposed of you. The Lady, by a modest smile, seeming
to be pleased with what was spoken, lifted her eyes to heaven, since she could
not her hands; and after she had some time kept them fixedly open, sweetly let
fall their lids, and drooped her head on her incomparable breast. Polexander,
thinking she was swounded, cut the cords from her arms, whilst the Prisoner
did the like to those on her legs; and when she was unbound, laid her all
along. Diceus presently came in, and looking on her, told his Master she was
dead. The King could hardly believe that ill news, but being confirmed by his
own sense, he could not otherwise then bewail the loss of that innocent
Lady, and wish from heaven a just punishment on her persecutors, which
instantly happened; And thus Polexander's mariners, descrying an English ship
bearing up to them, called out, they were like to be set on. Before our Hero
was disengaged from his pious and charitable endeavor, he saw the English
vessel fall fiercely on his. His Prisoner infallibly doubting the business,
My Lord, (said he to Polexander) let not the coming on of these men trouble
you, they come for her assistance who is not now capable of it; and if heaven
do not av^rt the sequel of begun mischiefs, I foresee yet more violent
ensuing deaths then the former. Scarce had he spoken these words, but he heard
most fearful and lamentable cries from the English ship; and presently after
saw a man of a good aspect, and middleaged, who violently drawing an old woman
by the arm, forced her to follow him. Come (said he to her) cruel, and
jealous mother; come and see the innocent Eolinda in those miserable torments
which thy calumnies have inflicted on her. Excuse not thy self by the excess
of love. Eolinda's afflictions are the product of thy envy and ambition. The
love thou feign'dst to bear me, is but a cunning and deceitful vizard, under
which thou have always hidden hatred to this innocent. Polexander, having some
glimpse (of what had passed) amongst so much obscurity, thought that the
English man who complained had need to be armed against those which the death
of Eolinda, and despair were about to throw on him. He therefore, with his
Prisoner, went to him, but before he could speak a word to him, the English
man perceiving the Prisoner, Altoph, said he to him in fury, what have they
done with Eolinda? My Lord, answer^d the other, and then pointed to Polexander;
he whom you see there had saved her from the rage of her executioners; and you
should have bin at the end of your afflictions, i^ heaven had not otherwise
disposed o^ her. How, cried he, is Eolinda then dead? Ah barbarous mother! O
inexorable heaven* and, in saying so, would have gone into the vessel where
the Lady was, for whom h^e lamented. But the old woman, whom he drew alter him,
resisting, he was forced to give a strong pull to make her follow him, and
when he had his foot on the side of the vessel, his heart failing him, he
fell down, his head foremost, between the two ships, and dragged his mother
after him. Every man did his best to save them, and to that end severed the
vessels. Some of the mariners leapt into the sea, though it was not altogether
calm, and search^d so well, that one of them coming from under water, lighted
on the English man's mother. Those that were gotten into the shalops, seeing him
come up, made to him, and took him in with his booty. But the taking her out
of the sea saved not her life, for whether she had hurt herself in falling, or
that her age had not ^rength enough to resist the harms she had received:
she died as soon as they had her into that Lady's ship, whom she had so
cruelly afflicted; for her son they saw him no more after his fall, he having
the happiness in his unfortunate end, not longer to survive his dear Eolinda.
Polexander grieved very much for his loss, because he judged by his actions,
(which he saw) and by the words he had spoken, that he loved much and was
very generous. This consideration giving him a desire to know his adventures,
he called his Prisoner, and told him, he should not return into England till
he had paid him his ransom: But do not imagine (said he) that I will have
an ordinary one; you must tell me the beginning of those things, of whose
lamentable end I have been a spectator. After he had thus declared his mind to
the English man, and saw him ready to pay his ransom in the coin he demanded,
he commanded his pilot to steer on his first course, and to all the English to
follow him. This order being given and presently put in execution, Polexander
shut himself into his cabin with his prisoner, and intimating his desire to
hear him, obliged the other to begin thus: Henry the Seventh, that now reigns
in England, is come to the crown, by ways which some hold very honorable,
and others very faulty. However, he was compelled to make the body of his
predecessor a staire to mount up by to his throne; and to ruin many great
families, not only to take from his enemies the power of making head against
him, but likewise to confer on his adherents such dignities and fortunes, as
were proportionable to the services he had received. He, whom you lately saw
buried in the sea, by these revolutions, being raised from an ordinary
Gentleman, to the degree of a Prince, and from a man much necessitated, to
immense riches, thought of nothing more then of giving his curious and
voluptuous senses, things fitting not only to satiate, but to keep them in a
perpetual appetite. Amongst all his passions, that of love was the most
violent: this torrent, which had beforetimes been restrained by two powerful
damms, travel, and necessity; having at last broke through them both, by the
assistance of wealth and peace, so spread it self beyond his bounds, that it
ran through all the English shires, and thence into France. For this Prince
enquiring after some beauty, on whom he might fix all his affections, was so
nice in his choice, that among the infinity of beauties which flourish in our
Isle, he thought none worthy of his perseverance. He therefore sent those, of
whom he made use in those plots of love, into Scotland, Germany, and France,
to choose him some beauty, not only of capacity to vanquish him, but to
continue also a long time victorious. They found not in Scotland, nor Germany,
any one from whom they could promise him that miracle. France was the place
which in the opinion of these new Judges of beauty, had wherewithal to content
the nicety of their Master. After they were come from the court into the
Provinces, they met with this rare and to be lamented beauty, whom inconstant
fortune, by an abhorred treason, deprived of an heart whereof she should have
been eternally victorious. But I speak not as I ought, Eolinda has lost
nothing of that glory which her charms had acquired her. You have seen her
depart the world with palms in her hands, triumphing over all calumny,
cruelty, and jealousy, and, in a word, over all those enemies who had plotted
her ruin. But I am too long in the relation of an adventure which cannot be
too soon ended. The English Prince's Negotiators sent him word, they had found
the Phoenix he had been searching in so many several countries. That how nice,
nay how loathing soever he were, he would approve of their choice, and even
find in it such rarities as his imagination could not figure to him. That the
beauty they had discovered was of luster, lively, and full of majesty; of an
age that had nothing of infancy, but the freshness, and sweet, and round
fullness; of an admirable wit, but mild, and obsequious; of an illustrious
birth, but by the mediocrity of her fortunes, ignorant of all pride and
insolence. At the only recital of these wonders, our Prince became
passionately in love: he burnt, he grew impatient, and would even have
abandoned the place he held near his Sovereign, to go testify himself to
that visible Angel, with what flames of love she environed him without the
seeing her. But those who had power over his inclination, and principally his
mother, restrained his first agitations, and strove even to smother this
growing passion. He grew angry at their remonstrances, and without neglecting
the respect which nature obliged him to preserve; he discreetly made known to
his mother, that love was a thing more imperious, and of greater power then
maternity. In brief, he wrote to his Agents they should make all necessary
overtures, but not engage themselves till they had sent, and he received her
picture. He was obeyed in it, and so conformably to his intention, that he
accused his Confidents of stupidity, or envy, for describing the fair French
Lady far less attractive then he found her. He presently sent them commission
to treat with the Parents of that beauty, and the conditions he proposed being
infinitely beyond their hopes, he was received with a great many thanks; and
the fair and innocent Eolinda being delivered into the hands of the English,
was soon after presented to her lover. I will not speak of his overjoyednesse,
his transports, and ecstasies, at the sight of that beauty. I cannot better
express the greatness of it to you, then in telling you it cannot be done.
Once the admirable Eolinda was brought to London, and received, not only by
private persons, but by the King and Queen, with so many tokens of estimation,
that she could conceive her happiness to be but a dream, or an enchantment:
Oh, how happy had she been, had she died in those fortunate times! Truly, for
her quiet sake it is to be wished it had happened then, but it had not been so
much for her glory: For the proofs of constancy, and generousnesse she has
since made evident to the world, (if we consider well of things) is the most
fair and noble part of her life. Within a little while of her arrival, her
marriage was celebrated, and that with such justs, turnies, maskes, and other
gallantries, as the Kings own was not more magnificent. You may well imagine
what the Prince's joy was for that day; 'twas incomparable, and followed by a
satisfaction which had lasted till this day, if it had been possible, a man
extremely in love, and exceeding knowing in the worlds corruption, had been
capable of possessing, without jealously, a Lady so wonderfully desired. Yet
this poor Prince, (at least I will believe so) had been free from that cruel
fate in marriage, if even those, who were obliged to divert his suspicions, had
not fomented them. He had not been married a year, I speak according to mine
own account; for according to his 'twas not a day, when his mother who was a
Scottish woman, and who with her milk had sucked in all that could be of
hair-braind, savage, and cruel in Scotland, became jealous of the power of her
daughter in Law, and enraged with the diminution of her authority. She kept it
secret, or made it known but to her most particular Confidents: For to
undertake any thing against Eolinda, was to put her self to the hazard of her
own ruining; and in that this stepmother placed the height of her misfortune.
But after she had a long time undergone it, she resolved to quit her self of it
at what price soever; and falling into all those extremities whereto a wicked
woman is incident, intended either to perish her self, or to ruinate the
authority of her rival. In the mean time, this young Princess was admired of
all; desired of many, and served, but without her consent, by two young Lords,
who flattered themselves with the hope of winning her, either by the profusion
of their riches, or by the greatness of their services and constancy. They are
now dead, and I may therefore speak of them without being accused of flattery.
I will say then, take from their lives the fault of attempting against the
honor of a married woman, there could be naught found in them but exceeding
rare qualities and most eminent virtues. This unhappy love, which disturbes the
most perfect harmony, and makes desolate the most flourishing families, with
one selfsame arrow pierced the hearts of these two young Lords. They sighed
one grief, they burnt in one desire, they attempted one design, and yet
concealed that from one another, and never spoke of the disease which they
equally suffered. The youngest was an Earl of an high heart, daring spirit,
and so free an humor, that he, thought he committed an offense, not in
affecting any fair subject, but to affect it and not make it known. The
other, who was two years elder then he, was no less free and generous; but he
affected fame less then virtue, and so that he performed worthy actions, it
imported him not whether it came to the knowledge of any man or no. Being of
this humor, 'twas no hard matter for him to hide his passion, observe silence,
and keep that respect whereto Eolinda's virtue, and the quality of her husband
ought to oblige him. The one then by a prudent boldness, and the other by a
generous timorousness advanced unperceiveably his design; and let no day
pass without trying to make known to Eolinda there was in their civilities
something more then that which is spoken only by way of discourse, and comes
from franknesse of humor. She no sooner doubted of their intention, but she
dexterously avoided their converse, and behaved her self more coldly toward
them, then the agreeableness of the Court permits. But when she saw these
remedies were not strong enough to cure so great an ill; she feigned she was
sick her self, and was near two months from visiting the Queen, that her
long absence might heal those whom her presence had wounded. But it is
bootlesse to pretend by resisting to have the upper hand of generous spirits.
Those two young Lords perceiving that Eolinda's sickness was a disease that
might prove mortal to their affection, had recourse alike to preservatives and
special remedies. They prepared themselves to suffer for a long time, to
dissemble much, and to grow obstinate against all difficulties. They even gave
thanks to love, that in Eolinda they met with a virtue able for a long time to
exercise their great courage. On the other side, Eolinda believing they thought
no more on her, left her chamber, returned to the Queen (who could not almost
live without her) and came again with a luster which she had not before her
feigned malady. If the ordinary gallants did redouble their sighs at the sight
of this new Sun, imagine what the two true Adorers did. Their quality gave them
access every where where the King was, and their gentleness had acquired them
so much familiarity amongst the Ladies, that the Queen her self missed them as
often as they were not in her matches and associations. These privileges were
the cause why Eolinda could not avoid the occasions of seeing them. She must in
spite of her self endure it, or make it known, (and by consequence make a
noise) and she found no less peril in the one, then in the other. For on the
one side, she considered, that should she endure this research, without
disclosing it to the Prince, and he should come to the knowledge of it by some
other who might discover it, he would have just cause to believe she was very
well contented with it. On the other side, she represented to her self, that
in making show of her discontent, she should be the subject of all the Court
talk, give a fair pretext to all detraction to invent what it lift for her
destruction; and what more troubled her, she should engage the Prince her
husband in those broils, as could have none other then a dismal success. On
these considerations, she took a way, worthy a soul, high and fair as her
own. She resolved to endure all the extravagances, all the talk and prattle,
and all plaints of those two lovers, as long as they could be interpreted to
her advantage, and thought on but as the ordinary freedom of entertainment or
gallantry of young men. But if ever they happened to make known their love to
her, or to search for occasions to see her in private, she resolved with her
self to discover it to her husband. After this resolution for six months, was
she forced to suffer the follies of those two lovers. She heard them every day
sighing by her, she saw them blush, wax pale, and muse in beholding her, and
many times she was compelled to shift place, that she might not hear the
excessive praises which they gave her beauty. But heaven having denoted the
fatal point, where the misfortunes of so many illustrious personages should
have their beginning; the Earl broke his long observed silence, and, by
mischance, seeing Eolinda as she was going in to the Queen, stayed for her at
the going forth of that chamber where she was to leave her squire and women. He
intercepted her in the passage, and humbly besought her to accept of his
attending to the Queens privy chamber. She trembled from head to foot, seeing
her self in a straight which she had so often, and so carefully avoided: and
standing steadfast, was so some small time without walking and answering. The
young Lover interpreting this disquiet to his own advantage, thought he was no
indifferent man with the Princess; and to oblige her by his discretion not to
be frighted another time. I see well, Madam, (said he) I have committed an
incivility, in thinking to tender you a small proof of my most humble
servitude. I will do penance for it; and, to make it answerable to what the
greatness of my fault requires from me, I condemn my self to pass the rest
of this day, without the being enlightened by those fair eyes which only give
me sight and life. In saying so, he made her a great reverence, and so left the
interdicted Eolinda. The mother in law to the Princess, at the same instant
coming out of the Queens chamber, entered into that where our Lover took leave
of his Mistress: The dangerous Scottish woman saw the last complement,
perceived her daughters confusednesse, noted she blushed at her seeing her; and
when she came near, she found her so troubled, shamefaced, and confounded,
that had she bin less wicked then she was, she would not have forborne to
believe there were very particular intelligences between that Princess and the
young Earl. Presently she resolved to draw a great advantage out of that
meeting; and in her malice causing in her some thoughts of the Divinity, which
could not be other wise then as of a man as wicked as her self, she gave thanks
to it for what she had seen, with a prayer to be assisted in what she went
about to enterprise for the ruin of her daughter in law. The unfortunate
Princess being a little come to her self, would have made her some excuses,
but the abominable hagge spoke thus: Do not trouble your self to seek for
excuses, that is for me to do, for coming so unseasonably to trouble you: and
with that went her ways directly to her son, to give him, under pretext of
affection, the mortal blow which has so tragically made him expire before
you. He was not at home, and though the old woman sent on all sides to find
him, and to effect his coming her as speedily as he could: yet for that time
her devilishnesse had no success, and got not the Prince to swallow her
poison, till after Eolinda had strengthened him with an excellent Antidote. The
Princess seeing her self fallen into that misfortune she so long feared, did
nothing all the while she was with the Queen, but consult with her self in what
manner she might make that ill potion pleasing which she was to give to the
Prince her husband. Presently she turned her thoughts on heaven, implored
assistance from thence, and its testimony in so tender a business; and
petitioned to be from thence furnished with words which should be proper for
the confirming the Prince in that opinion he had continually held of her
chastity. She had no sooner made this prayer, but her agitations and fears
left her, her mind retook its former serenity, and as her face was sensible of
the troubles of her soul, so did it also resent the recovery of her quiet. She
was with the Queen all the evening, and was so pleasing in her conversation,
that her husband who came thither with the King, could not sufficiently admire
her sweet humor. The King and the Queen being retired, the Prince and Eolinda
did so too, and being come home, severed themselves for different businesses.
The husband entered his withdrawing chamber to dispatch his most urgent
affairs, and the wife into her Oratory to implore again assistance from
above; and petition for that powerful and necessary art whereby truth may be
believed by her greatest enemies. Whilst she was in this exercise, her husband
came into the Oratory: I know not (said he) what my mother would have with me,
she has sent five or six times, man after man, and intreates me to go to
her before I go to bed, about something that concerns me more then my life.
What do you think it should be? Eolinda, who was risen as soon as she heard
her husband, My Lord, (said she) I will tell you if you please; but since it is
a thing which should not be known to any but your self, be pleased I may shut
the door, that I may the more freely speak to you. The Prince did it
himself, and holding her between his arms, with as much joy as a covetous man
fixes his eyes on his treasure: Tell me (said he) this strange business,
and falsify it not, for fear you anger me: what bitterness soever there be
in it, I shall there find sweetness, since I have it from thy fair lips.
Eolinda considering the kind speeches of her husband, as so many witnesses of
that miraculous assistance she was to receive from the goodness she had
implored: took a cross which was on her deske, I desire (said she to him) to
lose that part of salvation which was wrought on that tree whereof this is the
figure, if in the matter you command me to relate, I either add or diminish
any thing for my justification. The Prince much astonished to see his wife at
the end of so blithe a humor to fall into an act so serious: Is it in good
earnest, or in jest (said he) that you have put on such an austere
countenance? Those things I make use of (replied Eolinda) are too sacred and
venerable to be employed for so profane an use. My Lord. I speak in earnest,
and I humbly beseech you to believe, the business is the most serious and
important that you ever had yet in handling. Without doubt (replied the Prince,
smiling) my honor is in question; my mother has discovered that Eolinda has
her gallants. Well, well, henceforward I shall take better heed to what
concerns me. Ah! my Lord, (cried Eolinda) if it be true that I am dear to you,
and that I hold of your heart by stronger bonds, then those of I know not what
you call beauty; I beseech you not to jest with that which regards your honor,
and to grant me at last the request I have so often made to you. What request,
replied the Prince? It Is, my Lord, that you would take me from Court, and draw
me by a most pleasing absence from thence out of a torment which every day
renewes it self. The Prince laughing now with a better heart then he had done,
I see then (said he) that I have divined it; and thereupon embracing his wife
again, Tell me (said he) who are your gallants and how many be there of them?
I will wait on them, and bring them to thee. Eolinda, that could not
understand this scoffing, got from her husband, and casting her self at his
feet, Do not make me believe, my Lord, that we are no more the same we have
been hitherto. Do me justice, examine my life and my offense, and throw me
not headlong by your indifferency from the top of all felicities, where your
only goodness had raised me. The Prince desirous to give his wife the
content she desired, grew to be serious in spite of himself, and granted her
all the audience she requested. Eolinda forgot not the least particularity of
her meeting with her lover, and her mother in law; and having related all,
would have fallen on long justifications. But the Prince her husband stopping
her, You are a fool (said he) and if respect could permit it, I would say that
my mother is not very wise. You both vainly trouble your selves, the one for
having too much experience, and the other for having too little. But I will
take order this trouble go no further, and get not to me. I confess, my Lord,
(replied Eolinda, sighing) I have but little experience; yet have I enough to
know that of the like sparkles which have not been quenched in their births,
there have proceeded such flames, that the least distrustful have been the
first involved in them. Never trouble your self about it (replied the Prince)
I will so well smother these, that they shall neither fear nor hurt you. Do you
so too, and suffer not a poor lover whom you burn so. -- He could not make an
end of his new gybe, for Eolinda put her hand on his mouth, and wept with so
much violence, as if her husband had made her undergo some cruel effects of a
true jealousy. He so left her to comfort her self at leisure, and went to his
mother, who after the long discourse to him of a cunning and scandalous old
woman, ended it by this pernicious conclusion: That that man has neither
honor nor courage, who suffers his wife to take those freedoms which may be
ill interpreted. Then she filled his head with examples of fore-passed times,
represented to him how much the present were perverted, how dangerous the
Courtiers were, and what a hard thing it was to preserve a great deal of
virtue, with a great deal of beauty. This discreet son gave his mother leave
to speak as long as she would; but when she was weary, and yet not satiated
with depraving the innocent Eolinda, in these few words he answered her: I
must needs take a liberty to me, which at first will not seem respectfull
enough to you. Yet could you retire into your self, and make your self
mistress of that choler which has as it were plucked you thence, you would
acknowledge my freedom to be very just. Be pleased not to interrupt me and
permit me to tell you, I never expected from a person, so filled with honor
and virtue as you, a discourse so declining, and so much an enemy to them both.
It Is the annotation, or sign of true goodness, to interpret all others
actions to the best sense; and not to believe them ill, till a long time after
there is no permission to doubt them so. But now, in lieu of calling to mind
who you are, and of observing those laws imposed on you by your own virtue,
you would become a slanderer, and instead of judging my wife by your self,
your judgment of her is no otherwise then if it had come from one of the
prattling gossips of the Court. If through too much love of me you have so
grossly erred, I beseech you to lessen some part of your affection, to the end
you may not hazard the making the like slips; and to believe, that Eolinda,
having you for her domestical example, will preserve always an infinity of
virtue, to accompany an extremity of beauty. The old woman growing mad at her
sons wise remonstrances wonderfully upbrayded him, reviled him, and threatened
him with her malediction, protesting she would never take any more into her
consideration either himself, or his affairs. The night will better advise
you, (replied the discreet Prince) I entreat you to be led by it, and when your
choler is over, to reflect on your self and me, that you may know who is most
faulty. In the mean time I bid you goodnight, and so presently went away. The
old woman, all enraged, being got to her bed, and unable to take any rest, by
reason of her rage and malice, which equally denied it her, spent the best part
of the night in devising new plots for Eolinda's destruction. When she laid the
ground of her abominable devices, she rejoiced with her self at her good
invention, and turning her thoughts on the small regard her son had to her
advertisements* His father did the like, (said she) the first time my enemies
would have made him jealous. But a little while after he made me know well
enough that he had swallowed the poison which in all appearance he had utterly
rejected. All manner of men, how generous and wise soever they be, nay, though
they have never so good an opinion of their wives, are apt to be caught in this
trap, if they be brought to it by a dextrous and cunning contriver. My son,
who now laughes at my advice, and would for a need turn Knight errant, to
maintain the honor of Ladies, shall not pass this night without thinking more
then once on the young Earl. He will represent him to his own thoughts, yet
more fair and gallant then he is. He will say to himself, that man leanes on
a weak prop, who trusts to the virtue of a woman; and I dare lose my life, if
the first journey he makes, he wake not in the night, to ponder on what may be
done at London; and going further on, My wife (will he say) may now do
somewhat else then bewail my absence. This accursed woman, having spent all
the night in these execrable meditations, arose with the Sun, and resolved the
same day to begin, and wholly betake her self to her (...) design. Scarce was
she dressed, when the Prince, her son, sent to know (...) she did, and to ask
leave to visit her. She had resolved before in the night to come in to him
again, because, without that good correspondency, she saw no means to ruinate
Eolinda. She therefore told her sons Gentleman, she should be glad to see
him. As soon as she heard it, he came to her, and accosting her with all the
excuses and submissions which a good son should make use of for the
satisfaction of those who brought him into the world, kissed her oftentimes,
and entreated her to forget that had passed, to pardon his quickness, and to
live lovingly with his wife. She ^eigned she had no grudge at all at her, but
that she loved the Princess as if she were her own daughter. To perfect this
reconciliation, she went and dined with her son, and so cunningly forced her
humor, that the innocent Eolinda overjoyed at the cherishings of the old
woman, thought her self at the height of her happiness. She related to her
with the sincerity of a pure soul, all the affliction she had suffered by her
to Lovers, besought her to be a means for their period by one way or other,
and to take that business into more consideration then the Prince her son had
done. The old woman seeing so good a beginning to her enterprise, doubted not
of the success; she therefore promised her daughter in law all her assistance,
assured her of her affection, and then changing her mind and discourse,
according as her malice prompted her, forgot what she had told her son the
evening before, and read to her daughter lessons of far higher licentiousness,
and Court gossiping. The innocent Lady blushed at the indiscretion of her
stepmother, and to let her know, that she was not so simple as not to discern
what the befittingnesse of her condition permitted, from what it permitted not:
I confess (said she to her) it is impossible to live in the Court as in a
cloister; we must be seen and talked withal whether we will or no. But it is
not fitting, that by the affectation of some gesture or ornament which is not
usual, we should draw on us the eyes of young men: For my own part, I have
ever been of opinion, that none can without blame, (though it be not done of
purpose) contribute any thing to the extravagancy of so many fools
wherewithal the Court is composed. The old woman perceiving Eolinda's mind
was not to be infected by the contagion of her maxims, sought for some spirits
less strong to corrupt them. She had preferred to her Daughter in law a
Gentleman Usher, and a Gentlewoman of her chamber, and thought those might be
very fit instruments to set her engines on work which she could not agitate her
self, without discovering her design. She therefore spoke to those two whom
she had gotten from the most savage of the highland Scots, that is, from among
beasts less rational then wild bores or bears; and commanded them to have
recourse to her as secretly as they could, to hear of such things whereby they
might in short time attain to great fortunes. Pantaira, so was the
Chamber-maide called, failed not the next day to be at the old woman's uprising,
and to make known her hopes solely depended on her, declaimed against the
French pride, and the imperious severity of Eolinda. The old woman, delighted
with these depravings, told Pantaira, that if she had been hearkened to, her son
had never fetched a wife from the enemies of her nation. But (said she) why do
not you speak to me of your Mistress subtility, as well as of her pride. She
does not think her self meanly fair, nor is she of those who neglect their
beauty to avoid the importunity of Lovers. Ah! Madam, (replied Pantaira) I have
something to relate to you of good importance on that subject. What? hastily
asked the old woman. It Is (answered Pantaira) a secret not yet vented. The
Earl of Lettidur is desperately in love with my Lady: I cannot tell you
whether she know it, but I may well say, he does his utmost to win me for
him, and solicites me by the best of my friends: he promises me what I would
ask, so he might have my service for him to my Lady, and deliver her his
letters. Thou would say, the Earl of Trinobant, replied the old woman.
Pardon me, Madam, (said Pantaira) it is the Earl of Lettidur, who, within this
year and half, is returned from Italy. The old woman entertaining with all
her heart this new occasion for Eolinda's ruin; And is that Earl (said she to
the perfidious Pantaira) so enamoured on thy Mistress? He is so far gone
(replied Pantaira) as he would gladly win her favor with all the means his
father has left him. He is continually prosecuting his intention; and when my
Lady is where he cannot see her, he presently comes to my friend; and never
comes thither but to discourse of his love, and to oblige her by his gifts to
persuade me to serve him. That woman is become rich with his presents within
two or three months; and but for the fear of disobeying you, I had had a good
share in his liberalities. Thou have done well (said the old woman) in not
engaging thy self in that commerce without my knowledge. But now when it is
behoovefull for my sons satisfaction, that we know all the Earl of
Lettidur's intention, deal boldly with him, promise thy service, let him see
what credit thou have with thy mistress; in a word, take all he will give thee,
and make him hope he shall possess all he can desire. After she had so well
instructed the chamber maid, she dismissed her; and the very evening of the
same day, finding a convenient time to speak with Eolinda's Usher, Lycambus,
(said she) I begin to complain with thee, for the small benefit accrewes to
thee from thy service: had I thought my daughter in law would have done no more
for her servants, I had been more wary of taking thee from thy former place, to
make thee loose thy time in serving so ill a mistress; but there is an occasion
presents it self, wherein, without being beholding to her, thou may raise thy
self an honest fortune. I will assist thee in what I can, and promise thee
withal, the same from my son. Be then thine own friend, hazard thy self for
thy advancement, and make use of the means I will show thee. The Earl of
Trinobant is extremely in love with thy mistress, and has an intent to employ
thee in his suit; my son knows it from a good hand, and inasmuch as he is
confident of thy fidelity, and that it much imports him to know all the Earls
pretentions: he desires thou would prevent him, and handsomely go offer him
thy service. Fit thy self therefore to make good use of this occasion, obey
punctually thy masters commands, and work those furtherances which may be
necessary for thee to screw thy self into the Earls trust, and confidence.
Lycambus who had no more brains then a horse, never thought of asking time to
give an answer to her propositions The first thing he took hold on was that of
gain; he grew dazzled with the luster of his approaching fortune, and scarce
being able to contain himself in his excess of joy, was like to express the
height of it by throwing his arms about the neck of the old woman. She
hindered that brutishness, and told Lycambus he should yet have more then he
expected, provided, he were vigilant, ready, faithful, and above all extremely
secret. Lycambus laughed at these conditions, as at things which were easy to
be performed, and so returned to his mistress, with a firm resolution to bet ray
her as soon as possibly he could. In the mean time the innocent Lady believing
she had fully justified her self and shut up for ever those winds, which are
wont to trouble the calmes of wedlock, sailed securely on an unfaithful sea.
And enlarging her self from her usual severity, at the entreaty of her
husband, and counsel of her false mother in law, took delight in tricking her
self, and to make it appear that the French beauties are not paralleled but by
themselves. She was the glory of the English court; and acquiring still new
charms by the quietness of her mind, and the extreme love of the Prince her
husband, made as many conquests, as there were sensible hearts. But amongst so
many different passions, there were none like those of the two Earls, their
desires increased every moment, and their impatiency made them have recourse to
the most extraordinary remedies, to get them some little lessening of pain in
so great a malady. Pantaira and Lycambus following the order prescribed,
offered themselves to these sick men, and so highly extolled the goodness of
their drugs, that they sold them at their own price. Pantaira, receiving at
first a quantity of jewels from the Earl of Lettidur, took a letter he had
written to Eolinda, and promised to deliver it to her. I dare swear she durst
not so much as name him to her, much less deliver his letter. Yet she made
that Lover believe, it was received and read with a sign of affection, and by
the answers she made him her self by word of mouth, obliged him to write above
a dozen; all which she showed to the pernicious old woman, and by her counsel,
hid them in the bottom of a cabinet wherein Eolinda's jewels lay. On the
other side, the Earl of Trinobant believing he had found a treasure in
acquiring Lycambus friendship, wholly reli'd on him; and indeed he was so well
served for his money, that Eolinda went no where but he had notice of it. 'Twas
to small purpose her seeking out the Churches least frequented for fear of
meeting him, for being betrayed by her Usher, the Earl was always there
before her, She could not make a visit, but she there met the same displeasure,
and if by chance she escaped his importunities, she was sure to be persecuted by
those of the Earl of Lettidur. Who, poor abused Lover, imagining (according
to Pantaira's assurance) that she affected him, oftentimes would let slip some
words, and entreat Eolinda not to treat him worse in public, then she did in
private. She that was far from understanding his speech, could not but be
offended at it, and told the Earl one day, he wronged such personages as were
powerful enough to make him repent of it. I have done, (replied the Earl) and
since you are so scrupulous, I will not take the boldness to entertain you
any more, but by my usual mediator. Eolinda was as far from knowing what he
meant by these words, as by the former; yet she feared lest there were a great
deal of venom hidden under them: and as soon as she was alone with her
husband, renewed her complaints to him, and entreated he would go pass away
some months in a fair house he had some twenty miles from London on the side
of the River Thames; but he gave no more heed to her request now, then he had
done before. Yet, a while after, by the diabolical subtlety of his mother,
perceiving some commerce between Pantaira and the Earl of Littidur, and the
like between Lycambus and the Earl of Trinobant, he began a little to suspect,
not the virtue of his wife, but the perfidy of those two mercenary souls. He
therefore set a watch on their deportments, and since these watches had order
not to hide themselves from him, 'twas an easy matter for him to take them in
the manner, as he did Pantaira, coming out from her copesmate, who gave her a
letter which she had newly received from the Earl of Littidur. He read it, and
finding therein some passages, not only of one amourous, but of an amourous man
much beloved again; he was like to have cast himself headlong in the Thames,
on whose banckes he walked and read the letter: But he withheld, and would not
act so notable a folly, after he had made show of so much discretion. He kept
the letter, and commanded Pantaira to say nothing of what had betyded her on
pain of her life. When he was come home, he shut himself up in his closet,
and after he had a while suffered himself to be swayed by the impetuosity of
his anger, he recollected himself, and consulting as he had been
dis-interessed in a business of so great weight: I see not yet (said he) but
some light presumptions; for to believe a thing so beyond appearance, 'twere
not too much to have the testimony both of mine eyes and ears. I must not make
known my resentment, but to very good purpose, nor discover this secret to my
mother, but in case of extremity: For hating Eolinda as she does, she will
never leave till she have forced me to work her confusion. Let me reserve to my
self the knowledge of this matter, and not give that advantage to my enemies,
to publish to them my self, my weakness, and dishonor. In this good
resolution he abode some few days, and had power enough over his thoughts, to
disclose nothing of so intricate and perplexed a business. But Fortune, or
rather the Justice of heaven, which would deprive this poor Prince of those
felicities, for which he had been unthankful, let him fall into the pit he had
dug himself. The King, who had been informed by some of his spies, of the
Earl of Littidurs practices, told the Prince of it, and advised him not to be
so far a good husband, as not to take into his consideration the preserving
his royal house from dishonor. Imagine whether this counsel touched him to
the quick or no. He went straight out of the Palace, and walked toward the
Earls lodging, expressly to work him a mischief. 'Twas at twilight, and by
reason of the ill weather, there was no body in the streets. When he came
within twenty paces of the gate, he saw come out of it Pantaira's brother, who
betook him to his heales and ran away as fast he could. The Prince now
doubted no more of the loss of his honor. I must needs praise either the
wisdom or love he showed in so cruel a combination. He went to his wife, and
inventing some cause of discontent against Pantaira and Lycambus prayed her
very earnestly to dismiss them. Eolinda, who was the best mistress of the
world, took in hand the cause of her servants, and besought the Prince to tell
her wherein they had offended him, promised to reprove them soundly, and did
what she could to obtain their pardon. If they be so fitting for you (replied
the Prince) I will not discontent you so much as to put them from you, but you
shall do me a great kindness, if you could be without them. My L. (replied
innocently Eolinda) if I had brought those two servants from France, I would
presently have consented to their sending back again, for fear lest in
retaining them, I might be suspected of some ill correspondency: but since they
were preferred to me by the Duchess your mother, to have an eye over all my
actions, I fear their putting away; and that apprehension throws me at your
feet, to beseech you thrice-humbly not to put from me such people as are so
needful for my quiet. The Prince left her without making any answer; and that
grace which he had too long neglected, abandoning him in that fatal instant,
he lost with her all the virtues which bare her company. This unfortunate man
suffering himself to be carried away by his fury, and to be governed by two
passions alike blinded, made as many falls as he made paces, and one error
drawing on another, he came not to himself till it was to no purpose, but
altogether unprofitable for him to do so. In this case he went to his wicked
mother, who throwing brimstone into a fire already too much kindled, put him
forward to those extremities which shall for ever be the grief and opprobry of
England. This fourth Fury was not contented to have made him suspect the virtue
of his wife; but she would withal justify her accomplices, and said to that poor
Prince, how Lycambus and Pantaira were very excusable in their crimes, since
they had not offended but out of fear of disobeying a personage who in the very
instant of their disobedience, would not have failed to ruin them. This reason
had been of no validity, if the Prince's wisdom had been as at other times; but
in the blindness he was, it passed for a convincing argument. He returned home
thence, and made a mighty hurly-burly; and not desiring to see Eolinda, bur
only to afflict her, went to lie in the town, and stayed three days ere he
came home again. During that time, he was almost always with his mother, and
secretly sent for Lycambus and Pantaira, interrogating them, and learnt more
then he desired. The business was, how so many accusations could be verified;
and then his wifes cabinet of jewels was the most certain proof of them. He
sent to take it thence, broak open the lock, and found the Earl of Littidurs
letters in it. After so many evidences, believing there was no more doubt to be
made of his wifes dishonesty, he was so imprudent, that he never so much as
asked those wretches how long it was since Eolinda had been engaged in
affection to those two Earls; what favors they had obtained from her, which
of them was best loved, where was their usual meeting place, or at what times
they met together, and many other the like particularities, which all had
served for Eolinda's justification. But the hour of his miseries was come: For
the punishment of his sins he must be imprudent, blind, and enraged. He
resolved with his mother to bring his wife to a castle of his by this seas
side, on one side Dover; and to that end he went the next day to take leave of
the King, who liked not the suddenness of his departing. Yet he would needs
follow his own brain, and all the supplications Eolinda could make, were not
able to obtain any thing from that furious man. When he was come to his house,
he shut up his innocent Lady in a chamber, whose windows on all sides were
grated with iron bars; and keeping her there two or three days, he came at
last with his mother to see her. He threw the Earl of Litridurs letters to
her, and, Regard them well (said he to her) thou infamous woman. Your sport is
found out, therefore ask me no more the cause of my anger. Eolinda opened the
letters, read some of them, and not divining from whence they should come,
because they were not signed: My Lord, (said she to her husband, with her
wonted moderation) have these papers any thing common, or in relation with or
to my disgrace? From whence come they? To whom are they directed? Why do you
show them me? See (said the old Duchess to her son) how cunning she is! O,
how well she is versed in her trade! Madam, (replied Eolinda discreetly) I know
you are my accuser, do me the favor not to be my Judge too. The furious
Prince causing his wife to be silent, by a cruelty beyond example, Thou have no
other accuser then thy crime, (said he) nor shall thou have any other Judges
then my mother and my self. Answer us therefore without any falsification, and
tell us what privancies you have afforded your Gallants. There is no other way
to save thy self but that confession. My Lord, (replied Eolinda modestly) is
it possible you should believe that which you ask me? But art thou thy self
so impudent (answered the Prince) to make me that question, seeing so many
witnesses which accuse thee of that crime whereof thou feignest to be ignorant?
If these be the witnesses which accuse me (replied Eolinda) they are false
witnesses, for we never had acquaintance with one another. How, wretched woman,
(said the Prince) can thou deny that the Earl of Littidur writ thee these
love letters? At the words Eolinda gave a great shriek, and melting into
tears: But rather, my Lord, can you possibly believe it? If you have but only
suspected it, Eolinda is then no longer innocent; she has done worse then that
whereof you accuse her; she has prostituted her self; she has lost her
honor, and deserves not to live one quarter of an hour longer. This was all
she said then, and since that time, for all their threatenings, and all the
tortures presented to her, she never spoke but once when the Prince came to her
chamber. Two or three days after this cruel proceeding, that unfortunate
Prince was informed that the Earl of Trinobant was abroad in the country with
a great many of his friends, and the Earl of Littidur, disguised like a
Fisherman, had passed in a barque diverse times under the castle. This news
startled him, and made him look as well after his own preservation, as well
as the ruin of his pretended adulterers. After he had meditated on diverse
evasions and was to avoid that mischief, he found none better then to force
Eolinda to write to them; and under a pretext of an amourous appointment, to
make them fall into the trap where he desired to catch them. To give more
color to this assignation, he sent back his mother to London, and putting his
wife into the custody of an old gentleman, who had always very faithfully
served him, prepared himself to return to Court. He took horse at full noon
with all his household, but at the first lodging he feigned himself sick, and
put one of his Confidents into his bed to amuse the world. In the mean time he
got on one of those admirable gueldings which will run you some hundred or six
score miles in ten or twelve hours, and so in two and an half returned to his
house. At daybreak he came into Eolinda's chamber, where he found her at
prayers at her beds feet. As soon as she saw him she arose, came toward him
with such a respect and meekness as would have moved the heart of the most
barbarous man alive; and falling at his feet, My Lord (said she to him) I hope
much since I and you are alone in this chamber. Thou must (said he rudely) obey
me, if thou will hope with reason. I never had any other intent (amourously
replied Eolinda). Hear me then (said her husband) and bethink thy self well of
the answer thou will make me. The Earl of Littidur and the other of Trinobant
are not far hence, and without doubt, are come upon some advertisement thou
have sent them. If thou will save thy life thou must write to either of them
according to my mind; but do not look to be much entreated, for I condemn
thee either to write to them or die. My Lord, (replied Eolinda) I do not fear
death, since it is the certain repose of innocent creatures: but had I
committed that treason, which my enemies have constrained you to allege, I
should be so faulty, that I would think my self worthy all the torments
prepared for the damned. Ah impudent woman (cried the Prince) what yet more
testimonies of thy incontinency? I endure these injuries (replied Eolinda
sweetly) because heaven has given you all authority over me; but since I am
not thereby commanded to obey you, when your commands are offenses, be pleased
that for this time I may be disobedient. Thou must then die, said the
unfortunate Prince. I am ready prepared, (replied Eolinda) strike bodly, my
Lord, (said she) modestly opening her breast, I will receive the blow without
fear, and bless the hand that gave it me. I will have thine own to be the
executioner (said he:) That is not yet permitted me (replied Eolinda:) besides,
it would give you the greater satisfaction if you your self avenge your honor,
since you believe I have wronged it. These words penetrated the hardness of
the unhappy man's soul. In that very moment he remembered what he had been
before-times. The standish and poniard which he held, fell out of his hands,
and pitifully looking on her, Would to heaven (said he) thou were innocent! I
am so, (she replied) yet I deceive my self: No, my Lord, I am not, since you
have been capable of mistrusting me. The unfortunate Prince, not deserving the
grace of coming to himself, departed the chamber, overcome, but not persuaded.
He locked her up, and keeping about him the keys of the door, went to walk in
his Park, to deliberate on what he should lastly resolve. As long as 'twas day
he did nothing but go and come, and was above thirty times to see what Eolinda
did, through a little hole in the door, and found her still on her knees,
holding her eyes and hands toward heaven, and understood plainly once that she
begged thence a pardon for her persecuters, and that it would have commiseration
on her husbands error. Those words almost wrought that miracle which she would
have requested from heaven; and the unfortunate Prince began to be himself,
when his wicked mother arrived, according as they had agreed at parting. He
told her what he had done, and alleged the new doubts Eolinda's words had
wrought in him. The abominable hagge sharply reprehended him, to suffer
himself to be so easily seduced; and to confirm him in his former resolution,
said, That it behoov'd him to send Pantaira and Lycambus to the two Earls,
that by the success of their voyage, he might draw the last manifestation of
his wifes incontinence. Those two wretched agents were hereupon sent, and so
well instructed by the old woman, that for the further misery of many
innocents, their journey took alike effect. Lycambus met with the Earl of
Trinobant, and propounding to him the facility of delivering his mistress, and
by consequence, of enjoying her; he won him to hazard himself in that
enterprise, with all the rashness of a man very young and very valiant. The
brutish high-lander conducted him even to the place where his master lay in
ambush to surprise him: where he was enwrap'd overloaden with cassockes and
cloakes, gagged, and so led away to the Castle. The Earl of Littidur, with the
same easiness was taken in his fisher-boat, and as unworthily handled as his
rival. They were presently shut up in two chambers, and severally examined by
the Prince himself. They confessed they were to blame, and had no other excuse
for their offense, but the extreme beauty of Eolinda, and the tyranny of love.
But the Princess (said they both) had other means enough to free her self of
us, without blemishing her virtue by so base a treason. She needed but have
made known the aversion she has always had to us; (though some traitors have
told us the contrary) and we would have shown to her by a fair death, that our
lives were less dear to us then her favor. You shall neither of you save your
selves by these crafty excuses (said the Prince). Confess your crime, if you
will have pardon. Our offense (replied they, each one in particular) is already
confessed. We do infinitely love Eolinda, and would willingly give our lives to
have some small part in her good opinion. It has not cost you so much
(answered the Prince). Therefore prepare your selves to wash away with your
bloods the stain you have thrown on the house of your King. We dare die (said
those unfortunate illustrious Gentlemen) but we protest to you for the
discharge of our consciences, that if the intention be not a crime worthy of
death, we shall die innocents. The most condemnable Prince, having lost all
humanity with his reason, and being truly possessed with the Devil of blood and
fury, which served for a soul to his mother, hastily resolved the death of
those young Lords; and brutishly had them ponyarded by four Irish men. After
this execution done, he would have gone to the innocent Eolinda's chamber,
either to have cut her throat, or done her some other bloody indignity; but as
he was in a place of the stairs, whence you might see Eolinda's chamber door,
he heard somebody call him by his name, and forbad him to go further. He cast
up his eyes and saw in the door of that chamber a young English Gentleman of
his household, who with his sword and pistol in hand, threatened him to throw by
all respect if he came any nearer. The Prince asked him the cause of his
extravagancy. Ask me rather (replied the generous Englishman) the cause of my
just resentment, and I will tell thee, blind and enraged Prince, that I am here
to protect, as far as my life can, the innocent Eolinda, against the
persecutions of thy wicked mother. The Prince threatened to have him punished
according to his desert, and commanded two of his murderers to seize on him. A
great Irish villain stepped forth with a partisan in his hand, but when he came
within a few paces of Eolinda's generous defender, two pistol bullets stopped
his journey, and roul'd him to the bottom of the stairs. His fellow,
believing that the brave Englishman had no more fiery weapons, furiously came
up toward him, with an intent to strike him through with his halberd, but he
had not time to perform that brave thrust, for he received a like chastisement
with his companion for the like offense committed. They perceived then the
valiant English man had forgotten nothing of what was necessary for his long
defense. Indeed, he had yet three pistolls charged, and was so advantageously
placed, by reason of the thickness of the wall that he could not be set on but
before. The Prince would have obliged the two other Irish men to revenge the
death of their companions, but they would do nothing unless they had pieces:
They therefore brought them two long fowling pieces, and the villains
discharged them both on Eolinda's courageous martyr. O heaven (quoth he,
feeling himself shot in so many places) receive my soul and my life, which I
have freely exposed for the defense of virtue! and with those words fell down
dead; yet, for all that remained vanquisher: For the unhappy Prince, having had
leisure to bethink him of the execrable murder he would have committed, or else
withheld by the last words of the heroical English man, returned from whence
he came, and told his cruel mother he would never kill one whom he had so
much affected. The damnable hagge, after she had some time grumbled, told him,
he worthily deserved his dishonor, since he took pleasure in preserving the
cause of it. The Prince, offended with this reply, entered the great hall of his
Palace, and the first that came before him was the execrable Lycambus, who very
likely came to demand the reward for his treason: And art thou there then, thou
infamous and perfidious slave, by whose assistance I have lost mine honor and
comfort? The miserable Scot cast himself at his feet, and the Prince, taking
him by his long hair, dragged him about a great while, and then (with a bro^ad
sword that he had) stroke his head from his shoulders. The traitor, to save his
life, would have accused the old Duchess, but before he could speak a word,
there was neither speech nor life in him. The Prince then called for Pantaira,
but she was so close hidden, that it was impossible to meet with her. His
mother seeing him in such a fury, asked him if he could not distinguish between
the guilty and the innocent: You should discharge your choler (said she) on
that lascivious French woman, and not on those wretches who durst not disobey
her. Never doubt it (said he) Eolinda shall have her punishment with the rest;
but it shall be so, that no one whosoever of mine shall besmeare their hands in
the blood of that miserable woman. Presently, his wit furnishing him with a new
kind of punishment, he commanded that barque to be made ready, wherein you saw,
the innocent Eolinda die, and cutting off the two Earls heads, and that of the
charitable English man, made them to be nayl'd (with the other of Lycambus) in
that manner as you saw them. Then went he into Eolinda's chamber, and though
she fell into a swound at his entrance, yet he caused her to be carried into
the vessel, and set her in the same posture you found her. That done, he
commanded all his followers out of the barque, the sails being all hoys'd, and
towed her into the open sea by two shalops, and then abandoned her to the mercy
of the winds. See a great many tragical events, yet am I not at the end of
all; for scarce was the Prince got up again into his chamber, when Pantaira
(it may be repenting she had been the cause of so many murders) came to him,
and beseeching him to hear her, confessed, that neither Lycambus nor her self
had done any thing but by the command of his mother. Protested boldly, that
Eolinda never knew ought of their practices, nor done any thing misbeseeming
the virtue and honor of a most chaste Lady. That she had never seen, but in
public, any of the two Earls; and that the letters which were found in her
cabinet, had been conveyed thither without her knowledge, and that she had
never seen them. She had told more but that the old Duchess flew on her, and
in the fury she was, would have strangled her, if she had not been taken out of
her hands. The Prince in the mean while, filled with horror at what he had
heard, reflecting presently into himself, What have thou done, (cried he)
unnatural mother? I now doubt no more, Eolinda is innocent! and with those
words fell into a swound, and had not I borne a part of his fall, he had
infallibly broken his head against the floor of his chamber. We laid him on
his bed, and whilst his faithful servants bewailed his misfortunes, and strove
to recover him from his fainting his wicked mother caused Pantaira to be
strangled, and sent to make ready a ship of war which lay in the rode, with a
secret order to her most Confidents to make after Eolinda, and to throw her
into the sea. All this could not be done presently. In the mean time the
Prince recovered his spirits, and spying me at the head of his bed: Altoph
(said he) if my faults have not taken from thee that amity thou have always
borne me; go quickly, and strive to save Eolinda. If thou bring'st me her not
alive, be secure thy Prince is dead. I presently went forth, not knowing where
to find a ship to go after Eolinda; but as I came out of the Castle, those
whom the old Duchess had sent to make an end of the innocent Lady, told me
the ship was ready, and if I would be of the party, I should follow them.
Though I was ignorant of their design, yet I took hold of the occasion, and
imbarqued my self with them, and understood the command they had, a little
before our mariners had descri'd your ships. I can tell you nothing of what
past betwixt the mother and the son after my departure; but by what has happened
in your presence from the one and the other it is very easy for you to imagine
how matters passed betwixt them. Thus the Englishman ended his mournful
relation, accompanied with many a sad tear. Polexander let fall some to the
memory of Eolinda, and having blamed the imprudency, and bewailed the
misfortune of the Prince, sent back all the English, and commanded his Pilot to
put off from the coast of England. If the notes which are left me of the life
of this great King, have been carefully written, there happened not to him any
adventure worthy to be published, from the coast of France, to those of Spain,
which are the nearest to Africa. But it is remembered how in that place he made
use of that incomparable valor, and greatness of soul, which had ever made
him triumph over all dangers, all fortunes, and even of death it self. He was
beset with above thirty sail of ships, which falling in upon him, without any
observance of the ceremonies used at Sea, assailed him so hotly, that he had
scarce time to put his men in case to defend themselves. He failed not to carry
in a combat so unequal the same majesty of spirit he was wont to show in his
other combats. But seeing no way of safety, he would at least dye in one of
the enemies vessels, and make himself a glorious tomb of their bodies whom he
had slain. Through sword and fire therefore he made up to the greatest
vessel, and grapling with her, leapt in, to make a terrible but chery of his
infamous affailers. He had no sooner put his foot into the ship, but he was
known by him that commanded her. Hold, cried the Captain to all, (he was clad
after the Turkish fashion) lay down your Arms, it is the King of the Canaries.
These words went from one end of the ship to the other, and flying from ship to
ship, all the fleet knew in an instant, they had been like to have ruined the
famous Polexander King of the Canaries. In the mean while, he who had first
divulged this verity, intimating to our Hero a great deal of joy: My prayers
are heard, said he, I have somewhat satisfied the obligations I owe your
Majesty. You once gave me my life, and I dare say, this day I have preserved
yours. For, I most certainly know, that at last you would rather have chosen an
honorable death, then an ignominious servitude. I am the same Hamet, whose
life you preserved in the presence of Bajazet, Iphidamantus and Zelmatida. Know
more Sir, you are here amongst your servants, since all of us know no other
Sovereign then the great Bajazet. Hamet (replied Polexander) this meeting is
so strange, that I can scarce believe what I see and understand. But tell me, I
prithee, where is Bajazet, and why lies his fleet on this coaste? Sir, (said
Hamet) my General is sick in his Island, and sick with grief that he cannot
recover the treasure he has lost, which if fortune and our diligence render
not the sooner to him, this Age will lose the rarest Jewel it has next your
Majesty; and chiefly to prevent that mischance came we to Sea. My companions
and my self have altered our condition, and suspending for Bajazets sake our
former trade, we are no more Pirates, but to get into our hands the fairest
women. We fly up and down to every place where fame tells us the most
beautiful are, and not dreading the hazard we run in so difficult and
fantastical an enterprise, we place out highest felicity in the preservation
of our Generals life. Since you parted from our Island, we have sent him twenty
of the fairest women of the world, but she whom he longs for is not among that
number. Two days since we took one in Portugal, who is certainly the rarest
and most wounding beauty can be looked upon. She will not tell us what she is,
and that makes us believe it may be the same which Bajazet desires. Hamet could
say no more, because ten or twelve of his companions came and did obeisance to
our Hero. He entertained them with a courtesy which charmed the most
barbarous, and by a brave speech, amplifying the fortune they had made him run,
told them, it was not without cause, their meeting was more feared on the Ocean,
then that of rocks and shelves. The Pirates answered this commendation as well
as they could; and the aged Achaim among the rest told him, it was far from
any intention of theirs to turn their forces against him, for (said he) we
have an express order from our General, to obey you as himself, and to
follow your Majesty in all occasions, wherein you please to do us so much
honor as to make use of us and our arms. It Is not yet fifteen days, since at
the sacred name of Polexander, we released one of the fairest ships we ever
took. She came from that inaccessible Island, whereof all the world talks,
and no body can see. The Pilot which guided her, a very venerable old man,
assured us, he came from the Island of the Sun to see you at the Canaries, and
impart very important news to you. At these words the blood flashed in
Polexanders face, and he felt a beating of his heart which was not usual with
him; and being not able to suppress this amorous emotion, entreated Achaim to
tell him, what course he had seen that vessel steer. We left her on the
coast of Morocco, (replied Achaim) and the Pilot told us they went then to the
King of Senega. Polexander had gone away presently, if his ship had been in
case. But she had received so many Cannon shot, that the highest sail or
top-gallant sail, the maine mast, and that which bore the sprits sail were
shattered; the maine sheet, and the greatest part of the yards were torn and
broken; the very body of the ship was shot through in many places; and it
required time to rectify all this, which Polexander was forced to give, in
spite of his impatiency. To divert him, Hamet propounded to his companions the
showing him their fair prisoner, and his advice being approved, Polexander
went out of that ship into the Rover Selims, and there into a Cabin where the
fair Captive was kept. He understood by Hamets discourse whence she was, and
therefore did all his complements in her own tongue, and so pleased her, that
to show what contentment she took in his company, she put in practice all the
best of her language. Polexander replied with his accustomed cool temper, and
told her, he thought himself very happy to be in place where he might do her
service. And I, replied the Portugal Lady, shall be more happy then you, if
after the recovery of my liberty by your means, I might carry yours with me
into Portugal. You are not charitable (said Polexander) in rendering evil for
good; but I see you sin out of custom, for it being so common a thing with
you, and so easy to captivate and make slaves, you think to do it still, even
during your own captivity. I confess (replied she) I do very much affect to
make captives, but desire from them nothing but good deeds; and that you may
have a desire to be one, I would have you know, that the great Emanuel King of
Portugal thinks it an honor to be in my fetters. Her freeness of humor and
talk lasted till night, so as if Polexander had not bent all his thoughts on
Alcidiana's Island, he would have found in his meeting with that Lady
wherewithal to have entertained himself with a great deal of delight. When
their first discourse was ended, and that those two excellent wits had begun a
more regulated conversation, Polexander besought the Portugesse to tell him who
she was, and by what mischance she was fallen into the hands of the Pirates.
She replied presently, I am the daughter of the Count of Ebora, my name is
Ximena, and by that denomination have acquired so much fame and glory, that
there is nothing neither in Portugal nor in Spain it self, which can be
compared to me. From my infancy I have been highly affected by Emanuel. He
has been inflamed for me as much as he could possible; and burns yet with the
same fire, so that had I not preferred his greatness before mine own, he had
lost (to have enjoyed me) far more then the Crown of Portugal. The very day
he was King, he resolved to divide with me that power to which my generousnesse
had raised him; but I loved him too well to give consent to my own advantage,
I opposed the reason of Sat to that of love. I told him, his fortune was but
begun, and to place himself at that point where he deserved to be, he should
marry the daughter and heir of Ferdinand and Isabell. This alliance which
might have brought him five or six Crowns, was at first word odious to him. He
called me his Crowns and fortune, and told me he was powerful enough, so he
might have the happiness to reign with me. This generous answer had overcome
me, if I had not yet been more generous. I commanded him to obey me, and at
last enforced him to marry the Princess of Castile. She has been his wife
two years, but in that time Emanuel is grown twenty years elder. He
eternally complains of that absolute power whereby I have thrown him into that
irksome slavery; and comforts not himself, but in the assurance he has that
the Queen his wife cannot long live. It Is above a month since I left my house
and came to lie at Court, to give some intermission to his afflictions. I went
to Lisbon, and was at the great feast which was solemnized at the departure of
the navall Army, which should have reconquered all the Canaries. Polexander was
about to have interrupted her at that word, to know what was become of that
fleet; but the power he had on himself, made him appear to her, as one to
whom an intelligence which so nearly touched him, had nothing at all concerned
him. Ximena therefore continuing her discourse. After the fleet (said she) was
under sail, I retired to a very fair Castle, which the King had given me,
some two leagues from Lisbone. I have seen him there often, and two days
since having sent me word, he would come to me by Sea, I got me into a little
Galley to go meet him. The night overtooke me on the water, and the calmness
of the air being as great as that of the Sea, I intended not to retire till
day break. But when I was come within a mile of my house, two Barks coming
from behind a rock set on my Galley, and being overcome, notwithstanding my
servants resistance, I was taken and brought where now I am. See in short all
that you desired to know. The name of the fair Ximena was known to me, said
Polexander, but I may well say, I knew not what I did know before I had the
happiness to see the fair Ximena her self. The King of Portugal is too
happy to have so winning and generous a Mistress, and were it not for fear to
offend the worthy subject of his passion, I would accuse that Prince of two
much reason and obedience. Of a truth Ximena is a fair piece of Nature, for
the honor of whose enjoying there is neither glory nor Empire which is to be
taken into consideration. This speech displeased not Ximena; and Polexander,
(after he had some time continued it) thus went on: I entreat the fair Ximena,
not to take in ill part my curiosity; I would humbly entreat her to let me know
what is become of that fleet which is gone for the Canaries. The news of them
is not good, replied the Lady; for the famous Polexander fights there though he
be absent. His Genius is, where he cannot be himself, and conquers for him in
those places where he cannot be in person. Besides, it is related that a Prince
of the new world, called Zelmatida, is (unhappily for us) in the Island of
Lancerotta, and defends it with so much valor, that our Soldiers have no
less esteem of him then of Polexander. To this they add, that within these
fifteen days, there is got into the Isle of Teneriffe, a Prince called
Iphidamantus; that he has already given two great on-sets to his advantage,
and knocked our troops back again to their shipping. You have well satisfied
my curiosity, (said the Prince) and it is but justice that Ximena should be so
too. After this discourse, he took leave of her, and went to the Pirates. He
told them who Ximena was, and entreated them to send her back to the King of
Portugal. You shall not (said he) lose her ransom, for I will give you a
hundred thousand cro^s as soon as we arrive at the Canaries. His last words
were very harmonious to the Pirates ears, and they all said to Polexander, he
might dispose of Ximena as he pleased, and that they forgave him her ransom.
No, no, (replied Polexander) you shall not if you please refuse me. But I tell
you, that sum is but the earnest of a greater payment. Yet, before I discover
to you what I conceal, I pray send back Ximena; Alcippus shall conduct her
into Portugal, if you will lend me but the least of your vessels. Hamet
offered his; and whilst they were providing to go, our Hero withdrew in
private with Alcippus, instructed him what he should say to the King of
Portugal, and appointed him to go thence to Fez and Morocco, and so to
Senega, if at the two first towns he heard no news of Alcidiana's ship.
Enquire (said he) every where for it, neglect nothing; and never think of
returning to the Canaries, if thou bring me not some good news, and I will
stay there for thee. Ximena understanding by those that guarded her what
Polexander had done for her liberty, gave him extraordinary thanks, and after
she had bid him farewell: I was not yet weary (said she) of being a prisoner in
the hand of so magnanimous an Enemy. Our Hero as bravely answered her; and
as soon as he saw her under sail, he sent to entreat Bajazets chief Officers
to come aboard him. They did so, and when they were come together: My
companions (said he) there is a fair occasion offers it self to enrich you.
The King of Portugal has sent a fleet to invade my kingdom. If you will set
on them, you are sure of their defeat. Let Us fly then to so certain a
victory, and by the great number of prisoners and vessels which cannot escape
you, make your selves more formidable then you are to all the force of Spain.
The Pirates all at once arose, and laying their hands on the guard of their
Cymeters, See, said they to Polexander, wherewithal to confirm the good
opinion you have of our courage. Let Us on then my Lord to these Portugals, who
are certainly lost if they dare to attend us. The Council being thus ended,
they thought on the means of rightly putting it in execution. Our Heroes great
ship was all new fitted in less then four and twenty hours, and all the rest
put in good equipage for fight. A favorable wind arising the second day,
Polexander and the Rovers set sail, and in a mavelous good order steered
toward the Canaries. They were six days ere they could see it; the seventh,
they descried the prodigious mountain of Teneriffe, and the eighth, they began
to distinguish the Isles. Polexander held a counsel of War in the fight of
his dear Country; and finding one same heart, and one same will in all the
Pirates, bore up right to his enemies. Did the copiousnesse of my subject
permit me to expatiate my self in the description of combats by Sea and Land,
of sieges, of assaults, of taking of places and vessels, of duels, of
considerable deaths, and other glorious adventures which accompany the act of
war: I should have in this war of the Canaries, sufficient matter to
obliterate the illustrious and proud events wherewithal the renowned Cities of
Troy, Thebes, Carthage, Jerusalem, or any else have furnished their Poets. But
I must smother all those brave acts; and besides, having consecrated my pen to
the honor of Alcidiana, I veyle without sorrow a part of Polexanders, his
brothers, and Zelmatida's. That which comforts me in the wrong I do them, is,
they praise my ingratitude, and had rather I should speak of their
misfortunes, then of their achievements. I will therefore imitate their example
in this war, and relate it with as much nimblenesse as they executed it. The
Portugals being advertised of the forces were coming on them, forsook the
great Canary, since they could not keep it without their own loss. They
dismantled in the other Islands the sorts which were not yet defensible, or too
hard to be kept, and leaving a good Garrison in the rest, shipped themselves;
to encounter Polexander, or at least wise not to have at one time their Enemies
both before and behind them. Our Hero trifled not the time, but put himself
in battalia within Cannon shot, and compelled them to forgo their usual
slownesse. The fight was bloody on both sides, but incomparably more on the
part of the Portugals, then Polexanders. I must needs express, to the praise
of the Portugals, that to know how many they were, there needed but to count
the dead and the prisoners. There was not a vessel saved, for all that were
aboard them had made a vow to overcome, or to dye. Ipidamantus and Zelmatida at
the noise of this battle, left their posts, got a shipboard, and coming
fitly in, performed so many heroical actions, that the least of their glory
was to come off victorious. The Pirates fought as people who were certain to
carry away all the booty; and indeed, though the recompense were great, yet was
it below their Service. The fight being ended, Polexander highly praised them,
and sent away that very day to Bajazet to give him notice of his victory, and
the hardiness of his followers. Zelmatida and Iphidamantus, who during the
battle, had often admired the incomparable valor of our Hero, (who had
likewise his eyes for witnesses of theirs) came up to him in the Port of
Teneriffe. Their joys, their civilities and praises were great and
reciprocal. Polexander oftentimes asked Zalmatida's pardon, for so long time
abusing his goodness; called him the Defender of the Canaries, and the
revenger of the growing slavery of his world. Zelmatida in lieu of an answer,
only sighed, and gave way for Iphidamantus complements. Polexander forgot not
to render that testimony he ought to his courage; and said aloud, that to be
master of his Art, he was bound to be taught by his younger brother.
Iphidamantus modesty hindered the continuation of that speech; and that being
done, they landed on the Isle of Teneriffe, and because it was that, wherein
the Portugals had most fortified themselves, he resolved to make there his
beginning of driving them out of the Islands. The Canarians were not idle,
whilst their Masters labored so happily for them. Some of them cut the throats
of their Garrisons; others went and assaulted the Forts which kept them in awe,
and those of the best sort came to the three Princes Army. Some Portugals
defended themselves in their holds, even to the extremity, in hope there would
arrive a new fleet. Others more judicious, knowing they could not be relieved,
yielded themselves to the discretion of the Conqueror; so that in a month all
the Isles were free, and no other Portugals were seen there, but such as they
sold in the markets, and carried hither and thither, to end their lives in that
servitude which their ambition had deserved. Polexander yet was not satisfied
with the driving so unjust and obstinate Enemies from his dominions; but would
needs fight with them within their own walls, and by some great and remarkable
losses imprint in their minds for a long time the fear of his Name and Arms.
After he had therefore a while refreshed his Troops after their long travels,
with Zelmatida and Iphidamantus, he joined his own fleet with the Pirates, and
having paid them even to prodigality for their service done him, and
principally the ransom he promised for Ximena's liberty, he embarked himself
with a favorable wind, and staid not till he came before Lisbon with an Army
not only victorious, but invincible by his presence, and that of the other two
Heroes. All the coasts of Portugal felt his arrival. Many towns were
pillaged, many burnt, and an infinite number of young and old, of poor and
rich, were sacrificed to the just resentment of the Canarians. Lisbon it self
was got to the point of her ruin, and the fire and sword were about to make of
it a horrible place of burial; when our Hero considering this near
desolation, staid his anger, and was moved with the horrid object which had
followed the sack of so stately a City. Let us pardon the guilty (said he to
himself) for the innocents sake. Let those live who have provoked us, for the
love of them who never offended us. Let us not arm against our selves the
cries and tears of a great number of orphans, of widows, and virgins. The
astonishment which his arrival had cast as far as into the heart of Spain,
was so great, that Ferdinand and Isabell shut up in Valledolid, were a great
while without knowing how to oppose this tempest. They imagined that all the
Moors were again coming out of Africa into Spain, and to reconquer it in
far less time then they had lost it. But Polexanders departure calmed all
their troubles, and dissipated their apprehensions; and if he returned without
being King of both the Spaines, it was because his justice, and nobleness would
never consent to it. He returned home by Africa, drove the Portugals out of all
the places they were possessed of, and razing the fortifications, would have both
the Christians and Moors to know that he came into the world only for the
extirpation of tyranny. The King of Morocco hearing of our great Conquerors
being so near his territories, sent him a solemn Embassy. It was received
after a new way of State, for it was at Sea, and in the midst of a fleet,
consisting of above three hundred sail. The Ambassadors having had their
Audience, and done the accustomed complements, returned laden with presents.
Polexander seeing them upon parting, asked Iphidamantus if he would send no
news of himself to his old servant. I do not think (replied Iphidamantus)
but that after the turn I showed her they would be very welcome to her. Truly
said Polexander, you cause me to remember a promise you made me long since. You
must now acquit your self with putting it no longer off. And in so saying, and
taking Zelmatida by the one hand, and his brother by the other, he shut
himself with them into his Cabin. Zelmatida understanding whither he was led,
and to what purpose, was wonderfully joyed at it; and pressed Iphidamantus as
much as the King of the Canaries, to tell him how he fell into the hands of the
King of Morocco, and by what means he got thence. The brave Prince not able to
deny two so dear to him, and so considerable; told them, he had no other will
then what they might command; but (withal said) he had already so often
troubled them with the recital of his fortunes, that he could not resolve to
go on. Yet (added he) since I see you will absolutely have it, I am ready to
obey you. Know then, that after the mis-haps which happened to me at the siege of
Lepanto, and after the tragical end of the too constant Hysteria, I left all
the pretentions I had in the court of the Grand Seignior, and made a vow never
more to present my self to my most dear father and worthy Lord Achomat. In
speaking which words, Iphidamantus fighed often, and Polexander noting it; You
sigh (said he) if I be not deceived, and at the remembrance of your losses,
what a change is here? What is become of that insensibility which equal
triumphed over all things? Has Bajazet turned that heart of marble into a
heart of flesh? You may justly jest, replied Iphidamantus, sighing again, but
let us give over this talk, if you please, and give me leave to relate what you
desire to know. As Soon as I was at Sea, I called to mind that which the
generous Basha Achomat had told me not a year before, touching my birth, my
captivity, and the misfortunes of our house. This remembrance, bred in me a
desire of returning into my native Country, to the end I might learn, whether
or no I were the sole man left alive of our race. With this intent I came to
Argier, and habit and language having gotten me a great many friends in a small
time; I understood, the Canaries had not changed their master; and how the
great Polexander of whom I heard so much spoken in Constantinople, was not only
king of them, but what more astonished and extraordinarily pleased me, was, that
Aladin Bashaw Viceroy of Argiers assured me, that that Prince was the son of
Periander and Axiomira, and by consequence, the unfortunate Iphidamantus had
the honor to be his younger brother. Polexander having smiled at the quaint
phrase of his brother, We will, said he, make answer another time to these fine
words; for the present, Zelmatida and my self have no other design then to
hear you. Proceed then, if you love us, and plainly satisfy our curiosity.
Iphidamantus, resuming his discourse, thus continued it:

THE ADVENTURES OF IPHIDAMANTUS.
AS soon as the Viceroy of Argiers had intimated to me the prosperity of
Perianders worthy successor, I got to sea again, and with the most diligence I
could sailed along the coasts of Barbary: I was like to have been lost in the
straights of Gibraltar, and but for the extraordinary skill of my pilot, my
ship had been split in pieces against the point of an Island in the midst of
the straight. At last I got into the open sea, but 'twas to be beaten with new
tempests. The second day that I was got into the Ocean, my mariners, who had
never sailed but on the Mediterianean sea, were entertained by a wind they
knew not, and against which by consequence they could not defend themselves.
The billows went so high, that for three days we were every foot carried from
heaven to hell, and from hell to heaven. At last the wind threw us on the
coasts of Morocco. 'Twas there, that the storm redoubling, and that the
elements having made a particular combination to punish my offenses, turned
topsy turvy (if I may say so) the first order of nature, reconciled
contrarities which should be everlasting; found nourishment for flames in the
water; composed two rights of what should be one day, and made both the land
and the sea equally dismal unto us. Many leagues on this side Morocco there is
seen a rock, on which is built a Castle which they call Guargetsem: the tempest
bore me right against it. Twice did my ship strike against this fearful rock,
and by the impetuosity of the shock, not only opened it in the midst, but was
thrust off far into the sea, that of all those aboard, there was not one who
saw not his certain death before him. Every one therefore got hold of what he
could, to hinder their sinking with the vessel, but the storm made all their
forecast bootlesse, for the justling of the waves, which confounded themselves
one within another, swallowed up all my mariners and soldiers, with that which
they had gotten to save themselves. I only (who without doubt had not suffered
enough for my many offenses) was frustrated of that quiet which my companions
found in the arms of death. Having therefore (without faining) no intent to
preserve my miserable life, I was thrown by a wave into a Cavern which time and
the surges had dug under the rock of Guargetsem. When the sea is very high,
or that there is a violent storm, as there was then, the water enters into the
bottom of that Cave, and throws in what it brings with it; but when the waves
retire, or that it is calm, the place is dry; and has some resemblance with
those grottes which Art has invented for the imbellishing of Gardens. For an
hour or two I was but ill at ease within that cave, for I was upto the neck in
water, and knew not where to place my self better. At last the sea went out,
and then I found I was out of danger. The Sun which inclined toward the West,
and was then very near to the Tropic of Cancer, suddenly striking through the
thickness of those clouds which had been so fatal unto us, enlightened the
most obscure corners of my retreat. I set me at the mouth of it, to enjoy the
suns heat and dry my clothing. About an hour after I had been there, I
perceived some fishermen: who questionless were got out in their boats to
gather the remains of our shipwreck. I will not tell you that surely chance
was the Author of the good fortune befell me at that instant, but will let you
know, how those fishermen being desirous to get a chest which floted on the
waves, and which I knew to be the same wherein my servants put my best
habiliments) drove right to my Cavern. As they were about to take it in, I
cried to them for help; and my voice on a suddan coming out of that cave, so
affrighted them that they left the chest, and betook them to their oars. I
besought them to take me in, and told them, the chest which they were about
being mine, I would freely give it them, if they would be so charitable as to
carry me to the next shore, and tell me on what part of Africa I was
shipwracked. My habit and language making me pass for a Musulman, the fishers
believed, that Mahomet had sent them thither to exercise the hospitality which
he so strictly recommended to them. They therefore took me into one of their
boats, set my chest by me, not permitting me to open it for their reward; and
betaking them to their oars, brought me to a little-port, which is as the
entry of a Suburb by which they ascended to the fortress of Guargetsem: There
the fishers dwelt, and they received me into their Cottages built of clay and
straw, with a great deal of humanity; and carried my chest into a place under
ground, whereof they gave me the key. I refused it, and to obliege them to the
continuation of their affection, took out of my chest some chains of gold,
and rings, which I distributed amongst them: They grew ravished at the
richness of my presents, and judged by them that I was a person of great
quality. I thought it not amiss to keep them in that opinion; and to that
end, I went presently to put off my spoiled sea weeds, and take on others of
cloth of gold, enriched with buttens of rubies. When I had fitly clad my self
with the richest clothes I had, I came in to my fishermen, and astonished them
far more by this second sight, then he had done at first. They lifted up
their hands; they whispered together, came and peered me in the face, handled
my clothes, my belt and Cymiter, and asked me often whether I were an Angel,
or a man. When all their wonder was over, they told me in what place I was, and
assured me, their King would already have sent to entertain me according to my
desert, had he been advertised of my arrival. I asked them where he was; and
after they had by their answer informed me he was come a few days besore into
the fortress of Guargetsem, I thought there was no better course for me, then
to make my self known to that Prince. I therefore sent one of those fishers
to the Castle, and expressly charged him to relate truly how I was shipwracked.
He went up, and presently came back again with Moors. The first that saw me,
blinded with the luster of my Jewels, or surprised with seeing me, stopped on
the sudden, and turning to his companions; Ennoramita (said he to them)
Ennoramita. The rest gazed on me, and all with one voice cried out, that I was
Ennoramita. Straight they cast themselves at my feet, kissed my hands, called
me their Princess, and entreated me to go to their King. They drew me out of
my cottage, and causing all the mountain to ring again with the name of
Ennoramita, carried me whether I would or no up to the fortress. Some of them
being run before, to advertise Hely of my arrival, so ravished him with the
news of it, that forcing his weak legs to uphold him, maugre their
feebleness, he came to meet me, welcomed me with a great many pleasant
huggings, repeated a hundred times over the name of Ennoramita, would even
adore me, and gave me the title of a Goddess, and sometimes that of an Angel.
He entreated me straight to tell him how I escaped out of the hands of the
cruel Nephizus, brought me into a chamber, the best furnished I ever saw next
to those of Zelmatida, and Bajazet; and entreating me to take my bath,
withdrew, with a great deal of respect. Presently came in diverse white
Eunuchs, and seven or eight black. The last fetched all that was necessary for
my chamber; and the women having brought me into a great withdrawing room,
shut the door on us all. If I were wonder-strooke at what I had seen and
heard, I was far more when I saw my picture (done like a woman) hanging under
a cloth of Estate, made of cloth of gold. I asked those who would have
undressed me whether I would or no; for whom that picture was made. They
answered me all at once, it was for the Princess Iphidamanta. At that word I was
like to have fallen down, and certainly believed I was got into the house of
some one of those Enchanters, which every day work so many prodigies in the
towns of Africa. I knew not which way to be cleared of my doubts. In the mean
time I was in an extreme perplexity. But perceiving that Hely and his servants
had no other intent then to serve me, I said to my self, I should be very
unwise to dis-obliege them. I went therefore into the bath, but so dexterously,
that I discovered not the difference betwixt Iphidamantus and Ennoramita.
As Soon as I was dried, persumed and clad, Hely reentred the chamber where I
was, and showing me my picture: See (said he) that which has preserved my life
in your absence. At that speech I put on a very serious countenance, and told
him I had been in so great an astonishment, by means of that which had
betided me since I was taken out of the Sea, that I could scarce reserve to my
judgment sufficient to know whether I were yet my self or no. But let me tell
you. I am a man. Hely smiled, and shook his head, hearing me say so; and
taking me by the hand, fair Ennoramita Iphidamanta, replied he, do not think
to hide your self from those eyes which love has made so clear-sighted. You
have now nothing to fear. The traitor Nephizus is not in this country, and
Abdelmelec has acknowledged his offenses. You are absolute Mistress of me and
my Estates. Command solely, and you shall be punctually obeyed. I grew almost
mad to see my self treated like a maid, and in that choler, I spoake to the
King any thing that came first to mind. At last recollecting my wits: I cannot
imagine (said I to Hely) how you came to know my name to be so near to
Iphidamantus. But you may know that that Iphidamantus was born a Prince, and
bred up in the Port of the Grand Seignior, by the name of Solomon. I see (said
I) you do not believe me; but since your credulity is so wilful, I will make
you both an eye and hand witness that I am no woman. Presently I unbuttoned my
robe, and would have showed him my breast, that he might know I wore not
garments unbefitting my Sex: but he clapped his hands on his eyes, and
protested, he had rather dye then engage me in any action which should
displease me. No, no, (said I) I will do nothing unseemely. Come, see, and
disbeguile your self. That old fool, holding his hands still on his eyes, told
me, he was too certain of who I was to desire new testimonies. Should my eyes
(said he) now tell me the contrary, I would say they lied, and hold them for
Impostors. Be therefore still (if you please) what you have been. Be
Iphidamanta, be Ennoramita, be a Shepherdess, be a Princess; you shall still
be that visible Divinity which Hely will adore whilst he lives; and the only
beauty he will enjoy in that Paradise which his great Prophet prepares for him.
Nay, Iphidamanta shall be the chief part of my beatitude. She shall be the
most delicious dish I will taste of in the eternal feastings, and her divine
allurements will make me look with contempt on the miraculous Pomcitrons which
our Prophets Angels will give to his believers for the accomplishment of all
their pleasures. And to speak truth, how rare soever the beauties of those
celestial fruits are; what is there in them that can be compared to the
charms of Iphidamanta? This discourse, composed partly of that poor Princes
errors, and partly from those of the Alcoran, gave me good cause of laughter.
Yet I could not hold, but at last grew angry; and had I given way to my first
thought, I had made Hely repent him of his extravagancy. But when I called to
mind, that I should avenge my self on a poor man whom age had deprived of
judgment: I said to my self, I should be more senseless then he, if I went
about to wrong him. For three months together, I had as much of this as was
possible. I patiently endured the Kings highest impertinencies. I coldly
received his Idolatries; I gave care even with pleasure to his supplications,
his idle talk, and his wayanentings. In a word, I almost became the same which
that fool took me for; and took in hand as well the rest, though much
against my will, the needle and the spindle. At last, Hely brought me to
Morocco, and caused me to be received with an incomparable magnificence. But
after I had been there a while, and was grown of so ridiculous a life; I
resolved to beguile, or to bribe the Guard that was night and day set over me;
and to take my time, when some strange ship should be ready to set sail. There
chanced an excellent combination to perfect my design. Posts came from
Thu^is, from Argiers, from Fez, and many other places; who all solicited Hely
to bring into the field those troops which he had promised for the invading of
Spain; and assured him, that within few days, the Grand Seigniors fleet would
be at the general Rendezvous. These news a little suspended my old Dotard's
follies; and made him turn his thoughts on more important business. He sent
notice to Abdelmelec he should be in a readiness. Who answered him, he stayed
only for the ships which the Viceroy of Argiers had promised him for his
troops. That his Army was brave and very resolute, and that ere long he would
send him far better assurances of that verity, then words and letters. I
understood from Hely how the Grand Seignior (offended with the Portugals
beginning by their East-Indian Navigations to break the trade of Spice, which
from all times before had been through his Dominions) was resolved to invade
Spain, and by a continual war, take from them the means of sailing into
the East. It Was for that intent this great preparation was made. You have seen
the event in the battle which the Turks lost; it will be therefore
superfluous to relate the particulars. As Soon as Hely had made good his
promise, and drawn out of all places all that were fit to carry Arms; he
brought me back again to Guargetsem, that he might be far enough from the
noise of war, and by a sound repose satisfy his ridiculous passion. After we
had been there a month, Abdelmelec sent to the King his Father a great Gallion
which he had taken from the Portugals, and with that vessel above three
hundred Christians of several Nations. When I saw that vessel, I said to my
self, the Prince of Morocco had rather sent it to me, then to the King his
father, and in that moment, put on my last resolution of freeing my self. Hely
having extolled to me Abdelmelec's valor, and desirous to let me see the
proofs, brought me into a very great room where he had put all his slaves. I
looked on them, and though they were all wounded, yet I found them exceeding
constant in their adverse fortunes. I bid them (in Spanish) to be of good
heart, and told them I would take care for their safety, and labor for their
delivery. They gave me thanks, and one amongst them, of an exceeding good
aspect, said softly to me, that if he and his companions could but get weapons,
he assured himself (as incommodated as they were) to get again what they had
lost, and something more. That man's freeness was like to have ruined him; for
Hely suspecting what he said, gave command he should be presently strangled. I
besought him to spare his life for my sake: and I had no sooner requested but
it was granted me. From the prison we went to our ordinary diversions; and from
that day set my wits on work for the advancement of my Enterprise. I promised
so many things, and gave so much to two of my Eunuchs, that by their industry I
secretly got Arms out of the fortress, and as closely sent them to the
Christians. As Soon as they were in case to make use of them, and that they had
as many as they needed, they broke open their prison, cut the throats of the
small Guard they had, and got aboard their ship in the road of Guargetsem. At
the same instant the tumult began, I got to the secret staire that went down
from the fortress to the Sea, and by which my dear Cydaria saved her self as
I conjectured by the ordinary discourse which Hely had with me. When I was got
down, I found a boat ready for me, and my two Eunuchs in it. We got speedily
to the ship, and being aboard, the question was, what way to steer, to avoid
the falling again into the hands of our enemies. All the Christians having
chosen me for their Commander, besought me still to be their Releasor. The
fafest course for us (said I) is to make off from the coast of Africa, because
of the great number of Turkish ships which get thither. But since our ship has
all the marks of those of Turkey, and that our Arms, our Turbants, and the
rest of our clothes, may make us pass for some of their party, let us not
lose sight of these coasts, nor engage our selves in a Sea we know not. This
advise was followed; but had it not been for the ignorance of our Pilot, who
the very first night was run out of the way, it had cost us our lives, or at
least our Liberties. For Hely as soon as he heard of my escape, sent forth
four great barks well armed, which he had for the defense of the place, and
commanded those that went aboard them, to follow me to the worlds end, rather
then let me escape away. Our Pilots error having preserved us from that danger,
cast us into another as great. For, we lost sight of land, and were two or
three days wandering up and down the Ocean. At last we descried the high
mountain of Teneriffe, but knew it not; and as we were about to land there, a
storm cast us on the sides of a little Isle, where I learnt (said he,
addressing himself to Zelmatida) at the cost of my blood, how fatal
Polexanders valor is to those that provoke it. Our Hero being obliged to
answer to these words, extraordinarily praised Iphidamantus; and related to
Zelmatida particularly with what generosity his brother had taken Alcidiana's
Pilot into his protection, and with what boldness he came alone to assail his
whole fleet. After this discourse was ended; Iphidamantus entreated his brother
he would be pleased to let him prosecute a design for which he had left
Bajazet; and that taking again the ship which he brought from the Pirates
Island, he might make an end of his unhappy destiny. Polexander imagining by
his words, he labored under some great perplexity, and loath to use the
authority his age gave him over his brother; told him, he might do what he
pleased: though (said he) Zelmatida and my self would gladly enjoy you longer
with us. But since you are called otherwhere, go when you please. And, who knows
but love may be the cause of so speedy a separation? Iphidamantus fighed at his
brothers last words, and having taken leave of them both, caused his men to
make toward the mouth of the Straights. Achaim, Hamet and many other Captains
of the Pirates, came likewise to bid adieu to Polexander; and giving him
extraordinary thanks for the honor and riches whose acquiring he had been the
chief cause, swore to him many times, they would eternally preserve the memory
of his benefits, and a desire to merit them by their services. Our Hero having
bid them all farewell, had now no other thought (if we except the commanding
and perpetual thought which ^nseparably linked him to Alcidiana) but to bring
back his victorious fleet into the havens of the Canaries. This resolution was
attended with all the happiness which accompanied him when he took pains for
the contentment of others; and his return was such a plentiful sourse of
delights, as his Isles, how fortunate soever they have been always esteemed,
were ignorant of knowing any the like till to that day.

The end of the fifth Book of the second Part of POLEXANDER.
THE THIRD PART OF POLEXANDER.
The first Book.
THE Inhabitants of Africa were not the sole nation which admired Polexanders
victories. All men who had heard of them, spoke with astonishment, and the
Canarians rapt with so many more then mortal acts, promised to themselves by
their Prince's valor no less then to become (one day) the absolute Masters of
the Ocean. These transcendent hopes infinitely increased their former
affections, and caused them to employ all that they had of most cost and value,
to make our Hero's return as triumphant as his absence had been honorable.
They prepared for him stately entrances in all their capital cities; but
Polexander neglected those popular vanities; and looking on himself with more
cleer-seeing eyes then those he was surveyed with either by his subjects or his
neighbors; They provide triumphs for me (said he) who am beaten both by
heaven and fortune; All conspire my ruin, and yet these men persuade
themselves, that the chance of war, and the eternal order of nature are
changed and conducted as it pleases my destiny. Pluck off, pluck off the band
which blindes so many, and let us teach these ill censurers of humane
adventures, that all their judgments are rash, and make them see how this
Polexander whom they call the most happy, is a miserable man which has not so
much as the hope of that bliss which their wishes and blindness bestow upon
him After he had thus spoken to himself, he dismissed the Canarians, and, for
fear, left in his absence the Spaniards might make them repent of their
change, he gave them governors, who in the precedent passages had been known
for men of courage and government. As soon as he was disengaged from those
cares so incompatible with the thoughts of a lover, he retired himself to
meditate more at leisure, and find out some new way to get to the inaccessible
Island, or the sooner to his death. Above two hours was he musing on these
imaginary courses, but his wits being vainly drawn dry on them he was forced to
give himself for vanquished to that despair which he had always contested
with. Then our illustrious mis-fortunate Prince, believing he had good cause to
accuse himself, Why then (cried he) Proud and cowardly reason, have thou so
long time resisted, since to our common shame thou should have yielded, and
testified at last that thy obstinacy was an effect of thy fear, rather then a
sign of thy constancy. After he had thus reviled himself, he grew silent, and
began to walk up and down the chamber with such a pace as showed how
tragical the thoughts were that rolled in his mind: at last he stood still,
and turning his eyes toward that quarter of the world where he imagined the
inaccessible Island lay; Fair place (said he) which jealous of thine own
happiness seems to conceal thee from thy self, I give over my importunate
searches, and to tell thee with what respect I consider the Temple whose
Goddess I adore, I submit my consent and yield to that rigorous necessity
which will not permit me to see thee again. But what infamous counsel does my
more infamous despair give me? What? shall I wave my desire of seeing
Alcidiana because I have no hope of it? and since by my own strength, I cannot
raise my self to heaven, shall I dare to conceive such a crime as the
renouncing all the felicities there? No, no, fair Alcidiana, I will never lend
an ear to these detestable Emotions. I am resolved to spend all the rest of my
life in an Enterprise which shall not be less glorious to me then I find it
impossible: and since Almanzors example is a perpetual advertisement that the
obligation of dying without seeing you, is fatally incident and knit to your
adorers. I will (without expecting ought from love or fortune) go, and acquit
my self of what I owe to your incomparable merit, to the necessity of my
condition, and to mine own thoughts. After this he called for his trusty
Diceus, and by a command he gave him, made well known, that contemning again
the fruit of his victories, and all regal delights, he was about to re-begin
that wandering and desperate life to which he had so often and so unprofitably
abandoned himself. At the same instant Zelmatida entered Polexanders chamber,
and his own agitations not giving him leave to take notice of another man's:
Have pity on a wretch (said he) whom heaven in the very feeling of his
misfortune resuseth him the knowledge of it. My eyes are witnesses of Izatida's
death; they have seen the monument where she lies buried, and yet by I know not
what error, they begin to belly themselves, and would have me do so too. O
Polexander what shall I resolve on? If Izatida be alive, and that I do not
believe them, I make my self for ever unworthy to be looked on by her, and
become so mortal an enemy to my self, that one death were not sufficient to
avenge me of my unworthiness. Doubt then still (replied Polexander)
interrupting him, since so many advise you to it, and think with your self,
that these suspicions, these doubts and half hopes, are the secret presages of
a change in your fortune. I will believe you (said Zelmatida) not to draw any
consolation from so vain a hope, but rather to meet with death, who ever
unmercifully flies me when I run after it, and hides her self in the havens
when I search for her in the tempests. Zelmatida would have gone on, when five
or six men entered Polexanders chamber, and so made him leave the rest for
another time. He that came (...) first saluted Polexander, and presenting to
him an old man of above threescore and ten years, and a child of eight or ten:
Sir (said he) see what I have found of most rarity in in all (...) journey, and
I am sure you will not less esteem of them then I do, when you shall please
to know how much these two parsonages are worth. As soon as he had ended, the
old man began, speaking to Polexander as if he had known him: Great Prince
(said he) either all my experience is false, and the infallible rule of
Zayragia but ^ly and cousenage, or before the sun has twice pastthe line,
your ill fortune shall reconduct you to those places which your good has made
inaccessible: My general ^pputations have been made with all the care and
certainty of an art which is infallible. I have multiplied my characters, I
have divided them, and I have precisely met with the eight and twenty, which
are necessary for forming the words, under which are comprised the question
which Alcippus made me in your name, and the resolution of it. Polexander
wondering at the Africanes intricate speech, turned to the person who presented
him, and intimating he took no pleasure in those diversions: Alcippus (said he)
I well perceive that your affection has driven you to those curiosities which
you have always heard me condemn; and think you have acquitted your self of
your promise, if (no matter by what means) you bring me any news that is
pleasing. Sir, (replied Alcippus) the honor to have your commands and charge
is to me so dear and sacred, that as often as they are to be put in execution I
collect to my assistance all the care, all the diligence, and all that
circumspection they deserve. And this being granted, imagine if you please
whether I would so much become so adverse to my self as to profane that now
which has been so sacred to me; and whether I would employ the impudence and
imposture of a mountebank, to discharge me of those commissions which your
excessive goodness deignes to entrust to my fidelity; No, sir, I bring you
none of those Muhazimins, nor of those impostors which run 'up and down
Africa; I bring you here the learned Habul Ismeron, who is the oracle of kings,
and the still-watchfull eye of the kingdom of Morocco. The sole desire of
seeing this great Prince which his art had charactered to him for the miracle
of these times, (not thehope of reward) has made me so gracious, and so far
prevailed with him, as in the extremity of his age to quit the King his master,
and the sweet quiet of his retired life. What Alcippus has said (quoth
Ismeron) is true, and no less true then the art which I profess is so
miraculous and divine, that it is far beyond the reach of humane wit, or it
rather teaches us by its perpetual infallibility, that the condition of men
is not far differing from that of Angels. Yes, Polexander, I have forsaken my
solitude, to see (before I dye) the accomplishment of those things my Art
foretold me, and to contemplate at pleasure that masterpiece, wherein heaven
and nature seemed to have contributed all of theirs that was most excellent. O
what prosperities do future times reserve for you! And with what justice shall
the dysasters which must fore-runne them be put into the number of those
felicities? Farewell, brave Prince, destinated to extraordinary adventures:
Mine eyes have given mine intellect that which it wanted of perfectly knowing
you. Stay me not, I pray you, for the King my master and my age press me to be
gone. Though Polexander laughed at the old man's predictions, and condemned his
pratle, for all that he perceived the man showed a great deal of judgment in
his discourse, and by consequence, had a far more cunning then extravagance.
After he had better weighed it, he judged him to be some excellent wit, who,
as all others, having its defect and weakness, was fallen into that vain
curiosity of knowing things to come. He entertained him then very courteously,
and excusing himself for not performing it sooner: Father (said he) I fear
(for your satisfaction) lest your Art be not so certain as you present it to
me; And I assure my self, that when you shall take the pains to review your
calculations, you will confess, that if you have not failed in the place, yet
you have mistook in the person: I say in the person, rather then in the place;
because there is in this chamber a Prince which is yet more then you have
discovered by your characters. With that he showed him Zelmatida, and told him,
he was King of an Empire greater then the fourth part of Europe, and richer
then all Europe together. If he be such as you say (replied Ismeron) how then
has he forgotten the only person of the world who can best free him of his
doubts? Zelmatida had not given any great attention to the precedent discourse:
but when Polexander, by naming him, had brought him out of his musing, and the
old man by the reproaching his forgetfulness obliged him to speak: Alas
father (said he) show me that person which I search for through the world.
There he is (quoth the old man) and with that showed the Lad which Alcippus had
presented to his master. The little one cast up his-eyes and fixed them on
Zelmatida; who as earnestly regarding him, knew 'twas the Princess of Mexico's
dwarf. Habul Ismeron made use of that disturbance this agnition wrought: for
when he saw Polexander was busied about Zelmatida, he slipped out of the
chamber, got again to his ship, and so set sail: He was scarce out of the
palace, when Zelmatida, returning from his astonishment, cast his eyes full of
tears on the dwarf, and drew him to the like passion too. What, Galtazis,
(said he) Izatida is then dead, and cruel Hismalita could not then endure that
divine maiden, who by her innocent life, too highly reproved the crimes of her
own? Galtazis, standing a while, unable to speak, at last broak through his
sighs and sobs, and rather answering his own thoughts, then Zelmatida: Why
had I not died (said he) in my desert Island, rather then be the dismal
messenger of so deplorable a novelty; yet (said he) do not think I come to
relate to you the death of Izatida. No, Sir, she lives, but it is such a kind of
life, as in lieu of comforting you, should add to your just sorrows. Weep
then, Zelmatida, weep more then if my Princess were dead: And know that
inhumane fortune has for ever shut up those fair eyes which our Prophets, our
Priests, and our own thoughts acknowledged, for the auspicious stars of all
Mexico. Zelmatida apprehended not at first what Galtazis meant by his last
words, and therefore asked the explication: Izatida is blind, replied Galtazis
sighing: Blindleri'd Zelmatida, and have the Gods (which are represented to us
for so just) done so great an impiety? When that poor Prince had thus spoken,
he fell down as dead, and lay a long while in a swound in Polexanders arms.
After they had much troubled him, he came to himself, and being recollected, O
Izatida, (said he with a dying voice) thy fair eyes then, the true fountains
of light, are shut up for evermore; and mine ungrateful and perfidious, dare
have recourse to that of heaven? Pluck out (remediless Zelmatida) pluck out
those objects of hatred, and to dare do something which may equalize the
greatness of our affliction, tear out those unfaithful eyes, which open
themselves to such light as comes not from Izatida. With that he lifted his
hands to his eyes, and if Polexander had not hindered his resolution, he had
seen him renew that ancient desperate act, which is to this day the glorious
and horrible wonder of the tragical Theater. Garruca, who ran to succor his
dear master; held his right arm, and Polexander the other, who entreating him
to remember that Izatida was alive, said further, that if he surmounted not
this furious fit, he would make it believed that he loved his Ladi's life far
less then her beauty: after he had thus spoken, he made a sign to Galtazis to
continue his speech. The little one seeing his news and persuasions, had
wrought their effect far beyond his expectation, My Lord (said he) if that
unfortunate and innocent Lady whom you justly bewail, could receive from any
other then you, the consolation which is so needful to her in her blindness,
I would be the first should counsel you to die; but since Izatida's afflictions
call to you for redress, preserve carefully that life which is not absolutely
your own, and which you cannot lose without violating your faith, without
becoming ungrateful, and holding correspondency with our Princess enemies. I
am persuaded, Galtazis, (said Zelmatida,) I will live, and since my life (as
unhappy as it is) can contribute somewhat to Izatida's contentment, it shall
hence forward be as dear to me as before it was irksome. Relate to me
therefore (I prithee) the dysasters which ensued the supposed death of thy fair
Mistress; Whilst all Mexico (said Galtazis) bewailed the death of their
Princess, and that the people ran thronging to the place where they thought
her buried: The silly Montezuma and the bloody Hismalita, rejoiced for
diverting from them the storm which to their brutish fears seemed ready to
power down upon them; but their joy was soon turned into an exteam desolation.
Posts came to them from all parts, by whom news was sent, you had escaped from
all those traps they had laid for you, and that by the assistance of certain
men who came from another world, you were resolved to besiege them in their
own palace. This intelligence was seconded by another more terrible to them.
They knew you had landed in the Isle of Cuba, took the inexpugnable fortress,
cut the throats of some of the garrison, given life and liberty to the rest,
and freed the old Alisma, whom Montezuma feared more then all the rest of the
Peruvians. My fair mistress heard of all this in the prison of the Lake,
where she was straightly guarded; she gave thanks to heaven for your preservation
and honor, and shutting her self up with her Governess, passed over the days
and nights in prayers for your happiness. Some little time after the cruel
Hismalita came to visit her, and calling her a thousand times the farall
firebrand, that was to put all Mexico into a conflagration: Go (said she) thou
stranger, go and die by some other hands then mine, since my Gods will not have
me imbrue them in thy blood. The night (after these furious threatenings) being
half spent, we saw come into the Princesse's chamber, some unknown men who
hood-winking her eyes and seizing on her Governess, and my self gagged, and so
led us out of our prison. By the footmanship of those posts which from place to
place were laid to carry us on their shoulders, we came the third day to the
Port of Calciroeca. Quitalvor, who was Montezuma's Lieutenant in that Province,
having seen the directions and commands of our conductors, gave them a Canoe to
land us in some Isle of the Caribs, to execute that murder which (to her great
grief) Hismalita durst not do herself. But heaven, which had not decreed that
Izatida should be freed from all her miseries) raised a terrible tempest, and
by it threw us on coas^ unknown: those that were our conductors landed (and
made us do so too) on a desert shore: where, as in all places else, my fair
mistress, using that solid piety which made you admire her, had recourse to
heaven, and beseeching thence a protection for us and our enemies, moved those
Savages to pity, who led her to her death. They unbound her. took the band
from her eyes, and said, they had an express command from Hismalita, to carry
her into some place inhabited by certain Canniballs that would devoute her. But
happen what may (said they) we will not be guilty of the death of the great
Montezuma's daughter. I will not tell you (Zelmatida) by what prodigy or
remorse of conscience these hangmen became merciful: But I can assure you,
from that time forward, they served Izatida with such care and respect, as
without a miracle she could not expect it: When I call to mind the excess of
their courtesy, I say 'twas a thing against nature, and a kind of monster by
which the Eternal providence did presage to us some dysaster, which shall
never be sufficiently bewailed eitherby you or all the virtuous people in the
world: I dare say I had some knowledge of it before it happened. An unknown
spirit often spoak to me within, and whether I slept or waked, said, Fly
Galtazis, fly from this shore. The fruits here are poison, and the trees cast
no shadow but to kill those who come for refreshment under them. Our conductors
quickly made that prediction true, after they had been a while landed, they
sought a place for our retirement, which might be less offensive then were the
dry and hot sands on the beach. At last they found one, which seemed to have
all that could be wished for, both for necessity and pleasure. Many little
rivelets trill'd along by the grass and the flowers, and many trees as fair in
show as deadly in effect, framed natural arbours and alleys; the leaves of
them were very large, and green, and the fruit so great and beautiful, that
they were so many venomous baits to betray the innocent stranger. Our leaders
fell heartily to them, but no sooner were they in their bodies, but they felt
themselves stung as with prodigious serpents, which in less then four days
had eaten up al their entrails. Two of Izatida's slaves eat of them as the
rest, and died as they. For her self her ordinary food being her sighs and
tears, she ran no hazard that way; but by an act of that awful power, which
every day invented new accidents to try the Princess virtue, it unluckily
happened that she fell asleep under those deadly trees. Her fair eyes which
were shut up for a few moments, were shut up for ever: and the subtle venom of
those accursed trees sliding with their shadow on that other sun, covered her
with fearful and perpetual darkness. Izatida felt in sleeping the strength
of the poison, and awaking with it, O governesse (cried she) look to me, my
fight is gone, I see nothing at all; the virtuous Mexiqua (so was the name of
the governesse) ran to her, and finding but little alteration in her eyes, did
not believe so sudden a mischance could be long lasting; she got the Princess
to arise, and leading her to the source of a clear fountain, washed there her
eyes a long time: but Izatida finding but little help by it, Give over mother
(said she) this unprofitable labor. It had not been just that she should
suffer but ordinary punishment, who by her disobedience incurred the curse of
those by whom she came into the world. Just gods exercise your justice on this
malefactresse, let her feel more and more the weight of your arms; and since
as parents of all men you are interested in the cause of parents, hear the
prayers of mine, and though they petition for my affliction, deny them not!
Zelmatida at that word interrupting Galtazis: How ye gods (cried he) who are
not so if you be not just) would ye allow the tyrannies of an insensible father
and unnatural mother? and to be thought exorable, would ye hear the prayers of
your enemies? No, no, that excess of injustice cannot be in heaven; the curses
of Montezuma and Hismalita have had no power to wrest your equitable decrees.
It Is my dismal and tragical fate which has been the Author of these new
miseries. I am the venomous tree, the contagious shadow, who after innocent
Izatida's loss of peace and liberty, have lastly deprived her of her sight,
and questionless will soon lose all that remains to her of life. Think on
thy self monster, born for the ruin of virtue. Dye unworthy Zelmatida, and by
forcing thy self from the world, snatch from fortune, the sole pretext she
has of persecuting innocence. What (said Galtazis) shall Izatida's blindness,
and her other disgraces, rob her of that absolute command, which her beauty and
prosperity had acquired over your will? and will you lose the desire of
suffering for her as soon as you have lost your hope of being recompensed. Let
heaven reduce me into dust! (cried Zelmatida affrighted at Galtazis words) let
the earth open and swallow me, let hell be all my portion; if Izatida, although
banished, if Izatida, though a vagabond, if Izatida, though blind, be not as
dear to me, and as much honored, as in the height of her glory and the
extremity of her beauty. Believe it Galtazis, and assure thy self, my
constancy is growing to be such, that even in thine own judgment, it will
make me be reputed a man altogether insensible. I will obey you (replied
Galtazis) but let me get away (if you please) from a country more execrable
and horrid then Hismalita; and relate to you the last accidents which ensued
Izatida's blindness. We had been about fifteen days on that accursed earth,
and our unfortunate company which consisted at first of above fifty persons,
were reduced to five, when we saw our selves environed with thirty or forty
men, such as those that brought me hither. They stood still a while and gazed on
us, and at last understanding by our signs rather then by our words the need
we had of their assistance, they comforted us with a great deal of humanity,
and went to fetch what was fitting to relieve us in our extreme weakness. I
presently believed heaven had sent those men to assist Izatida, and therefore
brought them to the place where she was retired with her Governesse, and strove
by my actions to make them understand the greatness of her birth, and the
misfortunes of my Princess. They gazed on her, and admired her, as blind as
she was: and learning from me by my signs, that this accident betided to her
by the dangerous propriety of some trees, on that abominable coast, they
advised her to imbarke with them, to make trial whether the change of Climate
would not alter her fortune. She liked of all they propounded; and expressly
comanding her Governesse and my self not to leave her day or night; gave her
self to the conduct of those men who were courteous and charitable but only in
appearance. After we had sailed many days, we arrived at an Island which (if I
be not deceived) is not far from that whereinto the good Alisma had been exiled
by Montezuma. When we were entered a Fort which our Leaders had newly built to
make themselves masters of the Isle, we were there very civilly entertained;
and their Captain which seemed to be moved at our miseries, not only welcomed
with great demonstrations of friendship, but treated the Princess with as much
respect as if he had known her birth. He did what he could to know who she was,
but all his cunning was in vain; for ours was all of proof, and the aged
Mexiqua could so well conterfeit that her craft being taken for simplicity, she
wiped out of the inquisitive man's thoughts all the opinion he had that Izatida
would not be known for whom she was. She (in the mean time believing her
blindness was not the last of her misfortunes) often besought the gods they
would be pleased to deliver her from that she was threatened withal by the
courtesy of those strangers. I fear (said she) O ye just dispensers of good
and evil, the calm I have met in the extremity of a tempest: The excess of
my happiness makes me suspect it; and my mind which looks on it as a kind of
dysaster yet unknown to me, finds in it something yet far worse then my exile
and blindness. Ye Gods which are most just, and yet most good, avert from me
(if you please) a calamity which I fear the more because I least resent it! and
since a young maiden is but frailty and weakness, condemn her not to those
rigorous trials, which ask all the abilities of a soul high and vigorous. The
Gods (continued Galtazis) were no less deaf to her last prayers then they had
been to all her others. They left the Princess in the hands of men as
deceitful and dangerous as the shadow which blinded her; for when we thought
least on it, their Captain caused us to imbarke our selves in a ship which (as
he told us) was to sail into Spain; and promised us we should receive in that
second voyage the same entertainment we had in the former. But we found it far
differing: for five or six debauched young men having cast their eyes on
Izatida (who should rather have stirred them to pity then to love) resolved on
an act the most base and abominable that can be imagined. Before they would use
any violence, they attempted by way of mildness, and thought their words and
promises sufficient enough to shake a virtue as constant as that of the gods
themselves: but when they perceived their artifice thrived not, they put in
practice all that their brutish and cruel souls had kept hidden of most
impious and horrible. The two Mexicans which were left alive and my self were
bound and clapped up under the lowest deck, and the courageous Mexiqua reduced to
the terrible necessity of either ruinating Izatidaes honor, or kill her self
with her own hands. In this extremity, men gave us that succor which the gods
denied us; for a Prince (called Almanzor) passing happily by the ship wherein
that great villainy was to be acted, and being invited by the cries of the
Princess and her Governesse, came and set on our perfidious friends. After
half a days fight he became Master of the vessel, and by the death of the
guilty, avenged the innocence of my fair Mistress. You may please to know,
Almanzor had a Mariner who understood our language, and that by his means he
was informed of Izatidaes principal fortunes. You may take notice likewise,
that of all those who have been sensible of my fair Mistress afflictions, I
have not seen any (your self excepted) who has been more then that generous
Prince. When by the help of his Interpreter he had heard of the cruel usage
Izatida received from her father and mother: He cried out, O powerful law of
Love! O Alcidiana yet more powerful! why permit you not me to sail to Mexico,
and tear out the hearts of those two Monsters? After thus spoken, he turned
him to Izatida, and causing his Interpreter to speak for him, I must (said he)
in spite of my self forsake you; yet will I not leave you to the mercy of
Pirates and the Sea. I have a Pilot who shall conduct you to those places,
where for your comfort (I may tell you) virtue has her due respect, and never
has it more then when she is in distress.. Go thither then, with a
confidence, you shall not be there less honored then in Mexico. You shall
there meet with a Queen, who is as good a Mother, as yours is cruel; and who,
finding in you that which may make her forget my absence, will be engaged for
her own sake to show you all kind of respect and friendship. I will give you a
ring, which is to be the continual gage of the love that Queen bears me. At
the sight of it, she will deny you nothing; but will know by that token how
much the care of your preservation is dear to me. At the end of this
discourse, he took Izatida by the hand, and put on her little finger a Ruby,
which was more to be valued for the rarity of the graving, then the excess of
its greatness, and so bad her farewell, having first set at liberty the two
Mexicans and my self, and commanded the remainder of our enemies to come aboard
his ship. He gave us for our conduct, one of his Pilots and twelve Mariners.
These new Guides promised us certainly, that within two days they would set
us ashore on the coasts of Senega, or at least on some one of the Isles of Cape
vert. But they were ignorant of Izatidaes sad fate, who (too cruel and
implacable) seeing her self on the point to be overcome, redoubled her forces,
made her self more powerful then their Art, and to be avenged on their
humanity, armed the winds, stirred up the tempests, and suffered not the Seas
to enjoy a calm, till they were swallowed and buried under the billows. This
storm carried us far from the Kingdom of Senega, and held us three days
and three nights between life and death. At last it opened our ship in so many
places, that the Pilot judging we were lost, if we staid there any longer,
launched the Shallop, and went presently to tell Izatida, she must quit the
ship, or resolve to dye. She said, she was prepared for whatsoever might
happen, and that having lost the love of her parents, and the hope of
revisiting them, she could not be more pleased then to see her self at the
point of getting out of all her miseries. Nevertheless, (said she) I will not
disobey the gods, and am content to live, if they have not decreed I shall yet
dye. The Pilot took her in his arms, and letting her down into the boat,
called thither too Mexiqua and my self. We had no sooner placed our selves,
but a gust of wind broke the rope which held the Shallop to the Ship, and
carried us furiously through the waves. We were as it were dead, till our boat
meeting with a bank of sand, which made part of a little Island, slid on so
happily for us, that it stuck fast without breaking. The courageous Mexiqua
lost not her judgment in that extremity. She knew the water must be low in
that place, and on that knowledge judged that at the ebb we might very easily
get them on shore. Coming then to the constant Izatida, she told her what she
conjectured; and besought her not to be quelled by this last dysaster. Is it
possible (replied the Princess) that Death will not yet give us that rest
which is so necessary for us? Mexiqua's words taking off from me half my
fear, and those of Izatida making me reflect on the strange adversities we
underwent through the barbarousnesse of Montezuma and Hismalita: O ye too
rigorous gods! (said I aloud) cruel father, unnatural mother, what has this
innocent Lady committed that makes her the object of your indignation? Izatida
would not suffer me to say more: Hold thy peace wretch, (said she) Is this the
respect thou bear to those without whom I had not been in the world? Know
it is an addition to my griefs to offend those who are the causers of them.
After those few words she held her peace, and kept more then ever a profound
silence, which she broke not but when she was compelled. For my self, I could
not look on her without almost running desperate; I told Mexiqua I would walk
into the Island, to see whether it were inhabited or desert. Mexiqua was of my
opinion; and as soon as the sea was fully out, she took Izatida on her
shoulders and carried her a shore. I got thither as soon as she; and without
any delay began my resolved journey. I had not gone two or three hundred paces,
but I perceived some little hills at whose feet there was a wood. I thought I
might find some house thereabouts, but there was none. The place yet was very
fit to be inhabited, for there were clear fountains of fresh water,
treesloaden with fruit, and an incredible number of birds. I pursued my way,
and went round about the Island, yet found no habitation, nor any sign there
had been any. I returned to the place where I had left my fair Mistress, and
describing to her the place which I thought most fitting for her retreat, got
her resolution to go thither. She laid one hand on my shoulder, gave Mexiqua
the other, and in that manner let us lead her to the place of her future
abiding. Mexiqua was overjoyed with the delightful diversities of our
solitude, and to divert Izatida, told her that Fortune was infallibly
surprised, and that she knew not the beauty of the place where she had thrown
her. If possible (replied the Princess) let us obtain by our prayers that she
never get out of that Ignorance, to the end she may let us dye in peace, and
not envy us any more the comfort of a grave. As Soon as we were come into the
wood, Mexiqua and I sought out a tuft of trees that might be sufficiently thick
to shelter Izatida from the extreme cold of the nights, and those diverse
discommodities which in so little a time we had undergone under that inconstant
Climat. We found a better then we looked for: For at one corner of the wood
there were eight or ten big trees of one same kind which were hollow, and
within each of which two persons might lie at their ease. We chose three of the
greatest, one for Izatida, another for her Governesse, and a third for me. In
less then eight days we were so well accommodated in that place, that if the
remembrance of you, and the Princesses blindness had not troubled our
tranquillity, we had confessed our selves beholding to Fortunes cruelty, and
the fury of Hismalita. There passed not a day but I went a birding or fishing,
and to do the latter with more ease, I went into our sliden Shallop. I took no
heed how by little and little the Sea had gotten it off from the sands, and
drawn it far more distant from the shore then it was when we were
shipwracked. One day, being gotten into it before the tide came in, I fell so
fast asleep, that I awaked not, but at the tossing of the boat, and then I
found my self out in open Sea. Imagine (if you please) what my fear and
grief was. Truly they were so excessive, that I cannot express them to you. A
thousand times did I bid farewell to my fair Mistress, and making no doubt of
my death, prepared my self for it with all the constancy so little a soul as
mine is can contain. But death, ashamed to have ought to do with so weak an
Enemy, turned her weapons against such as were more hard to be overcome. For
when the Sun was almost ready to set, I descried courteous Alcippus his ship. I
made signs to them, and they came and relieved me, but imperfectly; for they
could neither understand my language nor my signs; and that was the cause why
in stead of recarrying me to Izatida's Island, they have brought me hither into
this. That which remains for me to say to you, (Zelmatida) is, that you will
obtain from Alcippus some one of his servants to bring you to the place they
found me. I know well enough from thence to guide you to my fair Princess.
But hap what hap may, hazard that voyage; and since you are so much obliged to
her affection, either lose your self absolutely, or endeavor to restore her
to her former content. Doubt not of it Galtazis (said Zelmatida sighing) I will
follow thy advice, and desire to be held for a trayt our and coward, if in
spite of all the obstacles and forces of Mexico, I see not restored to the
throne that divine Princess, who is unfortunate and miserable, only because
she would hinder my being so. After he had taken this generous resolution, he
turned to Polexander, and embracing him: Let me owe my life (said he) to him to
whom I owe my liberty, and after so many different obligations, let me have one
which I will esteem beyond all the other: and it is (Polexander) that you will
give me leave to be gone, and bestow on me Alcippus ship and Pilot. Do what you
please (replied Polexander) and dispose absolutely of those things which
Fortune has given me. After this interparlance, they embraced and took leave
of each other; but that same Fortune with which Zelmatida thought himself
reconciled, more apparently burst out against him in this occasion, then ever
she had done in any of his precedent adventures. The air grew dark on the
sudden, as if to make the lightnings more visible, the thunder began to
grumble with a dreadful noise, the winds added new tumults to this confusion
of the air, and the Sea compelled to undergo her usual tortures, found no
quiet in her very havens. Zelmatida grew almost mad at this hinderance; but
Polexander told him there was no likelihood that storm could long stay him,
and a day or two more or less for so long a voyage as his, was not
considerable. No, said Zelmatida, I am too much used to the injuries of
Fortune, to persuade my self she will so soon be weary of persecuting me. But
let her do her utmost against me; let her arm all the Elements, to deprive me
of the hope of reseeing Izatida: I will either overcome her hatred by my
resistance, or she her self shall be forced to give an end to my affliction by
the ending my life. This resolution is worthy so great a courage as yours,
(replied Polexander) yet if you will hearken to reason, she will tell you; it
is to hate Izatida, rather then to love her, in seeking rather to destroy your
self, then to succor her. Ah Polexander, (said Zelmatida) you had none of
these thoughts when you threw your self into the midst of the greatest
dangers, and among thousands of Enemies, only to hear tidings of Alcidiana.
Well, (said Polexander) let us talk no more of that, nor make Love either more
rash, or more wise then he should be: we will send for your Pilot and Mariners,
and if they think you may safely put to Sea, I will be the first that shall
solicit your departure. Zelmatida thanked the King for his advice, and besought
him he would presently send for his men, which he did; and within a little time
his Messenger returned with five or six Mariners, to whom Polexander related
(in the presence of Zelmatida) what he had disputed with him about the
unfitness of the season. They al confessed the tempest to be extraordinary,
yet told the Princes they had passed over far greater. It Is enough, (said
Zelmatida) I expected not so great a favor from fortune. Let us on then my
friends, as soon as may be, and give her no time to know what good she does us
unawares. After he had thus concluded for his departure, he (the last time) bad
farewell to Polexander, and taking Galtazis, Garruca, and his other domestics
with him, presently embarked himself. Polexander saw them go out of the haven,
and when he had lost sight of the ship; Go happy Zelmatida, (said he to
himself) go and receive the reward of thy fidelity, and never complain of
Fortune. It Is I that am the only and prodigious example of that unmercifull
goddesses fury. I have longings, and no hope; I am wilful and obstinate in
things which I know to be impossible, I run after a shadow, a Chimera, which
vanishes when I think to catch it; and my best grounded intentions are so many
waking dreams. Shall I give way to this invicible necessity, and shall I give
so much content to mine enemy, as to confess my self overcome? No, I will
dye, since I cannot vanquish; and yet I will not dye as long as I can defend my
self. Make an end then (cruel Fortune) make an end of what thou have begun,
and suffer not a man without hope or arms to contest with thee so long time
for the victory. After he had said thus, he retired and spent the rest of the
day with Alcippus. Diceus in the mean time performed his Masters commands; and
when all things were ready, presented himself to Polexander. The Prince
presently remembered what he had ordered, and asked whether it were done? Diceus
told him he might part when he pleased. Let it then be presently, (replied
Polexander) and though there be no hope left for us, yet let us not fail to
act that which only hope makes other men put in execution. He went forth of the
Palace as privately as he could, and by a by-way came to the haven; where he
found his ship ready, and the wind so favorable, that had they been all
enclosed in his ship, as in that of Ulysses, he would not have chosen another.
He left the Canaries behind him, and doubled that point of the Madera Island
which looks to the West, and is by the Inhabitants there called the Den, or
Cove of Wolves. O what vows and prayers made he to the Incomprehensible Power
which commands the winds, makes the Sea calm or raging, and to whom only there
is no place inaccessible, when he saw himself so near the fatal place where
all his felicity was enclosed! Had Polexander absolutely left himself to the
guidance of that Being, it is very likely his voyage had been more fortunate
then all the former. But his passion bringing him to have recourse to false
Divinities, that Power which calls it self jealous, could not endure such
Idolatry, but called those furious winds which are the Messengers of his anger
and appointing them to be Officers of his Justice, delivered up to their rage
our Idolatrous Lovers vessel. Those violent executioners of their Masters
will, flew to the farthest of the North to find out the cold, and the hayle;
and opposing them to the exhalations of the South, which are still contrary to
them, from thence formed both lightnings and thunder. Polexander who imputed to
Fortune the crosses which came from a higher hand, thought at this time there
would be a decision of their ancient quarrel. He therefore undaunted, looked
on death, and addressing himself to that imaginary power: Increase (said he to
it) the tempest if it can be; make the water and the fire but one Element,
carry me up to heaven, and then throw me down into hell: dash my ship against
the rocks, or beat her in pieces by the impetuousnesse of the waves: I fear
nothing, provided that by my shipwreck I escape the mis^hap of being any longer
kept from the place of Alcidiana's abode. This prayer was too unreasonable, and
addressed to a Divinity too weak to be heard, for that very day was Polexander
driven back again in ken of the Canaries, and from thence into that fearful
extent of Sea which separates both the worlds. The same Spirit which had
stirred up the storm, taking no pleasure in man's sufferings, sent our Hero a
calm, and by a pure effect of its favor, brought his forlorn ship into a
sanctuary, which Nature had framed with her own hands for the safety of
Navigators. This haven was of an ovall form which separated two rocks, and is
at the end of an Isle which is almost equal distant from the Canaries, the
Azores and the Hesperides. Polexander much moved for not seeing any end of his
labors, went on shore, and commanded Alcippus and Diceus to follow him.
As Soon as he was landed, he lay down on the grass to refresh himself, but
persecuted by his secret disquiets, he arose sighing, and began to walk in a
way much beaten. After he had gone some five or six hundred paces, he saw a
great wood, and at the entrance into it many little houses. He showed them to
Alcippus and Diceus, and contrary to his custom, seeming very curious, Let Us
go see (said he) on what place the storm has thrown us: And with that went
toward the Cottages, and as he came nearer to them, descried such things as
are not seen in the habitations of Fishermen, nor other the like Islanders.
Though they were but of wood, earth and thatch, yet were they all of one
Symmetry, and disposed in such order, that they were joined together by very
thick and high enclosures. He came to the Gate, and finding it open, entered
into a court not much unlike a cloister of the Carthusians. After he had a
while considered the place, and saw no body coming or going, he was afraid to
disturb by his presence the quiet of those that dwelt there. This made him
resolve to retire, but on the instant he was staid by the plaints and sighs of
a personage he saw not. He therefore drew near as softly as he could to the
place whence they came, and beckning to Alcippus and Diceus to be attentive,
placed himself on the side of the third cottage door. The party that lamented
was within it, and made known the height of her affliction by the vehemence of
her sighs. At last she betook her again to her speech, which her sobbings had
interrupted, and with a voice powerful enough to vanquish inhumanity it self,
spoke thus: I see well, that in changing of place, I have not changed my
fortune, and in carrying always with me the unhappy affection, which is the
sole cause of all my miseries, it happens to me as to those unpatient sick, who
think to recover their healths, in forsaking the places where they lost it. Ah
incomprehensible wisdom, which do all things for the best, I do not
complain either of the weakness or other infirmities of our Sex! I admire
the order of thy Justice in my own calamity; and believe, it is not without
some mystery, that after thy causing us to be borne without defense, thou
exposest us to those irreconcilable enemies, called men. But why permittest
thou that our eyes, our hearts, and our own reason should arm themselves
against us, and give us over (will we nill we) to the mercy of those monsters?
Why find we allurements in our tormentors? Why sweetness in our tyrants? and
in lieu of neglecting them even when they love us, why do we love them when
they most despise us? And thou too amiable Po -- ha! what was I like to say? I
had almost named the cruel one that kills me, and thou (I say) insensible
Prince, why see thou not me in the extremity whereto thou have brought me?
But for what new punishment return'st thou into my thoughts? O get thee, get
thee from that place which is filled with naught but the marks of thy
ingratitude; and be not so barbarous to stay and gaze on those tortures which
by thy means are inflicted on an innocent Lady. Her tears and sighs gave a
period to her complaints, and increasing Polexanders curiosity, forced him to
open the cottage door. He there saw a Lady laid on the earth, upholding her
head with one hand, and wiping her tears off with the other. She appeared to
him so fair in the midst of her sorrows, that he confessed her beauty was
far more then her sadness. The desolate fair one no sooner saw him, but she
gave an extraordinary shrieke, and shut again her door, without speaking a
word. Polexander amazed at the Ladies astonishment, excused himself to her,
but saw her not; and fearing to displease her, went to another Cell. He found
the door of it open, he knocked, he called, and for fear of committing
another error, expected when some one would answer him. But 'twas all in vain,
no body came; and had he not taken on a resolution to enter without leave, he
might have stood there till night. He made sign to his Squire and Diceus to
follow him, and entered into a hall, which had nothing of the austerity of an
Hermitage. The seeling was painted black, and on the black, there were fires
quenched with tears, Love-knots cut by Sythes, wings broken, mirrors
shattered, and among so many signs of despair, there were seen little
Anchors, which seemed to say, that the misfortunes described in those Devises
would one day have an end. Polexander dwelt not long on them, being wooed
thence by other paintings which filled all the one side of the hall. He stood
so much surprised, nay truly so much astonished when he had well considered
them, that being not able to speak, he took Alcippus by the arm, and showed
him with his finger the causes of his wonder. The Tables were all hung of one
height, yet some were longer then others. The first in rank was the portract
of a Prince who by his smoaky color, by his curled hair, by the littleness
of his eyes, and the disproportioned features of his face, made them censure
how sensual he was, and how inconstant as well in his love as hatred,
Polexander knew him by his Inscription: ZABAIM KING OF SENEGA, OF GUINEA, AND
OF ALL THE LANDS WASHED BY THE RIVER NIGER.

The second Table, (which was one of the longest) represented an Amphitheater,
on whose degrees there were a great number of Spectators. At one of the ends
was pictured a Knight, who held his sword to the throat of a man who seemed to
be drowned in his blood: and at the other end, the same Knight was represented
between two Lions stricken through with many wounds, and laid dead on the
sand. Above this Table were these words: THE COMBAT OF ZABAIM FOR THE
UNFORTUNATE ALMANZAIRA.

The third Table was as the first, and showed the picture of a Lady very sad
and beautiful. Polexander could not know her, because there was no
Inscription. Underneath these three Tables were four more, of which, the first
was the second of the longest. On that was seen a great assembly of all kind
of people, and in the midst of them a Prince and Princess holding hands. The
two next Tables were square, and the principal causes of Polexanders
astonishment. The first, showed a young Turk, above him was writ, BAJAZET; and
underneath these letters, C. L. U. A. P. D. S. Our Hero looked earnestly on
that Bajazet, knew him for the same that was Captain of the Pirates of the
Ocean, and did all he could to compose words from the seven letters which he
thought to have some mystery in them. But that which amazed him more, was to
see the picture of his brother next to the Turks; and the more he would doubt
of it, the more was he compelled by the excellence of the Painter (which had
made it perfectly resemble him) to confess it was that young Prince which was
held for the fairest man of his Age. But how could he doubt of it, since he saw
these letters at the foot of the Table, I. P. H. I. D. A. M. A. N. T. U. S.
After he had well looked on it, he turned toward Diceus, and asked if he knew
it not? Diceus answered, 'twas Iphidamantus. It Is he, it is (...), (said
Polexander) and what makes me absolutely believe it, is, that I see him by
Bajazet. That Turk loves him, and may be, more then he should. My brother
took notice of it on diverse occasions, and has told me, he saw his picture
in a box which that Rover always wore about his neck. It Is a strange thing to
be borne in the darkness of false religion. The most eminent personages are
in it subject to fearful abominations, and their virtues are blinded with so
many vices, that when a strict examination has passed on them, they are found
nothing less then what they are in the month of Fame. Polexander being freed
from these considerations, cast his eyes on the last Table of the second rank,
and there saw a man, who in the night time, let down a child (from a window)
which was in the swathing clothes; and further off, the same thief was seen
running away with the Infant. These words were at the bottom of the Table:
THIS WAS THE FIRST MISCHANCE WHICH BETIDED ALMANZOR PRINCE OF SENEGA.

At that name Polexander renewed his amazement, and knowing not how to fit this
stealing of Almanzor, with the adventures which the mute Almandarin had made
known to him. However it be, (said he) Fortune and Fame are very just, in
filling the Land and the Sea with the brave name of Almanzor. O Prince, more
worthy of envy then pity! how extraordinary is thy Fate? Thou find
Immortality in the grave. Thy glory has as many Theaters as there are
Kingdoms and Cities where valor and love are in estimation; and those very
Isles which are almost unknown, are acquainted with thy Name, and publish thy
great actions. Polexander had a subject for speech too fair and pleasing to
stop there. But he was constrained, by seeing enter into the hall a Lady, not
so young and fair as the first he had seen there; yet one, who by her majesty
and sweetness was not less powerful to draw his eye on her. He came to her
with a great deal of respect, and after he had asked pardon for the liberty he
had taken: Madam, (said he) it was not an indiscreet curiosity which made me
land on this Isle. A storm drove my vessel hither, and the ill weather stays
me here. The Lady turned her eyes on Polexander, and taking from the sight of
him I know not what secret joy, she answered him thus: Do not attribute either
to the winds or Fortune, a chance which without doubt came from that merciful
Goodness, which after the trial of my patience, would make use of you to put
a period to all my miseries. And truly, when I feel the inward comforts I
receive in seeing you, I am oblieg'd to believe, the will of heaven was the
Author of your arrival, and it declares to me by those extraordinary
agitations, that next that Power I should acknowledge you alone for my
Deliverer. The Lady thus ending her speech, Polexander would have replied to
it, but she hindered him. She took him by the hand, and leading him to a
corner of the hall, for fear of being heard by Alcippus or Diceus: I have
been here now almost five years, (said she to him) and all this time no
creature could come to know who I was. But at this present, in stead of
concealing my self as I have done hitherto, I find I am compelled to tell you
my name and fortune, without fear of any new miseries that may betide me by so
important a declaration. You see here Almanzaira sometimes Queen of the
fairest kingdoms of Africa, and now miserable and exiled into this unknown
Island. Polexander was much surprised at the name of Almanzaira, and not
doubting but she was the same whom Zabaim had repudiated, would have told her
the tragical end of Almanzor: But she gave him not time, for bringing him into
a garden, which seemed rather cultivated for necessity then pleasure, led him
into a wood wherein were many fair alleys, and seating her self in a place
environed with little ^rfe-banks, invited Polexander to do the like. Alcippus
and Diceus went another way, and the Queen seeing her self at liberty, in
this manner began the recital of her adventures.

The History of ALMANZAIRA and ZABAIM.
I Owe the honor of my birth to that great King, who by the extent of his
territories, as by the strength of his people, has always disputed with
mighty Belul the title of Emperor of Ethiopia. His name was Almanzor, and
because the Queen my Mother was brought to bed of me upon the River Zaira, he
would have me called Almanzaira. You wonder may be, to see the color of my
face not answerable to that of my Nation, but your astonishment will cease,
when I shall have told you, that my mother (as borne in Europe) was far
whiter then I. That Princess had not by my birth the contentment she expected.
For she never had her health past her childbirth, but dyed after three or four
years languishing. Almanzor having lost so amiable a wife, turned all his
thoughts and care to preserve what she had left him. I was then all his
affection: and noting in my extreme childhood, I know not what inclinations,
which bred great hopes in him, 'twas his will I should be brought up with the
most of wariness and curiosity. To that end, he built for me a Palace in the
midst of his gardens, and gave me many Ladies of eminent virtue, that having
always in sight, persons of such perfection, I might at last become somewhat
that was not ordinary. I profited so well in that school, that at the age of
ten years I had gotten to such knowledge as bred wonder in my Father and
Governesse. I lived in a continual repose to my age of sixteen; but as if
that sixteenth year had been the utmost term of my felicity, I found my
self (though innocent) involved in crimes and infamy. Far from the Kingdom
of Congo, reigned, under the authority of the Queen his Mother, that Monarch
feared of all Africa, whose remembrance is as dear to me as his enmity is
sensible. Almanzaira could speak no more, but her sobs did for her, and told
Polexander that, which may be she had not dared to say her self. At last she
grew recollected; and retaking her discourse: Zabaim, and my dear Lord (said
she) is the Prince I mean. He had not yet attained to his eighteenth year,
when his desire of fame, and the curiosite of seeing strange Countries made him
leave his Kingdom. He got to Sea, attended proportionably to his quality. Some
time he spent in the Court of the King of Guinea, from thence he went to that
of Benin, and came at last to ours at Congo. Almanzor welcomed him as a potent
Prince and his ancient Allie. Some few days after his arrival, some body
spoke to him of my beauty and wit, and those relators told him those tales lied
the more boldly, because they were certain I was not to be seen, and by
consequence Zabaim could not convince them of imposture. At first that young
King heard those praises without show of any desire to see me, nor any great
discontent if he had not: seen me yet. But as soon as he heard how my Father
caused me be kept in a Palace whereinto none had access, he seemed presently
troubled, and growing in love on hearsay, or rather following the error of
most young people, who affect nothing so much as what is forbidden, resolved to
see me. When he had set that design on foot, all others were suspended: and
without foreseeing the difficulties of his enterprise, therein embarked
himself with all the indiscretion which commonly accompanies those of his age
and quality. He might have made known his desire, and have asked the King my
Fathers leave to present his service; but he thought it would be no glory to
him to take those ways which should be common to him with Princes of less
value. He therefore concealed his intention from him, strove to win some one of
my domestics, set his Confidents on work, walked at all times near my
lodgings, and by a young man's imprudency no day past without talking to
Almanzor of his depart, and yet staid without any appearance of a just
hinderance. Some time past before my father had any suspicion of Zabaim, but so
soon as he had reflected on his discourses, he perceived the cunning. He
therefore set his confidents as spies over him; and watched him with such care
himself, as one evening he found him with one of my women. Be pleased to
imagine whether he were offended at it, he who was the most severest Prince of
the world, and the most jealous of his reputation. His first thoughts were to
kill Zabaim. But loath to draw so powerful enemies on his arms, or at least
pardoning the Princes youth, he thought it best to be freed of him without any
noise. To that purpose, the next morning he writ a note to him in the name of
the Prince his Confident, and sent him word, his design was discovered, the
King was advertised of it, and that if he did not quickly save himself, he ran
the hazard of never seeing his own Kingdom again. This letter was so nimbly
thrust into the Princes bed, that he perceived it not, though he was present.
When he was laid he found it, and calling for a torch to see what 'twas, was
much amazed when he saw his design thrive no better. His courage yet failed
him not. A day or two longer he staid in Court, with as good a cheer as
before, and inventing a specious pretext to color his departure, took leave of
the King my Father. Almanzor, somewhat troubled for thus making him quit his
Kingdom, sent spies after him, with charge, to see what way he took. At their
return they said for certain he was gone toward Guinea. He thought then that
the Princes passion would go no further, and that it was rather a Caprichio of
youth, then a design well framed. Time confirmed him in that opinion, and his
mind was quite at rest; when the King of Benin sent his Ambassadors to him to
renew their ancient Alliance, and entreat him to be pleased that the Princess
his daughter might pass some time in my company. Almanzor thinking himself
much obliged to the entreaties and civilities of that Prince, dispatched two
of the principal Lords of Congo, to restore his complements, ratify the
treaty of their Alliance, and to offer him as well as to his daughter all that
was in his command. Not long after the return of my fathers Ambassadors,
arrived Palmira, (so was the Princess of Benin called) and was received with
all magnificence, and the first day lodged with two of her Ladies within some
of my lodgings. Our first interview was accompanied with all that, which
courtesy makes use of in the like occasion; but there was this difference
betwixt my complements and those of Palmira, that mine were all heart and
freedom, and hers mixed with so much fear and humility, that I knew not how
to behave my self to her. She had not been with us above fifteen days, when a
strange accident discovered to me the cause of her submissions and differences.
The King my Father who punctually visited me twice a day, had let slip four,
without either seeing or sending to me. I wondered at his neglect; but I did it
more, when one evening I saw him come into my chamber, dragging after him a man
who had his hands bound behind him. As far off as he saw me, Almanzaira,
(said he to me; with the tone of a voice which witnessed at once both his
choler and grief) where is Palmira? I answered, she was retired. Let her come
to me, (said he) and turning to one of my women, commanded that servant to call
her. Whilst she was gone, Almanzor did nothing but walk with hasty strides up
and down my chamber. Some times he lifted his eyes and hands to heaven, then
he stamped on the planching, and afterward stopping short before me: O heaven!
which see all, (cried he) and art just^ why would thou suffer so horrid a
treason? But since it is thy will that I must punish it, posterity shall know, my
honor has ever been more (...) to me then my life, or my Crown. After that,
he turned him to my Governesses, and with an angry brow, It Is you, (said he)
unusefull and perfidious women, which one way or other are become confederates
with mine enemies, and you shall receive the deserved punishment of your
negligence and disloyalty. As he ended these threatenings, Palmira entered my
chamber. She neither trembled nor looked pale; and though in her conscience she
knew her self guilty, yet showed such a height of courage, as is not usual
with maidens. As Soon as she saw the Prisoner which my father held, she knew
him to be her principal Confident, and judging by his surprisall her cunning
was discovered; in lieu of being troubled at it; she spoke thus to the King my
father: Think more then once on what thou intend'st to do. Thy precipitation
may work more mischief then my rashness has done. Give no ear to it then;
if thou will preserve the name of discreet, and give thy self patience to
hear me. I call to witness that eternal Providence which reads my heart,
and beseech it to be never auspicious to me, if I hide from thee the truth of
(...) things as have passed since I have been with Almanzaira. I swear to
thee, that neither she, nor any of her women, ever knew me for other then
Palmira Princess of Benin. Let them live in that error still, and talk not to
them of a crime, of which they are ignorant, that they may so continue without
knowing the offender. Almanzor was staid at Palmira's words, and though he gave
no great belief to them, yet fearing to commit a fault, durst go no further.
Presently he led away Palmira, with his prisoner, and left me and my women,
poor innocent creatures as we were, in such a fear, that we passed the rest
of the night in asking one another what offennes we had committed with Palmira.
At day break, there came into my chamber, the President, and the most ancient
of Almanzors Council: After they had put forth my Governesses, they asked me
many questions, and would compel me to confess, I knew Palmira for some other
then the Princess of Benin. (Be pleased my dear Comforter, that I open not
again an unfortunate process, which made those who knew me not, to suspect my
innocence, and was like to have utterly ruined both mine honor and life.) Know
that Almanzor, (of a debonaire and loving father, grown suddenly a mortal
enemy) permitted the inhumane and miscreant Baramas Prince of Anzicana, to
maintain publicly I had lost mine honor with Zabaim. In prosecution of this
false accusation he gave me over into the hands of such Judges, who without
doubt were won by that unfortunate Tyrant; and with his own hand signed the
Sentence of death which they had pronounced against me. 'Twas by that bloody
Judgment I understood, not only Palmira to be that Zabaim for whom I was
accused, but also how without any regard to the quality of a Sovereign he was
condemned to three strange kind of punishments. First, they enjoined him to
marry me, to satisfy the public Scandal, and restore me my honor lost by
his means. Secondly, he was to fight with Baramas, or confess the crime
whereof he was accused. And lastly, 'twas said, if he escaped the first combat,
he should be exposed to the Lions for reparation of the injury he had dared to
commit against the Crown of Congo. In the interim, the Name of Zabaim and his
regal quality running in my mind, I long time meditated on the danger he had
undergone for me; and by little and little engaging my self to wishes for his
most advantage, I admired the discretion wherewithal he had lived among all
the liberties I had given him. Afterward, I approved of his love; and finally,
my memory representing him to me far fairer then it was painted there by mine
eyes, made him so dear to me. that I grieved not so much to lose mine honor,
as to be deprived of so true and respectfull a lover. For himself, he thanked
the Judges for their severity; and calling them his tutelar gods, and his
benefactors, besought them a thousand times, to cause their Sentence to be
speedily executed. His excessive joy, made my father think, I had not so far
forgotten my self as to satisfy the Princes desire. Notwithstanding,
imagining he could not stop the speech of the people, nor resettle his shaken
reputation, but by that great execu^ion, he would not have it put off. Many of
his subjects petitioned for my pardon and Zabaims, and told him, that though he
would not be so good a father as to have pity on a daughter whom all the world
thought innocent, yet should he be so wise as not to draw on his hands the
forces of many of his neighbors, who sought but an honest pretext, to
proclaim war against him. These reasons, which in all likelihood should have
staid, were the cause why he hastened the execution of Judgment. I will not
tell you Zabaims extreme joy, when he was taken out of prison to marry me; nor
what countenance I kept during an action which in effect was to me as glorious,
as in appearance it was full of dishonor. The Prince spoke to me a hundred
things powerful enough to obliege me to love him, yea if I had been to that
time his enemy; and seeing I dissolved in tears: Madam, (said he, casting
himself at my feet) why do you so exceedingly afflict your self? In troubling
the peace which the witnesses of your conscience should give you, you justify
the injustice of our common enemies. Remember that you are innocent, and in
performing the actions of a criminal, you cast blots on that most pure
reputation with which you ought to return to heaven. But what an ill
Interpreter am I of your sorrow? You weep not with grief for your offense,
since most certainly you have committed none. It Is the discontent to wed a
Prince without Name and merit which afflicts you: and you believe without doubt
that this alliance is no less infamous, then the crime whereof you are
unjustly accused. If it be so, Madam, be of comfort, since you shall be a widow
as soon as married; and at farthest within four and twenty hours you shall
see your self freed from that ignominious servitude whereto a cruel necessity
has engaged you. I could not endure that Zabaim should say more; but entreated
his silence, and my request was accompanied with such a countenance, as
sufficiently showed him what my intention was. The chief Priest of the gods of
Congo, had order to come where we were; and he entered with his attendants,
where omitting no ceremonies which are observed at the marriage of Princes, he
linked Zabaim and my self in such a bond, that in spite of a devilish
Sorceresse charms it holds to this day. As Soon as these Rites were performed,
the Prince of Senega was conducted back again to prison, and I was left
without any other company, then my afflictions, tears and prayers. The next
morning, they made me put on mourning, and in those funeral ornaments, I was
brought to the place where my dear husband was to fight with the perjured
Baramas. He came presently after me, and desiring to see me before he died,
presented himself at the foot of my Scaffold. Long time stood he with his
eyes fixed on me, and showed he durst not speak for fear of offending me. I
perceived his fear, and (desirous to assure him of my love, by such terms as
was firting for me) Our enemies (said I) have imagined they should lessen your
courage, and increase your adversaries valor, by clothing me as if you were
already dead. But their malice shall have a success quite contrary to their
hopes; and the black I wear, is a certain presage of that death which your
valor and just iudignation have prepared for them. For the rest, if you love
me, think of preserving a life which is the beginning of mine; and fight with
this belief, that one only Soul equally animates both our bodies, and she
therefore cannot be separated from yours, but it must instantly abandon mine. I
will then, Madam, (replied Zabaim) live and overcome, since it is your pleasure;
for I should doubt of that Providence which governes all, should I doubt of the
victory, which its Justice and your Innocence assures me. The Prince could not
answer me, because his enemy was come into the field, and cried audaciously, To
the combat. Hereupon Zabaim left me, and flew on Baramas as swift as lightning,
met with him like thunde, and had sooner killed him, then they perceived he was
wounded. This facility of quelling a man, which had the repute of being
invincible, so astonish^d the beholders, and so absolutely changed their first
imaginations; that all with one voice cryde out, that I was innocent. For all
this, I was brought back to my prison, and my dear Lord and husband to his.
But the people, confident of my virtue, and enraged at my fathers rigor, ran
out of the place where I had been justified, and ran to the Palace. Great and
little, rich and poor, men and women, rushed in, and cried, Congo is saved,
Almanzaira is innocent, the Calumniator is dead, and the honor of our Prince
is redeemed. Almanzor, who gave not over the being a father, though he was a
Prince, and a Prince exceeding jealous of his authority, was ravished to hear
these transports from his Subjects, and those testimonies of love. Yet would he
not let go nor forget the affront which in his opinion Zabaim had an intent to
put on him. Seeing then his subjects would not be appeased, he arose, and
imposing silence: My people, said he, I thought my daughter would have proved
innocent; but this is not enough, neither for my self, nor for her, nor for
you. It behoov'd, that she should not have been suspected. Vulgar persons are
as those lesser stars which may be obscured, and yet our eyes not less
enlightened. But those whom heaven has constituted Princes, in this resemble
the Sun, that being borne to be conspicuous to all the world, all their
Eclipses are noted, and their least blemishes not let pass unknown. I
perceive well by your actions and words, that you would have me indulgent, and
you beseech me for the life of her whom you think not unworthy of her birth.
Well, my people, I will remember I am a father, since that quality is not
contrary to the name of Judge and Prince. I cannot err, since heaven it self
has made so public a declaration in favor of her Innocence. I give you your
Princess, but ask me no more. This impudent and daring young man, who to
satiate his brutish appetite, has caused so many troubles amongst us, must
satisfy our just indignation, and restore to my daughter by another way then
that of marriage the honor which we may say she has lost, since she was in
danger of losing it. The people replied nothing to my fathers words, but went
out of the Palace, all at once blessing his clemency and Justice. Almanzor was
no sooner retired into his privy chamber, but two of his Officers came to him.
The eldest began thus: My Lord, (said he) Zabaim has requested a favor from
his Judges, which they have denied him, because it absolutely depends on you.
And what is that? (my father asked) It is not (said he) that you should give
him his life, nor that you should change his punishment; but that you will be
pleased, the Princess may be to morrow on the same Scaffold she was to day,
only to have the contentment to dye in her presence. He entreates you
likewise, that she come not clad in those mournful habits which accused her
of a crime whereof she was innocent. That Magistrate spoke no further, but
attended the Kings answer. My father was pleased with Zabaims request, and to
show he liked it, sent one of his Confidents, to command me from him, to deck
my self the next morrow as I was wont to do on my birth day. This command was
the more welcome to me, because I thought Almanzor had acknowledged my dear
husbands Innocence, and so sent his will that I should dress me for the
solemnity of my nuptials. On that belief I unloaded a part of those
afflictions which oppressed me. I set my mind at rest for some few hours; and
my hope of being happy was prevalent enough to shut mine eyes which had not
been closed since I was a prisoner. My sleep yet was not so sound, but that it
was sometimes interrupted by my dreams and affrightings. By that little light
which came at day-breake into my chamber I fully awaked: and calling up those
women which served me, commanded them to let my Guard know I was so. With a
great deal of joy they obeyed me; and almost as soon I saw enter my chamber
the Ladies who had had the care of my breeding. At their coming in all my cares
vanished; and I believed that he who did me that favor, seemed to promise me
many others. Those Ladies dressed me, and their neatness was accompanied with
so much diligence, that I was ready when I was sent for. Out of my prison I
came, and saw all the streets full of people. Joy sat in their countenances,
and when I entered the Amphitheater, the clapping of hands, and acclamations
assuring me of the public affection, were certain presages of my approaching
felicity. A little while after I saw appear the valiant Zabaim, accompanied
with his Judges, and followed by a great Guard. Never did my imagination
represent him to me to amiable as he appeared that day. He intimated a courage,
which made no man doubt but that he was really a King. In the mean time, pity
and horror seized upon me, when I saw my self so far deceived in my hopes.
My affrightment was far greater, when Zabaims Judges and Guard, placing
themselves on the Amphitheaters degrees, left him alone on the Sand. We gazed
on one another, with eyes which witnessed the truth of our affection. But
as soon as I saw one of those dreadful and furious beasts, which was to
devour the Prince, I fell (after a great shrieke) flat on my face, and so lay
in a swound all the time which my dear husband spent to make himself
victorious. The shoutes of the people, the noise of the trumpets, and the joy
of my women brought me from my fainting. I recovered my ^ight, and the first
thing I saw, was my beloved Zabaim, who planting his foot on the Lions belly,
and leaning on his sword, seemed to ask whether there were any more enemies to
be overcome. A little after that dear Prince came to me, and gave me thanks for
the good success of his combat; and saying, a thousand like victories could
not make him worthy my favor, he swore to me, his utmost desire was to gain
by an honorable death the glory to live continually in my memory. They gave
him not time to continue his discourse, nor me leave to answer him: for all the
Spectators, leaving their places, and making their excess of joy resound
through the place, came all thronging about my Scaffold. Some took Zabaim, and
(whether he would or no) placing him on the buckler wherewithal he fought, put
him on the shoulders of ten or twelve men, and in that manner carried him about
the Amphitheater. Others took off the Lions skins, and (with them) setting
their heads on tops of pikes, carried them as trophies before the invincible
Zabaim. During this little triumph, some advertised the King my father of what
had passed, and though he seemed discontented at it, yet Zabaims virtue touched
him; and judging, by what he had done, what he might do, esteemed himself
happy (in himself) to see me the wife of so great a King. Yet, he would not
let the people perceive he was capable of so quick a change. He kept in his
Palace; and though he desired Zabaims alliance as much as his Subjects, yet he
seemed as if he had been yet in his first sentments. When those who carried
Zabaim were entered the Palace, they asked to see their King: He came out on a
terrace, (which was in a place from whence one might easily speak to those in
the Court) and seeming to be much astonished; What Is here (said he) my
subjects? Have you chosen another Prince then my self, and put in my place the
man I see on the buckler? The multitude confusedly answered, no: And after they
had many times cried out, Heaven save our Sovereign Prince! My Uncle began to
speak for all; and told my father, that Congo besought him by his mouth to
preserve a Prince, which had not only vindicated his innocence by all kind of
proofs, but who promised no less by his valor then to add to the Crowns of
Senega and Gambra, those of the greatest Kingdoms of Africa. As my Uncle ended
his Remonstrance, I entered the Palace borne by ten Gentlemen. At sight of me,
the shouts and applauses began again. But when the people saw that Almanzor
was not to be moved, they fell on the earth, and said they would never rise
thence, till they had obtained Zabaims life, and the accomplishment of my
marriage. At last my father was pleased to be forced, and told them he accorded
to their prayer, what he would not have yielded to the solicitations of all the
Kings in the world. They thanked him for it after their manner, by shouts,
clapping of hands, and other confusions. As Soon as Zabaim was at liberty, he
came, took, and led me to my father, of whom he knew so well and with so much
eloquence to ask pardon, that he got it for us both. Almanzor granted it with
his eyes full of tears, as transported, he embraced us both, and leaving
himself to be wholly overcome by his own good nature: I have (said he) erred
my children; and knowing you as I do at this present, I disavow my
circumspection and hastiness. Live happy, live long! What said I? Let us live
together full of quiet and honor, that our perpetual union may make us
beloved of the good, and redoubtable to all miscreants. Zabaim cast himself at
my fathers feet, when he heard him speak with so much affection, and embracing
hard his legs; My Lord, said he, you shall never repent you of the favor you
have done me. I will give you a good account of the life you have given me, and
if so be the favor of heaven second my pretentions, I dare vaunt, that the
glory of my forefathers shall be but a part of that which I will leave to my
children. Almanzor took up my dear husband, and held him long in his arms
without the power of speaking a word, except that he would forget what was
passed, or would not remember it, but to affect more the person who had cost
him so dear the getting. These tokens of reconciliation having spent the rest
of the day, the two following were bestowed in preparing the solemnity for my
nuptials, and the pastimes wherewithal they were to be accompanied. For many
months our Court was busied about nothing but in celebrating my marriage feast.
After all the sports were ended, Zabaim took leave of the King my father, and
departed, to satisfy the request of all his subjects. For my self, who could
not resolve to leave a personage that was so dear to me, I fell into a swound
in bidding him farewell, and in that manner was carried into my dear Lords
Ship. After a happy voyage we landed at Senega, and were there welcomed with
all the magnificence which the people use to display on the like occasions. Two
years together Zabaim served and honored me with the same distance, and the
same passion which lovers make show of in their first pursuits. I was his sole
delight. I absolutely ruled the mind of the Queen my Mother in law, I enjoyed
the love all the Kingdom, and never Princess lived environed at once with so
many prosperities: Truly they were excessive, and so not of long continuance.
At the beginning of the third year, Love gave place to war. Zabaim offended
by the King of Melley, entered with his arms into his territories, and made
himself master of them. The Kings of Temian, of Guma and of Dama armed
themselves to reestablish that Prince; but by the valor of Zabaim they were
enveloped in the fortune of their allie. The King my Lord, laden with palms
and honor, returned to me, and renewed his former flames. A little time after
the King of Guinea, who by his power had made himself redoubtable to all his
neighbors, and who alone thought himself to be the Arbitrator of peace and
war, put a great Army into the field, and sent to proclaim war against
Zabaim. My dear Lord, unwilling to suffer this audacious Prince to go
unpunished, entered his Kingdom, and conquered it with an incredible
promptitude. But alas! how fat all were his victories to him? what did he lose
in getting that great kingdom? and how cruelly did a slave belonging to the
King of Guinea, avenge the defeat and death of his Master? Yes, (my dear
Deliverer) during that Conquest, Zabaim by my mis-hap rather then by his fault,
or if you will, by the power of charms and philters, rather then by his
levity, became so dislike himself, that you cannot without horror hear that
which I have to tell you. But before I relate to you so prodigious a change,
promise me, rather to bemoane my Lord, then to blame him, and that no
compassion which you shall have of me, win you to wish him ill: for, I shall
hold you for mine enemy, if you cannot love me without hating him whom I love
more then my self. Rather bemoane us both: abhor that witchcraft which has
had power to ruin so solid an amity; and if you have ought which you can
lawfully affect, beseech the Author of all love which is sacred, that he give
you not over as he has done my dear Lord and husband, to the mercy of those
infamous Sorcerers, which corrupt the best dispositions, and make brutish the
most rational of men. The three first months of my dear Lords absence, I
heard so often from him, that I admired his care of writing to me, and the
speediness he commanded his Couryers. The fourth, both the one and the other
grew more slack, and the fifth passing without any news at all, I was
perplexed with so great apprehensions, that both sleeping and waking me thought
I still saw that dear Prince in his grave. Had I not feared his displeasure, I
had gone to see him in his Army. But rather willing to be unfortunate, then to
undertake ought he might dislike; I had recourse to my vows and prayers, and
did then nothing but beg from heaven, either to take me from the world, or
preserve to me the friendship of my dear Lord, without which my life was a
torment to me. In less then three weeks, I sent above twenty Posts into
Guinea. Those who most truly loved me, returned with that haste I commanded
them, and brought me the Kings letters. I received them with that transport of
joy you may imagine. But when I saw not in them those terms of love I had read
in the former: Alas, cried I, I have lost my Lords affection. Unfortunate that
I am! some one of my actions, or of my words, have received an ill
interpretation. I confess, dear Zabaim, I have erred; but how great soever my
offense be, it merited not so rigorous a punishment, since my heart never
consented to it. My grief had even carried me to despair, if my women had not
used all kind of reasons to suppress it. Sometimes they accused me for
suffering my self to be deceived by vain imaginations; then they put me in
mind, that time and business had changed the Kings amorous thoughts into
others more serious. These considerations did a while master my sorrow: but a
little after I rejected them, and would receive no more comfort. At last, after
I had well wept, written much, long expected, and made many prayers and
sacrifices, my dear Lord returned to me. I did not think to see him of eight
days when he came into my chamber. This sudden welcome surprisall so
transported me, that going to meet him, I lost at once my strength, my
knowledge, and my sight. What did not that good King do, seeing the excess of
my love? He kissed me a thousand times, and wetting my cheeks with his tears,
stood a while without turning his eyes from me. When he saw I came not again,
he caused me to be carried and laid on my bed, where joining his mouth to my
cheeks, Poor Princess, (said he aloud that my Nurse might hear him) can I be
rational and betray thee as I do? With that he held his peace; and stirred not
from my boulster till some remedies had recovered me, which by little and
little I did; and the first thing I took notice of, were some tears which were
yet on my dear Lords face. That sight presently blotting out all displeasing
imaginations that remained yet behind, and making me believe I had ill
conceived them, I gently let fall my head on Zabaims cheek, and thus bespake
him: Your Almanzaira then is yet pleasing to you. She may yet glory she enjoyes
your favor, and time has not deprived her of that which love had given her.
The King could not answer me. His Speech was restrained by I know not what
hinderance; but his silence and tears assured me of his love far better then
his words would have done. I besought him to go take a little rest, and after
so long and painful a journey, not to give himself new vexations. To these
words I added a many more, and entreated him so often to look to his
preservation, that he arofe from me; but in rising said: Ah Almanzaira! how
happy should we be, if we might be always together? Though that Speech made me
fear some new disaster, yet I made all other thoughts give place to that of
the Kings health; and pressed him so hard to go repose himself, that he gave
me that contentment. He was not above two hours away when he came again to me,
where he passed the evening and part of the night. In all which time, he left
not to entertain me in the same manner he was wont before his voyage. Nay, me
thought, he had in his speeches more of tenderness and of passion, then I had
noted in those I had from him when his love was most violent. I know well these
particularities do but weary you, and you may laugh at my simplicity: but,
pardon if you please (for this troublesome remembrance) a woman who loves
nothing in the world but her husband, and yet cannot have the contentment to be
with him. Five or six days together the King was in his good humor: and I
already esteemed my self the most fortunate Princess of my time; when I found
my fears were just, my suspicions reasonable, and the Kings kind usage but
forced. He fell without any apparent cause into so deep a melancholy, and was
moved with so much impatience and disquiets, that in all the Court there was
none but I who found him supportable. My entertainment grew troublesome to
him, all companies displeased; and not suffering himself to be seen but
seldom, he abode whole days retired in his Cabinet. His anxiety went yet
further. It made him hate his Palace, the aboade in towns and the frequency of
his Courtiers. He retired him to a Castle which his Predecessors had built for
their pleasure in hunting, and seemed to be delighted with that Sport, to have
some pretense and means to muse and plod at his liberty, and wander the woods
alone. This life made me feel my first griefs, and search all the imaginable
means to know the cause of it, and thereto to apply a remedy. Before I had
recourse to those extraordinary, I would try the most speedy and facile. I
therefore went to the King in his retirement, and besought him, by his first
affection to tell me the cause of his melancholy. Dear Almanzaira, (said he)
if it be true that thou yet love me, do not enquire after my affliction. Get
thee from me, and let me undergo the punishment I have deserved. The fear I
had to displease him, kept me from pressing him any farther, or staying longer
with him. With mine eyes drowned in tears I left him, and promised in that to
show my obedience as well as in all other things. Believe what I am now about
to tell you; and thereby judge of my Lords noble nature. He could not refrain
from weeping when I went from him; and the grief he had to see me afflicted,
made him to tear his hair, and oftentimes beg his death from the Deities.
When I was come back to Senega, my first sorrows renewed; and fear,
representing to me the future, more unfortunate then I have found it, made me
lead a life so retired, as if with the Kings favor I had for ever lost the
hope of seeing him again. At last I threw my self into the arms of the
afflicteds Comforter, and thence supplicated for sufficient strength to resist
so prodigious a calamity. Truly, that Bounty that would not have a tear of
theirs lost who are conformable to its will, suffered not mine to be
fruitless, but granted all I petitioned for See how it happened. You may please
to know, that among those who came with me to Senega, there was a Prince of my
blood who became so pleasing to Zabaim, as he made him his Confident, in spite
of all jealousies from the Principals of his Kingdom. That Prince so wisely
husbanded his favor, and so gentilely obliged even those who had professed
themselves his enemies, that by little and little he quelled their envy, and
filled all the Court with admiration of his virtue. In this general
approbation he had been a year when he was engaged to follow Zabaim into
Guinea. At his return he avoided all occasions of coming where I was and
durst not come to give me an account of those commands I had given him. I
presently therefore thought him guilty, though was innocent; and not knowing on
whom to throw Zabaims change, I imagined Almaid (so was the favorite called)
had wronged me to him, that he might solely possess him. With this belief I
returned to Senega, and gave it not over, till I understood the true subject of
all my afflictions. Zabaim one day sending to me Almaid, to make known the
affection he preserved me in midst of his melancholy, or rather to hinder my
complaining of his ill treatment, I conjured him by our neerenesse of blood, by
my sad fortune, and by the authority which heaven had given me over him, not to
conceal from me any longer the causes of Zabaims hatred. When I perceived he
strove to put me on some other discourse without answering me, I redoubled my
entreaties and commands, and led him into a little closet whereto I usually
retired me to weep more freely. When he saw himself alone with me, he was not
a little perplexed, and much doubted, I was not come to that extremity, without
having taken some strange resolution. I shut the door, and fell on my knees
before him, with an intent to move him by those extraordinary submissions.
Straight he kneeled too, and almost not daring to look on me. Madam, (said he)
let not your Majesty do any thing unworthy your birth, and virtue, and suffer
not a curiosity (which cannot but be prejudicial to you) increase a malady
which it cannot cure. No, no, (replied I) I will not lose the occasion I have
to get out of my miseries by one means or other. I cast me at your feet,
Almaid, not as your Queen, but as a poor afflicted Lady who has need of your
assistance. Take pity therefore of so many tears which I have vainly spent,
and suffer her not to languish out her whole life, whom you can comfort by one
only word. Almaid, moved by my tears, could not hold his first constancy in
so great a cause of compassion, and falling to weep as well as I, called
himself a thousand times unfortunate, and wished he were dead. I left him to
his raving a long while, and spoke to him all that my grief prompted me, to
win him to discover to me the cause of all my miseries. But when I had long
expected, and saw his pity extend no further, then to bewail and not to
succor me: I arose, as one furious, and getting out his sword: Barbarous and
inhumane wretch, (said I) which have but a false and seeming pity on my
afflictions, and who take pleasure in persecuting of Innocence by thy
feigning comforts; thou would have me with mine own hand perfect that murder
which thy calumnies have begun. Almaid hearing me speak in that fashion, and
knowing I was resolute enough to fall on his sword, had he gone about to take
it from me: Madam, (cried he) preserve that virtue which has made you hitherto
victorious over your enemies, and know your wrongs are less dangerous then the
remedy you will apply to them. I will not propose to you these considerations
to release me from that absolute command you make me. Know, Madam, I will obey
it. But you must please first to promise me secrecy, to be of good heart, and
to have power enough over your self, to suffer without resenting the most
unjust contempt in the world. Were I now (replied I) to hear my Sentence of
death, and that I should be engaged to execute it my self; I am ready
prepared. I refuse no kind of torment, so I may know what it is that troubles
the King, and makes him hate the sight of me. You shall be satisfied, (said
Almaid) and I swear to you by that which is greatest in heaven, I will
conceal nothing of what you desire to know, on condition you first render my
sword. There it is, (said I) and do not believe, if thou deceiv'st me, but there
are means enough to deliver me from my miseries, and make thee repent thy
treachery. Almaid, judging by my actions as well as words, he must either ruin
me, or discover Zabaims secret, resolved to save my life even with the loss of
his fortune. He arose then, and as soon as he saw me set, (beginning his
discourse by a long Preface, which tended to nothing but the justification of
men's inconstancy) told me, it betided even the most wise to have extravagant
humors, and to prefer the most abject things which they possessed not, before
the more excellent they enjoyed. After that preparation, he related to me as
succinctly as he could, how Zabaim in his conquest of Guinea was fallen in love
with a white Slave; and so fondly amorous, that to behold the alterations she
wrought on him, 'twas necessarily believed she had bewitched him. This
Sorceresse (Madam) has not only made him forget his first affection, but made
him insensible of his own honor, and not left him so much discretion to hide
the excess of his folly. Most commonly, the like passions are of small
continuance; and though they are even strong enough to last in spite of time,
yet have they not such ability as to bicker with absence. This love of Zabaim
is quite contrary. Time strengthens it, absence, in lieu of quenching, feeds
and augments it. Those mad men which are chained up, have not more fearful
agitations then this Prince has every day. He finds no ease but in his
self-vexations. He hates all company where his grief is restrained. He flies
into the forest before day, and most commonly there spends entire nights. He
scarce eats or drinks. He has ever in his mouth the name of Zelopa, (so is
that Sorceresse named) and if he see her not again the sooner, I will not
promise you his life. Here Almaid ended: and I, who was prepared to hear
matters more prodigious, found my self in heaven when I heard this. I looked
on Almaid with a cheerfulness he expected not; and desirous to let him know
how I took it: This is then (said I) all the cause of my Lords melancholy, and
his aversion to me. Truly you are not to be pardoned for being so reserved in a
business, which has not troubled me, but only while it was concealed from
me. Your extraordinary silence had been excusable if Zabaim had intended to
have repudiated me, or to immure me to be starved betwixt four walls. But what
thought you would betide when I should know the King loved another woman then
his wife? The corruption of all Ages, and the examples of all Princes have
taught me, that 'twere worth wondering at if Zabaim should not take the way of
his Equals, but have been contented to enjoy one sole woman. I bewail his
weakness, I deplore his blindness, I condemn his inconstancy, but I wish
him no ill at all; and were not heaven displeased with his passion, I should be
the first to serve him as his Agent. Go Almaid, go, and labor for that Princes
quiet who loves thee so dearly. Leave him no longer in his despair, bring her
hither whom he loves, and free him from those fears he suffers for my sake. I
promise thee I will not cross his contentment, nor omit any thing belonging to
the endeavor of a wife of honor. Were I in your place, I would quickly find
some specious pretext, whereby, without scandal, that happy Slave, what said
I, that happy slave? that abominable Sorceresse, might live with her Lover. But
why should I soil my self in your ordures? All you men are ingenious enough
in wickedness, without any need that my too much love to my Lord should make
me your Confederate. When I had thus spoken to Almaid I was silent to hear
what he would answer. But he was so ravished with my resolution, and so
astonished at my constancy, that he could not reply. At last he came out of his
admiration, and falling at my feet, Madam, (said he) your wisdom this day
saves all Africa, and I hope in little time your virtue will be the Kings
preservation. Since you have taught me with what dexterity this malady is to be
treated, I swear to you I will forget nothing of that which may hasten his
recovery. Thus ended our discourse. Presently I writ a letter (to the King)
full of respect, and sent back Almaid to him: and within short time understood
how Almaid had taken the way I had prescribed him. Zabaim had a cessation from
those cruel tortures his affection inflicted. By little and little he became
accessible, left his country life, and recalling about him all those whom his
melancholy had estranged, made the Court as full and flourishing as ever. But
not to shut himself presently within his Cities, nor to give his subjects a
new cause of entertaining themselves with his alterations, or rather to drive
away the time whilst they went to fetch the infamous Zelopa, he would needs
make a progress through his Kingdoms. Before he began it, that journey he
came to Senega, and entreated me by the love I had always borne him, to forget
what was passed, and to be the same with him I had been the two first years
of our marriage. I confess to you, I received his excuses as if they had been
true; and was as sensible of his kindnesses, as if a loyal love had produced
them. He was so overjoyed to see my affection nothing lessened, that a hundred
times in a day he asked my pardon for his extravagancies. For my part, I
doubted not, if he had not been forced by some witchcraft, but that he would
have repented him of his error, and been won again by my care and
complying. In this good correspondency we began our progress, and so ended it.
It Is true, that oftentimes he fell into his frensies, and was as transported
from himself by the charms of that Sorceresse. But his disquiets lasted not,
and the hope he had of reseeing Zelopa, joined with the facility he promised
himself from me, made him hide his passion so well, that it troubled no body
but himself. We went even to the frontiers of Guinea, and Zabaim, resting
himself in a very fair town, intended to stay there till the Spring, and
resolved to pass that season in all kind of sports and pastimes. Three weeks
or a month after our arrival, the speech went, that the only daughter of the
late King of Guinea was coming to the Court, to cast her self at the Kings
feet, and to beseech him for somewhat whereon to subsist after the ruin of her
house. This news coming from the Town to the Court, at last entered my closet;
and one day, Almaid so well watched his time, that he spoke to me of that
supposed Princess, even in the Kings presence. I seemed to believe what he
told me. Zabaim was overjoyed at it, and saw well by my innocence, I would
contribute as much to the settling of his pleasure as himself. When Zelopa was
within three days journey of the Court, I advised the King to send to meet
her, and give her all those honors which appertained to a Lady of her
extraction. He praised my courtship, and promised to follow my counsel. But
when he saw I resolved to go so far to entertain Zelopa as out of the town,
and conduct her my self to the Palace, his joy so much troubled him, that had
I been ignorant of his affection, that which he did to thank me, had been
sufficient to have too much discovered it to me. Some five or six hours
after, Zelopa came to a Castle which is but a quarter of a League from the
town. I went thither to her with all the Court, and neglected nothing of that
which might sarisfie her pride or expectation. I found her not more fair then
Almaid had described her to me. But I saw by her countenance she should be very
humorous and cruel. My conjectures (alas!) have been but too true; and I
feel yet daily the fearful effects of that ambitious and barbarous mind.
Let me relate to you my misfortunes in order, and you will admire, what my
desire to please Zabaim made me do in spite of my inclination. I kissed that
infamous woman, I spoke to her in her own language, to entertain her the more
civilly, I intimated to her the resentment the King and I had of the honor she
did us, and so was with her, as she had been the greatest Princess of Africa.
In a very ill garb she returned my complements; and showing a brutish pride in
her actions as well as words, gave a most disadvantageous opinion of her self
to all those that came with me. I endured all that fools extravagancies for
his sake that loved her; and forgetting the birth heaven had given me, gave her
place, and with the most respect I could, brought her to the Palace. Zabaim,
whose passion deserved pity, came out of the town, and under a pretext of
hunting, would witness to the Sorceresse, that her absence had nothing at all
lessened the power of her charms. But, (my dear Comforter) let us lightly
pass over this fatal enterview, and be pleased, I spare him, who is so much
the more to be bemoaned, because 'twas either by force or frailty that he
became guilty of my misfortunes. The pernicious Zelopa was received and lodged
in the Palace as if she had been something more then Zabaims wife. She was
served with so much order and State, as made all the Court quickly believe
there was some mystery in those Ceremonies, and that she was not come to
implore the Kings elemency. The day after her arrival, there were by his
command Justes proclaimed, and to make himself amiable to that fool, made the
most prodigious expenses that ever love joined with prodigality had ever
brought any man to. All the winter was a continual succession of Sports, of
Masks, of Feasts and other pastimes; and he was not in favor with Zabaim, who
would not ruinate himself to increase the monstrous excess of his luxury.
Whilst these wicked riots drew the anger of heaven on the head of my dear
Lord, I was almost continually in my closet, bewailing the crimes whereof I
reputed my self guilty. But being not good enough to appease the eternal
Justice, I employed in those actions of pity, all that were esteemed good
people in Senega. Day and night were the Temples open, and our Priests did
penance for their Sovereigns sin, opposed their prayers and Sacrifices against
the impetuous hand of heaven and purity. Zelopa had not been at Court full six
months when I found my self with child. I concealed that alteration as much as
I could possibly; and as if I had foreseen the miseries I was to undergo for
it, did nothing but weep and afflict my self, till I was brought to bed. For
all that, my women no sooner discovered that which I concealed, but they
divulg'dit; and by that declaration filled all our Territories with a
contentment beyond imagination. Zabaim no sooner heard of it, but he abandoned
for a while her, who compelled him to look on me with contempt, and came to
throw himself at my feet. Many times he kissed my hands, and bedewing them
with his tears, Dear Almanzaira, (said he) can you endure the sight of the
most ungrateful and perfidious of men? But I wrong your virtue to doubt of
those miracles you can do. Yes, you love me in spite of my infamies, and the
case wherein you are, gives me so great and so certain proofs of it, that I
must hold those for mine enemies who ^ve persuaded me the contrary. I could not
answer him but with my tears, nor de^d my Innocence, but in witnessing the joy
I had to see him. Eight days he staid with me; and during all that time, he
either thought not on Zelopa, or thought on her but to despise her. O happy had
miserable Almanzaira been, if her Lords good motions had lasted longer, or
rather if Zelopa's charms had had less power on the will of so great a
Prince. He seemed to be absolutely freed from her, when Zelopa sent to ask his
leave for her return into Guinea. At the sole name of that Sorceresse, he
returned to his first madness. He was likely to have fallen down flat. He
suffered incredible agonies; and ^ruly I heard him say, (turning his eyes on me
as he had been ready to give up the ghost) make an end Almanzaira, finish my
miserable Destiny, and suffer me not longer to languish. No, no, my Lord, (said
I) you shall never perish through Almanzaira's fault. Had your malady none
other remedy then my death, it should not be incurable. Come home to your self
then, and figure not in your thoughts those ills which are not. And since
Zelopa's company is so necessary for your repose, either stay her by your love
or power. With that I left my chamber, which I had not done in three months
before, and went to the lascivious Zelopa. I wondered to see her so much
altered, and believed she had given out speech of her departure, by that trick
to re-inflame Zabaim's affection. I entreated her to stay yet some longer time
in Senega, and easily had my request granted. It Is true, she yielded not to me,
but on condition she might go from Court, and have the liberty to retire her
self to some place where she might not be seen but by her own domestics. I
carried Zabaim that news; and may boast, by that Service (which shall be ever
glorious to me) I preserved his life. Presently he left me, to run whither he
was hurried by the power of Charms, and the next day departed the Court and
Town without bidding me farewell. He showed Zelopa all his Kingdom, and to
take from before her all displeasing objects, he embarked himself with his
Minion, and carried her into the fairest and most delight some of his Islands.
She took a great delight in it, and calling to her aid all those Spirits
which had made her eyes and tongue so powerful, compelled them to pluck out of
Zabaim all his remainder of reason and humanity. The poor Prince felt the
effect of those new Sorceries. He became an enemy to his fame, to his people
and his own blood. He forgot his woeful Almanzaira, and casting the respect
of himself into oblivion, he adored his Crime, and lay buried in the
sensualities and ordures of Zelopa. Near three months slid away; during which,
I contented my self in complaining alone, and weeping without witness: but
when I saw my misery grow every day worse and worse, and that Zabaim neither
sent me Letter nor messenger, I could not choose but let my grief break forth.
Restore me my Lord, (wicked Zelopa) cried I often, and oppose not thy self
against the Decrees of that Sovereign Justice which would not have thee enjoy
him. My women and friends joined their complaints with mine; and (believing it
would please me) said all, so great a licentiousness was not to be longer
endured. Cruel and unjust friends, (I replied) to what crime will your
unfitting cares of me carry you? What, shall we revolt from our Prince? Is he
not absolute Master of our lives? and can his actions be reprehended or
chastis'd by any other power then that which is above his own? The Ladies were
astonished at my resolution and remonstrance: and making them known to their
husbands, hindered them from putting in execution that which they had
determined for Zelopa's destruction. In the mean while, I drew necre my time,
and feared lest by my too much tormenting my self I might become the murderer
of that on whom my utmost hopes were settled. Living therefore in some rest, in
regard of it; I talked mightily alone, and of accusing me for too much
endangering the life of a creature which was Innocence it self: I will no more
afflict me, said I; the Gods, Nature, my Duty and Love forbid it; and I should
be more guilty then Zelopa, should I stifle within me the Image of Zabaim, the
hope of so many people, and the cause of my approaching happiness. Keep then,
keep Almanzaira the treasure thy dear Lord has entrusted thee withal, and
deprive not thy self of that means which (alone) is left thee, for the
freeing him from a Witches enchantments. With the like resolutions, I spent my
going with child, till my ordinary throws gave way to others which were yet
new to me. At break of day was I delivered of a Son, which was received by all
those who assisted me, as if he had been the tutelar god, by whose virtue the
power of the Sorceresse should be absolutely annihilated. A little after his
birth, they gave him me in mine arms: As feeble as I was I took him; and, I
befeech the gods (said I to him) thou be borne to a more happy Fate then thy
Mother. Present^y, the Messenger whom I had chosen to carry the news to the
King, went away, and used such expedition, that in two days he came to the
unfortunately enchanted Island. Zabaim received the message with an appearance
of joy; but sent back my Posts not giving him leave to take his repast, and
made him set sail without the permission of speaking with Almaid of any other.
The same day he came to me, concealed what might discontent me; and inventing
an extreme satisfaction, said, the King had promised he would be quickly with
me. Alas! he came not, and thought it enough to send Almaid. That generous
Favorite, seeing me so desolate, forced himself as much as was possible for
fear of increasing my afflictions; but the compassion he took of my fortune
overcame his resolution, and drew tears from his eyes. 'Twas yet worse when he
would have spoken to me, for his speech failing him at the first word, he stood
as knowing not what to say, and by that confusion told me, what Zelopa's
wickedness was able to make me suffer. In the mean time, that Wisdom which
is the Source of all other, forsook me not in that extremity. In lieu of
despairing at Almaids discomfort, I found my self miraculously fortified. My
courage increased, and finding my self armed against all that might happen:
What Almaid, (said I) must I contribute a constancy and consolation which I
expected from you? Cannot you endure the sight of an unfortunate woman? or have
you not the heart to tell to what new torments she is condemned? Almaid seeing
with what constancy I bore my affliction, took courage; and thinking there was
no need of mincing my misfortune to make it the more supportable to me: Madam,
(said he) the King who is not yet well satisfied in his former suspicions,
would see the little Prince before he would have him acknowledged for his Son.
He has commanded me to come hither, and to bring the child to him without
delay. Let nothing hinder you from being conformable to what he desires. Do
this last violence on your self. Give him that admirable proof of your love
and obedience; and consider (if you please) the consequence and importance of
his command. Cruel and barbarous command! cried I, but I must obey it, since
my Lord will have it so; and that with the sensibility of Nature I lose all
those fears which our Enemy throws on us. Take this little Infan^ Almaid, and
go (maugre your self) deliver it to the fury of inhumane Zelopa. She cannot
endure Zabaims lawful heir to live. He must dye to assure her tyranny. One
same day must give and take away from me the quality of a Mother; and without
doubt by a fearful agnition that monster must offer up the Son to those Demons
which have sacrificed the father to her. Almaid having by his remonstrances and
tears obliged me to put a period to my laments; Madam, (said he) if any of my
actions have had the power to make your thoughts do me the honor as to think
me worthy the name of an honest man, I submis^y beseech you to believe the
little Prince shall run no danger; and that I will dye a thousand deaths (if
possible) ere I suffer any whatsoever to attempt ought against his life. Let
your Majesty therefore set your mind at rest, and satisfy the will of a
father who is most dangerous to be provoked. I will not say some great
happiness may succeed your obedience, but I am certain, your refusal will
render our wrongs absolutely incurable. After he had thus spoake, and told me
what peril it was to detain him, he cast himself at the feet of a Lady of
Senega, who was most of my Counsel, and all my comfort, to dispose her to
follow his opinion. I knew well I must resolve to leave my child: I therefore
called for it, and bedewing it with my tears: Go, said I, little creature,
unfortunate as soon as borne; go, (under the protection of heaven which I
adore) whither his commands call thee, by whom thou saw the light. Give him
a trial of thy obedience even before thou know him: and when thou art with
him suppress thy cries and tears, for fear of his ill interpretation, by
imagining thou turn'st against him all those arms which Nature has bestowed
on thee. With these words I fell into a swound, and my child had fallen on the
ground, if Almaid had not caught him. He carried the child to his lodging, and
in less then two hours making all things ready, put on his way with my Son,
and the women which waited on him. The very day on which that desolate troop
came to a Castle on the Sea side, Zabaim heard of it, and (leaving his
enchanted Island) came to see this living image of himself. Almaira presented
the child to him, and said I beseech'd him by our first love to consider that
Infant as he was the father of it. It Is that to which Zelopa represents me,
cried Zabaim. She would have me use that power which the name of father gives
me; and would not have any thing that is mine own to be deerer to me then my
self. Thou therefore poor innocent creature must bethe Sacrifice, not for the
expiation but the continuance of thy fathers offenses. Zelopa covets thy life,
weak and unfortunate Infant; and will not believe my love to be without
example, till she have seen me commit a murder which shall never have any.
Dye then, since my fury condemns thee; and let my weak and captivated reason
give way to that unjust necessity which pronounces the Sentence of thy death.
What, thou weep'st my child? and thy little cries seem to implore my
assistance against Zelopa's cruelty. Stay thy tears, smother these laments,
and if thou will have me to be pitiful, do nothing that may make me so. But
alas! I see that all things conspire with thine Enemy. Nature betrays in
fayning to succor thee. Thy tears, in lieu of pleading for thy safety,
solicit thy destruction; and thy cries precipitate thy fate, in going about to
divert it. Well, it is done, I am vanquished. Pity has mollified my hard heart.
I feel the force of blood. I confess my self thy father, and therefore thou
must dye: for Zelopa assigned me that fatal moment, and commanded me then to
begin thy murder, when Nature gave me the most lively and tender feelings a
father could have for his Son. Zabaim could not continue his lamentations. The
overflowing of his tears, and the violence of his fobs and sighs, took away
the use of his voice. He stood sometime like a Statue; but on the sudden,
passing from one extreme to another: He shall dye, since you will have it so,
(cried he) he shall dye, the little Monster who will not restore me the life I
have given him. Almaid staid not till the poor Zabaim put those dreadful
words in execution, but snatched his Son from him; and giving no ear either to
his threatenings or prayers, went out of the Castle, cast himself into a bark
which waited for him at the Sea side, and carried his little Prince into a
Sanctuary; where in spite of all Zelopa's devils, he has found his happiness
and safety. Yes, my dear Almanzor, that goodness which I have so often called
to thy succor, has covered thee with his wings; and leading thee as 'twere by
the hand to that honor thou enjoyest, would have thy very infancy to possess
its beauties and wonders. Till then Polexander abode in a deep silence, but at
the name of Almanzor he broake it, and looking on Almanzaira with a kind of
astonishment: how (said he) Madam, was Almanzor Prince of Senega your Son?
Almanzor the lawful Prince of Senega (said she) is my Son, but he of whom you
speak to me, is not. Ah Madam! replied Polexander, how you affrighted me! for
if the unfortunate Almanzor had been your Son, you must have prepared your
self for new sorrows. Almanzaira showing her good nature even to her enemies,
entreated Polexander to relate what had betided the Son of Zelopa since he was
crowned King of Senega. I am now cleared of all my doubts, (replied Polexander)
and to make an end of yours, know that Almanzor is now no more then a little
dust, and he has suffered for the sins of those which brought him into the
world. The same passion through which his father has committed so many crimes,
has made the Son act one, which is so much the more prodigious, since by its
execution he has cut off for ever the means of repenting him for it.
Polexander had not continued this discourse, but seeing himself pressed by
Almanzaira, he recounted to her how Almanzor at the sight of Alcidiana's
picture, fell extremely in love with that Queen. That some few days after he
was crowned, he forsook his kingdom, and put to Sea, with a resolution to
find the inaccessible Island: but despairing of his voyages success, and not
enduring a Rival in Alcidiana's love, he was forced to satisfy his jealousy
by a combat. In which he had the better, but receiving not so much as he hoped
for, he retired himself into one of the Canaries, and after he had there
caused to be built a stately Tomb, had employed his own against his own life.
Almanzaira sighed often whilst Polexander made her this relation; and when he
had done: All powerful heaven, (said she) lifting up her eyes, thou have
showed thy Justice in the death of that Infant of impiety, now let thy mercy
beseene toward the child of benediction. The offense is punished, let the
criminals acknowledge it, and after so long disorders, let all things return
to the course thou have ordained him. Almanzaira and Polexander could not keep
on their conversation, because an old woman (coming in) addressed her self to
the Queen, and said; Madam, Amalthea is dying, and petitions from you before
her death, the honor of a visit. The extremity wherein she is, gives me the
boldness to entreat you, not to defer that work of charity: Ah good heaven,
(cried Almanzaira) by what accident is Amalthea brought to that ill estate! You
may know it from her self, (replied the old woman) in the mean time, I most
humbly beseech you from her, that you will obtain so much from this stranger,
as his staying in this place till your return. Polexander delayed not for
Almanzaira's request, but offered to abide there, or follow her: and if my
Service (said he) may be any way beneficial, command me, Madam, what you
please, and you know your injunctions shall be inviolable laws to me. The old
Matron casting up her wetned eyes on our Hero. O aspect too dangerous, because
too charming! (said she) how true do I find that which Amalthea has so often
told me? But, Madam, (continued she) addressing her to the Queen, fly from
this desirable Enemy, and come understand such things, which without so fatal
an occurrence would not seem credible to you. Almanzaira comprehending nothing
of the Matrons Speech, arose, and after entreating Polexander to give a few
hours to the satisfaction of a personage which merited to be obliged: She is
(said she) of those unfortunate ones, in whom reason is found to be weaker then
affection. She has loved in spite of her self. She loves still, and has for
two years done penance for a fault which deserves not that name, since 'twas
never voluntary. Polexander would gladly have known who was this
Innocent-guilty-one, but seeing the Matron extraordinarily press the Queen, he
suppressed his curiosity, and presented his arm to assist the Princess in her
walk. She very gracefully would not accept it, and to justify her refusal,
told him, the laws of her Hermitage forbad the receiving of any such
courtesies. With that she went out of the room where she had entertained him,
and making new excuses to him, wished him to go see the grots and water-caves
in her wood. You will there (said she) find such paintings and rarities, as
will let you know how much pains the faithful Almaid had taken to make me
find some flowers among the sharp thorns of my Exile. So she left him, and
went as fast as she could possibly to the place where she was so longingly
expected.

The end of the first Book of the third Part.
THE THIRD PART OF POLEXANDER. The second Book.
AS soon as Polexander had left the Queen of Senega, he entered an Alley
wherein Alcippus and Diceus had long walked: and calling them, I must (said he)
relate to you such adventures as surpass all those you have ever yet heard of.
He began to walk a great pace, after he had made them this preface; and, as if
he had suddenly forgot what he had said to them, made almost a turn in the
alley without opening his lips. At last he came to himself, and astonished at
his musing, I know not, said he, whence this distraction becides me; but I am
an ill presager, or this is a forerunner of some new misfortune. Yet, hap what
hap may, I am reduced to such a point, that though heaven it self had
undertaken it, it could not make me more miserable then I am. After these
words, he related to them Almanzaira's afflictions, and amplified with all his
eloquence the miracles of her patience and piety. Alcippus and Diceus were
extremely moved at it; and in their first emotion, besought the King their
Master to take so virtuous a Princess into his protection. Polexander seemed
insensible to his servants prayers, and setting another discourse on foot, I
wish (said he) I were far from this Island. Certainly I shall meet with some
discontent here. I feel my self extremely otherwise then I use to be. My body
trembles, and my agitated spirit makes me fear the explanation of certain
words which that old woman spoke to me who came for Almanzaira. Whilst he said
thus, he saw that Matron running as fast as she could. He would feign have
avoided her, but not being able to do it without incivility, he went to meet
her, and asked whether she desired any service from him. You may render a
signal one (replied she) to the person that sends me; and she therefore
conjures you by the name of Alcidiana that you will not disdain to see her. At
that word Polexander grew pale and trembled, but unwilling the aged woman
should perceive it; I will go (said he) where you please. Yet I am most
certain you take me for another. With that he went in great haste to the
garden gate, and there remembering his pace was not proportionable with the
Matrons; he returned to her, and so went to the same Cell where he staid at his
entrance into the Hermitage. Almanzaira met him at the door, and showing her
sadness by her eyes full of tears: Amalthea (said she) knew you at your first
entrance into this place, and though that knowledge has brought her into the
misery she is, yet has she an extreme desire to see you. It may be she
expects her cure from the hand that wounded her. Be pleased then to enter,
and let us see what lessening of pain that poor sick Lady can receive from
your presence. Almanzaira presently led Polexander into Amalthea's chamber, and
placed him where she might see him. It Is he, cried the dying Lady, it is even
he; but miserable Amalthea regards him not. The desire thou have made known to
see him, is certainly a temptation of those cruel Enemies who would retard
thee from that rest which virtue has prepared for thee in heaven. With that
she shut her eyes, turned her head aside, and calling Almanzaira: Madam, (said
she to her) let him depart if he please, and when I am dead, give him the
letter which you shall find under my beds-head. She spoke so low those last
words, that the Queen well deemed she was departing. She lamented her as much
as if she had been her own daughter; and to perform her last will, took the
letter which she had laid under her boulster, and gave it to Polexander. The
Prince unwilling to stay in a place where his sight was so deadly, went forth
much afflicted; and felt in Amalthea's death one of those new disasters whereof
a little before he had spoken to Alcippus and Diceus. He forbore not to open
the dead Ladies Letter; but he durst not read it; for all his imaginations
having no other object but Alcidiana, he conceived he should therein meet some
great example, either of that Princesses anger or contempt. After he had well
considered on what he had to do, he ventured to read the letter, and first
found these words on it: To the unfortunate Polexander. It Is to me indeed (said
he) this letter is addressed: For, though there may be other Polexanders in the
world, yet there is none that can dispute with me for the title of Unfortunate.
Read then Polexander, read a Letter which must belly its superscription, if it
be not extremely dismal to thee. After these words he leant on Alcippus, and
found in the paper this that follows:

SOme other may talk to you of my life; for mine own part I will give notice
to you of nothing but my death; I say of that long and cruel death, of which I
have been three years, or rather three ages dying. I was with the divine
Alcidiana, and lived in that delightful and continual repose which Innocence
crowns youth withal, when the Queens Sacrificers and Pilots published in the
Inaccessible Island the wonders of your life. They spoke of your courage, as of
that of the ancient Semi-gods. They extold your generosity beyond all others;
and proved your incredible prosperities were the pure effects of your excellent
virtue, and not the favors nor Capricioes of fortune. I confess it,
unfortunate Polexander, I was struck to the heart with the recital of so many
miracles, and Love, whose name and maliciousness I knew, took the mask of
esteem and admiration, to gain under that disguise what he could never have
obtained of himself. I was in Alcidiana's privy Chamber when this mischance
betided. I lost the respect I owed to her quality, and that to mine own birth,
and declaring to her my folly: Madam, (said I) is it possible you have so long
time been ignorant of these things, or have you envied your Subjects the
protection of so brave a man? Alcidiana blushed to hear me say it, and asked
me whether her people had need of any other safeguard then her own? Nature
(said she) has been too favorable, to reduce us to the shameful necessity
of imploring the help of man. We have no need of Polexander. For, had we been
so unfortunate as to have occasion to use his courage, we would have retained
him, when Fortune cast him on our Island. Have you then seen him (said I)
interrupting him, and can you keep this indifferency, or rather so cruel a
neglect? Ah Madam! your insensibility will be one day punished. I durst not
prosecute this discourse, because I perceived by Alcidiana she liked it not;
but desirous to leave to her Subjects a memorable example of her severity, she
not only forbad them to speak of you, but by a declaration contrary to her
own inclination, condemned your memory to an eternal oblivion; and any
whosoever of her Priests or Pilots which should conduct you into the
Inaccessible Island, to be exposed with you to the flames of the Altar of
Vengeance. All these rigours no way lessened my passion. It got new strength in
growing elder, and when I knew it proceeded from love, I found my self too
weak to suppress it. One day finding my self alone with the Queen, I cast
my self at her feet, and besought her with tears in mine eyes, to let me know
all she had heard of you. She grew extremely cholerique at it, but seeing her
anger did but the more stir up my desire and impatiency: I will (said she)
give you that vain contentment; yet I vow your extravagancy amazeth me. A
hundred times I kissed her hands in lieu of being troubled, and confessed to
her I was no more rational. In the mean time, my tears, my sighs, my dying
looks, and my faintings wrought so much pity in the heart of that Princess,
that she told me of your arrival in her Kingdom, and the command she gave for
your departure thence as soon as she knew your affection. By the content she
took in that narration, I judged you were not so indifferent to her as she
would make me believe; and that her passion betraying it self, discovered that
which she held with so much difficulty. As Soon as she had ended her discourse,
I felt my self clean altered from what I was before. Reason which had
forsaken me, took her place again, and setting before mine eyes the fault I
committed against my self, made me condemn my first inclination. I retired
from the extremity whither my disposition had hurried me, and contemplating you
as destinated for the sole Alcidiana: Amalthea, (said I to my self) thou can
not love him without a crime: for, to enjoy him, thou must either betray the
Queen or thy virtue. Give over then; leave that so amiable Polexander to his
just Possessor. But art thou so silly as to persuade thy self, that he who so
much disquiets thee is so lovely as they would have thee believe? Ask some who
are less interessed then a Mistress and her servants, and thou will find,
there is a great disproportion betwixt the true Polexander and Alcidiana's. I
did what I said, I changed my opinion, and would have let the Queen know it,
but she prevented me, and asked what I thought of Polexander? That which I
think of all men, (said I) and I swear to you, Madam, by the duty I owe your
Majesty, that I never inquired after him, but only to satisfy my curiosity.
Alcidiana smiled at my answer; and strictly embracing me: Amalthea, (said she)
I will fully content that affectation when thou please. Thus we parted. For
my part, I got to my bed. But all night long I did naught but call to mind the
defects which they usually cast on men, to give me just cause to neglect you.
Not to lie, I had almost effected it, and my imagination had already half
cured the wound it had made: when Fame contemning Alcidiana's declarations,
brought you into the Inaccessible Island as a Conqueror over the Kings of
Castile and Portugal. I looked on you with excessive joy, in a table where you
were drawn, defending alone the Port of one of your Isles against all the
Enemies fleet. The Sea was stained with their blood, and the shore strewn with
Spaniards, which seemed to have come offer themselves to your sword, that they
might have the honor to dye by your hand. O! how fatal was that sight to me!
I confess it to my shame, Polexander, I felt my self burn with so sweet a
fire, that in spite of all the remonstrances of reason, I took delight in
being consumed by it. My extravagancy, which till then had been concealed, at
that time burst out, and made me stop mine ^ares to all prudent counsel.
Neither the consideration of Alcidiana, nor the care of my reputation, nor the
fear of heaven could make me alter my resolution. I got from the Inaccessible
Island, and not daring to take leave of Alcidiana, put to Sea, without other
Guide then my blinded passion. Heaven could not suffer my unbridlednesse, nor
consent to my ruin. It staid me on the brink of the precipice; and by a
violent fever made an end of another that was far more burning That sickness
was my health. For that great Physician which never leaves his cures imperfect,
so strengthened my soul by the weakness of my body, that he made me capable
of that horror we should have for all the ordures of the earth. I renounced the
greatness of my birth. I took leave of the world, and to do a long penance
for the errors of my youth, came and confined my self within this Isle.
Almost two years have I tried to appease the anger of that incomprehensible
Spirit, that is no less just then merciful. I have bewailed my loving the
Creature more then the Creator. I have fasted, I have prayed, I have wept; in
brief, I have omitted nothing of all that which might restore me the Innocence
which my frailty had robbed me of. My sufferings have been followed by
consolations; and though my mind has been often tempted by the charms of
your remembrance, yet I can say it came off victorious. Yes, I dare brag now I
am certain of my victory. I see the end of my combat such as I desired. Heaven
opens it self to receive me, and shows me that immortal Crown it has
prepared for all those hardy Combatants who know how to tame the rebellion of
sense and the disorders of the will. Farewell then Polexander, admire the
virtue of Alcidiana, and condemn not the infirmity of Amalthea.

Polexan^er had his eyes full of tears all the while he read the letter; and
when he had ended it: I did verily bele^ve (said he) this letter would be to me
a Source of new disasters. O fortune! O Alcidiana! O love! O death! which of
you four will have so much pity as to put a period to my miseries? This sad
cogitation having a long time tormented him, he called to mind the assurances
Amalthea had given him by her letter of Alcidiana's favor to him. But he had
not been scarce a moment settled on so pleasing a subject, when despair and
incredulity deprived his thought of all those fair Idea's. He returned again
to those old distrusts of himself, took for lies Amalthea's verities; and
rejecting his least hopes as rashness worthy thunder, made himself as
miserable as he had cause to think him happy. Thus, to no purpose he persecuted
himself when Almanzaira came out of Amalthea's chamber as much afflicted for
the death of that Princess as for her own misfortunes. At the first word
Polexander was about to speak to her, she interrupted him, and showing him a
man who then entered the Court of the Hermitage; it is Almaid (cried she) and
presently ran to meet him, and said what was fitting to oblige him to speak
freely before Polexander. After that declaration Almaid was not fearful of
being known; therefore addressing him to his Queen: Madam, (said he) give
heaven the thanks which its justice and pity deserve. Your misfortunes are at
an end, and your enemies power is extinguished. I know, (replied Almanzaira)
the unfortunate Almanzor has slain himself. It Is true, Madam, said Almaid,
the brave Polexander which seems to be descended from heaven, on earth, to
free the world of tyranny, and exterminate monsters, has delivered you from
two the most fearful and cruel that Africa ever bred. Polexander in lieu of
making himself known, undertook Almanzors defense; and addressing him to
Almaid: Our passions (said he) are disorders of the soul, and therefore the
harder for those by whom they are governed, to preserve either all their
judgment or all their imagination. This being so, I wonder not your affection
transports you so from your self as to draw your sword against a woman, and
pardon not the memory of the dead. I am far from justifying Zelopa, since her
actions accuse her, and being condemned by Almanzaira, she is so by the mouth
of Justice it self. It Is Almanzor I defend, not only for being Zabaims son,
but because I knew his virtues, and that he never consented to the crimes of
his mother. Besides, his valor was so extraordinary, that all these Seas have
been the Theater of it; and if he had not coveted death, he by his acts would
have showed himself the worthy son of that great Monarch who is the Author of
his life. Polexander never vaunted he overcame him, and that report which
attributes to him the glory of it, is even more injurious to Polexander then to
Almanzor. Almanzaira knowing that Almaid could not reply to this speech but
with bitterness, interposed: and addressing her to Polexander as not knowing
him: Your generosity (said she) agrees well with that pity I have for Almanzor.
I confess him to be more worthy our bewailings then our reproaches, and I
should not have less love to my self then Almaid witnesses, if the just
cause I have to wish ill to the mother, should make me descend to hate her son.
But tell me (said she) turning to Almaid) how was Almanzors death taken in
Senega? Madam (replied Almaid) after Polexander (no matter what they say to the
contrary) had overcome the false Almanzor, and the news of his death was
spread through all Zabaims dominions; there was so great and so general a joy,
that the most time-serving, and most interessed Courtiers suppressed their
infirmity and cowardice, to be the first to let Zabaim and Zelopa understand
an accident which was to be so insupportable to them. Zelopa was sick for her
Sons absence, and had resolved to put to sea to seek him, when her Confidents
brought her news of his death. At which she became as immovable as that
Queen whom a like accident had before time turned into a Rock. But when that
mortal insensibility had even given place to those fearful resentments, which
grief, despair, and rage, hurl on all miscreants. Zelopa not only grew
furious, but seemed to be fury it self. She cast her self on the earth, tore
her hair, scratched her face, and talked of nothing but what was horrible,
called an hundred times for all the Devils in hell to assist her. No, no,
cried she afterward, come not at all, poor, weak, and deceitful spirits;
you cannot give me back the life of my Son, and I desire nothing else from you.
The rest is in my power. It must be executed, and by an act worthy my courage,
and plunge all Senega and her King in a calamity which shall have no end, but by
the death of the one, and the entire desolation of the other. Every one
trembled with horror to hear the threatenings of that Fury, and some ran to
advertise the King of his wifes desperation. He came with all speed to comfort
her, but he found her weltring in her gore, and yet holding the poniard in the
wound she had made. When she saw him, she cast her furious and ghastly looks on
him, and drawing the weapon out of her wound, Hold here Zabaim, (said she) see
the last pledge of our abominable alliance. Take it yet reeking with my blood,
and making an end of that murder I have began, appease the shades of thy wife
and Son. With that she gave up the ghost, and let fall the poniard she
presented to Zabaim. At that word Almanzaira, interrupting Almaid: Alas, (said
she) for heavens sake tell me what became of the King my husband? He did
strange things, replied Almaid: He took Zelopa in his arms, lamented her in
terms full of impiety, a hundred times kissed her wound, and all bloudied with
his horrible kisses, carried that miserable creature into his closet. The very
day of that murder I came to Senega, and caused to be published in many places,
not only that you were not dead, but that the true Almanzor was yet living and
full of honor. As Soon as I had spread abroad this news, and had understood
in what manner the false Almanzor was slain, I put to sea to advertise you of
it. That which you are to do, Madam, is presently to leave the place of your
long banishment, and by your presence give content to the longing eyes of so
many people which by your return expect that of their former felicity. Let Us
go, (replied the Queen) and quickly, to render what we owe to my dear Lord,
and not permit (if it be possible) the Sorceries of Zelopa to last after her
death. And you, O my dear Comforter, (said she to Polexander) I beseech you by
your generousnesse and your obliging offers, not to forsake me till you have
seen the end of those adventures whose beginning I have related to you. I
shall have need of your courage, your counsel will be behoofull to me, and the
same Genius who in comforting me by your sight presaged my happiness, tells me,
that without you it cannot have its accomplishment. Though (replied Polexander)
I account my self unable to contribute any thing to the perfecting a work
which more excellent hands then mine have undertaken, yet I will wait on you;
and not being capable of performing any more, at least I will testify my
obedience to you. Go hence then Madam the soonest you can, and think how
necessary for Zabaims preservation those moments are, which my consideration
makes you lose. Almanzaira went presently to take leave of her Company and
Hermitage, and then ran toward the Sea. Polexander commanded Diceus to embalme
Amalthea's body, and that when he had caused it to be brought aboard his ship
to follow him to Senega. Alcippus went with his Master, and embarked with him
in Almaids vessel. Almanzaira fearful, least there might happen some
slightness betwixt them, did what she could to make them discourse often
together: and taking the occasion of letting Polexander know the sequel of her
fortunes: I have, said she to Almaid, related to this Knight all that has
betided me to the day that you went to Sea with my Son. I entreat you to let
him know the rest. Almaid, who to himself had much esteemed the generousnesse
of Polexander, was glad an occasion was offered to oblige him. At first he
entreated to be excused if he repeated such things as he had already heard, and
adding to that request other civilities, in this manner continued the
adventures of Zabaim and his wives.

A Continuation of the History of the Princes of SENEGA.
THat general peace which reigns so absolutely from the height of heaven to
the very depth of the waters, makes me call to mind that most happy day
wherein I violated the humane Law to observe the divine: and wherein by a just
disobedience, I chose rather to expose my self to the danger of losing the
fathers favor, then to lay open the Son to the hazard of losing his life. But
before I relate to you the strange accidents of my voluntary Exile, and the
fair adventures which accompanied the youth of the lawful Prince of Senega;
be pleased I recount to you the misfortunes of Almanzaira, and the dreadful
resolutions which the too much blinded Zabaim took, through the ambition and
fury of Zelopa. When that Sorceresse understood by the return of her Idolater,
that the young Prince was got away, she sent all the ships she had after him,
and commanded to bring back again dead or alive Almanzor and Almaid. Whilst
the Instruments of her cruelty strove to execute her horrible commands, she
turned her fury on Almanzaira, and either by her death or banishment would
force the throne to be yielded to her. To bring that to effect, she altered her
ordinary course of life, she avoided all occasions of being with Zabaim, and
when she was engaged to see or speak to him, 'twas with such a coldness, that
not a King, but a slave would have been troubled to endure it. After she had a
while thus dissembled, and saw by her disdaines and cunning refusals, that
Zabaim had more love and less reason then ever: she counterfeits one very
passionate, and complains that her too much facility has made her the scorn
of him she so highly adores. Zabaim, not able to resist her charms, cast
himself at the feet of that harlot, gave her such honors as are due to none
but a Deity, confirmed the vows of his eternal servitude, and (excepting
naught in the world, protests not to retard any thing she will command him to
execute. When Zelopa saw him in that fury; What am I the better (said she) for
all these protestations, since they prove at last but false hopes and vain
words, whilst another is placed in the throne, and solely acknowledged for
Zabaims wife? She must likewise only enjoy you, or if I do, it is fit, I see
no more such a difference betwixt her and me as may make me justly doubt of
your affection. Ah Zelopa, (replied Zabaim) you know my love is unfeigned) and
that every moment I lay at your feet those Crowns which Almanzaira wears on
her head. If that be not enough, exact from me stronger proofs of it, and he
who to please you has not spared his own Son, will not stick at things of
less moment. Put therefore out of my thoughts the displeasing object of
Almanzaira's happiness, (replied Zelopa) and let not my love have any more the
affliction to be crossed by so powerful a Rival. Zabaim contented, if not to
the death, at lest to the banishment of his wife. But when it came to the point
of pronouncing the Sentence, he was struck with an extreme remorse, and would
not have Zelopa's Instruments employed in that Commission. He chose one of his
Gentlemen, whose age and virtue assured him he would acquit himself of it with
as much address as modesty. Him he sent to the Queen, who since the loss of
her Son, was fallen into such a strange disease, as she had scarce strength to
stand, and yet was it impossible for her to endure either lying or sitting; she
was walking in her Palace-garden, when Zucalin, (so was the discreet Gentleman
called) came to her. As Soon as she saw him, you are welcome, said she, and
pronounce boldly by what death Zelopa would have me end my miserable life.
Madam, (replied Zucalim) that is happened at last which all good people forelaw.
Ordinary crimes have drawn on extraordinary; and the love of a Strumpet after
it had quenched that which Zabaim ought you, now enforces him to account you
for his Enemy. O heaven! cried the Queen at that word of Enemy, does the King
then believe after so many proofs of my obedience and love, that it is possible
for me to hate him? Yes Madam, (said Zucalin) He believes you plot against his
life, and use all kind of means to oblige his subjects to take Arms against
him. Almanzaira could not answer to that supposition, but lifting her eyes to
heaven; Thou know it, infinite Intelligence, who see the hearts and
thoughts of all men, thou know it, said she, weeping: Yet avenge not that
calumny laid on me, for I fear Zabaim may be comprised in the punishment.
Zucalin admiring the resignation and virtue of Almanzaira, told her, he had an
express command to see her out of Senega, and to conduct her to Melly. Do you
imagine whether these news might touch her? Yet she received them with a
constancy which seemed insensible of all kinds of persecutions. But when
Zucalin told her she was to prepare for her departure: How (said she) shall I
not be permitted to see yet my Lord once more? and be able to assure him in my
leave-taking, that not only banishment, but even death would be welcome to me,
if he had commanded it. Madam, (replied Zucalin) that contentment is taken from
you, till your Innocence after better examination be generally known. Ah
Zucalin! (said the Queen) it is not credible that the King fears my Innocence.
But I can yet well undergo that last of misfortunes for his sake. After that,
she went to a Chariot, which to that end attended her at one of the Palace
^tes, and entering it, was with a Guard conducted to the frontiers of Melly. She
(...) ^o sooner gone from Senega, but Zabaim and Zelopa made their entry there
as in triumph, and within a few days after the blinded Zabaim was publicly
married to his Sorceresse: and not only caused her to be crowned Queen of all
his Realms but declared that the children he should have by her, should be the
only lawful Inheritors. At that word Almaid turning to Polexander: Since you
knew the false Almanzor (said he) I doubt not but you have heard how six months
after the crowning of Zelopa, she was brought to bed of him, and in her lying
in, received a discontent, which in all likelihood she could not expect from
Zabaim, if Almanzaira had been as dear to him as she was before her
banishment. The King of his absolute authority, and may be to testify to his
Subjects he yet remembered and affected Almanzaira, would have Zelopa's son to
bear the name of Almanzor. The tears, the prayers, and the fury of that cruel
and ambitious wretch, could not alter his resolution. She was forced to let her
Son carry the name of her mortal Enemy, and to avoid by that little disgrace
those greater which threatened her. This rebellion of Zabaims will contrary to
hers, made her verily believe that so long as Almanzaira lived, her name would
never be blotted out of that Princes memory. She therefore stood no longer
trifling out time, but resolved to make her away, and to that end gave an
accursed Commission to such as she thought fit for such an employment. But
Almanzaira having twice or thrice escaped the knife, and doubly the poison,
after near fifteen years of imprisonment, was advised by her most
affectionate Servants to free her self from Zelopa's fury, and by a feigned
death to divert a true one. Zucalin (who by Zabaims express command had her
always in guard) thought notwithstanding all his care and precautions, she
would at last fall into Zelopa's traps, and he was the first who gave her that
judicious counsel. She consented to him, and after a sickness of some forty
days, which was not counterfeited, but in the success, the report went that
Almanzaira was dead. Her women (who the better to deceive others, were the
first deceived) so lamented her loss in speech and behavior, that in seeing
them Zelopa's Spies and the Queens Enemies could no more doubt of her death. At
that very time I came to Melly, and confirming the Princess in her resolution,
I got her by night into my ship, and brought her into the Island we now came
from. In the mean time Posts were sent to Zabaim to give notice of the Queens
death; and the more to beguile him, a supposed corpse was brought to Senega with
all royal pomp and Ceremony. Every one bewailed her death, and the King
himself acknowledging a part of his faults, gave the Hearse such honors, as
would have madded Zelopa to have seen them bestowed on Almanzaira alive. Let
us leave Zabaim in his just tears, and ^^erpassing all the revolts and wars
which followed the Queens supposed death, return we to the young Almanzor,
who, with my self, fled from the fury of his father and his future
stepmother. After our ship had sailed all the rest of the day and the
following night, I thought the young Prince could not (without an extraordinary
mischance) fall into the hands of those whom Zelopa had sent to retake him. I
therefore bethought me to find out some place of safety where I might have him
bred up while Zabaim's want of understanding kept him from the knowledge of his
errors. I was oftentimes tempted to land in Guinea, but I straight called to
mind, Zelopa was there exceedingly beloved, by reason of the great privileges
she had obtained for all that Country: and therefore to keep him safe, 'twas
fittest to carry him into some region whose name his cruel Enemy had not so
much as ever heard of. But that eternal Providence which is not less pitiful
then cleere-sighted, took me from my superfluous care, and let me know, that
as Almanzor's birth was the work of its hands, so would it not that his
preservation should be imputed to any other. Our calm was therefore turned
into a furious storm, and after ten days danger we were freed from it by
shipwreck. Far from the Countries warred by our fertile and delicious Senega,
is a Kingdom which on the East has the Estate of Biafar, and the deserts of
Borea. On the West it is bounded by Guinea, on the North by the wilderness of
Zanfra, and on the South by the Ocean. 'Twas on the rocks which seemed to
defend the entrance into the Country that our ship split, and cast us, as I may
say, into the arms of a King, who by his excellent qualities and virtues more
then mortal, justly merited the title of a Deity which his people gave him, if
it be lawful to communicate to man a prerogative which befits none but him
that made them. When I perceived our vessel was ready to run on the rocks of
that coast I caused Almanzor's Nurse to be bound fast on a bundle of Cork, and
commanded the strongest of my Mariners not to forsake her, but to strive by his
utmost power to bring her to shore. For mine own part, I took the little
Prince, either to save him by swimming or to dye with him, and with no more
trouble expected the wrack which in all likelihood our ship could not escape.
Presently our Mariners perceived we were running on the rocks which lay even
with the water, and cried out we were all lost. They spoke parrly true, for our
vessel being (I may say) miraculously thrust in between two rocks, opened by
the sides, and yet stuck so fast that it could not finke, nor yet be carried
away by the waves. Those whom the fear of death deprived of their judgment,
threw themselves into the Sea to get to land which was very near, but they
were almost all broken on the rocks. After I saw the strangeness of our
shipwreck, I lifted mine eyes to heaven, and presenting the young Almanzor to
the Divinity which inhabits there, begged for his preservation by the virtues
and tears of his mother, and my prayer was heard as soon as ended. The winds
which always obey the will of him that sends them, having executed the command
imposed on them, retired to their place of rest and gave some quiet to the Sea.
This while the water had gotten into all under hatches, and as the waves broake
on the rocks they arose up even to our feet, but straight retiring they seemed
to acknowledne certain unknown bounds which they were not permitted to pass.
I commanded our Mariners to make a little want of the best plancks of the ship
to carry Almanzor and his Nurse on shore. 'Twas very hard for them to do what
I commanded, the Sea having swallowed all things necessary for that work. Yet
they set to it as well as they could, and in less then two hours had fitted
somewhat, capable to hold five or six persons. They lanch'd it, and two of
them getting on it with oars tried the hazard, and carried on shore what the
Sea had left us. They returned quickly, and assuring me there was no danger to
be run, I caused the Nurse to go on, and then came my self with the little
Prince, and so were happily landed. Our Mariners returned with their waft, but
came not so back, for they fell unluckily on the point of a rock, and were
compelled for their safety to betake them to their swimming. My care of
preserving Almanzor making me forget all other, I took him in mine arms, and
to discover some place of retreat, went from the Sea with his Nurse and my
slaves. I had not gone two hundred paces, when I descried a troop of men which
seemed to come right toward me. I stood not to think whether that meeting
might be favorable to me, but instantly giving thanks to my invisible
Conductor, I kept on my way, and staid not till the Abyssins commnaded me to
cast mine eyes to the ground. That commandment had not so surprised me as it
did, had I known where the tempest had thrown me, but being ignorant of the
cause of that Ceremony, I at first made some difficulty to submit to it. At
last the number of those which environed me, and for the Princes sake I became
obedient. We laid us on the earth, the Nurse, my servants and my self, and so
staid till by another order they made us arise. I cast mine eyes on him that
was nearest to me, and knew him for the same Abrinzias King of Benin, to whom I
had been sent Ambassador a little before the Queens marriage. I fell on my
knees, to observe the custom of his Subjects who hold him for a god, as I have
told you, and showing him the young Almanzor: See (said I) a Prince who
conducted by that eternal Power which you represent on earth, is come to cast
himself into yourhands, to be warranted from the cruelty of his enemies. Do
him the same favor you did in times past to his father; and make it appear by
a gracious intertaining, that on just cause your Subjects call you the defender
of oppressed Innocence. After Abrinzias had heard me with all the debonarity I
could expect from him, he alighted from his Elephant, and taking me apart,
entreated me to tell him who I was, whence I came, and whose child it was
which I presented to him. I satisfied his demands; and gave him such an
affright and terror at the repetition o^ Zabaim's extravagancies, that falling
on his knees, and lifting his eyes and hands toward the Sun: Thou still-waking
eye (cried he) of that Divinity whose shadow I am, and no more, irreproachable
witness of all the actions of men, call me to judgment before the throne of
eternal Justice, and deny me thy pure light, if ever the tyranny of sense, or
the weakness of spirit force me to the like brutishness. After he had made
this holy protestation, he took the young Almanzor, and holding him in his
arms: Yes, merciful heaven, (said he) I receive as from thy hands the prefe^
thou sendest me by this stranger; and subscribing with joy to the decrees of
thy will, I will be this Innocents father, and betwixt him and my Son divide
all my love and care. With these words he delivered me again the young Prince,
and intimating to me how happy he thought him self in finding so fair an
occasion to exercise his charity, entreated me to follow him. He commanded one
of his Camels for baggage, to be given to the Princes Nurse, and would have her
still before him. We rode till Sunset, and then came to a royal house, which
is Abrinzia's usual aboade, when the necessities of his State, and the love of
his people permit him to leave the City, and in retiredness to taste the
delights of a Private man. I will not relate to you with what care that good
King caused the young Almanzor to be bred: but will only say, he respected and
considered him as his own Son, and the virtuous Andromeda his wife, finding in
him those causes of satisfaction which she met not in the person she had
brought into the world, would even have given him the first place in her love,
if the fear of heaven had not obliged her to observe the order of Nature, and
not to bestow that on a stranger, which was only due to the child of the
family. Almanzor's youth was as noble and fair as the Prince of Benin's was
insupportable. Perseus (so was he called) had a melancholy accompanied with a
brutish fury, which made him not only incapable of submitting himself to his
Governors or to the King his father; but so awkeward and indisposed to all
exercises both of mind and body, that it seemed, heaven having so much
exhausted its treasure at the birth of Almanzor, had reserved nothing for that
of Pers^. This which I have spoken (if you please) shall suffice, for the first
fourteen years of A^life. Come we to the fifteenth, and by the apprentiship
of his val^ judge what this Master-peeces should be. In the season wherein the
Sun swerves from the Equi^tiall line to get up to the Tropique of Cancer, there
rushed out of the Deserts of Zan^ra a prodigious Serpent, which having laid
waste the Territory of Guangara, by the death of more then a thousand men, made
himself an entry into the kingdom of Benin. He came on even to the gates of
the City Budis, and marching as a hardy and judicious Conqueror, came the
soonest he could to the City of Benin, as if he would have presented battle to
the King himself. He utterly left desolate all those Provinces through which
he had passed by the justice of heaven. The people assembled and armed
themselves against this Monster as against a common enemy, but their resistance
was vain; for that puissant adversary overthrew whosoever presented himself
before him. No arrows so great or weighty or sharp soever could pierce him,
and there was no better way found by any for their security then to shut
themselves up in towns. After he had made a general havoc through the
Kingdom, he set him down in the territory of Benin. The wood and fountain of
the Sun he chose for his usual abode; and, as if he had been satisfied with
his Conquests and would now stop their progress, he stirred not more away
far from a place the most holy and most religiously kept in all the Estate of
Benin. From time to time he came even to the Town Gates, and kept the King in
a manner besieged within his walls, and wholly interdicted the peoples commerce
and exercise. In the mean time the devoute. Abrinzias, contemplating that
Monster as a scourge which heaven would make use of for the chastisement of his
offenses, thought this persecution would not cease but by a public penitence.
He had therefore recourse to those remedies which were taught him by that
eternal Law which the most barbarous have graven in their hearts. He wept, he
fasted, he punished himself for his people; he added public processions and
solemn sacrifices to his private devotions, and reclaiming the people from
their Luxury and debauches, went himself every where preaching tears,
repentance and amendment. Whilst all the Court was in prayers and
mortification, a valiant and generous Knight had an intent to fight with that
Monster. He was called Bellerophon, and had gotten so great a reputation
through all Africa, (...) 'twas held for impossible, that which he could not
execute. At all points armed he rode out of Benin, mounted on an excellent
horse, and resolved to dye or to deliver his Country from that terrible
slavery. The people drawn by the hope of their safety, followed that generous
warrier, but at sight of the Monster, fear freezing their blood made them
abandon their deliverer, and shut them up again within their walls.
Bellerophon was left alone, and his courage increasing by the general
affright, he went to search for his enemy even among the Palm trees,
wherewith it seemed he would crown himself. The Serpent not being now so
eager at his prey as he was at first, would scarce lift up his head when he saw
Bellerophon; but by some hissings contented himself to make appear how much
he contemned his adversary. Bellerophon came on for all the turbulency and
furious frightments of his horse, and making use of his agility in shooting,
answered the hissings of the Monster with those of his arrows. But none of his
shafts could wound him; He was every where invulnerable. Yet Bellerophon gave
not over shooting, but hitting him above the eye, made him rear up his red and
blew crest, which made on his head a kind of a crown, and to unfold all those
great circles in which he seemed to have insconc'd himself. He suddenly darted
himself on Bellerophon, and had infallibly inwrap'd him, but for the
extraordinary leap, which (out of fear) the warrior's horse made. The Knight
seeing his Steed unserviceable, alighted, cast his horse off, approached the
enraged Serpent, and by a good hap (worthy his courage) with an arrow which
struck out his right eye, we learnt the Serpent was not invulnerable. But
alas! that knowledge was dearly sold, for Bellerophon could not avoid the
coming to gripes with the Monster. 'Twas related to Abrinzias that the bold
Knight defended himself to the death, and though the Serpent had enfolded his
arms and legs, he made him feel the weight of his blows; but his resistance
was all in vain, for he was torn in pieces (for all his Arms) and devoured
by the Monster. This strange accident filled all the town of Benin with
desolation and fear. Almanzor was with Andromeda when the news came of
Bellerophon's death. He had ever dearly loved that Knight, being as his
companion in all his exercises. You may imagine whether he were moved at his
loss. Truly he was so much, that it drew tears from him. But his love not
being satisfied with these demonstrations, made him resolve on others more
worthy his valor and the memory of Bellerophon. He therefore prepared him to
avenge his death; and his high Spirit carrying him to great undertakings, he
would by so fair an occasion give a beginning to the miracles of his life. The
generous Prince would willingly have communicated his design to me, but
imagining I would not approve of it, he concealed it from me; and one day
secretly withdrawing himself (unknown to any man) he went to find out that
dreadful Serpent even among the Palm trees, and to fight with him, took only
his sword, his bow and his arrows. You will hardly give credit to what I must
relate, though there is nothing more true. Almanzor went alone into the wood of
the Sun, approacht the Serpent with an heroical confidence, looked on his
hugeness and deformity without astonishment, and by his noise calling him to
the combat, by some arrows he let fly toward his den would give him time to
defend himself. The Monster animating him by beating the earth with his tail,
raised his crowned head, and throwing at once venom and fire from his eyes,
made the Cedars and Palms to tremble again. Almanzor stood firm, and with
himself consulted how he might best encounter that monstrous adversary.
Straight he nock'd an arrow, and lifting his eyes to heaven, I do what I can,
(said he) do thou the rest, and let thy powerful hand conduct the shaft which
mine lets go at hazard. He was heard. That arrow was so well guided, that it
pierced the Monsters tongue, and there stuck fast. The next was more
fortunately addressed. It struck out the other eye, and with the means of
bringing himself on, took that away of his defense. Almanzor marked what he
had done, and doubting no longer of his victory, shunned the grapling of the
blinded Serpent. After he had long time fought with the trees, and his rage
turning on himself, had extremely weakened him by his own blows, he lay
extended on the earth, and discovered a part of his white and yellow panch.
Almanzor perceiving so fit a mark for his arrows, shot him through, and left
not till he laid him dead. When he was secure of his victory, he went out of
the wood, and after his thanks to heaven, and vow, to hang his bow and arrows
with the Serpents skin, he returned to the City, and told all those he met,
there was no more to be feared, for the Serpent was dead. Whilst the better
hearted went to see whether Almanzor spoke truth, he came to the Palace, and
there found every body much troubled about him. He presented himself to
Abrinzias, and falling at his feet: Sir, (said he) I humbly beseech your
Majesty to pardon the fault I have committed; I come from the fountain of the
Sun, and the Serpent is dead. Imagine Polexander how Abrinzias was affrighted,
though he saw Almanzor unhurt. He inquired who had advised him to fight with
the Serpent, and who went with him to that Enterprise. Bellerophon's death
(replied he sighing) drew me to revenge it. I could not live, and suffer the
murderer of my friend to survive him. Heaven has favored me so much as to
acquit the debt I owed him. Abrinzias lifted up his eyes with admiration and
joy, and to satisfy his curiosity, asked Almanzor how all things had happened.
He related it to him, as I have to you; but it was with so much modesty, that
Abrinzias foreseeing then what Almanzor has done since: My Son, (said he)
embracing him, search out new Kingdoms and Provinces worthy thy valor. This
little corner of Africa deserves not to contain thee. With that he brought him
to the Queen, and recounting so heroical an action, obliged her to shed at
once both tears of joy and sorrow; the one for her love to Almanzor, and the
other for that of her own Son. The excess of Abrinzia's contentment made him
not forget what he owed to his people. He sent his Heralds through the town,
not only to publish the Serpents death which had so much annoyed them, but to
make known to all, the Author of their deliverance and the public
happiness; and after that, went out of the town, waited on by all the Court,
and most of the people, and so came where the Serpent lay slain. The multitude
not forgetting their old use, appeared very hardy where there was no danger;
and running on the dead Monster, cut him in pieces; and by that means, made
Almanzor but imperfectly perform the vow he had made. But whilst the people
made themselves sport with their dead Enemy, and vented all their fury on his
skin, Almanzor bewailed the death of Bellerophon, and in a generous piety
gathered up his bones and broken arms scattered through the wood, and giving
both the one and the other to his particular friends, followed them himself to
a place fit to preserve the relics and memory of that valiant Knight. The
good Abrinzias was much moved to see so many verall virtues break forth of
tha^ young Prince, and had esteemed himself the happiest of Kings, but that
the defects o^ his own Son, and his vicious inclinations cut from him the best
part of his happiness. But heaven, who would recompense in the person of
Almanzor the injury it had done him in that of Perseus, gave him every day new
causes to bless the arrival of my Prince, and to forget the imperfections of
the legitimate, through the admirable qualities of the adopted. But while
Almanzor lived the joy of the people of Benin, the admi^ation of the rest of
Africa, the envy of all generous Princes, and that the greatest Potentates sent
Ambassadors to Abrinzias, to rejoice with him for Almanzor's honor, and the
delivery of his Country: the ambition of Spain, an enemy to all men's quiet,
which runs through Sea and land to drive thence both peace and liberty, came
unfortunately to disturb the delights of the best King in the world. Vasquez
de Gama, General of the Portugal Fleet, returning from Calecut, was by a
storm driven into the River of Benin. In lieu of leaving to the Inhabitants
that peace he found there, he landed out of his ships men more cruel then the
Serpent which Almanzor had slain. That young Prince hearing of the Portugals
i^rode, ran to oppose them, and by his exploits then, made appear yet far
more then by his first combat, that he was borne for the ruin and extirpation
of Monsters. I, in that adventure followed him, but was so unfortunate as to be
taken by the Portugals, and carried prisoner into Gama's ship. I offered him
gold and pearls for my ransom, and even told him I was Abrinzia's brother,
and omitted nothing of what might make him capable of a resolution to set me at
liberty. But the loss of his best Soldiers, and the dishonor to be beaten
back again to shipping by Almanzor, working him to a revenge, made him
inexorable. The night after his defeat he weighed Anchor, and unmoved by my
tears and supplications, carried me into Spain, and presented me to the King
his Master for Abrinzia's brother. Those three years I passed in that
servitude., hindered me from being a spectator of Almanzor's great adventures.
But heaven infallibly permitted it for some good; and if I deceive not my
self, to the end my Prince living unknown to himself as well as to his
Enemies, might retard their ruin without taking pains for his own. Know
then, after he had repulsed the Portugals, and seen their ships far from the
coasts of Benin, he mustered his men; but finding me wanting, he was so
afflicted, and witnessed such resentments as I shall never recompense by any
service, or the loss of my life. A hundred times exclaimed he on his fortune,
cast his arms away, and running where the slaughter had been greatest,
searched all the dead, to see whether I were of their number. But not finding
me, he ran to the Sea; and his grief transporting him: Thieves and villains,
cried he to the Portugals, give me back Almaid; and if your avarice cannot be
satisfied by an ordinary ransom, I engage my self to conquer for you all the
golden country for the liberty of my second father. But in uneffectuall
petitions I lose that time which I should employ for Almaids redemption.
Therewithal he sent a servant of his to Abrinzias, to advertise him of my
loss, and to beseech him humbly, he would be pleased to command the Royal
vessel to be made ready and armed to pursue those who had carried me away
prisoner. That ship was carefully kept in the River of Benin, and as a thing
consecrated to their Deity, was not used but to sail some days in the year,
to carry those offerings which the Crown of Benin owed to the great Temple of
Congo. Almanzor went to the Captain of that ship, and persuading him, that the
succouring of the miserable, and giving liberty to those which had lost it, was
a pleasing Offering to heaven, obliged him to arm his vessel, and keep it
ready to weigh Anchor as soon as the Kings permission came to him. The very
same day leave came, and though Abrinzias writ to Almanzor, not to hazard
himself in that voyage, yet he embarked himself, and followed the Portugals.
His ship being not so good a sayler, nor so well governed as those he chased,
could never fetch them up. But on the contrary, in the first tempest being
forsaken by the Pilot, he was eight or ten days at the mercy of the Sea, and
at last ran on a bank on a coast far distant from that of Benin. Almanzor
saved himself in a little boat that was in the ship, and armed with his
usual armor, landed on that unknown shore. No sooner was he on land, but he
saw himself environed with many armed men, who infallibly taking him for
another, cast themselves at his feet, and showed by their clapping of hands,
and their shouts, they were exceedingly delighted. The most apparent of the
Troop, standing a while as ravished with admiration or joy; Welcome, (said he)
O most happily returned is this worthy Prince, which was borne for the safety
of Nations, for the destruction of Tyrants, and the protection of the
afflicted. O my dear Country, dry thy tears, revive thy hopes, acknowledge
thy happiness, behold thy tutesar Angel; and come meet this powerful
defender, who is going to pluck thy Princes out of Captivity, and break the
chains of their servitude. Almanzor was much surprised with this man's
acclamations, and to know the cause of it, would not take him out of that
error. On the contrary, he entreated him to relate what had happened; who were
the enemies he was to fight with? and what was become of those should defend
them? Great Prince, (replied the man) I should be too tedious if I recounted to
you all the miseries that have betided us since your absence. Know that the
untameable King of Tombut, the furious tyrant of Temian, and the hardy Prince
of Agadez, renewing the wars they had other times begun out of mere ambition,
and yet under pretext of avenging our first Queen, came thundering on this
Kingdom with a powerful Army, and to make the people revolt, published all
about, that the King by the advice of the Queen now reigning, had caused his
first wife to be poisoned, and poniarded his Son. My King (who without flattery
has all the qualities of a great Prince) did what he could to repel force by
force, but seeing himself forsaken by most of his Subjects, he was constrained
to shut himself up in a strong place he has on the River of Senega, and to
expect there the aid was coming to him from Melley and Guinea. That succor
was vainly looked for; for the Kings fault, which grew not out of men's
memories, and his second marriage, which was contracted by a murder and a
sacrilege, were the reasons why no body would take Arms for our defense. The
King seeing himself out of hope to be relieved, resolved to dye like a man of
valor. He made a salley on his enemies; but after he had lost many of his
people, and received diverse great wounds, he was taken, and ignominiously led
before the King of Tombut. Zelopa, so is our Queen called, advertised of that
mischance, did not what another wife would have done. She had no recourse to
tears and cries, but got out of her Palace with a manlike heart, and taking
the place of the King her husband, made a speech to the people and soldiers,
and won them to a defense even till death. The Enemy in the mean time sent
her a Herald, and word, that if within eight days she resolved not to render
her self to their discretion, they would cut off the Kings head. Those eight
days expire to morrow. Judge my Lord, if hitherto we have not had great cause
of affliction, and seeing you returned, whether we have not more reason to
rejoice. The man thus ending his discourse, besought Almanzor to take some
course instantly for the safty of his father and mother. Almanzor somewhat
troubled with the novelty of this adventure, knew not what to resolve; but his
innate generosity dissipating all those cloudy, made him see how honorable
this occasion might be to him, and the interest he had, not to disbeguile those
who took him for what he was not. He resolved therefore to assist the
imprisoned King, and the afflicted Lady, and intimating so much to the person
who entertained me: Let Us go then (said he) where the Kings enemies are, and
see by what way we may attempt his delivery. The man (after he had kissed his
hand) replied; I see already the King my Masters fortune begin to alter. His
long prosperities are reviving, and the Enemies of his glory shall not triumph
over it unpunished. When he had thus witnessed his joy, he directed Almanzor
how he was to demean himself, and without surther delay, led him with his
companions to the place where Zelopa was besieged. On the way Almanzor let him
know his error, told him he was the King of Benins Son, and taking the name of
him whom he thought his brother, called himself Perseus. The man, not caring
much by whom, so his King were redeemed, made Almanzor to go on day and night.
Their journey was so fortunate, that they entered Senega undiscovered by their
Enemies. Almanzor sent his Guide to Zelopa to intimate his arrival, and he
found her very sad, but very resolute, and capable to suffer greater disasters
then those which encompassed her. With an extreme joy she heard the news of
Almanzors coming, and the good opinion given her, made her conceive an
exceeding great hope of assistance from him. She sent the Captain of her Guard
to meet him, and well knowing how to accommodate her proud nature to the
necessity of her occasions, she went her self so far as into the Presence to
give Almanzor the more honor. She was very well followed, and very richly clad
for one in mourning. She courteously welcomed the Prince, and with so many
kindnesses that had he not been preoccupated by a secret aversion, which he
could not be rid of, it had been a hard matter for him not to be caught by her
blandishments. But that just and powerful Antipathy making him see a great
deal of pride and lasciviousness in all the Queens words and actions, he
staid not with her longer then was time to take advise, and resolve for his
combat with one of the Enemy Kings. At break of the next day, he sent one of
Zelop^'s Heralds to defy the King of Tombut; and with the challenge, to
present him the conditions of the combat. That King who had caused himself to
be named Indomptable, because he had never been conquered; was ravished at
Almanzors proposition; and thinking himself already victorious, told the
Herald he should let his Mistress know, he took an exceeding content in
hearing she resolved to make an end of the siege and war by so quick a way.
But (said he) tell her, she must not hope that after my victory I will take
notice of her tears, nor hearken to her petitions or any her other subtleties.
She must dye with her husband, and expiate by fire the murders they have
committed together. To the Prince of Benin, say too, I make profession of
keeping my word, and if the chance of war give him the advantage over me, I
will not only set Zabaim at liberty, but my brothers and my self (burying for
ever all memory of things passed) will presently return into our Countries.
The Herald came back to Zelopa and Almanzor, and relating the success of his
negotiation, they thought presently of putting it in execution. At the time
prefixed, Zelopa's troop came out of Senega, and ranging themselves in battle
array before the Enemies army, both parties stood on their guard Presently were
seen a troop of Archers, who conducting Zabaim to the end of the field, bound
him with his hands behind his back to a post, and made the hangman sit down
at his feet, who with an Axe which he carried on his shoulder was to cut off
his head. Almanzor incensed with that spectacle, came out of Senega, and in a
little time after appeared on the place for the combat. The King of Tombut
straight followed. You well know after what sort a very valiant man dispatcheth
such a business; and therefore I will not trouble you with the particulars of
that which passed in this occasion. The King of Tombut did as much as a man
could do who had termed himself Indomptable. Yet his great courage in this
combat met not that success it had found in some preceding: for he was
compelled to give place to the valor of a youth of sixteen years, and to
receive from his generosity that life which he could not preserve by his arms.
He questioned heaven for his bad fortune, accused it for protecting of
injustice, and charged it with reserving its greatest ability for the defense
of the most impious actions. But this miscreant was deceived in his apparances,
and the blasphemies he vomited against the order of the eternal Justice, were
but signs of the indignation he took at his disgrace, and not any proofs of
love he bore to Equity. Almanzor very generously treated him, after he had
overcome him, and bearing apart in his affliction as well as in his pain,
entreated him not only to make it appear on this occasion, that he was worthy
the title of Indomptable, but also to suspend all his resentments to give
satisfaction to his word. I will do it (answered the King) and in case my
faith had not been engaged, I would have submitted all my just choler to your
courtesy. Truly Fame has been ungrateful and jealous for concealing so
extraordinary a valor as yours; for mine own part, I find a consolation for
my defeat in the glory of its Author: and I should think it most precious to
me could I acquire so noble a friend. I will never refuse (replied Almanzor) a
condition so advantageous to me, I rather beg your amity, and entreat you in
giving of mine, not to think on this day, but to remember you have overcome
me. I am too happy, replied the King of Tombut, and would believe I had not
bought your friendship with a valuable price, if I had not laid down for it
all my reputation. After this contract of love, the two Princes embraced, and
by that action gave occasion of different thoughts, not only to the King who
was so ignominiously bound, but also to the two Armies, and all those who from
the walls of Senega had been Spectators of the combat. As Soon as those two
Princes had ended their complements, they cast their eyes on the unfortunate
Zabaim; and, as if already they had but one will, went to set that captive King
at liberty. As Soon as they came, they commanded thence the Guard and
Executioner; and Almanzor looking on the unfortunate Zabaim with a great deal
of pity, wept almost all the while he was unbinding him. He considered him
often, and his good nature making him partaker of the Kings ill fortunes:
Remember (said he) that Justice which reigns in heaven can as well chastise
Kings as other men. Your afflictions shall have done you good service, if they
can make you call to account the state of your conscience, and win you to a
serious consideration and hatred together of your former life. Pardon me, Sir,
the liberty I take, and do not think, I would wrong your present condition
because I have saved your life; or as your Enemies, triumph on your misery. I
do no less esteem you tied to this shameful post, then if you were seated
in your throne; but that which gives me the boldness to deliver my thoughts to
you, is a desire I have, you may henceforward live happy, and by a true change
of life avert the vengeance of heaven which yet groans over your head. Zabaim,
to these words answered nothing, but holding his eyes fixed on the earth,
confessed by his silence the enormity of his faults. Almanzor having wholly
unbound him, brought him to the three Kings, who presently restored his royal
robe, Almanzor put on his Diadem with his own hands, and the peace being
presently proclaimed, the gates of Senega were set open. Those who had been
such deadly foes embraced each other, and made appear by so quick a change,
that the Subject has neither hatred nor love but when they are forced to those
passions by those who command them. Zelopa came down from the wall, (from
whence she had beheld what was passed) and came to meet the King. The King of
Tombut who could not forget his causes of hatred, entreated Almanzor not to
engage him to see her, who thinking his request very just, not only consented
he should retire into his camp, but accompanying him to his tent, entreated
his wounds might be searched: He saw them dressed, and being assured they were
not dangerous, took his leave of the King, after he had by many vows renewed
the assurance of his friendship. He returned to Zabaim, (who was in great care
for him) and reconducting the King to his Palace, through the applauses and
acclamations of the people, besought him to have perpetually in mind the
business of that day. Polexander not able to abide longer in that impatiency
Almaid's relation gave him: What? (said he) intetrupting him, Is this Zabaim of
whom you talk the same whose adventures the Queen has bin pleased to make
known to me? The very same (answered Almaid) and judge whether Almanzor did not
gloriously avenge himself (unwittingly) on that ungrateful and unnatural
father, who would have murdered him in his cradle. Almanzaira could not
refrain from tears at those words, but pleased her self in exhaling her
griefs by her weeping and sighs. Almaid perceiving Polexanders astonishment;
That which you have heard of Almanzor (said he) is well, but it is nothing in
comparison of what you are to know: you shall see this outcast Son give
twenty times life to his Father for that one which he would have taken away;
and not only re-establish him in all his estates, but re-settle in the Throne
that Fury who had driven him thence, and robbed his mother of it. Polexander
had yet more questions to ask, but he let them pass for not hindering the
contentment he expected from the rest of Almanzors adventures. Almaid perceived
his intention and thus went on: For five or six days together Zabaim seemed
more sad and afflicted then he was even in his imprisonment, and spoke of
nothing but repentance, of change of life, of recalling those whom he had
unjustly banished, and banish those whom he had more unjustly retained.
Imagine what thoughts these demeanours might work in Zelopa, and what
revolutions she foresaw in her fortune, if she did not oppose the rebellion of
her slave. She did it, (and so effectually) that Zabaim trampling under-foot
his word, his honor, and his proper interest, threatened the King of Tombut and
his allies; and made insolent protestations, to wash off with their bloods the
stain they had cast on his reputation. Whilst he was acting his new
extravagances, Zelopa was perpetrating new villainies; she looked on Almanzor at
once with the eyes of concupiscence and hatred: she loved him for his person
and gracefulness, but she hated him because she knew 'twas his advise and
admirable virtue which troubled the harmony of her designs, and plucked off
the muffler she had wound over Zabaims eyes. Yet Love preserved his Empire, and
Ambition reduced it to its former servitude, was compelled (together with
hatred and cruelty) to submit to their ancient Conqueror. Zelopa then
reconciles her self (unwittingly) to her mortal enemy; she adores him whom
she would before time have strangled with her own hands, and equally sins
both against heaven and her own intention. But Almanzor who under the name of
Perseus had gotten the love of all Senega, fled from the monster he was not
permitted to destroy, and threw himself among thorns to avoid the walking on
flowers which hid invulnerable Serpents. Whilst Zelopa was agitated with this
new Fury, there came diverse Posts which made her change, or at least suspend
her criminal affection. They brought Zabaim news, that all Guinea had taken
arms, that the Kingdom of Melly was ready to denounce war, and the most
part of the Commons of Senega leant to Rebellion: This Advertisement was
slighted for some few days; but that thunder after it had rumbled awhile broke
out, and Zabaim saw himself reduced to the estate of being King of one only
Town. Almanzor got into the field and sent Couriers to the King of Tombut to
entreat him to keep his word: that King forgetting Zabaims follies, came to
assist him for Almanzor's sake, and brought with him a mighty Army, whereby the
Rebelis of Senega were quickly brought back to subjection. As Soon as Zabaim
had left his wicked Angel, that great courage of his manifested it self, with
which he had conquered the half of Afric. His wisdom accompanied his
valor, and even made the King of Tombut to admire him; whithersoever he
marched he became victorious, and Almanzor far more affecting fame then
spoil or prey, gloriously out-went the steps of his Father; in one same day,
he redeemed the King of Tombut whom the Rebels had taken prisoner, and
dis-ingag'd Zabaim, who having lost his horse and arms, was going to satiate
the fury of his rebellious Subjects. A few days after this glorious action,
Zabaim was enforced to resolve on a battle; the revolted were joined, and had
composed an army able to amate such hearts as had not been truly courageous.
But Almanzor representing to Zabaim and the King of Tombut the fortune and
honor of their former actions, made them contemn the great number of their
Enemies. The battle was fought, and proved so bloody, that from both sides
there dyed on the place fourscore thousand men. That memorable day, Almanzor
saved his fathers life five times, and twice the King of Tombuts; the better
cause at last had the victory, and by an entire defeat of the rebellious
party, corfirm'd that important verity (which says) The Power of Kings is a
Power derived from above: and that the bonds which bind Subjects to their
duties being made by the proper hand of heaven, cannot be broken without
violating the divine Laws as well as humane. This battle intombing all the
Rebels of Senega, did the like to the Rebellion; all the Towns rendered
themselves to their former obedience, and that commotion being of the nature of
those tempests which happen in the fame Climat, was as short as it was violent:
Zabaim seeing himself more absolute in his Realms then he was before the
revolt, would a while enjoy the peace he had restored to his Subjects, to go
all fresh and unroyled into Guinea, and by the ruin of all those Tyrants, who
had divided his Empire, preserve what appertained to him by his right of
Conquest. He brought with him to Senega (to refresh themselves) the King of
Tombut and Almanzor, but he gave them new perplexities, in thinking to bring
them to their repose: Zelopa was to them an object of horror and hatred; and
though they looked on her very differingly, yet they found there the same
defects and the same crimes. But she who was no lesie bewitched by the beauty
of Almanzor then Zabaim was by hers, could not suppress her heat in reseeing
him: she welcomed him with all such kindnesses as were able to make Zabaim
jealous, if his eyes had not been enchanted as well as his other senses; she
called him her son and her defender, and her disordinate passion depriving
her of reason, she fell about his neck; What (said she) can I neither give nor
refuse this brave Warrior, by whose valor I enjoy my Crown, enjoy Zabaim,
and enjoy my self? Almanzor not being able to endure those derestable
pratings, wrested himself by force out of her arms; and to make her ashamed,
Remember (said he in leaving her) I am not Zabaim: Thou art not indeed, said
she with a languishing voice, but thou art somewhat more. Zabaim heedlesly
contributed all that remained to ruin his wife utterly, and recounting
Almanzor's glorious actions, threw sulphur and oil on the fire of that
enraged woman: at the sole name of Almanzor, she was taken with tremblings and
shiverings; she sighed while Zabaim praised him, she held her eyes fixed on
him, and from time to time speaking unseasonably: O my only deliverer! cried
she, finish thy work, and leave not thy glory imperfect; thou have saved my
Lord the King, thou have restored to us a part of our Empire; Go, and by the
ordinary miracles of thy good fortune, ruinate those Traitors which are
revolted from us. Those words as artificial as the brain from whence they
came, were expounded one way by Zabaim and another by Almanzor; he grew almost
desperate at Zelopa's folly, and to free him from it, intended to abandon
Senega; but as he was at the point of parting, diverse considerations and some
secret power staid him whether he would or no, and upbraided him of cowardice
to fly before a woman; nevertheless he was forced to take that resolution, and
overcomming all those obstacles which opposed his departure, he avoided the
precipice whereunto Zelopa's fury had infallibly drawn him. One day meeting
him in the great garden of Senega; In humane (said she) which deniest life to
thine enemy which begs it of thee, and gloriest in the destruction of a wretch
which implores thee; know that I am in possession of that Empire thou disputest
with me, and Kings have not usually resisted my charms. Ask the people of
Guinea; consult with those of Melly and Senega, they will tell thee, their
Princes have been my slaves, and that the Crowns and Lives of Monarchs depend
more servilly on the power of my charms then on that of Fortune; yet thou
flyest me, thou scorn'st me, and (may be) adding indiscretion to insensibility,
thou accusest me to Zabaim. Ah cruel Perseus! neglect not thy destiny, make
not thy self miserable in contemning thy good fortune, and drive not to
despair a creature that sues to thee for pity; I yet beseech thee Perseus,
hearken to my supplications, let me adore thee, accept the offering of my self
which I make thee; the gods whom thou so much fear, and so often namest,
have they taught thee to neglect all vows and sacrifices? look they of what
value the Present is which is offered, and are they not contented with the
zeal and heart of their Adorers? Why then do thou then despise mine? What!
insensible man, thou do not answer me, but deaf as well as blind,
participatest in nature with those trees which environ thee: but what said I?
No, thou too evidently make known to me thy cruel intention, I lose my
words and time (thou say) and thy hatred increasing proportionably with my
love, the more I persevere in beseeching thee, the more obstinate art thou in
denying me; would to that Spirit which torments me that one day our Destiny
might be altered: or at least that my patience might be turned into fury! I
should then avenge me of thy cruelties, and immolating thee to my contemned
flames, I would have him for my Sacrifice whom I could not have for mine Idol.
Zelopa thus ending her speech dissolved into tears, and went from Almanzor as
from an enemy, with whom we are yet loath to break. The young Prince being not
a little moved by these shameful solicitations, called to him that high virtue
which was so deeply rooted in his heart, and consulting with her on this
occasion, confessed he should make him self guilty of Zelopa's crimes, if by
his absence he stopped not the course of them: he therefore without taking
leave of Zabaim or the King of Tombut, (and heaven which always tends means
for the execution of good resolutions) was pleased he should find in the mouth
of the River of Senega, a ship belonging to the King of Morocco; in it he
embarked, and learned from the Captain, he was sent by the young Prince of Fez
to invite the Princes and Knights of Africa to the Turney which he had
undertaken for the honor of Alcidiana. Polexander surprised with that name,
interrupted Almaid, and vexed either for not being at that meeting, or with the
boldness of the Prince of Fez; Who (said he) put that fancy into the Moors
head? I cannot tell you that, (replied Almaid) for I never enquired after it,
but I can relate to you all that passed at the Turney: I beseech you (said
Polexander) do so, and let me know what happy Knight 'twas who preserved that
fair Queens honor. 'Twas Almanzor (replied Almaid) without any intention to
be the man, or without ever seeing or desire to see Alcidiana. He overcame not
only all the African Knights, and many dextrous Spaniards who came thither to
defend the beauties of their Ladies, but he so roughly handled the proud Prince
of Fez, that 'twas his own fault if after he had disarmed him the the other had
not been brought in case to beg his life from Almanzor. The Turney being
ended, all retired; our Prince who had made a league of friendship with the
Prince of Meda, embarked in his ship, and steered toward Senega: he related to
Meda, that Zabaim was in Guinea, striving to regaine by arms what he had lost
by a revolt, and got that Prince to resolve on that voyage; they arrived where
Zabaim was on the very point he was about to give battle. They did that day
incredible things, and Almanzor (according to his happy fare) came to assist
the King when he was like to be slain: Zabaim got the victory, but he was so
wounded as he was feign to be carried out of the Field. In all likelihood the
joy for the victory and the good success of business should have been
excellent balm to have cured that Prince's wounds; but it happened that his
suffering himself to be transported with pain, melancholy and impatiency,
they contested with the Physicians and Chirurgions art and the virtue of their
remedies: his wounds were invenomed by the troubles of his mind, and grew so
worse and worse, that it behoov'd them to carry him far from the noise of the
Army to avoyde a greater mischance: he was brought to the Palace of the ancient
Kings of Guinea, which is built at the bottom of the Straights of Camboes, and
for fear lest in his absence the Rebels might make head again, he appointed
Almanzor in his place, and gave him all the Command he had over his Troops:
Almanzor made so good use of his authority, and by the miracles of his valor
so much terrified the enemy, that in less then six months all Guinea was
reconquered, and the name of Zabaim more beloved, or at least more feared, then
it had been after his first Conquest. Almanzor laden with palms and honor,
left his Army with the King of Tombut and came to Zabaim; he was almost cured,
but his melancholy and grief were not yet suppressed. Long time he embraced
Almanzor, and a hundred times called him his Son and Protector; but though in
outward show he witnessed an extreme joy, yet he could not bridle his
affliction, nor dissemble the grief that overcame him: Almanzor took notice
of it, and being once in private with him, besought to make known whence
proceeded that anxiety and discontent which he strove to conceal from him; I
wish (answered Zabaim) you had never been at Morocco; I foresee such
misfortunes as I shall be extreme sensible of, and are already so much the
more insupportable to me since all my foresight can afford no remedy: with
that he sighed, and the fear of what might betide so vively touched him, that
he could not go on with his discourse. Almanzor who loved that Prince no less
then him of Benin, fell at his feet, and entreated him to discover the cause of
his sorrow: But Sir (said he) do not believe I make this Petition to satisfy
my curiosity; No, it is to offer you all you can expect from a Son; leave not
then your making use of my service; dispose of my arms and life, if either the
one or the other can any ways redress your afflictions; and give me not
cause by your refusal, to believe that absence and time have lessened your
affection. Zabaim after long consultation with himself, resolved to satisfy
Almanzor; Know (said he, sighing) it is your consideration afflicts me and not
mine own; I fear the danger whereto I my self must expose you; not that I
doubt your valor, or have lost the remembrance of those brave acts you have
lately performed; it is my love that cannot suffer you to hazard your life
again; hitherto I have given you over freely to your valor and the darts of
my enemies; but do you know why? 'Twas because my fortune was more dear to me
then your preservation: but now, since all my Crowns, nay, not my life is
nothing so dear to me compared with you, I wish you without courage; I hate
war, I detest all quarrels, and in a word, I fear all occasions wherein
honor might engage you. Almanzor containing himself in the modesty of a man
who has no great opinion of himself, Sir, (said he to the King) if the love
you bear me disquiet you, I beseech you let the same affection free you of
that trouble: I desire to be beloved of you, but it is fit (if you please) that
your love be peaceful, that it be just; and that it leave all timidities,
frailties and vexations, to the passions of that Sex which is composed of
nothing but fear, weakness, and perturbation it self: Tell me therefore
what I have to do, and what terrible enemy it is that awakeneth your fear for
me. Zabaim believing he should wrong Almanzors courage to persevere in his
doubt: Know (said he) that Alcidiana's beauty has gotten you the hatred of the
Prince of Fez: he believes you pretend to her favor, and since you parted from
Morocco, his jealousy has hurried him through all Africa to find you; he
has been at the Canaries, he has run through all the Countries of Tombut, of
Meda and Senega; at last, and within these two days, he is come hither, with a
resolution rather to expect you here yet six months, then to lose the occasion
of meeting with you; he is very valiant, but he is no less proud: The
greatness of his birth, and the combats he has sought, have given him so
insolent an opinion of himself, as he imagines he is the terror of all other
Princes; I vow to you, that my greatest grief is not for seeing you engaged in
a combat which questionless will be very furious; but I sorrow for your being
here, since your friends would have taken your place, and made known to your
Rival, that there needs not a valor so great as yours to humble his pride.
Almanzor concealing from Zabaim the advantage he had had over the Prince of
Fez; I am sorry, (said he) that amorous Prince is become so jealous of a man
that intends not to cross his affection; not that I am ignorant of the
incomparable merit of a Princess, whose Fame flies through all Lands; I admire
her virtues, I find her worthy the vows of all hearts which are capable of
love, but I am not a man of sufficient merit to pretend to the honor of
serving her. This verity, Sir, is but for our particular satisfaction; if you
love me conceal it, for you know well it touches my reputation to publish it;
let the jealous Abdelmelec therefore do what he pleases, I have neither
excuse nor justification for him: but replied Zabaim, that which most troubles
me in this business is, that you must necessarily see him, for I cannot in
civility choose but lodge him in the palace, and entertain him as a Prince my
Ally. Almanzor would have rectified some of these slight difficulties, when
Abdelmelec who may be had heard of his arrival, came to Zabaim: the fire
sparkled from his eyes, and witnessing by his gate as well as countenance how
far he was distracted from himself; I understand (said he to the King) that
he who boasts he gave me my life, is with you: the impatiency I am in, to
maintain with my sword, that hely'd, would not suffer me to stay any longer
from knowing the truth of it. Zabaim told him Almanzor was arrived, and strove
by his speeches to bridle the mad man; But Abdelmelec letting himself loose to
his natural impetuosity, and presently knowing his vanquisher came up to him
with an insupportable insolency, and told him (without deigning to look on
him) that he could not hide himself so close but he had at last found him
out; Zabaim would have answered willingly to those audacious words, but
Almanzor approaching Abdelmelec with a temper that witnessed the power of his
soul: I am sorry (said he) for putting you to so much pains; had I known your
mind, you should sooner have had satisfaction. This answer infallibly
asswaging the Barbarians fury, he changed both his action and voice, and as if
he would have capitulated the business by an explanation, instead of coming
to handystroaks: No man (said he to Almanzor) shall ever undertake to wrong me,
but he shall repent his undervaluing my courage or my friendship. I have
always esteemed them both, (replied Almanzor) but you have not made so long a
journey to be contented with words; I will not therefore go about to excuse my
former actions. Abdelmelec seeing himself not where he thought, put on again
his haughty looks, and the former tone of his voice, and eying Almanzor with
an insupportable contempt; It seems (said he) you would prevent the Challenge
I come to make you: certainly in that you give me more cause to pity you, then
to be offended; Yes Sir, you shall give me other satisfaction then by words,
and ere four and twenty hours be past, I will make you feel that I know how
to confound the ridiculous dexterity of breaking a Lance. We shall see what you
say, replied Almanzor, and I shall be glad to take forth lessons under so
excellent a Master; in the mean time, if you please, let us leave this
discourse, which cannot but be irksome to Zabaim, and forget our difference
till we be in case to decide it. Zabaim who thought it fit not to interrupt
them, began to speak when he perceived Almanzor would change discourse; and
addressing him to the Prince of Fez: You are very generous (said he) to bear
so much love to a personage who glory's to be insensible, and by a title as
proud as redoubtfull, calls her self the irreconcilable enemy of mankind. The
fair Alcidiana (replied Abdelmelec) is just in her mislike with all men; of
whom has she ever heard spoken that has not deserved her contempt or hatred?
Certainly, though the public report, which is always the report of fools,
has placed some even among the gods; yet it is most true, there is none that
is worthy of Alcidiana. Such a one has the repute of valiant, who may be daily
accuses himself for the contrary, and that it is but artificial. Another
seems magnificent, whose conscience upbraides him with many secret basenesses.
A third is profuse, and makes show of extraordinary liberalities, yet a hidden
avarice gnaws out his heart: in a word, Men are public cheaters, and this age
in particular brings forth almost no others; and this being true, I leave it to
your consideration to think, whether Alcidiana be not exceedingly judicious in
publishing her hatred to them, and for remaining in a place not to be infected
by the arrival of such monsters. But (said Almanzor to him) if we are all so
imperfect, if we are all such monsters as Alcidiana cannot abide; can there
be found any man so idle as to think himself exempted from that general
imperfection, and that he alone enjoyes such parts as are not to be found
again in the whole race of men besides? Abdelmelec, who looked not on
Almanzor, but asmew with one corner of his eye: It Is for your self (said he)
to resolve the question you make us; I have long since answered to it for as
much as concerns me, (replied Almanzor) but I would very feign know your
opinion, and learn where that Phoenix is, which deserves to be burnt by so
fair a Sun. Almanzor could not so well contain himself, but that by his
action he made known that he jeered at Abdelmelec's vanity: That Prince, as
quick of apprehension as full of pride, perceived his pretended Rivall's
gybing, and the fire flying into his face, The resolution we have taken (said
he) stays my just anger, and retards the chastisement your indiscretion
merits. Go young man (added he, shaking his head) go, make ready your arms,
and renounce in time the insolence which dazles you; if, with the enjoying of
Alcidiana's favor you will not likewise lose so many years you have yet to
live. Almanzor was no way moved with all those indiscreet words, but keeping
him still in his merry humor; You wish me too much ill (said he to the Prince
of Fez) to follow your counsel: therefore, be you not displeased if I give no
heed to it, and defer your imposing such shameful necessities upon me, till
you have overcome me. Zabaim not being able any longer to endure Abdelmelec's
violent passion, broke off their conversation, and excusing himself on his
troubles, gave civilly a Congey to the Moorish Prince: Night straight came on,
and Almanzor retired betimes, not to be the last in bed. At day-breake he
arose, and consecrating his first actions to that Bounty from whence he had his
being, strength and courage; prepared himself to satisfy the jealous
Abdelmelec. The time of Combat being come, Zabaim who was engaged to renounce
all his inclinations, to take on him the indifferency of an Arbitrator, came
into a place appointed for all Shows and Exercises. As Soon as he was set,
Almanzor appeared on the one side, and Abdelmelec on the other. They divided
the Wind and the Sun equally betwixt them; and presently the Trumpets
signified to them they were at liberty to do what they would. I will not lose
time in relating to you how these Combatants were armed, what their Devises
were, what their Horses, and how the rest of their equipage: I will only let
you know, Abdelmelec carried on his Buckler the picture of Alcidiana, and was
so unfortunate, that with the first blow, Almanzor cut it in two pieces. That
stroke was not to be spoken on, but for the extreme grief Abdelmelec
conceived at it, he accused heaven for his ill fortune, and in lieu of
complaining for his want of address, he accused the Sun of choler and
jealousy. Almanzor who accounted for extravagances all the transports which
proceeded of Love, laughed at his enemy; and to mad him indeed, told him if he
could keep the Original no betterahen he had done the Copy, he thought him one
of the miserablest Lovers in the world. The Prince of Fez stung with his loss
and the others words, replied not; but thrusting his Horse on Almanzor's, made
known by his valor, that his pride and ambition were not absolutely unjust.
The Combat lasted above two hours, without any perceivance to whom the
Victory would incline; but a little after, Fortune declared her self for
Almanzor; He pursued his Enemy so hard with blows, that he felled him under
his horses feet, and presently alighting from his own, and offering his Sword
to that dejected proud one; It Is now (said he) Abdelmelec, that thou must beg
thy life of me; and since thou art not in case to instruct me, I will take thy
place to tell thee, that thou soyl'st thy virtues with a vice, which is not so
much as supportable in the person of those who are continually victorious.
Courtesy and humility should be the particular virtues of Kings: Others which
are not of so high a birth, may sometimes be proud, but Princes renounce the
advantage they have over the rest of men, as often as they are apt to forget
themselves. This long oration was not very pleasing to Abdelmelec, for
Almanzors Sword was all that while at his throat: nor would he answer a word to
it, but showed by his demeanor, he desired rather to dye then to beg his life.
Almanzor gave it him, and presenting his hand to help lift him up, Come (said
he) let us go get our selves dressed, and never afflict your self with the
success of your Combat; for I swear to you, Alcidiana has not brought me in
love with her, and I have no intent to cross your Suite: Abdelmelec hearing
Almanzor's declaration, could well have wished he had never been jealous of
him, but 'twas too late for those thoughts. He was then carried to the Palace
and put into the Surgeons hands; Almanzor who had but two slight hurts, got
again on horse back, and followed with the Acclamations and Praises of all
the Court, went to Zabaim, and related to him what had passed betwixt
Abdelmelec and himself. The King would see his wounds, and have their first
dressing in his presence. For Abdelmelec he was sore hurt, but his rage to be
twice quelled by one same man, troubling him more then his wounds, he besought
Zabaim to be pleased he might retire to Morocco: Zabaim told him the danger
whereto he exposed himself; yet had he rather hazard his life in getting
further from Almanzor, then to preserve it by being engaged to see him again.
Zabaim did all he could to stay him, but seeing his exceeding resolution to be
gone, would not hinder it, but conducting him to his Ship, left him to the
protection of Mahomet. Almanzor in the mean time thought on his cure, and in
less then fifteen days was in case to leave his chamber. The second time he
went abroad, as Zabaim and he walked on the Sea shore, they perceived a ship
bear right up to them: they had the patience to stay her entrance into the
Gulf; and (as soon as she had furled her sails) the curiosity of learning
news won them to send for the Captain of the Ship; who receiving the
commandment, sent back him that brought it; and entreated, he would let Zabaim
understand that he had such things to show him as would be very pleasing to
him. The Messenger was no sooner returned, but the Captain landed, and with him
an ancient man clad like the Jews of Africa, and a woman of more then three
sore years old, which led in her hand a young maiden of sixteen or seaventeene
years, so amiable, and so richly clad, that the two Princes invited by her
admirable beauty, stood long time gazing on her. Ah Almanzor: thou had not
now been the Captain to a company of thieves, if the power of thy soul had
not slackned at sight of that fair Wanderer. Zabaim, after he had long looked
on her, made her come near, and asked the Captain whence he was, and by what
adventure those three persons he brought with him were fallen into his hands.
The Captain (following the ill custom of those that come from far)
unwilling to let slip the least accident had befalne in his voyage, was about
to begin a very tedious relation: when Zabaim cutting him off bade him answer
succinctly to these two questions. The Captain, obeying against his will, told
him he was of the Isle of Madera, and had a long time trafiqued into Spain:
The last time I was at Lisbon (said he) I had such contrary winds, and the
tempest was so furious that I was cast on the coasts of Fez; I staid there some
time to trim my ship, and attending a favorable wind, the very day before I
set sail, as I walked on the strand, those three persons you see there, came
out from under the rocks which were by the Sea side, and showing their fears
by their tears, cast themselves at my feet; this old man embracing my knees
began thus, My Lord (said he) if you believe there is in heaven a Divinity
which recompenceth pious actions, and watches for the preservation of
oppressed Innocents, have pity on three miserable creatures, and suffer not
this harmless Soul (with that he showed me this young maiden) to be a prey to
those villains that pursue her. If their cruelty would have been satiated by
our deaths, we had glutted it: but their fury threatens us with a more horrible
disaster. They would immolate the honor of this Virgin to the brutishness of
their Prince, and have us consent to the ruin of that, for whose preservation
we would give a thousand lives. The good man's speech much moved me; I took
him with his company into my ship, and weighed anchor to return to Madera; but
the wind unwilling to have it so, has cast me on this Coast; and the old man
knowing it, gave thanks to heaven, and besought me to land him with his wife
and daughter. I could not deny him so just a request, and therefore bring him
with me, taking to witness the Justice which reigns in heaven, that I have
carefully observed the Laws of Hospitality, and have not failed of any duty
which the prudent Law of nature wills us to render to one another. This
Commander, (that might pass for a miracle amongst Seafaring men) asked those
whom he conducted, whether they had any cause to complain of him: but
receiving thanks and blessings from them in lieu of accusations, took leave
of them and the Princes, and so retired into his vessel. Zabaim was ravished
at the virtue of that Pilot, but he was far more with the beauty of that
visible Angel, who was come from a place so remote to put her self under his
protection. For Almanzor, he stood as tied by the eyes on the face of the fair
stranger, at last he suddenly came out of his deep and dangerous
contemplation; and having heard nothing of what had been said, It Is to be
confessed (said he to Zabaim) that she is perfectly fair: but let us know what
she is, and whence she comes? For this quarter's hour (replied Zabaim) we
have talked of nothing else: No doubt, if you continue as you begin, you will
out-goe all those that have been before you. Almanzor blushed at Zabaim's
jeasting, and though it reflected on the pleasure he had taken in beholding the
fair stranger, yet he could not refrain from looking on her again, and to
wonder in himself at the sweetness of her eyes, and the power of her other
a^rements. Zabaim interrupted this second contemplation, and said to Almanzor
(smiling) that he found it strange, so great a heart which had not yielded to
the absolute power of Alcidiana's marvells, could let it self be suddenly
overcome by a beauty which was not comparable to her. I shall never have that
dishonor, (replied Almanzor) for I am not of those imprudent men who leave
their hearts in the disposition of their eyes. All fair things please me, but
the delight I take in seeing them, carries me not to the desire of enjoying
them: with that he broke off, and addressing him to her father whom he could
never be weary of seeing: Old man (said he) tell me of what Country are you,
and what sad fortune makes you thus wander through the world, with a personage
so unfit to undergo the discommodities of travel? The good man first set one
knee a ground, and afterward accompanying his voice with an abundance of
tears, My Lord (said he) the story of my afflictions which has its beginning
almost with that of my life, asks too long time to recite it you: be therefore
pleased that I conceal it; yet I will let you know, that as miserable as you
see me, I am descended from a father, who was as much renouned for the brave
actions of his life, as for the antiquity of his race. My Country neighbors
to this, and the horror of vice has made me abandon my means and unfortunate
Country both together; and to renounce the favors of a King, whom I was not
permitted to contradict, and with whom I could not comply without offending.
Zabaim stricken with those words as with a thunderclap, looked on the old man,
and thought he had othertimes seen him, but with another countenance: yet
would he not make it appear that he knew him. Almanzor, for his part admired
that young wonder, and for her sake participating in her parents fortunes, be
sought Zabaim to have pity on that unfortunate company, and give them a place
of retreat worthy his bounty. Zabaim perceiving well that Almanzor's compassion
was mixed with love, would needs give him some trial of his friendship, by the
well entertaining of those strangers: He was not satisfied with lodging them
in the Palace, but he gave them (of his own choice) white and black Slaves
for their service, and commanded them to wait on the young strange Maiden with
the same diligence and the same respects they did on the Queen. Whilst these
things were executed, Almanzor thought deeply on the beauty he had seen: his
memory presented her to him with incomparable graces, and his judgment (which
governed now no more with its former liberty) betrayed it self, and approved of
that Prince's errors and agitations. Zabaim who made no show of knowing his
disease, and to intimate he had spoken naught to him but merrily, discoursed
with him about the conquering the rest of Guinea, and by the way of his
victories to reconduct him even to his fathers Kingdom. Almanzor replied to
that proposition, but in such a manner as Zabaim took notice, that the object
of the fair Stranger solely possessed all the Princes thoughts. The time for bed
separating them, my dear Lord retired to his chamber, overjoyed that he might
muse at liberty; and got to bed, that he might not be diverted neither by the
lights, nor the presence of his servants. As Soon as he was alone, he thought
he breathed more at his ease then before, and from that first joy insensibly
passing to the contemplation of the unknown, he of it framed a fancy more
alluring and more perfect then the original; and spent all the night in
contemplating the work of his imagination. At last he grew ashamed of his
weakness, and Reason re-entring by little and little from whence she had been
driven, represented to him the wrong he had already done himself, and the
misfortunes he was running into: That light possessing so brave a mind,
dispersed all darkness. Almanzor broke his chains, and gloriously freed
himself from the hands of his Conqueror. He acknowledged his error, blushed at
his weakness, and filling his memory with those high designs which the
charms of the fair Stranger had banished thence: Is it thus (said he) that
thou practisest those lessons which so many excellent men have taught thee?
What is become of those profitable documents were read to thee for the guiding
of thy life? Have thou quite forgotten the Counsel which the great
Sacrificator Arismestidez gave thee? Almanzor, said he to thee, thou will
quickly grow to an age wherein thou will have no greater enemy to fight withal
then thy self. The strength of nature, the goodness of your temperature, the
heat of your blood, the beauty of your mind, and the presence of delightsome
objects, will combine together, to triumph over you, and to make you a slave to
your own infirmity. Meet and oppose this dangerous conspiracy, arm your self
betimes to resist these potent enemies; fortify as much as you can possibly
that absolute Empire which the superior part of your soul should have over
the rest. But the best advice I can give you, is such a one whereby you will
conjecture I contradict my self: As often as I have spoke to you of the
excellency of the virtues, and particularly, of those proper to men of your
condition; I told you, they had honor for their recompense as well as for their
object; and how that honor was not to be acquired but in exposing our selves
to dangers; that in hazarding our selves in the most perilous enterprises, and
in preferring a fair death before a shameful flight: I now read you the
contrary. You must fly Almanzor, yoe must fly, if you will be victorious. You
must be extremely fearful, if you will come gloriously off this combat; in a
word, love is not to be overcome but in avoiding all occasions of encounter.
Almanzor stopped after this speech, and the better to consider the parts of it
was a long time silent. At last, vanquisher of the strangers beauty, and of the
passion she had raised within him: Let us (said he aloud) follow these wise
rudiments. Let us not give place to such enemies, which will leave conquering
us as soon as we give over fighting with them: Let us rather fix on the
pleasures of the mind, then the sensualities of the body; and not defer to
break our bonds, since they are not yet indissoluble. After he had taken that
resolution, he bethought on the means to put it in execution, and found none
better, then to take on him the leading of the Army which Zabaim would send
into Guinea; and not see again that enchanting beauty which in so short a time
had wrought so great an alteration in him. These high deliberations being
confirmed, he slept, as if he would have Love know, he was free from his
tyranny; and wakened not till Zabaim made a noise by coming into his chamber.
That King, who thought the Prince extremely in love, either out of jealousy
or otherwise, left his former advisednesse, and began to chide him for it. He
told him, he knew his vigilance too much to accuse him of sloth, yet seeing him
so long in bed, he could not but believe so great disquiets had interposed his
nights rest. You have better divined (answered Almanzor) then (may be) you
imagined. It Is true, I have undergone a shrewd conflict this night, but my
resistance has been such, that I am come off with the victory. That which I
have now to say to you, is, that you lose not the fair occasion which the
differences betwixt the Usurpers of Guinea offer you; and without ingaing your
self in this war, you will do me the honor to consent that I serve you in
this expedition as I have done in others. Zabaim disbeguil'd of that which he
believed, and may be glad to have Almanzor far from the fair Stranger,
thanked him for his advice and proffer; and having often embraced him, said, he
would accompany him in that war. Almanzor intimated, it was not fit for him
to be absent from Senega in a time wherein his ancient enemies might easily
revive the rebellion. But on the contrary, that he ought to raise a new Army to
stay exotique factions, and in case of necessity to oppose those that would
hinder his conquests. Zabaim liking the counsel well, and seeing all things
succeed according to his desire, drew his Army out of his garrisons and made
Almanzor General over it. The Prince being ready to depart, remembered the
fair Stranger which he durst not see again* and unwilling that ought which he
had once loved should become indifferent to him, he entreated Zabaim to
continue his good treating of the three strangers, and if they desired to
return home, to give them whatsoever should be needful for their voyage. The
King promised him to forget nothing of what he owed to his love, and to make it
appear, gave them more attendants. As often as Almanzor sent to hear of them,
his Messenger brought him word that the Father and the Mother esteemed
themselves very happy to be fallen into so noble hands; but that the Daughter
wept in her good fortune as she had done in her ill, that her griefs rather
grew then decreased, and that neither the company nor consolations of her
Parents could any way assuage her sorrow. Almanzor who may be was not so well
cured of his love as he thought himself, was moved with that Maidens
affliction; but loath to run the danger of losing himself in succouring her;
he befought Zabaim by his bounty and visits to charm the grief of that
desolate fair one: with that he took leave of the King, and with his most
speed got to the Army. He carried himself with no less courage, and
government in that last War, then he had done in the former. He pursued the
traitors even to the Frontiers of Benin, and having given them battle (as a man
might say) in the sight of the courteous Abrinzias, made him a Spectator of a
part of his brave actions. In sum, while that King was weeping and grieving
for the loss of that dear Son, he understood from the public voice, that
Almanzor had made himself Master of the most Eastern parts of Guinea, and as
General to Zabaim, had ruined all the petty Usurpers of that great Province:
He scarce durst give credit to so good and so strange news, and was on the
point to send men expressly to know the truth, when Hydaspes brother to the
hardy Bellerophon, (of whose death I have told you) came to him from Almanzor,
and presented to him four of the six Usurpers of Guinea. Imagine how excessive
Abrinzia's joy was, and how many tears these good tidings drew from the eyes
of the virtuous Andromeda. But all that joy was nothing comparable with that
those two Princes received when the saw Almanzor himself arrive at Court
triumphant and victorious of a part of the Princes of Africa. The great fame he
had gotten by his Combats, and the advantageous alteration which two years
absence had wrought in his countenance and stature, made him so exquisite in
the eyes of Abrinzias and Andromeda, that they almost committed idolatry in
taking him for somewhat more then man. The Feast for his return lasted diverse
months, and was not disturbed but by a horrible attempt of the Prince of
Benin: That insolent and furious brute, jealous of Almanzor's reputation, and
enraged at the kindnesses he received from the King and Queen, plotted with the
counselors of his ordinary villainies to murder him whom he thought certainly
was his brother: The difficulty was in finding the opportunity for the
execution; Many ways were proposed by Perseus confederates, at last they fixed
on one that might do the feate, and the cowardly Prince run no danger. 'Twas
that that Monster (borne to afflict those who had given him life) lying with
Almanzor (as he did often) should stab him whilst he slept, and after he had
killed him, give himself some light wound to cover his villainy; and make it
believed, that those who had murdered Almanzor had an intent he should run the
fame fate too. The time for execution resolved on, Perseus redoubled his
kindnesses to Almanzor, and so behaved himself toward him, as if he meant to
yield up his birth right, and acknowledge him already for his King. Almanzor,
who saw not Perseus defects, or rather that would not take notice o^ them,
showed him a love mixed with respect, and thinking he must one day be his
Sovereign, thought himself very happy in enjoying his favor. The night being
come wherein the most abominable act was to be committed that ever frighted
nature, those two Princes went to bed together, and as soon as their slaves
were gone, Perseus agitated with the rage he nourished in his breast, did such
actions as might have well made him suspected, if Almanzor had been capable of
it. That innocen^ Prince asked him the cause of his disquiet, but since he gave
no answer, would not press it further for fear of displeasing him. Straight
after he fell asleep, and as if himself had conspired with that hangman
against his own life, delivered it to his mercy. Though that Monster was full
of impatiency and fury, yet he staid till the poor Almanzor was very fast
asleep: seizing then his poniard which he had hid under him, and by the light
of a candle, which was not far from the bed, choosing the place where his stab
might be most mortal, lifted up his arm to accomplish his damnable design.
Ah, wretch, cried Polexander, (interrupting Almaid) stay thy fury and thine
arm. He neither held one nor other, (coldly replied Almaid) but just Heaven
who had before preserved Almanzor in so dangerous occasions, would not have him
meet his death in so sound and assured a repose. It filled the soul of Perseus
with a panick terror: it troubled his eyes, and making his hand to shake, so
happily diverted the blow, that the poniard in lieu of being stabbed into the
body, was struck into the arm of my dear master. The Angel who had the
guard of so fair a life, made him feel the stab before he had it: A certain
trembling seized on him and awaked him, so that he saw himself ready to be
stricken, but being but half awake, could not stay Perseus his hand. As Soon
as he felt the stab, he threw himself on the Murderer: Sir (said he) with that
generous mildness wherewith he was wont to qualify his fiercest enemies, what
cause have I given you to treat me thus? Have my enemies prevailed more on your
inclination then my affection and service could ever obtain from it? Come home
to your self I beseech you; think to what others passions have carried you,
and assure your self, I will forget the blow you have now given me, if you
will promise to drown in oblivion the causes why you cannot love me. The to be
abhorred Perseus, in lieu of being moved by those generous words, did his utmost
to get free from Almanzors hands, and may be too, to perfect the murder he had
begun. But our Prince, (wounded as he was) got him under, and that could not be
done without wakening his slaves, who ran in at the noise. My masters (said
Almanzor) come help me; the Prince agitated by some strange malady has lost
all knowledge and understanding, and questionless mistaking me for his enemy,
has (with a poniard stabbed me into the arm. All the slaves ran to him, with
so dear an affection, that they had torn Perseus in a thousand pieces had
they known what had passed: howsoever, they rudely enough drew him out of the
bed, and one of them, who naturally hated that barbarous Prince, cried to his
companions, 'twas best to bind him since he was distracted. Almanzor chid him
very much for losing his respect, and commanded he should no more come near to
Perseus. Six others, who had no mind he should get away, kept him, whilst two
of their companions who were Surgeons stopped Almanzor's wound. As Soon as he
was dressed, he labored much with Perseus to win him from his sury, but
perceiving all his persuasions were lost, he turned him to his Slaves, and
forbad them on pain of death from ever speaking of that adventure. Whereupon,
Perseus with as much rudeness as pride, called to be no further detained from
his own lodgings, for (said he) I will not be any longer amongst mine enemies.
Almanzor presently commanded those that had him in guard to conduct him to his
chamber, and entreated (in parting) that he would believe he should never have
any more affectionate servant then himself. The next day he came abroad, and
lived in such manner with Perseus, that Abrinzias and Andromeda knew not the
base act of their Son in above six months after. Now a while after Almanzor
was cured of that secret wound, Abrinzias contemplating him as the man by whose
virtue his Son and Estate might be much advantaged, resolved to offer him
part of his Crown to oblige him to the preservation of all. One day therefore
being retired with Almanzor and his Queen, My Son (said he) tell us what is
your int^tion; will you leave us for Zabaim, and under hope of a more eminent
fortune then you can expect from us, neglect two persons which value you more
then all the Crowns of Africa? Almanzor answering as he ought, and Abrinzias
judging by his reply, that he surely thought him to be his Father: I will use
you (said he) not as the younger brother of Perseus, but as his elder, his
Master and Defender. Know therefore that after mature deliberation on the
proposition I am to make you, and with Andromeda's advise, I am resolved to
divide my Estate betwixt you and Perseus. Heaven can witness if I have not
wished (only for your sake) that my Kingdom were as great as all the Empire
of Ethiopia, or that of the Ottomans: But when I consider that the greatness
of the Present is not always a testimony of the greatest affection, I fear
not to offer you a part of the Kingdom of Benin, since by that donation my
Self and Andromeda transact to you, and waive all that is in our power, and by
consequence give you as much, as if we had set on your head all the Crowns of
the world; look on our hearts, not our Present, and remember that he is not
the greatest Monarch who has most land, and the greatest number of people
under his subjection; but he that knows best how to suppress those
disordinate desires which ambition breathes into him. Abrinzias stopping a
little to take breath, Almanzor or would have answered and gotten out of the
trouble whereinto the Kings proposition had thrown him; but Abrinzias staid
him, and be sought he would hear a second which he had to make him. Know (said
he) that Andromeda and my self are not satisfied with choosing you for our
Successor, but we have thought on the finding you a wife, and by some alliance
worthy your self, establish your Throne, extend the Limits of your Government,
and purchase you a repose no less innocent then delightful. We have cast our
thoughts on all the Princesses both of Africa and Asia, but after our long
consideration we find none to be compared with the Princess of Congo. It Is
true she is yet but young, but what can there be said which is spoken of her
virtue, her wit, and her beauty? It may be, you may imagine I offer you a
treasure which is not in my power; and that Princess (as young as she is)
being fought to by the greatest Princes of Africa, there is no likelihood she
would bestow her self on a petty King of Benin. We confess there were some
denial to be feared if Almanzor had no other quality then what we give him;
but you must understand, that her Nation, (who within these three years have
given you the title of Africa's Deliverer) and the Princes of her blood,
equally wish you for their Master. See what Andromeda and I have been
meditating for the comfort of our age, and not to leave poor Perseus to the
mercy of the greatest enemy he can ever have, to wit, to his own discretion,
Almanzor taking his breath again (at the end of the Kings Speech) as if he had
got out of somewhat that troubled him, fell at Abrinzia's feet, and intimating
his inward sorrow; Is it possible (said he) that some words or actions of mine,
have made you believe that you could not surmount my ingratitude, satisfy my
ambition, nor stay me longer in your service, at a less rate then by setting
your Crown on my head? If it be so, I deserve to be looked on by you, as one
of those abominable children, by whom the wrath of heaven chastises the pride
of such Families as are blinded with the height of their good fortune. But, not
desirous to appear better then I am, suffer me to let you know, that I feel
not my self guilty of so black a crime, and the more I examine my conscience,
the more it assures me, that I never aspired to your Crown: whence is it then
you make to me (pardon me if I say) so unjust propositions? For it seems, you
offer me your Crown but to bridle and chain in my fury, and so take away the
cause of my attempting against your life. That which I owe you, the care you
have taken for my breeding, and the love you have always shown me, are such
strong bonds, that they are capable to regulate a nature more ungrateful and
ambitious then mine. If you please Sir to honor me with your love, cast that
design from your fancy, or permit me to punish my self for being the cause of
it, and avenge you of a monster that could not glut his appetite, b^t by
devouring his own benefactors. Abrinzias and Andromeda hearing how Almanzor
interpreted their thoughts, or rather admiring his incomparable virtue;
embraced him one after another, and told him, that the knowledge they had of
his good nature, and not the fear either of losing or ill treatment from him,
had made them resolve to quit the Throne, to place him in it with his brother
Perseus. Perseus (replied Almanzor) has right to it alone, when heaven for his
punishment shall deprive him of you. At those words Andromeda could not
refrain from tears; and (casting her self on Almanzors neck) Why Cried she)
has not that just heaven permitted Perseus to call himself rightly Almanzors
brother? These words were followed by many others, but I omit them as ^oo
tedious and unnecessary for your satisfaction, and will only let you know that
this interparlance or some other cause which Almanzor would never discover,
cast him into so deep a melancholy, as he hated himself for it, and yet could
not for his heart suppress it. He forsook the Court and all company, and
spent whole days, either i^ the Deserts or on the Sea shore. This strange kind
of life made the King and Queen of Benin fear some new disaster; and their
affection persuaded them that his pensiveness presaged some dangerous
sickness. Hydaspes, who almost never forsook the Prince, was the first that
took notice of his alteration; he did what he could to divert him, but
perceiving ordinary remedies were not powerful enough to extirpate so
extraordinary a distemper, he had recourse to more violent. Finding therefore
one day Almanzor weeping; With what Justice (said he to him) dares a Prince so
wise in couns^ll, so valiant in execution, and so happy in the success,
complain, either of heaven, of fortune, or himself? What will not your
enemies say, Almanzor, if your discontent comek to their ears? Will they not
have cause to make the world believe, that you see with grief the age of the
King your Father, that you meditate some plot against Perseus, and in brief,
that you are tortured either by some crimes you have committed, or by those you
have a desire to perpetrate? Almanzor was very sensible of those last words,
and imagining that some other might have Hydaspes thoughts, intended to
overcome his melancholy, and to seek in the toils of war that quiet which he
could not meet withal among the delights of peace. Almaid here staying, as to
take breath; Polex^nder who had a desire to speak, turned toward the virtuous
Almanzaira, and showing to her into what admiration the adventures and virtues
of her Son had drawn him, collected in brief all the points of Almaids
relation. That done; he discoursed much with the Princess, and remonstrated
that all the misfortunes of her life had nothing in them so mortal, but that
she might find their remedy in the birth of Almanzor. That good Mother failed
not to confirm Polexander's words, and confessed to him, that if Zabaim and
Almanzor could be preserved to her, she would account her self infinitely
obliged to that Goodness which had made her the wife and mother of two so
great Princes.

The end of the Second Book of the third Part.
THE THIRD PART OF POLEXANDER. The Third Book.
ALmaid seeing Almanzaira and Polexander (whom he knew not) seemed by their
silence to entreat from him the continuance of Almanzors adventures, was
willing to satisfy their curiosity, and thus proceeded: Hitherto we have been
Spectators (if I may say so) of Almanzors glorious troubles and triumphs; we
must now be the same, of his Weaknesses, Discredit and Servitude. He continued
in that irksome Melancholy of which I have spoken, and as if his ill Genius had
in spite of himself thrust him on the precipice where he was to be ruined, he
went every morning out of the Palace to pass the most part of the day on the
point of a rock, where he had for his prospect but an open desert of waters as
vaste as his thoughts. Hydaspes, almost daily waited on him thither; and
knowing his Masters malady was a disease which came further then from the in
temperance of blood or of other humors, strove to sweeten the bitternesses of
that Prince, and to prepare him for those accidents wherewith he was threatened
by that supernatural sickness. One day as they were together on the top of
their rock, and had their eyes fixed on the Coasts of Guinea, they saw a far
off a ship which with a favorable wind came with full sails, sailing from the
West, Eastward. They thought her at first to be a Portugal. Almanzor, whom I
may call the best Master of the world, at that instant thought on me, and that
remembrance drawing him from his melancholy; It may possibly be Almaid, said he
to Hydaspes, who after his long captivity has found a means to return to us.
Let us go down and see whether my conjecture be true or no; with that he
arose, and showing a joy beyond appearance, Surely, said he to Hydaspes, this
Vessel comes to us and brings great cause of comfort. Alas! how was that poor
Prince deceived, if not in all, at least in the principal part of his hopes!
For my self, his expectation was not frustrated, for I was in the ship which
he looked on with so much joy: but traitor and unfortunate that I am, I brought
with me bolts and chains under whose weight the courage of that Prince was to
lie fainting. I will no longer hold from you the success of that adventure: I
came and cast anchor where Almanzor was, and making my excess of joy and
actions of thanks, to which the happy success of my voyage obliged me, to
resound again by many Cannon shot, I lanch'd a Shalop, and first, went down
into her, that none before me might kiss that Land which was as dear to me as
my native soil. No sooner had I set foot on shore, but Almanzor came to me,
presently knew me, cast himself on my neck, and weeping for joy, My Father!
(said he) and have I then recovered you again after so long time of your
loss? and has that misericordious Goodness from whom I have so often
petitioned you, granted me even that for which I durst not supplicate? You may
well believe without my telling you, that my joy was not less great then my
Masters, and that so happy and unhop'd for a meeting extremely surprised me: I
cast me at his feet; I had heard in Senega of all his brave acts; I made
appear to him the share I took in his honor, and without discovering to him
the secret he yet knew not, I did so extol the exploits he had performed for
Zabaim, that he broke off my speech, and forced me to make known to him by
what miracle I got from the Portugals hands. I related to him what had betided
me in my prison, and the excessive goodness of Emanuel King of Portugal in
giving me my liberty. But my Lord (said I) I have stranger adventures to
acquaint you withal, and it behooves you, (if you please) to give ear to
them, for you have therein a very great share: besides, it is required from
your generousnesse, not to leave a work imperfect, which will acquire you no
less honor, then those wonderful acts, by which you have resetled on the
head of Zabaim those Crowns which his crimes had worthily plucked thence.
Almanzor showing a great desire to know those adventures; My father (said he)
we cannot have a more fit time then this: begin then, and assure your self we
will give you a very respectfull audience. I began again to speak, thinking
to do clean contrary to what I did, and addressing me to the Prince; At my
returning (said I) from Portugal I put in at Cape-utred, chiefly to hear how
matters went with Zabaim. All the people of that country had no other name in
their mouths but the name of Perseus Prince of Benin. His combats and his
victories was all their talk: They called him the Father of the Country, the
Defender of Zabaim; and they durst speak openly, That the Justice of Heaven
had forgotten it self in employing so powerful an arm for the protection of
Zelopa's wickedness. At first, these news made me much amazed, but after I
had well thought on it, I imagined that the true Perseus could not work so
many wonders, and that infallibly you had borrowed the Name of your brother to
make him the more famous by your victories. I went up as far as to the great
Port of Senega, to inquire further and clear all doubts, and lodged my self
with a rich Shepherd, who employing his goods with a great deal of charity,
is the father of all the poor, and the host of all strangers. He welcomed me
with his accustomed courtesy, and though I was so exceedingly changed that it
was impossible to know me; yet I believed by his excessive kindnesses, that he
put me in another rank then the rest of those strangers that were in his house.
I had a great deal of conversing with him, and by the description he made me
of Perseus, I knew it was Almanzor. This first doubt taken away, I desired to
be satisfied of others, and was so fully, that there has scarce happened any
thing either in the Wars or in Zabaims Court, of which I had not a particular
information. After I had been two days with that able and generous Pastor,
seeing the time fit to prosecute my voyage, I went to take my leave of him;
when an aged man (accompanied with a woman almost of his age, and a virgin
whose incomparable beauty could not be hidden by the veil which covered her)
came, and cast himself at my hosts feet; and moistning with his tears the
white locks which hung along his cheeks and down on his shoulders: Charitable
Servonitez (said he to him) deny not to three miserable wretches whom you see
before you, the assistance you give to all that are afflicted, and give way (if
you please) that they may retire into a place, where Innocence unjustly
persecuted has always found her safety. We are no Criminalls though we fly
the world and the day, and seek not a Sanctuary, but to defend us from
Injustice and violence. Mine host raising the old man and his company, you are
welcome, said he, and assure your selves your preservation shall be as dear to
me as that of mine own Son. But if you think it fitting, tell me who are
they that would injure you, because you may have such enemies, as the safety of
my house (which has never yet been violated) will not warrant you from their
outrage? The old man coming close to Servonitez, We would (said he in the
others ear) try to save this innocent Creature, (showing him his daughter)
from the pursuit of Zabaim, and the fury of Zelopa. How! my friends (cried
Servonitez) you are all lost; and yet you are not, (said he presently) for lo a
stranger (speaking of me) who will deliver you from the persecution of those
two enemies. He is ready to hoise sail, and I see no other way of safety for
you, but to abandon with him this unfortunate Land. But (replied the old man)
what assurance have we not to meet, with him, that misfortune which alike
prosecutes us by Sea and Land? His goodness secures you, answered the old man.
Go therefore, and doubt not, but that Providence which visibly pluckes you out
of the danger which you know of, will also deliver you from those which are yet
concealed from you. The old man hereupon turning toward me, My Lord, said he,
your countenance and Servonitez free me of all that fear my daughter throws
on me: I beseech you then to take us into your protection, and make known to
us whither you are bound. Time (I replied) better then Servonitez shall tell
you what I am, in the mean while, quiet your thoughts and live at rest,
without fearing from me any ill that may betide your self or your daughter. If
you have an intent to rerire into some certain place, let me know it, and I
promise to conduct you thither. But if all Countries be indifferent to you, I
will bring you to the King of Benin's Court, which is the retreat of virtue,
and the Sanctuary of all such as are persecuted by fortune. I had no sooner
spoken those words, but the old man fell again on his knees: Eternal
Providence (cried he) I can now say my prayers are heard. Thou miraculously
pluck'st me out of the hands of blinded Zabaim; thou bring to naught the
tragical plots of Zelopa, and bringing me again to the generous Perseus,
seem to promise these two innocent and weak creatures, that peace and
safety which all things else deny them. Almanzor (interrupting me) asked, with
a trembling voice, where those poor people were? They are in my ship, said I,
and as I would have gone on with my discourse: No, no, Father, said Almanzor, I
know all I desire to know. Come let us go see those Strangers, and not give
them cause to retract that good opinion they have of Perseus. With that he
entered my Shallop, and Hydaspes and my self following him, he commanded the
Mariners to row back to the ship. As Soon as he came to her he went aboard,
and presently met with the old man I told him of. They straight knew one
another, and the Prince having embraced him; My father (said he) you are in
place where all honest people are in safety. Abrinzias will give you, what
Zabaim has denied you. I fear no more, fortune, nor Zabaim, replied the old
man, your presence makes me contemn them both, and my company as weak and
timorous as they are, shall no sooner know they are in your protection, but
they will instantly defy all their enemies. On the sudden, Almanzor changing
his countenance and voice, Almaid (said he) with a look a little troubled,
present this very day, this good old man and his company to Abrinzias, and do
you your self take care for what they shall want. After that, he turned to the
old man, and embracing him again, Excuse me (said he) if I leave you, I have
some affairs which permit me not to be longer with you; and ending his
farewell he took Hydaspes with him, as if he had been in great haste, entered
into the shalop, and caused them to ^et him on shore. He walked above a hundred
paces without speaking a word; and Hydaspes has told me, that the Prince
sighed often in his walk, and stopping every foot, made known by his
agitations that he was not at peace with himself. At last he turned to
Hydaspes and commanded him to return to my ship, and to conduct the strangers
to his Summer lodgings. Hydaspes was much surprised at this command, but he was
far more, when arriving four or five hours after, at the place which
Almanzor appointed, he found it richly dight with all the goodly furniture of
the Crown. Diverse slaves, black and white, presently came in, who well
instructed in what they had to do, prepared bathes for the old man's wife and
daughter. Hydaspes, who had been that fair maidens guide, had seen her heard
her speak, and consequently admired her; returned to his Master with a
resolution to upbraid him for his neglecting so fair a creature, and to beget
in him a desire to see her. As Soon as he found him, My Lord (said he) the
strangers are where you appointed to lodge them; but, -- in sp^aking that word
he smiled, and went not on. Almanzor looking on him very seriously, What would
you say with your But, replied he? My Lord (quoth Hydaspes) I will tell you,
since I am commanded to speak, you have performed but half the honors of
your house, if your self vouchsafe not to visit your guests. In good earnest
Hydaspes (said the Prince) tell me, which think thou is the fairest, the
Mother or the Daughter? This question (replied Hydaspes) no more makes me
wonder then I did at your neglecting them both. Thou think me then (said the
Prince presently) either very rude or very insensible: you shall never suffer
for the first defect, (answered Hydaspes) but for the other, pardon me if I say
to you, that neither your self with all your Eloquence, nor your learned
Amenistidez with all his reasons and subtleties shall never be able to justify
you. But, without faining Hydaspes, (continued the Prince) Is that young
beauty, which questionless has stung thee, so amiably alluring as thou
striv'st by thy reproaches to persuade me? I would pardon you that question
(replied Hydaspes seriously) if you had never seen this wonder, but having
viewed her more then once, I must needs call you, the most unjust and most
insensible of all men. Work it so (if it be possible) that your imagination
may represent her to you such as she was when she arrived in Guinea; add to
the extreme sweetness which dwelt on her face, the Majesty of Andromeda, and you
shall have a picture of what she is now. Ah! well (said Almanzor) since thou
take so great pleasure in her sight, return where she is, and tell her in my
Name all that which thy civility and affection shall advise thee. Assure her
and her Parents too of the contentment I receive by their arrival, and obtain
for me the permission of visiting them. Hydaspes ran presently to Osmin's
chamber (so was the old man called) and beginning Almanzor's complements with
him, ended them with his daughter; but with so many offers of service, so many
testimonies of affection, and so many fair words, that it seemed Hydaspes
spoke not in the name of his Master, but to have the more liberty to discover
his own thoughts. Axiamira (so was the fair strangers name) and Osmin
answered as they ought to so many civilities, and calling Almanzor their Lord
and Hope, assured Hydaspes they would always conform themselves to all things
which should be pleasing to the Prince. I ratify (said Axiamira) all that
Osmin makes me say, since the knowledge I have of Almanzors nobleness
persuades me he has no other desires but such as are regulated by virtue it
self. Hydaspes, ravished by the wit as well as the beauty of Axiamira, came
back to his Master, but he durst not tell him what he had done by reason of
Abrinzias who was with him. As Soon as the King was gone, and had taken with
him many troublesome ones that followed him; Almanzor entered into his privy
chamber, and putting forth his slaves, there was alone with me: Well Hydaspes
(said he) have thou seen Osmin? have thou spoke with his daughter? may I go
see them? My Lord, answered Hydaspes, I begin to recant the opinion I had of
you: your countenance, your action, your words assure me you are not so
insensible as I thought you. Surely, you are more discreet then neglectfull,
and if I have any insight in the agitations of an amorous soul, I perceive by
yours, that you are not without passion. At that word Almanzor interrupting
Hydaspes, Give over this talk (said he) if thou art not of combination with so
many secret and powerful Enemies as I have resisted since my Guinea voyage.
Why, have thou not taken notice, Hydaspes, of the violencies I have used to my
self, of the pains I have endured, and the conflicts I undergo daily, to
gain a victory which thy discourse has deprived me of; and to preserve the
quality of Insensible, where withal thou lately upbraidedst me? Yes, dear
Hydaspes, I strive to be insensible, I do my utmost to acquire a true
Indifferency, but I undertake all these combats in vain, and to no purpose all
these resistings. I must (Hydaspes) I must give way, and no more stubbornly
resist the power of my Destiny. These words teaching Hydaspes to read his
Masters thoughts; he repented his high extolling of Axiamira to him, and wished
he could wipe off these praises he had given her. But that artifice seeming
too gross to him, he thought he must make use of another: He therefore told
Almanzor, that indeed he had not seen any fairer then Osmin's daughter, but for
all her charming beauties, she was not a subject sufficient for him to fix on.
What (said he) will be said by so many personages, in whose breasts you ought
to preserve the honor and fame you have gotten, if for I know not what beauty
you renounce the alliance of so many Kings which sue to you? and forgetting
your condition and hopes, suffer your self to be captivated by the allurements
of a Wanderer, who (may be) strayes from Kingdom to Kingdom to establish her
a fortune by the sale of her beauty? Almanzor, in lieu of growing in choler at
a discourse which had offended him, abode in a patience not imaginable, but his
grief for Hydaspes liberty being stronger then his constancy; he was forced
to carry his handkerchiefe to his eyes lest the other should see his tears.
Presently after he looked on him, and accusing himself for Hydaspes fault:
It Is I (said he) who am guilty of those blasphemies which you have vomited
against Axiamira's virtue. Yes Hydaspes, I will punish my self for the crime
you have committed through your too much love to me. I know your thoughts
contradict your words, and in the very instant that your mouth wronged innocent
Axiamira, your heart derogating from your tongue, asked her pardon for it. See
Hydaspes what it is to contend with a known truth: in lieu of being believed,
you become suspected, and by that unhappy cunning affirm even that which you
had an intent to ruinate. Imagine, noble Sir, to what a necessity Hydaspes saw
himself brought, by the strange interpretation Almanzor gave his words. He
stood a while without the power of answering him; but when he perceived
effectually that Almanzor grew afflicted as if he had been guilty; he cast
himself at his feet, and besought him to call to mind, who he was, and what
he ought to so many people who expected their preservation, their felicity and
example from him. These considerations were not prevalent to bring him to
himself: He continually sighed, and looking on Hydaspe^, with eyes bathed in
tears: Criminal that I am! (said he) it is I, it is I that have compelled thee
so unworthily to wrong the most transcendent virtue of the world. Hydaspes, who
one way or other would draw him out of that agony, perceiving that the thought
of honor and of Abrinzias were too weak to move him: At least (said he)
reflect on Axiamira; and since you love her, witness to her your affection by
other proofs then by sorrowings and unprofitable lamentings. Admire if you
please the efficacy of a passion which* after it has been long time contested
with, yet at last gets the victory; and to avenge it self of so long a
resistance, insolently makes use of its victory. At the only name of
Axiamira, Almanzor came out of his perturbation, and remembering no more his
first resolution, showed an extreme impatiencie for not seeing that beauty,
which longing was no less extraordinary, then his constraints had been
thitherto to keep himself from seeing her. Presently he sent back Hydaspes to
advertise Osmin he was coming to see him: thither he went, and had scarce
delivered his Message when he saw his Master. Osmin and his wife went to meet
him, and casting themselvrs both at his feet, rendered him thanks for his
incomparable favors. He took them up, and treating them with as much respect
as he would have done Abrinzias and Andromeda, assured them that thence-forward
they four would but have one fortune. Axiamira was behind her mother,
Almanzor came and saluted her. She was nothing moved by seeing her self so
kindly treated by so great a Prince, but continuing in her former
indifferency, and neither making show of pride nor baseness, she gracefully
received Almanzors complements. The Prince strove to say somewhat to her, but
he made known by his discourse that his mind was disordered. Yet I think
Axiamira took no notice of it, for she being always recollected to her self,
had no attention to what outwardly happened. Yet did she at that time more then
was accustomed to do: She lifted her eyes a little to look on Almanzor, and
presently casting them down again; You (said she) look on a creature who for
two years has been exposed to all the outrages and violence of fortune.
Hitherto her malice cannot be satiated. I know not whether your prowess which
has quelled so many enemies will be able to overcome her. I wish for your
honor and my peace, you may have the victory, for I shall be glad to add
this new and supreme obligation to those I owe you already. After she had thus
spoke she was silent, and Almanzor then beginning, let her know he was not in
case to vanquish, but came himself to implore her aid against afar more
redoubtfull Enemy then fortune. Osmin, his wife and Hydaspes, drew near to
Almanzor and Axiamira, and intermedling with their conversation, took them
both off from the worst strait, they ever met withal. Almanzor could have
wished his interparlance endless, but his discretion being at that time more
powerful then his love, he retired in good time, and left (as I understood
since) Osmin and his family, exceedingly satisfied. As Soon as he was in his
chamber he thought on Axiamira's speech, and after he had entertained Hydaspes
with all that, which he found admirable as well in the actions as words of that
beauty: Assure thy self (said he) Axiamira is not Osmins daughter. Hydaspes,
who had ever been of that opinion, confirmed i^ in him; and told him, that
infallibly she was some personage of high extraction, who for some important
considerations had been entrusted to the wisdom of those two good people.
From that imagination they passed to others; and Hydaspes continuing in the
terms of complay sancie and approbation, left Almanzor in the liberty of
extolling as much as he would Axiamira's perfections; and to extend and dilate
himself into such praises, as any other but himself would have thought too
excessive, or at least very tedious. The Prince gave him leave to retire after
his love had exhausted his Eloquence. To bed he got him, not to sleep, but to
meditate-at pleasure, and by that meditation to form to himself new Idea's,
and find new ways to express his passion. The next day, in all appearance,
he was the same man he had been before times, but indeed 'twas another
personage: no more that Almanzor whose soul knew no other passion then the
desire of honor, who had his element in the most difficult enterprises, and
who so highly proclaimed, that it was more shameful for men to make love, then
for women to go to warfare. He was no more that Almanzor who had wholly
dedicated himself to the practice of the most austere virtues. He had
transmigrated into another nature, and esteemed not the greatness of courage,
perilous adventures, and the acquisition of fame but as they were subjected to
the Empire of Love. When I came into his chamber, I found him in his amorous
meditations. He had sent for me by Hydaspes, to the end to make known his
passion to me, and give me thanks for the service I had done him. Imagine
whether his discourse amazed me. It was yet less then it had done, if Hydaspes
had not discovered to me all that was passed since my return. I strove to
restrain by some considerations the overflowing of that passion: but Almanzor
cutting me short; Do not (said he) imitate Hydaspes, and speak against your
own thoughts, through a desire to hinder a matter already resolved on. Your
Son (Almaid) must love; he must; heaven will absolutely have it so, and that
love Axiamira. But (said he) how unfortunate am I, in that I must give an
account of my life to others then my self! I am overtyr'd with visits and
business; and, for a little vanity which the power of Commanding gives me, I
must deprive my self of my contentment, yield my self a slave to other men's
passions, and for the accomplishment of all misery, have all my labors and
industry rewarded with perfidy and ingratitude. They are not suspicions and
doubts which make me speak thus: No, they are truths, Almaid; and such truths
as you have unwittingly told me. Ah! ungrateful Zabaim, King! incident to all
crimes! must thou needs (after so many services which I will not remember) be
the author of my just complaints, and the object of a yet more just
indignation? But (he went on, addressing him to me) to the end we may
proportion the punishment with the fault, bring me hither Osmin. I will from
his mouth understand the wrongs Zabaim has done him. I very attentively gave
ear to all these words, and knowing they proceeded from an extreme affection
and hatred; I feared, lest the power of love might be able to violate that of
nature, and win Almanzor to break with Zabaim. These fears made me oppose
against the complaints of my dear Master all that I thought availeable to get
him from that opinion he had of Zabaim. I therefore besought him to do nothing
hastily, nor upon the relation of parties interessed, dissolve an amity which
seemed to be immortal. I know (said he) what I owe to Zabaims favor. He knows
too how I have served him. Notwithstanding he has sailed of his word, and
endeavored to rob me of the treasure wherewith I entrusted him. Judge to what
a resentment so great a contempt and so base a treason obliges me. Yet I will
not do what love advises me. It shall never be reproached me, that I neither
know how to make or preserve friendship: If Zabaim have injured me, his fault
shall not make me commit another; but it shall teach me how to demean my self
with him, that so hereafter I may cut off all causes of sailing in our amity.
Go then Almaid, fetch me Osmin, and let us see how far Zabaim is guilty.
Presently I went and brought Osmin to Almanzors chamber. The presence of that
old man extremely comforted the Prince, and made him seem far less unquiet
then he was before. He spoke to him with a very temperate spirit, and entreated
him to relate all his fortunes: but before you begin (said he) you must
satisfy me in one thing which troubles me, and make known how Zabaim has
treated you since my absence. I know you had rather lose your life then
preserve it by an untruth. Therefore I entreat you not to forget the injuries
Zabaim has done you, no nor so much as to suspend the resentment of them; to
the end that without preoccupation you may make me a plain and true recit all
of what has befalne you in Guinea. Begin then, and without considering that
Zabaim is my friend, tell me the truth purely. Osmin, whom I have always
known most sincere, taking heaven to witness what he was to speak; Two days
(said he to Almanzor) after your departure, Zabaim took the pains to come to
my lodging, where he staid a while with Axiamira, but seeing her in a silence
and sadness not to be surmounted, he left her; and taking me by the hand,
Father (said he) let us leave this fair maiden to her self. I followed him;
and when he was come to the Sea side, he made me a long Speech of the
obligations in which he was engaged to you, and repeated all the requests you
had made him in behalf of my daughter and my self. He added, that for your
sake and particularly for mine, he would always respect me as his own
Father, and that hence forward he would put no difference betwixt his wife and
my daughter. I rendered thanks for his proffers, and telling him they were too
advantageous for a stranger like my self, and a poor maiden as mine was; I
humbly besought him to contract all his liberalities into one; which was, to
give me the means by which I might return into mine own Country. Father
(replied the King) I am ready to grant what you have desired, but I must not
for the infinite love I bear you, become mine own enemy; and in preferring
your content before mine own, leave an ill opinion of my self in those who
look not on the actions of Kings, but to find fault with them: yet let us
pass by the conceptions of the multitude which commonly are most unreasonable,
and fasten on that of Almanzor; Will not he have cause to believe that I have
abused you, when he shall understand that contrary to what we had agreed
together, you have staid so short time with me? Stay therefore here yet a few
days, and have patience till I can send him your resolution: You are too
generous and too good, (I replied) and if the love you bear were not founded
on the worthiest cause in the world, I could not but still think on the
excess of your courtesies. But Sir, as I imagine, your Majesty needs not use
so much circumspection in so inconsiderable a business: We are three poor
Wanderers that have no name but by our miseries; and who cannot receive the
least favor, but we must acknowledge it to be beyond our expectations. Suffer
us then to accomplish the course of our calamities, and let not your goodness
be so sensible as it is, of those outrages, which Fortune is not yet weary of
making us undergo. I made this long speech to Zabaim, to the end, that moved
with compassion, or overcome by my reasons, he might give way to our departure.
I cannot tell you whence those impatiencies of parting (which I discovered)
proceeded: but I confess to you they were very extreme, and yet my wife's and
Axiamira's were greater. For all that, my prayers, my solicitations and
entreating Zabaim in your name, could not obtain the leave I demanded. He
opposed so many shows of amity, and so many reasons to my request, that at
last to comply with him, I went against mine own thoughts, and yielded to stay
yet with him. That conformity of mine was so pleasing unto him, as embracing
me with the transport of a man very passionate, Father (said he) I will make
you confess that Almanzor is not the sole man deserves to be beloved, and
raise you to that happiness, that with the one part of your affection you
bear to him, you shall lose all that other which you bear to your native
soil. After all these artificial promises he returned to the Palace, and
leading me by the hand, made his Courtiers take notice of my extraordinary
favor. From that day, he demeaned himself toward me as if truly I had been
his father; and added a many more slaves to those he had given us before your
departure. The more my credit increased, the more I suspected him; and knowing
well, it came not out of any respect to you, nor from any merit in me, I
imputed and laid all the cause of it on the love Zabaim bore to Axiamira. Nor
was it long concealed from me. The Kings frequent visiting us, the excessive
presents which he continually sent my wife, and the submissions wherewith he
presented himself before Axiamira, were to me too certain proofs of his
folly, and too assured presages of our approaching ruin. At last, he resolved
to put off the mask he had long worn, and imagining Axiamira loved you, he
thought there was no better way to settle himself in her thought, then by
driving thence the memory of you. To that end, he spoke to her of you, but in
such a way, as taxing was subtlely intermixed with praise, contempt with
estimation, and envy with acknowledgement. I will not (my Lord) relate the
particulars of his discourse, for Axiamira would never tell it me; know only,
that after Zabaim had well praised you, he made an ample declaration of his
extreme love. Then he told my daughter, that if she would give him some
assurance of her affection, he would promise her no less a recompense then the
three Crowns which Zelopa wore on her head. Axiamira, incensed at his
detestable propositions, was ready to break out; but the greatness of her
heart, and that scrupulous virtue whereof she has always made profession,
neither permitted her to make show of her spirit, nor to answer Zabaim's words.
She would avenge it on her self, and by tears, watchings, and other
austerities, ruinate the innocent cause of that Princes offenses. He (for all
that) did not give over his enterprise for so comfort less a beginning. On the
contrary, the difficulty of it adding to his desires, he resolved to carry
away that victory either by force or cunning^ 'Twas then we began to see the
infallibility of our destruction. When it was permitted us to be alone, and
all three together could freely disclose the thoughts of our hearts; we broke
forth into infinite sorrows and lamentations. We invoked heavens Justice to
assist us against the impudicitie of so often and many ways guilty a Prince.
We called for it is thunder: We besought you to be yet once more our deliverer:
but seeing our selves for saken of gods and men, and growing desperate of your
return, we fell from plaints and tears into a resolution to die. Axiamira
showing her brave spirit in that extremity; Father (said she) my constancy
has now been long in contestation with fortune, I fear it may faint, and
after so high a flight have an ignominious stouping; deliver it then from those
new enemies which assail her; and if your power extend not so far, I pretend
not to engage you on impossibilities. Your example makes me but too well know
by what way we must generously enfranchise our selves from a place where we
cannot live with honor. Let us get hence, and make Zabaim know we were born
free. But if all passages are stopped us, and we be no more permitted the use of
our liberty, let us try our courage. Death is always ready to succor such
who call on her as they ought. It shall be it, my dear Protectors, it shall be
it, which in spite of all the tyrants chains and guards shall put a period to
our fears and slaverie. When we heard Axiamira speak so generously, my wife
and my self stopped the tears which had so long time distilled from our eyes,
and prepared our selves by a mutual constancy to a glorious death: Yet before
our putting that last resolution in execution, I had a mind to attempt some new
means to save Axiamira: I tried, but in vain, to corrupt some of our slaves.
I writ to you diverse letters which I gave to diverse persons whom I thought very
trusty; I especially hoped you would come and relieve us; but I know well now
that my letters never came to your hands, and that Zabaim had them from the
traitor who promised me to deliver them to you. I wondered no more, why he was
so jealous of me, nor why he placed near my daughter so many black Eunuchs,
who, not content to pry into all our actions, would even hear out words too.
At last he took away that little liberty was left us. He himself forbad us
the going forth from our lodging; and told me one day in choler, that his love
being too much contemned would turn into fury. To this lamentable estate were
we brought, when Vice it self took arms for the defense of Virtue, and
though it was not its intention, imploi'd all that could be of force and fury
to make her victorious. Zelopa who for six months had been sick (as they
said) of love and despair, understood by some of her confidents that Zabaim
had forgotten her, and passionately in love with a young maiden which had been
sold him by her own father (note my Lord how wicked the vulgar are in their
judgment) was ready to seat her in Zelopa's place. These news getting her out
of the bed wherein she languished, made her leave Senega. Into Guinea she came
more furious then a Lioness that pursues the hunters which have stolen her
whelps. She called to her succor all those Devils which the public voice
gave her altogether for her gods and slaves. She sacrificed to her fury three
of her principal Officers, for not advertising her presently of our arrival,
or rather for not employing fire and poison against the father and daughter.
Zabaim hearing of his wife's frenzies, was terrified with her threatenings and
cruelties, and as an offender escaped out of prison, seeing himself ready to
fall into the hands of them who are doubly irritated by his flight, he grows
pale, loses his resolution, repents him for breaking his fetters, and looks
on those that advised him to escape as on so many enemies. Axiamira, who lately
was his sole delight, his happiness, his life, and somewhat more then even
Zelopa with all her Philters and Spirits, was become to him a subject of
horror and hatred: and, if I know not what remainder of dying virtue had not
opposs'd it self against the outrage of his bewitched soul, he had doubtless
himself (to obtain remission for his inconstancy) cut the throat of Axiamira
before Zelopa's eyes. In the mean time, that Witch, like another Fury broke
loose from hell, came by great journey's to fill the Court with massacres and
impoysonings. The blinded Zabaim hearing of her coming, resolved to go meet
her, and by that submission as well as by his tears to pacify the fury of his
tyranness. Before he parted he would yet once more see Axiamira, and by that
view give a secret and new aliment to the fire he could not extinguish. As Soon
as he saw the Princess: What Princess, said Almanzor to Osmin, interrupting
him? Pardon me that mistake my Lord (replied Osmin) I would have said the
unfortunate Axiamira. Go on (father) said Almanzor, and e^e no more so. The
poor Osmin blushed, and all ashamed for disclosing a thing he would have kept
secret, thus continued his discourse: As Soon as Zabaim saw Axiamira; You would
not be Queen (said he) and you are now going to be a miserable slave, who
shall languish all the remainder of your life under the cruel yoke of an
inhumane Mistress. Thy threats (replied Axiamira) sway me as little as thy
promises: I have scorned the one, and I fear not the other. With the same
courage that I trod under-foot thy Crowns, I can undergo all kinds of
torture. Yet when I have a mind to free my self from thy tyranny, and the
slaverie wherewithal thou threatnest me, thy guards and thy irons shall be too
weak to hold me. Zabaim moved with those words, and feeling his flame
rekindling, by the generositie as well as the attraicts of Axiamira, wept
before her a long time, and cursing the rigor of his Destiny, showed he had
no mind to have her ruined, and yet he could not save her. He presently flew
thence, as if he had feared Zelopa knew of his visit, and left us in a firm
resolution to die, rather then to fall into the hands of that inhumane
Sorceresse. Axiamira would not have us linger any longer, and proposing to us
death, as an expedient, or help the most facile and pleasant, besought us for
the last course to renounce all desire of life, and not put our selves again
to the hazard, dangers and incommodities of a flight, which could not be
discovered, but it must be far more dismal to us then death. I need not (my
Lord) tell you, it was not for our own sakes that we could not resolve to die.
Had we been alone, my wife and I, we had soon disburthened our selves of an
irksome old age: but when we came to consider that we should destroy in the
birth, a miracle which nature had produced to be the ornament of her age, our
constancy vanished, and death seemed to us a monster, which we were obliged to
avoid as long as we had any means left to escape. My wife and my self having
therefore resolved to try for our safety, we proposed it to our daughter: she
showed her self very repugnant to it, nevertheless her obedience being far
stronger, she consented to all we desired of her. Presently we provided our
selves for that escape, and taking hold of the occasion which may be was
offered us, we deceived our slaves in faining Axiamira to be sick. The night
then after the departure of Zabaim, being come; we disguised our selves, and
getting through a lower window which looked into the Palace gardens, we got
into the wild fields, and from thence into a desert which is frontire between
Guinea and Senega. Though our flight was favored by the departure of Zabaim,
and a very precipitate breaking up of Court, yet was it discovered, and as we
entered the desert, we saw five or six black slaves which pursued us, their
Scimitars ready drawn. Affrighted with the yellings and fury of those
barbarous villains, we flung our selves into the next Caverne we saw, without
fear of meeting any of those furious beasts which usually retire themselves
into such like places. Our fear was our safety, for sliding into that hole
with all the silence that accompanies timiditie, we hid our selves among
bushes which almost stopped up the mouth of it. Those who ran afterus, redoubling
their shouts and threatenings, cast themselves into the Cave, but having
(without doubt by their yellings) awakened two lions which lay there asleep,
they were constrained (in lieu of taking us) to defend themselves. This unhop'd
for succor made us turn up our eyes to heaven which we saw not, and beg that
great Soul which animates it to restrain the fury of the lions, and not
suffer them that had been our Defenders, to be our devourers. Our prayer was
heard: Those lions after they had satiated their hunger on those wretches,
forsook their den, and lessening our fear by their departure gave us liberty
to breathe and to know our selves. My wife and I searching for Axiamira
gropingly found her, far less affrighted then in Zabaim's Court, and
received from her that heartning and comfort we would have given. She advised
us to forsake that place whilst those we feared were gone. We did so, and after
we had vvandred above a moreth amongst the mountains of Lions (without any
food but what we got by our prayers from the Inhabitants of those mountains,
we passed the River of Saban to the town which carries the same name. Many
Merchants of Mansara who were come thither to trafique, received us into their
company, and taking pity of my wife's age and mine, and of Axiamira's tender
years, set us all three on their Camels, and conducted us happily to the City
of Ponda. Finding my self so near the ordinary abode of Zabaim, new fears
followed my ordinary ones, and they were yet augmented by the report that ran
of that Prince his return with his wife. I forsook therefore the town where
I had been so well received by night with my little company, and having none
other Guide then the same who had so happily conducted us to that time, I came
at last to the house of charitable Servonitez. His reputation which is not much
less great then Zabaims, but more worthy to be envied, invited me to him, and
there made me meet yet with more then I was made to hope for. I need not (my
Lord) recount to you the particularities; that Knight (said he pointing to me)
has not held till this time from relating them to you. Almanzor seeing Osmin
give over; I know said he the end of your adventures, but the beginning of them
(which I would feign hear) is yet behind. But we will defer that recital
to another time, and employ the time we have in giving order for our particular
affairs. For Zabaim we will forget him, till the time come wherein we may make
him know (without avenging his perfidy by another) that he has more wronged
himself then us, when to satisfy his sensuality he has undervalued our
requests and friendship. Speak therefore (father) to me freely, and tell me
whether you intend to follow my fortune, and love me so well as to end your
days with me, and give over into my hands the care of your family. This
proposition was conceived in such sort as Osmin noted in it a hidden necessity
of abiding with Almanzor. But that necessity was so conformable to his
thoughts, that he received it as the highest favor could come from the Prince.
He told him likewise, that since he had left his country, and the advantages
of fortune, because he would neither violate the divine Laws in flattering his
King in his vices, nor the humane in running into rebellion; he had not
wandered by Sea and land but to live in a dominion where a man might applaud
virtue and condemn vice without fear of being persecuted. That double
felicity (said he) do I find in all places where you command. You are no
less good then powerful; and the good you do, is never the recompense of a
servile flattery, nor a criminal obsequiousness. Almanzor interrupting Osmin,
Beware father, said he, lest in condemning flattery you become a flatterer. The
only thing I can assure you, is, that I will do my best endeavor to hinder
all good men from becoming miserable. With that he dismissed Osmin, and
promised him that very day he would go and confirm these veri^ies to his wife
and daughter. Osmin being gone, Almanzor took Hydaspes by the one hand, and my
self by the other, and walking up and down the chamber, now cast his eyes
upon the one and then on the other. At last standing still: What, said he? You
do not doubt now but that Axiamira is somewhat else then what she goes for.
Poor Osmin ^ath unwittingly discovered all, and possessed me with a desire of
knowing by what cruelty of fortune that Princess has been plucked from the
arms of her parents. Hydaspes spoke first, and made a long enumeration of many
Princes who by diverse accidents were fallen into the like misfortune as
Axiamira. If I durst have spoken what I knew I could have confirmed Hydaspes
proofs by the very example of Almanzor; but thinking it not fit to let him
know who he was, before I had conferred with Abrinzias about it, I advised him
neither to believe nor disbelieve what he thought of Axiamira. I have a
business more important to make known to you, (said he) it is that I mark I
know not what in this adventure which troubles me, and makes me fear lest you
fall not into the crimes, but the weaknesses of Zabaim. I see your spirit
stirred with certain agitations, with which it was not lately acquainted. You
have disquiets in your most pleasing recreations. You sigh and laugh together.
You make them hold their peace which speak to you, and you are silent when you
are bound to answer. In that little time I have had the honor to be near you,
I have seen you put on all those different forms, and even during Osmins
relation, you sometimes seemed inflamed as if you had been in the heat of a
combat; and then pale, as ready to swound. Scarce could you contain your self
in one place, and I saw you every moment ready to interrupt Osmin, though you
witnessed a great pleasure in hearing him. May be (my Lord) you know not what
malady it is which discovers it self by these strange symptoms. It Is love,
(replied Almanzor sighing) but a love so pure and perfect, that I should be an
enemy to virtue if I were ashamed to confess it. After that declaration he
held his peace, and I presently began to lay open to him how unworthy of him
the subject of his love was. Father, (said he) after he had entreated me to be
silent; if Axiamira's excellent qualities received no wrong by your
remonstrances, I would endure you as far as I have done Hydaspes; and would
not think it strange that you should treat me as one blinded, unreasonable,
like another Zabaim, in brief as an effeminate man who for a sensual pleasure
contemnes all honor, treads virtue under foot, and renounceth his part in all
that is excellent in the world. But when I shall have given you freedom to
throw all those injuries on me, what think you will come of it? Even nothing;
but that you will have confirmed me in my resolution, and gained to your selves
a continual repentance for opposing the innocence of my intentions. Be better
advised my friends, and cross me not, since you have not done it hitherto in
seeing me in the most dangerous occurrents: but be witnesses how I demean my
self; pry into my least actions, and fail not to reprove me if you see me
swerve into any thing unworthy. By this speech, Almanzor silencing us both,
made us to fall from one extreme into another, and of his Censurers (which we
would have been) to become his Confidents. This conversation once ended, he
went to the King; and understood from a Courier sent to him from Zabaim, that
very shortly by a solemn Embassy he would not only give him thanks for so
many countries he owed to his valor, but offer him a great part of it.
Almanzor almost insensible of those promises, used Zabaims Posts very civilly
in the presence of Abrinzias, but in private he made known that his Master had
offended him; and so he was sent back with a letter (which we were bound to
approve, after we had long debated) and it was thus:

Perseus to Zabaim King of Senega.
JUstice commands me to write to you as to the most unworthy of all men. But I
know not what Law (which I cannot read under) forbids me the upbraiding your
crimes, and the violating that amity I have promised you. Not because of your
undeserving, and that I am not obliged to hate my self for my capacity of
loving you. Some other then I would repeat and reproach you my deservings: but
since in all my actions I never proposed any other end but honor, I also never
expected any other recompense. Enjoy happily (if the remorce of conscience will
permit you to be happy) Senega, which I have preserved to you against the power
of your enemies; and Guinea which I have finally reconquered for you. I repent
not (for all that you have done me) the yielding you so many proofs of my
affection. But hence forward I shall know how to make a better election, and
not hazard my life for such men, who loving nothing but their pleasures and
brutish desires, glory in their breach of promise and legitimate affections. Go
not about by your excuses and artificial reasons to justify your violences.
Though Axiamira's beauty were powerful enough to captivate your love, the
consideration of Perseus should have been as prevalent to have hindered you
from showing it.

But, honored knight, I have too much troubled you with affairs of State. I
return to those of Love, and let you know, that Almanzor had no sooner
dispatched Zabaims Messenger, but he came to Axiamira's chamber. He found her
in her ordinary neglect and melancholy. He came to her with a fear that is not
to be believed, and utterly losing the remembrance of all that he had
premeditated to speak to her, he was brought against his will to call for
Osmin to him, to recollect his wits by that diversion, and find some cause of
talk. When the old man was come he took him by the hand, and addressing his
Speech to him; Have you (said he) intimated to this fair Lady my resentment of
Zabaim's insolences? Axiamira staid not till her father had satisfied
Almanzor's demand; but turning to the Prince, her eyes still cast downwards:
My Lord (said she) if you commiserate our afflictions, do not (if you please)
renew them, by making us call to mind their Author. His name makes us tremble,
and our memories which in spite of us retain the image of him, never
represent it, without making us suffer yet more tortures then that tyrant had
prepared for us. You have most just cause Madam (replied Almanzor) to condemn
that barbarous man into an eternal oblivion: yet give me leave to call to
mind his impudencies; and that their excess may vively remain in my memory,
that he may not vannt to have wronged without punishment. No, no, my Lord
(replied Axiamira) it is not fit you should trouble your self to inflict ought
on him; he is sufficiently and rigorously chastised in living with Zelopa; it is
the greatest torture his most animated enemies are able to inflict upon him. I
do what I can (said my dear master) to have no other will then yours, but
when I take into consideration the state of Zabaim, pardon me, if I say you are
too good in not wishing him a greater punishment then Zelopa. I confess it is
high, nay, it is even insupportable; but he is not sensible of it, and his
insensibilitie makes him meet his delights where you find your afflictions.
Axiamira was long silent, at last she began again, and blushing as she had
been ashamed of her own thoughts; Osmin (said she to Almanzor) can tell you,
Zabaim has not all the insensibilitie you imagine; If he be not very
insensible (replied Almanzor) he is at least blind and very irrational, to
love the infamous Zelopa, and have no respect to a personage which shall not be
worthily enough styled, though she be called the wonder of her age, the
astonishment of Africa, the desire of all souls, and the felicity of all
eyes. Yes Madam I repeat it (and be pleased I do so) Zabaim is a monster which
nature has produced to make Africa more horrible then ever it was before,
since he has had ignorance and brutalitie enough to treat you with less
respect then he does a Sorceresse, a prostituted Strumpet: Love also disavowes
him, and ashamed that one so barbarous should make him Author of his crimes;
throws himself at your feet to justify himself of Zabaim's insolences; and
protests to you (with his drowned eyes) he never inspired him with so foul and
criminal cogitations. Axiamira a little lifting up her eyes, as if she would
know who 'twas that spoke to her, witnessed with a very good grace that she was
astonished, and retyring a little backward, I am (said she) so little used to
hear so fair words, as I confess I know not how to answer them. Hitherto I
have received naught but injuries, both from men and the elements: and either
of them have treated me as the scandal and infamy of my Sex. I have passed
for a vagabond, for a slave, and may be for something worse. Those that have
been more just would not condemn me before they knew me, and when they had
that knowledge, finding me not very guilty, they called me the unfortunate
Innocent. After that (my Lord) judge if it be not a strange noveltie to me to
hear my self termed to be the wonder of my age, the astonishment of Africa,
the desire of all souls, and felicity of all eyes. Certainly I am so much
amazed at it, that the confusion it causes in my soul, is greater then it
shows in my face. Reserve those titles for some others, since they cannot be
justly attributed to me; fit your words to my necessitous condition; call me
vagabond, call me unfortunate, call me a slave, and I shall be able to
understand and to answer you. Many shipwracks, many prisons, and many other
indignities, have been as so many Masters which have taught me this doleful
language. Axiamira said no more; but 'twas too much to draw out of Almanzor's
heart, all he had remaining of reason and liberty. He confessed himself
absolutely overcome, and with a great deal of pleasure put on the chains he
had so long time refused. He thought on the excess of his happiness, and that
consideration plucking him from himself, he remained so exceedingly
transported, that of a thousand things he spoke to Axiamira, whether it were
to praise her, to give her thanks, or to show his passion, there was not one
of them but discovered the alteration of his judgment. Axiamira perceived it,
and by a nimblenesse of wit, which is not comparable but with it self: I
wonder not (said she) if you express your self so ill, since I make you
speak a language which you never practiced. The happiness which attends you,
the honor which invirons you, and the adoration you receive from so many
Nations which affect or fear you, have a particular language; and it must be
absolutely unknown to any that would understand the tongue of the miserable
and afflicted. Almanzor ravished with Axiamira's wit as much as by her beauty,
sighed very deeply in lieu of answering her; but his discretion imposed a
rigorous silence on the agitations of his passion, and obliged him to speak,
and tell Axiamira, He had no need of an Interpreter, either to understand or to
answer her; That in that little time he had the honor to see her, he had
perfectly learned the language of the unfortunate and the slave: Axiamira
(believing by these words, that doubtless Almanzor was about to disclose his
passion to her) called Osmin who unperceivably was gotten a little off, and
told him, if he came not to intertaine the Prince, he would run the hazard of
being quickly wearied with so ill company. My dear Master soon understood the
subtlety of Axiamira's wit and her wisdom, and that knowledge inflaming him
more then he was: I perceive well (said he to himself) that my servitude will
last as long as my life: in the mean time, to let her see, that he absolutely
conformed himself to her will, he began again, and addressing his words to
Osmin; Father (said he) I think you too happy, in being accompanied in your
disasters by a personage not only able to comfort you, but powerful enough to
take away all feeling of them. Osmin replied, with the gravity of a father
speaking of his child, and his wife interposing her self in the discourse,
showed, she could not so well act her part as her husband. Axiamira continued
still her faining, but Almanzor who could no longer be deceived by it; noted in
all that maidens words, that she was infinitely above what she would seem to
be. I should be infinitely tedious (generous Sir) if I did not cut off the most
part of those private converses, to tell you in a word, how my dear master,
forgetting all, to think of naught else but Axiamira, so imprudently demeaned
himself in his love, that Abrinzias and Andromeda perceived it. They loved him
no less then they did Perseus, and thought themselves no less obliged to have
an eye to the actions of the one, then of the other. They therefore resolved to
withdraw Almanzor from an affection which seemed to them unworthy of him: yet
would they not make use of unjust means to perfect what they intended. They
had their whole life time thitherto condemned all craft, deceit, and violence;
and their goodness had persuaded them, that to hinder one ill by another, was
to multiply mischiefs in lieu of suppressing them. Andromeda following such
rare maxims, would need know Axiamira, before Abrinzias should make any show
to my dear Master of the discontent he took in his alteration. She therefore
sent for the mother and the daughter, and without laying traps to ensnare them,
turned them on all sides; and left them not till she had put them to all the
trialls her wisdom advised. She was very well satisfied from both, and from
their first converse, found so much sweetness and virtue in Axiamira, that I
shall not lie if I say she became almost as far enamored of her as Almanzor.
Afterward, she could not live without her; she had her name still in her
mouth, she even loved to praise her in Almanzor's presence; and when Abrinzias
blamed her for that indiscretion; You (said she to him) know not Axiamira, and
would it had pleased the Divinity we adore, that this Maiden had been borne
for our unfortunate Perseus. Whilst Axiamira was thus exceedingly beloved of
Andromeda, Almanzor swom in pleasures beyond expression, and though Axiamira
would neither permit him to see her in private, nor once to intertaine her with
his passion, he was yet so content with his fortune, as he thought he had
nothing more to wish for. Now, one day when Andromeda had shut her self up
with Axiamira in a Temple of Virgins, destinated to the worship of a god which
those of Benin call the Soul of the Sun: Almanzor sent for Osmin, and being
alone with him, entreated he would acquit himself of the promise he had so
often made him, and make known who Axiamira was, and by whom she was delivered
unto him. Osmin, in stead of replying, cast himself at Almanzor's feet, and
kissing them whether the Prince would or no, there kneeled, as bound, without
doing any thing but bedewing them with his tears. The Prince at last raising
him up, Father (said he) if you think me unworthy to know, or incapable of
concealing so great a secret, I release you of the promise you made me, and
swear to you to smother for ever my curiosity though it be not condemnable.
Osmin recovering his use of speech, My Lord (said he to the Prince) my sighs
and tears proceed from an other Sourse. I have (at least) as great a desire to
disclose to you what I know of Axiamira, as you have to know it. But alas! I
fear the event of a Prophecy of the great Abul Ismeron. He threatened me in
Morocco, that I should lose Axiamira as soon as my obsequiousness should make
me err in that secret I had promised her. Keep it then inviolably (replied
Almanzor) but free your mind of that credit you give to Abul Ismeron: sometimes
he tells truth in his predictions, but it is by chance, and for one verity they
contain, there is discovered in them a thousand lies, and as many
impossibilities. When I was in Morocco at the Prince of Fez his Tourney; had
not he published that no stranger Prince should carry away the honor of the
day, but Abdelmelec should come off victorious if he continued in the terms of
his Defiance? The event yet showed the contrary; That Prince was vanquished by
another Prince, which is not altogether without name, and was overcome with the
same weapons he himself had chosen in his Challenges. The Imposter Ismeron
went further on; he durst maintain in the presence of the King of Morocco,
that I gave my self out for what I was not, and in spite of all apparances I
was an obscure person, who neither knew my place of birth, nor the quality of
my Parents. After these falsities, judge whether your Prophet deserves any
credit should be given to his predictions. Osmin dis-beguil'd, or to speak
more truly, abused, by that great example, laughed at Ismeron's menaces, and
believes not fortune to be hardy enough to assail him under the protection of
Almanzor. He besought him therefore to hearken; and preparing him by a long
preface to the belief of such wonders as he was to tell him; thus began the
relation. I am descended from the great Abuchar Izchias, which founded the
Kingdom of Zanhara, and who laboring for naught else but to make his people
happy and free, thought that the power of Kings was never more absolute then
when it was submitted to the will of the Subject. Thence is it, that of all the
Kings of Africa, those of Zanhara are the least powerful and least renowned:
but in recompense, they are the most assured and contented. He who raigns at
this day, would needs dispense with, and give over the Laws his predecessors
had observed, and suffering himself to be corrupted by the contagion of his
neighbors, thought, that to divide the Sovereignty with his Subjects, was to
descend from his Throne, and mingle himself amongst the throng of the people,
and enjoy nothing of Royalty but the name and the ornaments. Do you know what
is betided him on that frenzy? He has lost the love of his people by it, with
his peace and safety, and found himself without Subjects, when he thought he
was absolutely King. I was long one of those in whom he had a particular
affiance; but he met not in my disposition, either baseness enough to flatter
him in his faults, or so much ambition as to build my fortunes on the ruins of
my brethren. I often times remonstrated the wrong he did himself in changing the
ancient Laws of the State, and humbly besought him, he would be pleased I
might retire, to the end I might preserve the fidelity I ought him, and not
fail in that I owed my Country: He would never give me leave; but told me,
'twas to be an enemy to reason not to prove of his alterations. I yet staid a
while with him, beseeching and pressing him always to cast his eyes on the
diminution he brought on his authority in going about to increase it. But
perceiving he went on, from the absolute power which is not altogether ill, to
a tyranny, which is evermore pernicious; and that after he had despoyl'd the
husbands, and fathers of their goods, he attempted the pudicity of their wives
and daughters; I left the Court, and within a while after, the Kingdom: My
wife, who has always made profession of an eminent virtue, was the first that
solicited me to leave my goods, to save mine honor; and the first who exposed
her self to the perils of a difficult journey. After I had engaged my self
with all my Family in those deserts and famous mountains which are placed as
inviolable bounds between the Kingdom of Morocco and that of Zanhara, we
arrived at that stately and populous City which may be called the Queen of
Africa, where we were received by the King, with all the freeness and bounty
we could hope from him: and for mine own particular, I was with him in that
esteem, as had not the remembrance of the King my master, and the love I bore
him, continually crossed my repose; I had met wherewithal to lose the memory
of my country, and bless the hour of my banishment. You have seen that
Prince. His two Sons have felt the weight of your arms; and all that Court,
amazed at your valor, have exposed to you all that it had of most magnificent.
This being so, I might justly be accused of the imperfection incident to those
of my age, if I should make you a description of it. I must therefore go on,
and tell you that after I had been two or three months with Hely (so was the
good King of Moroccoes name) I got so far into him, that there passed nothing
in the State, nor in his royal house, wherein he took not my advise.

The second year of my service with him began those bloody tragedies which
ambition and love exhibited to his two Sons, and I presently foresaw the
unhappy Catastrophes. I presently gave that Prince such counsel as had saved
him his Crown and life, had he not less loved them both, then he did two the
most ungrateful and vicious children of the world. Nephisus (so was the
youngest called) being retired from the Court with a resolution to have by fire
and sword, what was due to him by birthright, made himself Master of
Guargetsem, which is seated on a point of the Mount Atlas, and thrusting far
into the Ocean shelters the mouth of the River of Sus from all the North winds.
The Portugals who had not cherished the divisions of the Kings house but for
their own gain, offered Nephisus both men and Arms; and put into the
Fortress all things necessary to defend it against the whole force of Morocco.
The good Prince Hely earnestly put on by his Priests remonstrances, and the
counsel which I thought my self bound to give him, departed from the City of
Morocco, and with a potent Army falling into the country of Sus, beleaguered
Guargetsem. But when he thought on Nephisus (whom he dearly loved) he let fall
his arms; and showing himself to be too good a father, would not have his
Army oppose themselves against the fury ^f that unnatural Son. Presently he
sent such as had been beforetime most pleasing to him, to entreat him to
acknowledge his fault, to break off instantly with the enemies of his
greatness and religion, and not to give over for a prey a Country which should
be so much the more dear to him, because it was to be a part of his Dominions.
But Nephisus insensible of that excess of goodness, attributed his fathers
extreme love to him, to a weakness of spirit and want of courage; and like
some beasts that grow more furious when they are clawed and strok'd, he became
very ragefull because he was no more powerfully set on. Every day he made
sallies, and bragged among his confederates, that the Corpse of the King his
father should shortly serve him for a step to the throne. But see an example of
that to be dreaded Justice, which never lets pass unpunished so prodigious
crimes as those of Nephisus. At one of his Sallies the Governor of Taradant a
bold and trusty Knight as ever was in Mauritania, met, bustled, overthrew him,
and took him prisoner. The good Hely no sooner heard these news, but he came
out of his tent, ran to meet his Son, and finding him in the midst of an armed
troop, embraced him, wept on him, called him his best beloved and his heir;
and entreated him to pardon the Governor of Taradant for his daring to lay
hands on him. Nephisus intimated his distraction and stomach by his silence;
and (though a Prisoner) threatened those who hindered him from executing his
pernicious resolutions. But the respect they bore to the father made them
patiently endure the insolences of the Son. I was one of those that stood
stiffely for his detention, and by a just boldness withdrawing Hely from his
fatal debonarity, made him know that he was father of his people, before he
was so of his Son; and by consequence that he could not be indulgent to the
crimes of the one, without becoming culpable of the miseries of the other.
Hely, who was not less judicious then facile, confessed with a great deal of
mildness that my remonstrances were just and my counsel wholesome: but said
he, what shall become of my Son? It Is better that I perish in the age I am,
then you should be bound to deprive my Estate (by the death of Nephisus) of
those felicities it attended from his government. The Kings principal Officers
would have gladly pleased but not lost him; but foreseeing that Nephisus
liberty would be the death of Hely, they were strongly resolved against his
clemency, and told him, that if he would not do his Subjects justice, his
Chieftaines were resolved to forsake him. To this, he answered nothing,
(unIesse it were they should remember he was a father) and his silence passing
amongst us for a secret consent; Nephisus was remitted into his hands who had
taken him. Whilst he conducted him to Taradant, he assailed Guargessem, and the
Commander's captivity taking away the Soldiers hearts, the place was rendered
within a month of it is beleaguring. The Portugals failing in their plot
retired, and Hely presently entered the fortress. At first he was insensible of
his good fortune, but the continual representing to him the unnaturalness of
his Son, and denoting the defects he fell into against his own estate through
his too much clemency; he grew sensible of his error, and gave those men
thanks who maugre his countermands had applied a remedy to it. We were both
one evening discoursing of those occurrences, when on the sudden a surious
wind mingled with lightning and thunder drew the good Hely to his chamber
window, either to divert his sad cogitations, or rather to intertaine them with
so fearful and dismal an object. Whilst he stood as it were buried in his
musings, I descri'd a far off at Sea, two great fires, which sometimes
approached, and then again went off from one another. At the noise I made in
seeing them, the King came out of his meditation, and perceiving the cause of
my astonishment, stood very heedfull to see what would become of those fires.
The wind which blew from the West Easterly, made them make a great deal of
way in a small time, and brought them so near us, that we distinctly saw they
were two ships which may be had fired one another because they could not
otherwise get a victory. Hely, who was of the most sensible and humane nature I
ever yet knew, presently shared in the calamity of those that were confined to
those burning vessels; and though he deemed them Portugals, and by consequence
his Enemies, yet he showed his desire to relieve them. He sent diverse of his
guard to take all the Fisher-boats that were by the shore, and commanded them
to take in if it were possible all those that were not yet lost in that
conflagration. They obeyed, but only for fashion sake; and indeed their pains
was bootlesse, and their fear of losing themselves in striving to save
strangers kept them from that hazard. One of these two burning ships being
driven full against our rock split in pieces, and left to the mercy of the Sea
those whom the fire had not yet consumed. The other met luckily with the mouth
of the River of Sus, and all burnt as she was down to the water drove (as we
understood next day) on a shelfe up the River. Hely (grieved at so strange a
sight) went to his bed, and commanded me to take care of those who were taking
out of the Sea. I went down to the shore, and seeing there the good Kings
guard, blamed their disobedience, and compelled them to return to their boats.
It was exceeding dark, the Sea went high; and the fear so general, that this
second attempt was as vain as the former. One of the boats being thrown
against the point of a rock was overturned, some of the Soldiers drowned, and
the rest affrighted at the loss of their companions, got to land, and
protested against ever turning Mariners again. I would have returned, but
something (I know not what) staying me, I remained there almost alone. As the
Tide went out, the wind calmed, and the waves grown smoother, brought even to
my feet some pieces of that double shipwreck. As I was earnestly righting that
which came a shore, amongst chests, fardels, and half burnt pieces of plancks
and other timber, I saw a man who (forgetting the danger from which he was not
yet got free) called with a loud voice Iphidamanta, and seemed he had no mind
to save himself, but only in regard he was loath to leave the person who
owned that name. I thought it good with my self but knew not wherefore, to
answer at the name of Iphidamanta. I had scarce twice or thrice repeated it;
but he who called, put himself to swim, and came to land fast by where I sat.
As Soon as he was out of the water, I ran to him and offered on the behalf of
the King of Morocco, all that he needed in his adverse fortune. Afterward, to
free him from the trouble wherein he saw him, I said, That I only touched with
compassion, had made answer as often as he called Iphidamanta. The man sighing
at those words, stood a while silent, at last he asked me on what Province of
Africa he was cast, and besought me to tell him my name: I satisfied his
demands, and strove by my best reasons to comfort him, or at least to draw him
out of his despair. But he, insensible of all things but his loss, Reserve
(said he) for some more less miserable then my self, the remedies your
charity presents me. I must dye, said he, and must find by my sword what I
could not meet with neither in the fire nor the water. Ah! fair Iphidamanta,
thou art lost, and even those endeavors wherevvith I strove to preserve to my
self the happiness of seeing thee, have reduced me to the misery of never
seeing thee more. After he had thus lamented, he left me, and leapt into a
little boat that was moar'd at the Sea side; but when he was got some twenty or
thirty paces, the surges brought him back again. Five or six times he strove
to force her, and as often was cast back a shore. At last he came out of his
vessel, and finding me where I was left: If (said he) your pity be not fained,
tell me where I may find some Mariners. My shipwreck is not of so little
importance, but the remains of it is able to enrich many. I advised him to
stay till day, ere he put himself to Sea, and promised to provide him as many
men as he needed. Then I entreated him to retire in and pass the rest of the
night with me; but I could not possibly get him from the place where he was,
and his obstinacy cut off from me all means of comforting him. I therefore
took my leave of him, and as soon as I was in my lodging, sent five or six of
my slaves, to get Mariners to serve him. At day break I returned to the Sea
side, to learn what was become of him, for I thought not to meet him again:
yet I did; but in the most deplorable estate you can possibly imagine. He held
in his hands a robe imbroider'd with gold and silver, which was in some places
burnt and in others bloody. When I came near, he lifted it up into the air,
and with a languishing voice cried out, See just heaven what thou have
permitted Fortune to perpetrate! See all that remains of that wonder for whom
thou seem'dst to have reserved the best Crowns of Europe! Do thou thus
deceive the faith of men? and reject the prayers of the most innocent? Did
not thou encourage me to pluck Iphidamanta out of the hands of a Tyrant to
whom she had been inthrall'd? Did thou not make me hope to see her one day
seated on my Throne, only to engage me to an unfortunate enterprise which has
hastened her fate, and buried in those waves which have swallowed her, all that
could ever make me happy? Thou would have it so, just heaven; and thereby I
know thou redemandest the life thou have given me. I restore it thee, and
render it as a gift I am ashamed of. With that he cast away the robe, and took
again the poniard wherewithal he had already struck himself; but I held his
hand as he was about to double his blow, and making my self known: Credit not
(said I) your despair, follow more wholesome counsel; and at least preserve
so much of your self as remains. When he heard me speak he cast up his eyes,
and knowing me, Osmin (replied he) I will dye, and not give Fortune the
contentment of seeing me longer under her tyranny. But before I go hence, I
will trust thee with my last Will. Entreat from me the King of Morocco, that he
will please to send into Scotland, and advertise the King my father of the
tragical end whereto his denial has brought me; and if my last petition can
move him, obtain that he send some one to the Canaries to let the Queen there
know of my death. Polexander was so vexed to hear of the Scottish Prince his
death, and withal, the contrary of what he had known from the old Narcissus,
that he had not power enough over himself to suppress his first agitations,
and remain in that indifferency, with which he had heard the other incidents
of Almanzor's History: he interrupted unseasonably Almaid; and besought him,
before he went further on, to let him know whether after the death of the
Scottish Prince, there had been nothing heard of Iphidamanta. Almaid was far
from imagining 'twas Polexander spoke to him; nor made he any reflection on his
troubles and agitations, but imputing them to that impatient and inconsiderate
curiosity, which extraordinary adventures and events raise in the most solid
and retired minds: I will (said he) presently satisfy your demand, and relate
to you very wonderful verities, at least if Osmin made not my dear Master
believe so. Know, that Spimantus had no sooner done speaking, but suddenly
plucking away his arm which Osmin held, he struck his poniard deep into his
breast, but so happily for him, that he was as soon dead as wounded. Osmin, very
much grieved for not being the stronger, mingled his tears with that
unfortunate Prince his blood; and after a long bewailing his sad disaster,
commanded his slaves to cleanse the body and carry it to his lodging. In the
mean time he went up to the fortress to give an account to Hely of what he
had seen, and acquit himself of that the Prince of Scotland at his death
incharg'd him: yet he could not perform it, for at his entering the King's
chamber, he saw tovvard twenty of those men half Shepherds, half Fishers,
which inhabit on the banks of the River of Sus; and he heard the eldest of
the company in presenting a young maiden (clad like a Shepherdess) to Hely,
speak thus: The fear which I and my companions had, least some of your
Soldiers or others, might by force take from us this excellent beauty, is the
cause that made us entreat her to quit the rich habillements she wore, and to
conceal her self under the simplicity of those she has now on. At break of
day we being embarked for fishing saw very far in the River somewhat which
cast up a thick smoke. We made to it with our boats, and perceived it had
been a great ship which by fire was burnt down to the water. That cruel
enemy seemed not content with the mischief it had done, but searched into the
bottom of the ship for new subjects whereon to execute its fury. It flew every
where, and consuming the bodies of those it had smothered, cast up such a
stinking fume, as it was almost impossible for us to approach it. We were
returning very sorrowful for not being able to succor any body, when most
pitiful shrikes and cries which seemed to implore our aid made us alter our
resolution. We entered the smoke, and some twenty paces from the ship we
perceived some women, who embracing one another floated on five or six great
bundles of cork which had been lincked together. Pity made us cast away all
fear. Through fire and sword we came to the women, and taking them into our
boats, left the fire to make an end of that ravage it had so far advanced.
As Soon as those poor creatures saw themselves out of that danger which they
had as it were miraculously escaped, they testified by their tears and actions
how much they were obliged to us. We asked them by what accident they had
been reduced to that extremity, but they could not answer because they did not
understand us. Their language was no less unknown to us then ours to them.
Yet that hindered not, but we continued our assistance. We conducted them to
our Cotes, where commending them to the care of our wives, we returned to the
River, to try if we could save any thing out of the burning vessel.

Our pains was not unfruitful, for fastening a cable to a piece of timber on
which the staff or handle of the ships rudder rested, we drew the rest of the
vessel on the sands, and opening it by the keele, found therein much rich
furniture which the fire had not yet touched. At our return home we more
heedfully considered (then we had done at first) the women you see, and were
struck as with lightning at the fight of this new Shepherdess. Her robes
which shone again with gold and silver, and the Diamonds she wore on her head
made us imagine her to be some personage of an elevated condition; and so we
entertained her, and instantly resolved to come and present her to you. We
could not make her understand our intention, nor she us her will. First of all
I thought fit to disguise her for my former reason: and as soon as my wife had
shown her the garments she wears, she showed a great deal of contentment,
and retyring with her to put them on, gave her in exchange her rich robe and
Diamonds. But we thought it not fit that we should make our benefit of them.
Therefore (Sir) I have brought them with me not only for that consideration,
but to the end you may not doubt of my words. See, here they are both. With
that he delivered to the King as 'twere a half Crown of Diamonds, and
unfoulded a robe which for the richness as well as the fashion would merit a
particular description but that other matters of more importance oblige me to
put it off till another time. Hely took no heed neither to the Jewels or robes
of the stranger, because his eyes were so fixed on her face, that he was
incapable of all things else. In the mean time, the Prince of Scotlands
adventure winning Osmin to believe this Shepherdess was Iphidamanta, he came
to her, and when he had long time regarded, I know not, said he, whether I be
deceived, but I have ill understood what the Prince of Scotland told me, or you
are Iphidamanta. The Shepherdess blushing at Osmins speech, looked on him
with a modesty full of majesty, and presently fell a weeping. Hely losing the
object which had held him so long enchanted, came out of his ecstasy; and
seeing Osmin before him. Does not (said he) this adventure much amaze you? Sir
(replied Osmin) you would your self be far more, if you knew it all.
Thereupon Osmin related to him the death of the Scottish Prince, and the
requests he made him, dying, and never believe me, said he, if this
Shepherdess be not the Princess Iphidamanta. Hely touched with some inward
motions not proper to his age, made known to that fair Shepherdess, how
pleasing her coming was to him; and spoke to her with such respects and
submissions as seemed to undervalue regal Majesty. Osmin thought at first, his
civilities so full of affection, proceeded only from the Prince's goodness,
which was extended to all his Subjects, and many times made him forget what he
was. But that very day, Hely made him lose that opinion, and let him know,
though he had a great deal of goodness, he had far more love. He bought
Iphidamanta's robes and jewels at six times more then they were worth, and by
so excessive a liberality changed the fortune of a great many poor people. The
Fishermen enriched beyond their hopes returned to their Cottages, and the
fair Shepherdess abode in the fortress with those women, but so sad and
desolate, that she moved them to pity who were the most insensible. Hely not
enduring so great sorrow in a person so dear to him, did all he could to
comfort her, and besought her to make known to him the cause of her
affliction, that he might work a remedy if he were powerful enough to bring it
to pass. That desolate fair one gave the Prince no answer but with her
tears, and seemed to fear something more then the shipwreck which she had
escaped. Thus passed the first day of Iphidamanta's arrival: the night after
made an end of undoing the good Hely, and the following days brought him to
such an extremity, that being no longer able to hide his malady, made good that
ancient verity, That Love is a fury in the souls of old men. He strove to
retrive in the wrinkles of his face and feebleness of his body some remainder
of beauty and strength: He consulted with his glass to disprove if he could
his fifty five years which upbraided him with his folly. It seemed to him he
was not altogether old, and that time had dealt with him far kinder then with
others of his age. Not content with flattering himself thus, he sent for Osmin
to have a Rival in his self-love, and a confident in that he bore the
illustrious Shepherdess. But Osmin whose integrity could not be corrupted,
gave ear to the Kings dotages with much grief, and severely answered him; Are
you well advised (said he) what you do? Have you forgotten that Abdelmelec and
Nephisus had not been criminal, but for suffering themselves to be transported
by a passion which is so delightful to you? And if I dare speak what I
think, I hold them less guilty then you. Both the one and the other have
violated the Laws imposed on them by nature, and engaged themselves in
passions which you cannot approve of. This is true: but they have this excuse
so generally received, that youth and wisdom are incompatible: and (without a
wonder) it is impossible to be young and not be amorous. Can you (Sir) justify
your errors by the same reasons? Are you young? Should not you be wise? Hely
suffered him not to proceed, but interrupting him, Osmin (said he) the greatest
part of humane actions are only condemned for not being well known. You
disallow of my intention because you are ignorant of it, you will approve of it
as soon as I have disclosed it to you: object not to me neither my age, nor the
judgments which your counsel has made me give against my sons. You know that
Abdelmelec is not in exile for loving Alcidiana, and that Nephisus is not in
prison for being engaged to the service of the Princess of Tunis: and for your
upbraiding me with mine age; I am so, but not so old by much as were our holy
Prophets, Mahomet and Hely, when they married their last wives. Know Osmin,
know, that since my children are so great enemies to my Government and age, I
ought to seek my preservation and support in some illustrious alliance. Heaven
more careful of my good then my self, has miraculously sent me the Princess
Iphidamanta, to the end, that getting Polexander for my ally, I may be secured
against all mine enemies. Osmin perceiving such strange alterations in Hely's
mind; I confess (replied he) these reasons would not be very considerable if
they were true. But how should it be possible for that man to think how to
defend himself from the ambushes of his children, who by a pernicious
indulgency has always cherished their ill nature, and has himself invited
them to stab the steel into his breast? No, no, Sir, you do not seek for the
confirming your authority by Polexander's alliance, but the satiating your
voluptuousness in the enjoying his sister. This is too much for Osmin (quickly
replied Hely) yet I pardon his boldness, but on condition he give a more
favorable interpretation to my intentions, and (to take away his ill thoughts
of me) that he shall himself be Iphidamanta's Guardian. Osmin perceiving his
sharpness was unprofitable, resolved to be, no more so rigid to so little
purpose: He took on him the charge of Iphidamanta, and sent for his wife, to
the end the Princess might be in unsuspected company. As Soon as she was come,
Iphidamanta left her habit of Shepherdess, but put not off her sadness.
Some days after Hely returned toward Morocco, and before he went out of the
Province of Sus, sent privately to the Governor of Taradant to set Nephisus at
liberty. That Prince whom the prison had a little cooled, presented himself to
his father, and for some fifteen days gave him so many causes of satisfaction,
that the King forced by his nature, and blinded with his passion, discovered to
him the intent he had to give him a mother that by a just title should merit
the surname of beautiful. This declaration wrought a great effect in the
spirit of Nephisus, but it broke not out till sometime after. In the mean
while Hely was no sooner entered Morocco with the magnificence of a victorious
King, but he renounced all his glory to transfer it on Iphidamanta, and to
make known to all his Subjects, that 'twas she who was truly victorious, and
only deserved the triumph. He received her, as such, in the most stately
appartment of the great Palace of Morocco, and gave to serve her all the
officers, and white and black Eunuchs, which were wont to wait on their
Queens. Nephisus having enjoyed his curiosity of seeing the Princess;
returned, with an extreme desire of often visiting her, but Hely taking notice
of it, became so jealous of him, and so furious, that he was at the point of
ruining Nephisus: yet his natural debonairity withholding him, he commanded
Osmin to deny all men whatsoever the entrance into Iphidamanta's Palace; and
himself forbad Nephisus. This prohibition caused fearful disorders: in the
mean time, Hely, in love with Iphidamenta even to folly, visited her
punctually four times a day, and though he could not overcome her silence, nor
stint her sadness, yet he promised himself the fruition of her. For her sake
he violated all the Laws of his Religion; he re-established the Idolatry which
Mahomet had so rigorously forbidden, and sent as far as Italy for a Painter
excellent enough to draw for him Iphidamanta's picture. One day, leading that
Princess into a marble Cabinet which is in the midst of the garden of flowers,
he cast himself at her feet, and never blushing for Osmin's wife, being a
witness of his extravagancy, It (said he) extremely troubles me that I am not
able to offer to your incomparable virtue, but things so base and vile as are
my Kingdoms and my life: But cast not your eyes (if you please) on the
smalnesse of the offering, consider the heart and the humility of the offerer;
and assure your self, that if he had in his hands all the Crowns of the
world, he would lay them at your feet with the same zeal as he does those of
Fez and Morocco. Iphidamanta hearkened to this Speech as she was wont to hear
some others, that is, without making show of any aversion or content. These
coldnesses yet added new flames to the Prince his former fire: the more he was
neglected, the more amorous he grew, and the less progress he made in his
suite, the more happy success he promised himself. Whilst he was in these
meditations, the Painter (he had sent for) arrived out of Italy. Presently he
would have him draw Iphidamanta's picture, to the end he might have the liberty
of seeing her at all times, and in all places. But for all his extreme desire
to have it done, he was yet a long time before he could consent the Painter
should see her: he called for him, and asked if he could not draw a face by the
description should be made of it? The Painter answered as he ought to that
demand; and to flatter Hely's malady, assured him, if he could but only once
cast his eyes on the face he would have portraied, he promised to perfect the
rest by virtue of his imagination. Hely was a long time contesting with two so
contrary necessities: at last, Love carried it from Jealousy. He resolved to
set his Painter on work; but he had judgment and respect enough to undertake
nothing without Iphidamanta's leave. He therefore came and desired a permission
to take her picture, but being absolutely denied it, he had recourse to the
credit of Osmin's wife, who promised to obtain what he desired, provided he
left to her the managing Iphidamanta's spirit. This promise restored to him all
his lost joy, and kept him from further pressing the Princess. As Soon as he
was gone, Osmin himself used many kind of reasons to win the Princess to
satisfy Hely. He advertised her, that her life and honor being in a manner in
that Prince his power, 'twas not fit to discontent him for an indifferent
matter. The Princess persuaded by this, granted what Hely desired of her; but
know said she to Osmin, it is to you I give my picture, and not to Hely, and
remember (if you please) that this is the sole favor you must expect from my
obsequiousness. Osmin promised, never to importune her with ought that should
be displeasing to her, and so went to Hely with these good news. The King took
the occasion was presented him, and after the observing a thousand ceremonies,
(which, we must be in love, not to count ridiculous) he got Iphidamanta's
picture. As Soon as he was possessed of that treasure, he forgot the care of
his affairs, and neglected his own preservation, to have his thoughts and
eyes eternally fixed on that Copy, when he was not permitted to see the
Original. That continual contemplation so increased his love, that it was
impossible for him to defer the accomplishing of it. He made known
therefore, that without delay, he would declare Iphidamanta Queen of Morocco.
Osmin confessed to my dear Master, 'twas not his fault that Hely had not
satisfaction; but knowing that Iphidamanta would resolve to die rather then to
marry him, he tried if he could unblinde him: yet knowing, he was one that
would be deceived, he laid before him, that the Princess being as a Prisoner
in his power, was not like, acceptably to entertain his suite: that she could
not believe his love was either true or just, since he treated her not as a
freewoman, which is sought to by the ways of honor, but as a slave and
vagabond whom no man fears to outrage or ruin. Do better, Sir, (said he)
remit Iphidamanta at liberty, send her with a great equipage to the King her
brother, and choose the principal of your Estate to accompany her, withal to
demand her in marriage. Your counsel is very good (replied Hely) but my
affection will not permit me to make use of it: make me any proposition, the
most difficult, I will refuse none, provided, Iphidamanta stir not hence. I
am ready to send Ambassadors to Polexander, I will submit me to such
references as the Canarian Princes have not even dared to promise themselves
from the least of the African Kings. I will do more, I will release to him all
pretentions which the Kings of Morocco have to the Islands he has conquered;
and if he be not contented, let him choose of my three crowns which he likes
best, and I will give it him, so he grant me Iphidamanta. But that I should
deprive my self of the felicity of seeing her, under an uncertain hope of
enjoying her; that I should put my self in jeopardy of losing a treasure
already in my hands, and to exercise I know not what superfluous
correspondency, that I should renounce essential possessions and happiness,
it is that, which must never be expected from me: I will die before I be
separated from Iphidamanta. But not to lose the time in fruitless
contestations, this is my resolution: Arzilland as you know is ready to
imbarke, for the conducting into Scotland the body of Spimantus, and to present
it to his father. In his return, I would have him go to Polexander, and under
pretext of visiting him from me, sift that Princes mind, speak wittily of the
loss of his sister, and if he perceive in the King any disposition to hear
him, he may let him know what is become of her, and what my intention is. Hely
by this speech making known his mind to Osmin, demanded what his was. Osmin,
seeing there was no remedy, and he could not help it, approved of the Kings
resolution, and besought him in the mean while to behave himself so toward
her, that she might not have cause to believe her self a slave, nor to press
him for her departure. Hely, promising Osmin both, sent for Arzilland, and
giving him full instructions, commanded he should set sail that very day.
Arzilland no less expeditive then affectionate, obeyed his Master; but the
revolutions which followed his departure, gave him far other thoughts then
those he had at his setting forth. He was not got into Scotland, when Nephisus
rekindling the fire of division which he had a while kept as extinguished,
made the King his father know, that he was able to dissemble though not to
amend. He handled that good King more outrageously then he would a miserable
slave; he accused him of ignorance, of folly, and even threatened to pluck out
with his heart, that infamous passion which made him the laughter of his
people. Hely as insensible of these injuries, made his excuses to Nephisus,
besought him to hear his justifications, and almost asking him pardon for the
others insolences, gave him the boldness to continue them. That miscreant
seeing his impiety to have so good success; left Hely, got on horseback, and
accompanied with his confederates, rode through all the streets of Morocco to
raise the people. When he perceived that his persuasions were powerful over
their minds, but not sufficiently to make them revolt; he left the town and
went to Abdelmelec who with a strong army had already violently seized on the
Province of Hea. Hely thinking himself not safe enough in Morocco, and not
resolving on war for fear of losing his Mistress, had no sooner news that
the two Princes came by long journeys to besiege him, but he departed from
Morocco with Iphidamanta, Osmin, his wife, and their domestics, and in all
haste came to the Fortress of Guargetsem. There, as if he had been in the
highest peace that could be, or had abjured all things but his love, he even
forbad Osmin from speaking to him, in any manner, about business; nor to
trouble his repose with the fortune of an Estate which he abandoned to the
ambition of Sons. Osmin, affrighted with this command, was neither
sufficiently coward nor traitor to obey him. He secretly sent for the Governor
of Taradant, and besought him by the excellency of his virtue, and by his
valor so often approved, to have pity on the Kings weakness and his countries
desolation. That Governor promised Osmin all that a man of honor should in
such an occasion; but whilst he was in preparation, the two detestable Princes
made themselves masters of the best towns, and found every where so little
resistance, that they were at the gates of Guargetsem before the Governor of
Taradant had time to assemble his friends or his troops. Hely, who passed his
time altogether in idolatrizing Iphidamanta, and in promising her such Crowns
as he had lost: was much astonished when the roaring of Cannons and the
clamours of Soldiers told him aloud, what his most affectionate servants durst
not whisper to him. Presently he ran to Iphidamanta, and casting himself at
her feet: Would to heaven fair Princess (said he) that I might by my death
free you from the danger wherewithal you are threatened by my cruel and
unnatural Sons! You should see me run to it with joy, and voluntarily yield
up what remains of my life, for the ransom of your honor and liberty. But
their abominable ambition will be no more glutted by my death, then it is by my
Crowns. It Is your honor they aim at, and the accursed Nephisus, will not
think himself fully cleared of those execrable vows he has made, if at once
he commit not two of the greatest murders can be imagined; I mean, if after
his attempting on my life, he do not the like on your honor. Iphidamanta,
according to her custom, dissolved in tears whilst Hely spoke to her; but at
last urged by a just indigdation: It behooved you then to have had more care of
my liberty (replied she) when it was in your power: So would you not have been
reduced, to give me now such vain testimonies of your fear and weakness; but
take no care for me, I know better then you how to prevent the villainies of
your Sons. Hely stood wholly confounded with love and joy at those judicious
words, and leaving Iphidamanta with Osmin's Lady, went to see whereto his
enemies had brought him. Osmin followed, and charging him, but with silken
words, (if it be lawful for me to use the Court terms) with the irreparable
faults his passion had made him commit, would have persuaded him to think on
his safety whilst it was not absolutely desperate. Hely, stopping at that
speech, There Is an end of the matter (said he) I must die: Abdelmelec and
Nephisus have too constant and assured an impiety to promise me the least good
that can be. That very day they combined to make war with me, they resolved my
death. Should I give into their hands all regal authority, and on the faith of
a solemn Treaty open the gates of this fortress: assure your self they would
not be satisfied. They will have me end my miserable life by the most infamous
tortures can be invented by their merciless impiety. But that which I more
fear, is, they will expose Iphidamanta to such horrors, as the sole
imagination of them kills me. I will therefore prevent all these disasters by a
death which shall not be unworthy Iphidamanta nor my self. With that he walked
on, and ascended up a bulwark from whence he might descry all his enemies
camp. He knew the ill estate of the place he was in, and judged rightly by the
advanced works and demolitions the Cannon made, that he had but a short time to
live. He stood there above two hours, as if he had expected some Cannon shot
to finish all his disquiets by a fair death. But heaven which is always
indulgent to humane frailty, preserved that sacred head, and would not by a
tragieall end, give his unnatural children cause to glory in their
wickedness: nor yet would it absolutely preserve that drowsy and rest-loving
Prince for fear he should utterly lose himself in his remissness and too much
insensibility. Osmin perceiving Helies intention, withdrew him against his will
from the bulwark, and trusting in the Governor of Taradants promise, assured
him he should shortly have succor from whence he expected it not. Hely laughed
at it, and as if he had known his approaching misfortune, staid at the foot
of a tower which his enemies battered. A great part of it fell in that instant,
and in such a manner, that without the particular providence of heaven, Hely
and Osmin had been orewhelm'd with the ruin.

Osmin was not hurt at all; but Hely escaped not so cheap. He was struck down
and wounded in his head and many other parts of his body. Some of the garrison
Soldiers thinking he had been slain, drew him from under the rubbish and
ruins of the tower, and carried him to his chamber. As Soon as the trusty
Eunuch Atlas saw his Master in so ill plight, he ran to Iphidamanta, and
melting into tears, Come (said he) and see to what point of mishap your beauty
has brought the best Prince of the world. Follow me Iphidamanta and try, at
least by one tear, and one word of comfort, to witness to my Lord the King
that you are sensible of his wounds. Iphidamanta was astonished at Atlas sad
relation, and her natural goodness making her forget all other consideration,
she went with Osmins Lady to the Prince his chamber. As Soon as she came near
his bed, and that she saw him all bloody, O heaven! (she cried) permittest thou
thine own lively image to be thus disfigured? Hely knowing her, stretched out
his hand, and raising himself a little; fair Princess, (said he) since my
life pleased you not, let me know at least that my death is welcome unto you.
Impute not to heaven nor to the inhumanity of my children the tragical end of
days. They have both, rather with pity then rigor, treated me as they have
done, and death it self shows how pitiful she is, since it has prevented the
despair and contempt whereinto your loss would infallibly have carried me.
Give them thanks rather for being so conformable to your wishes, and for
delivering you at last from that bondage which has cost you so many tears.
Farewell then fair Princess, weep no more, if you desire not to afflict me
at mine end. Rather by a pleasant countenance signify to me, that you take my
death as a favor. I will even hasten it, if you desire it. But whilst I seek
for comfort in my misery, I forget the care I should take for your
preservation. Go, and make ready for your departure. Get you quickly out of a
place which will soon be filled with your greatest enemies. Entreat Osmin (as
I do with my heart) that he forsake you not; in the mean while I will beseech
Heaven with all the zeal I can, that you may be as faithfully beloved, and (if
I dare say so) as religiously adored by him that must enjoy you, as you have
always been by the most unfortunate Hely. Iphidamanta had not failed
answering him, but that she was hindered by fearful cries, noise of armor,
and the affright given her by a great many Soldiers who with their Symeters in
their hands confusedly entered the Court of the fortress. Hely seeing her so
much amazed, and hearing withal the shouts of the victorious Soldiers, Fly
(cried he, dying as he was) fly fair Princess, and stay not till you are in
the paws of the Lion that will devour you. And thou Osmin (said he) if thou
have ever loved me, and if the affection I have borne thee deserves any
acknowledgement, save the best part of my self, and suffer not base fear to
make me dye more cruelly then can all the barbarousnesse of my two Sons. Osmin
hearing himself so exceedingly conjured not to abandon the Princess in that
extremity, withdrew her from the Kings chamber, and running to his lodgings
for some of his slaves, and what he had of most value, descended by a private
staire to the foot of the rock, and with his little company entered into a
Bark which the Governors of Guargetsem always used to keep there, for any
urgent necessity. All things favored their flight. The tumult and confusion
which always accompanies the taking of places, the calm which could not be
fairer, and the night approaching, conspired together for those innocents
safety, and drew them from the sight and fury of Nephisus. Osmin put his hand
to the oar, and in the night time got to certain high rocks (far enough
from Guarguetsem) which might have served them for a safe retreat. He was not
long there, for a Merchant of Madera being driven on the same place, took him
into his ship with his company, and promised to waft him into the Isle of
Teneriffe, or any other of the Canaries. Osmin having thus recounted to the
Prince Almanzor Iphidamanta's adventures; You have understood my Lord (said he)
that the Madera Merchant could not perform what he promised us, for when we
had been a while under sail, a tempest arose and cast us on the coast of
Guinea. I must confess (said Almanzor then to Osmin) you have related to me
strange adventures; yet is not my curiosity absolutely satisfied. You have not
told me how Iphidamanta was stolen from the place of her abode, who that Tyrant
was out of whose hands Spimantus vaunted he had redeemed her, nor by what
accident the two vessels were fired. My Lord (replid Osmin) I have had the same
desire, as you, and cannot yet get any further satisfaction. Only I will tell
you, that the Princess seeing her self void of all protection but mine, threw
her at both our feets, and besought me and my wife to take her for our
daughter, to conceal the truth of her birth, and in stead of the name of
Iphidamant a which was not hers, to call her Axiamira. There now remains
nothing for me, but to petition you, for that Princess sake, to let her
perceive nothing of what you know, and to actuate all that honor and love
shall advise you to give a glorious issue to her long wanderings. Father (said
Almanzor embracing Osmin) I will strive to perform what you injoyne me, and if
it be not that you should have a good opinion of me; be assured, you shall
never repent your confidence of my discretion. After these promises he
dismissed him; and remaining alone to give himself wholly over to his own
contentment, and to be overcome by those transports which the excess of his
good fortune brought on him: he tasted (the remainder of that day) more sweets,
and resented more ravishing joys by the strength of his imagination, then he
will ever meet withal again, either by the knowledge of his parents, the
conquest of all the Empires of the world, or the very possession of Axiamira.
He himself has confessed to me that which I tell you, and having laid before
me all the fair chymeraes which in that happy time had passed through his
fancy: Almaid, (said he to me) what felicity can there be compared to mine, if
by the number of my exploits, and by the immutability of my faith I be able to
oblige Iphidamanta to the not disdaining my humblest servitude? O how capable
do I find my self of the most honorable and difficult enterprises! How does
the elevated birth of that Princess raise my thoughts beyond ordinary
conceptions! How am I ashamed that I have done no more since I knew the world!
How powerful a spur to honor is the desire of making me worthy
Iphidamanta's esteem! And what emulation and disquiet do Polexanders famous
acts (which are still before mine eyes) bring upon me! I will follow his steps,
Almaid. I will undertake something great enough, to the end I may without
impudency make known mine affection to Iphidamanta, and at least give an
honorable pretext to my boldness. I should trouble you brave Knight did I
repeat all the brave words so fair a passion put into the mouth of Almanzor.
As Soon as Andromeda was come from the place of her retirement, that Prince
went to visit Axiamira, and inventing new humilities to come worthily near
her; I wonder much (said he) that the Deity with whom you have so privately
communed these four days, could be won or resolve to let you go out of his
temple. It Is true, (replied Axiamira) my return is a just cause of wonder. The
sanctity of the place whence I come, the authority of the Deity which inhabits
it, and the example of so many religious souls which burn with love, should
for ever have made me renounce the company of the world. But alas! my
weakness has been stronger then all those powers, and I have found my self
so incapable of so high a perfection that I should think I had more ambition
then zeal, if I durst only pretend to it. You are a very unjust Interpreter,
(said Almanzor) pardon me Madam if I speak to you with so little respect. You
give my words a clean contrary sense to my intention. You accuse your self
for not being devout enough; and I accused the god with whom you were so long,
for not being sensible enough. Truly I cannot conceive how that Deity who has
perceptions and penetrations far beyond those of men, and by consequence sees
in you those beauties which are concealed from us; such perfections, as we
cannot discover, and such brightness as our too weak and dull eyes cannot
perceive, has not reserved to himself a wonder which of all those that are
visible comes nearest to it self. Give me leave (replied the Princess) to
ask, whether you think well on what you say; and whether you be not more
unjust then I to jest so, either with the gods or with a miserable maiden.
Almanzor blushed as fire at Axiamira's reply, and was about committing new
impieties to justify the former, when Andromeda interrupted his design, and
made him change his discourse for others less serious, but withal more
pleasant. A few days after were seen some ships on the coast of Benin, and
upon the news to Abrinzias; Almanzor who would fai^ne do somewhat of worth in
the sight of Axiamira, asked the Kings leave to go and see what they were. He
had his request granted, and was so happy in his voyage, that he burnt two of
the ships which he knew were Pirates, and in spite of all the resistance of
many determinate Soldiers, brought two more away with him into the River of
Benin. But what a jealousy did this bold attempt throw on Fortune, and how
unhappy was that Prince for doing more then men should do? The very night
after this audacious Enterprise, the Pirates landed, and not content with
robbing the Country, dared even set on the royal Palace. Almanzor who well
expected this revenge, sallied on the Rovers, and followed with all the bravest
men about him, drove them back into their ships. At his departure he left the
Court much troubled, and at his return he found it in a general desolation.
Osmin and his Lady, tearing their hair, and scratching their faces, cast
themselves at his feet when he entered the Palace; and told him, the Pirates had
stolen away Axiamira. At those words, Almanzor stricken as with a thunderbolt,
was like to have fallen down dead, so quick was his resentment of that
lamentable accident. O that I were but able to represent to you the excess of
his sorrow, and relate his pitiful words by which he expressed a part of it! I
should enforce you to bewail him; and your generousnesse winning you to bear
a part in his sufferings, would make you as much afflicted as he was at that
fatal instant. After he had grieved even beyond what passion permits, he took
Osmin by the arm, and commanding Hydaspes and my self to come near: I will
(said he) have you two to be witnesses of the promise I make this good old man,
to the end, that if I happen to fail in it, he may use you against me, and
call you to avenge the wrong he shall receive by my faithlesnesse: after he
had spoke thus to us, he turned him toward Osmin, and lifting his eyes to the
Moon which was then at full: I swear (said he) by this Star which is no
less venerable to me then the Sun; not to see again the King or Queen, not
to set foot in my native Country, and never to give rest to my mind, not
truce to my afflictions, nor intermission to my journeying, till I have
restored to you that treasure I have made you lose. I hope, sooner or later, to
discover the forcible takers away of Iphidamanta; and then woe shall betide him
who has had any hand in this attempt. The power of the whole earth shall not
protect them against my indignation. What e're they be, they shall fail under
my vengefull arm, and if Polexander himself had enterpris'd it, he should
have felt, that a just sorrow can give to the most weak, a strength sufficient
to conquer the most invincible. After this speech, he took me by the hand, and
entreating me to yield him that proof of my affection: Almaid (said he) stay
you here, and intimate to the King the resolution I have taken. I recommend not
to him either Osmin or his Lady, because he is none of those Princes whose
languishing virtues require to be often solicited to keep them in agitation. He
had no sooner ended, but he hastened with Hydaspes and his other servants to the
place where the night before he had left his ships. In the best of them he
embarked, and as if his eyes had been blindfolded as well as the god that led
him to those high resolutions, he cast him self into danger without taking
notice of it, and with one sole ship would have gone and assailed the Pirates
fleet. Hydaspes, as valiant (or to say truer) as rash as he is, could not but
be afraid of his Master's desperateness, and loath to consent to his loss,
There is (said he) neither courage nor honor in a^ enterprise so out of all
appearance. The best success you can expect in it, is to die infamously by the
hand of some one of those thieves, or to end your life in their slaves fetters.
Almanzor laughed at Hydaspes remonstrance, and letting him know the greatness
of his courage for bad him to lend an ear to it; Take notice (said he) that
the greatest part of our adventures are so many miracles; and most commonly
those have best success which are most against humane reason and providence. I
confess to measure things by the rules of common wisdom, it were not only
rashness but likewise rage, with a handful of men to offer to fight with an
army. But you see not that which the eternal Providence keeps hidden under
that temerity; and if I be not deceived, it will betide, that of all the
hazards we have run, this will be the less dangerous. This speech shut
Hydaspes mouth, and made him expect some favorable prodigy from that Divinity
in whom Almanzor seemed to put all his confidence; surely he was not deceived.
A few days after he put to sea, a tempest which in all likelihood should have
been his destruction, was the cause of his safety. For the Pirates fleet being
separated by the storm, he met with the Generall's ship far distant from all
the rest; and knowing her, set on her with such a fury, that he forced her to
lay him aboard to avoid the sinking by his artillery. It was then, there began
a fight as bloody and obstinate as ever was seen on the Ocean. Both parts gave
over all fiery offenses, and those which are not dangerous but when they are
cast from afar off. Every one took his Simeter, or Battleaxe, and the desire
of vanquishing being equal on both sides, made them alike forget the care of
their preservation. That day Almanzor surmounted himself, and did such
wonderful acts of valor, as I intend not to persuade you to credit, since I
can very hardly believe them my self. After he had made him a bloody way in
the Pirates vessel, he forced upright to the General, and plucking from him
Hydaspes whom he had laid at his feet: It Is (said he) against me thou ought
turn thy arms, since 'twas I only who made my companions resolve to assail
thee. The General sparkling fire from his eyes, replied; And thou, but not
thou alone shall from my hand receive the just chastisement for thy rashness.
These bold words were seconded by effects no less haughty. Almanzor first
struck his enemy, and charged him with so much vigor and quickness, that he
scarce gave him leisure to put by, or avenge himself. Yet did he what a
valiant man could, and gave not ground till his Symiter was broken, and
weakened by the loss of almost all his blood he could not possibly stand
longer. He was no sooner fallen, but Almanzor offering his Symeter to his
throat, Thou shall dye (said he) unless thou restore me the Princess thou
have stolen. The Rover making show that that speech was more deadly to him then
all his words: Do not (said he to Almanzor) abuse thy victory, but know that
scoffing and jeering never well became the mouth of a Conqueror. I confess,
the desire of getting that Princess of whom thou speak, has brought me
from Morocco to Benin, but that design has not prosper'd; and I acknowledge
now that wicked projects, sooner or later, have but unfortunate events. I
feel, I feel the blow wherewith I was long since threatened. My crimes have
exhausted all the patience of heaven, and by a just retribution, I meet with a
violent death, that so I may be exemplarily chastis'd for so many murders
which my command has committed, though my hand has not been able to execute
them. The Pirates Speech so sensibly touched Almanzor, that changing in an
instant from an irreconcilable enemy, to a pitiful Comforter: Hope better
(said he) from the bounty of heaven, and since it has brought you to repent
you of your former life, doubt not but it has in store a better for you. You
shall live for its glory and the example of others of your condition. But let
not your repentance be imperfect. Be sorrowful for offending without cause the
Prince of Benin. I swear (replied the Pirate) by that just avenging Deity
whose hand i^ now heavy upon me, that I know not, where the Princess
Iphidamanta is: and I die with more grief to lose her for ever, then to lose
the light of day. With those words he gave up the ghost, and left Almanzor so
extremely afflicted, that his victory went near to have been very dismal to
him. For the Pirates seeing their General dead, (in lieu of losing courage as
men of war usually do in like occasions) showed themselves more hardy and
furious then before. They rushed all at once on Almanzor, and if the necessity
of defending himself had not drawn him from his dangerous compassion, he had
run the hazard of accompanying the vanquished Rover. He then turned head on the
Pirates, he drove them back, he pierced them, he dispersed them, and by his
terrible blows enforced them to have recourse to that goodness which a little
before they had despised. Almanzor received them to mercy, and stopping his
Soldiers fury, My Companions (said he to them) it is enough that we have
brought our enemies to ask their lives. Let us use them so as they may be
bound to esteem us as mild to those which yield, as we are redoubtfull to
such as resist us. The Pirates ravished at Almanzorse xceeding generosity, as
much as they had bin terrified by his in comparable valor, threw their weapons
and turbants at his feet, and as if they had now a time to accord their desires
with their thoughts; Fill (cried they all to gether) the place which Nephisus
has left empty by his death! The name of Nephisus struck Almanzor to the
heart, and won him to grant the Rovers what they desired, only to clear such
doubts as they had cast into his mind. Seeing therefore so great an union
where a little before there was so great contrariety; and so profound a peace
where so much war had bin kindled; First of all (said he to them) I desire to
know whence your General was, and what is become of the Princess he stole
from the Court of Benin. One of the Pirates speaking for all, I know (said he)
better then my companions, the reason of your demands, and I can better then
they satisfy you in them both. Know (said he further, sighing) that the
unfortunate Nephisus whom you see dead at your feet, is the same Nephisus who
for the beginning of his miseries, felt in the Prince his brothers Turney, that
your pastimes and diversions are dreadful. It Is the same Nephisus who
following the counsel of his natural ambition, and the passions of the King
his father's enemies, violated the most sanctified Laws, and wronged a
goodness which had never parallel. It Is that Nephisus who failing in his faith
to the Princess of Tunis, and of his duty to the good Hely, would have
ravished Iphidamanta from him, and besieged him in a Fortress whereinto he was
retired with her. In sum, it is the same Nephisus, who thinking himself by
his taking that place not only master of his fathers life, but possessor of
his Crown and of Iphidamanta; saw himself compelled to abandon his defeated
army, to fly out of his fathers territories, and (that he might have a refuge)
to implore the assistance and protection of those, who now demand yours. I
believe (my Lord) these general things will be sufficient to satisfy part of
your curiosity; for the rest, this is all the manifestation we can now give
you. When Nephisus left the Pirates Island for the stealing or forcing away of
Iphidamanta, he chose for companions of his fortune, two of his most resolute
Captains; the one was called Thalemut, and the other Achain. They promised him
to throw themselves into Abrinzias Palace in two places which they knew, and to
take thence Iphidamanra whilst with his troop he amused another where that
Kings guard was. They executed what they had promised; but Nephisus being
constrained to retire to his ships sooner then they had agreed upon together,
neither met with Thalemut nor Achain. A tempest presently arose, and our
vessels were so dispersed, that this unfortunate Prince never heard since what
was become of those two Captains. If you please I may have leave to tell you
my opinion; I think that Thalemut and Achain are certainly retired into their
Island, and carried the Princess along with them. Quoth Almanzor, that which
you have told me, fills me with astonishment, and gives me a great deal of
satisfaction. But I should have all I desire, if you would instruct me what
course I should steer to get to that fatal Island. The Pirates who were about
him, spoke all at once, and offered not only to conduct him thither, but also
to cause Iphidamanta to be restored to him, if so be she were in the hands of
any of their Captains. Almanzor embraced them all one after another, to thank
them for a promise that was so pleasing to him; and in recompense, told them he
would (if they thought them worthy) fill Nephisus place, and give them a
General as affectionate as he, if he did not give them one as valiant. The
Pirates taking him at his word, forgot their passed losses by the gain they
had in him, and betook them to the course which their former combat had put
them far from. Almanzor, commanding his Mariners to follow him, abode in the
Pirates vessel, and was compelled to suspend his melancholy, and accommodate
himself to their brutish manner of life. Fortune seconded his designs, and to
give them a more happy beginning, presented him a fair occasion to gain the
love of the Pirates: for the day after he was embarked with them, he met with
four sail of their companions, fighting with twelve Gallions or Spanish
ships. He not only dis-ingag'd them, but took two Gallions laden with gold
from the new World, and by that Prize which he gave wholly to the Pirates, so
absolutely won them; that the last, ratifying the election of the first,
proclaimed him their Head, and bound themselves to make all the rest consent to
it. With this resolution they kept on their voyage, and as they met their
companions, made known to them Nephisus death; and extolling the valor and
liberality of Almanzor, disposed them to receive him for their General. In a
little time Almanzor understood the humors of his new Subjects: he knew how to
handle them with such dexterity, and propose to them such enterprises
conformable to their wishes, that they blessed the day of his victory, and
promised to themselves under so valiant a Commander, to become Kings of the
Ocean. A few days after they arrived at their Island, and in the haven met
with Achain, who after his escaping many great dangers both by land and sea,
was at last got home to his accustomed Sanctuary. The Pirates who were with
Almanzor made show to him of their true affection by their impatiency of
understanding from Achain, what he had done with the Princess Iphidamanta.
Eight or ten of the most remarkable went aboard him, and so dilated themselves
in the praise of my dear Master, that if the death of Nephisus, and the taking
of the Spanish Gallions had not served them for more irreproachable witnesses,
the severe Achain had punished them as traitors to their General, and
abandoners of their confederacy. But being won (as well as the rest) by
Almanzor's nobleness and his wonderful deeds of arms, he came to him, and
making to him (with all the necessary circumstances) an oath of fidelity: The
obedience (said he) I owe thee now, obliges me to declare to thee the success
of the voyage which our late General made us undertake. And to tell it thee in
few words, thou may know, Thalemut and my self assaulted the King of Benin's
palace, and forced it in the spite of al resistance: he that was our guide in
that business, was deceived when we were to be brought by him to Iphidamanta's
chamber, and having made us break open four or five without finding her,
stole from us for fear of Thalemut who had threatened to strangle him. We gave
not over the perfecting what we had begun, for Thalemut searching on one part
and I on the other, we at last found what we sought for. Thalemut had much ado
to make himself master of the chamber where the Princess was; the door being
defended by five or six valiant men, with so much obstinacy, that he could not
get entrance till he had killed them all. Thalemut who never much studied
civility, took Iphidamanta rudely enough, and never moved with her tears or
entreaties, carried her out of the palace, and whilst I made good the place to
stop those that pursued him, he brought her to his ship. I presently retreated,
and set sail after him, but the tempest which befell at day-breake severed us,
so that since then we met not. Be then assured, that if Thalemut be not
shipwracked he will be quickly here. But I advise thee, to receive the command
which I and my fellows offer thee; for never hope to get Iphidamanta out of
Thalemut's hands, if it be not by the quality of our General. For as such,
thou may absolutely dispose of us, and all we have, and not being so, thou
can not avoid that hard necessity whereto all those are reduced, whom the
chance of war throws into our hands. Here Achain was silent, after he had
made known to Almanzor that he must resolve either to take on him the
Generall-ship of the Pirates, or for ever lose the hope of regaining
Iphidamanta. He therefore got into the midst of them, and when he saw they were
all attentive; Yes my friends (said he aloud) I here fully declare my self,
and will satisfy the common desire of so many valiant men as you are. After
this Declaration, he drew his sword, and holding it aloft to be seen of all
the assembly, he thus continued his speech: I accept (more willingly then I
would a Crown) the title of your General, and solemnly swear by this sword,
which has achieved me some name in the world, that hence forward it shall not
be employed but for your defense and benefit. I desire but one thing, and it is
that you promise me to live as adventurers which seek their fortunes and
advantages of war with the hazard of their lives: That you shall make a just
war with your enemies: That you shall not assault such as cannot defend
themselves: That you shall not use as slaves, such prisoners of war as would
ransom themselves: And above all, that you renounce that brutish delight of
forcing and stealing away virgins, to which Nephisus sensuality had engaged you
against your own intentions. As Soon as Almanzor had made an end, there was a
deaf noise among all the assembly, and the muttering of voices having long
continued, (to witness the repugnancy the Pirates had to those Laws) it ended
in a deep silence. Almanzor, who would feign win so much from them, that
nothing infamous might be intermixed with the glorious story of his life,
thought, that to bring them to it, something extraordinary must be promised
them. He therefore began again, and by his countenance showing the constancy
of his mind; Promise me boldly (said he) such things as cannot but be
advantageous unto you; for my part, I oblige my self to lay before you as a
prey all the riches of Europe and Africa, to make you considerable with the
greatest Princes; and to make you dispute fame and potency with the most
flourishing Kingdoms. These promises calmed all the storms which troubled the
Pirates minds. They cried out all, they would observe Almanzors laws, and
confirming their promises by an infinite number of extravagant actions,
proclaimed that Prince (the third time) chief and General of all the Pirates.
Presently they placed him on a Buckler, and eight or ten lifting him up into
the air, showed him to all the Assembly, and so carried him to the Fortress.
The acclamations, the bonfires, and other liberties were the public witnesses
of the Rovers satisfaction. But Almanzor was insensible of all these honors
done him, and fearing all dangers and sholes in the sea, absolutely despaired
of Thalemuts return. Nevertheless within a few days after he came in, and
knowing well Almanzors valor, he not only consented to their Election, but
well weeting how impatiently he was expected by the General he went to him
with his prize. He accoasted him after his wonted fashion, and presently
falling to matters more essential: I cannot (said he) yield thee a greater
proof of my allowance of their choice then by offering thee this prisoner.
Imagine the transport of my dear Master, in seeing himself so near that
Princess for whose sake he had exposed himself to so many dangers: but his
affliction was far greater, when Thalemut had taken off the veil wherewith
she was covered, and made known to the Prince so much transported with joy
that he had no cause at all for it. In effect it was not Iphidamanta, but (as
Almanzor understood from her own mouth) an Egyptian whom Perseus had gotten
from some Ethiopian Merchants. Certainly he was like to have died with grief
for seeing himself so far from his hopes; and but for the power which
Hydaspes had over his thoughts to divert his tragical resolution. Iphidamanta
had in less then one month stuck a poniard in the breasts of two of the most
famousest Princes of Africa. I could now relate to you all the brave actions
done by Almanzor since he was General of the Pirates, tell you of the laudable
alterations he has brought in their Commonwealth, and the important Services
he has done the ungrateful Zabaim since the Pirates changed his name from
Almanzor to Bajazet. Polexander breaking out at the name of Bajazet; Ah Almaid
(said he) how cruel have thou been in concealing from me so long, that, whose
knowledge would have been so acceptable to me? Why then, your Almanzor is that
generous Bajazet, who by his incomparable virtues and g^atnesse of his courage
having of a Society of thieves created a lawful Commonwealth, governes with
so much Justice and magnificence, that his quality deserves the envy of all the
Princes in the world. After thus much, he turned to Almanzaira, and continuing
his Speech: Madam, (said he) what great cause have you to rejoice in the midst
of your ill fortune, if Bajazet prove to be your Almanzor? Almanzaira looking
on him with a pleasing countenance; I confess, (replied she) without this
comfort which betides me at that time when my miseries seemed to me at the
worst and desperate, Zelopa's cruelty had been long since satiated. Knight
(said Almaid to Polexander) you knowing Bajazet as your discourse informs me,
I have naught else to relate further, but what I have done since his command
forced me to leave him: I went to Abrinzias and Andromeda as soon as he was
gone and declaring his resolution, I staggered that wonderful constancy
wherewithal they were wont to receive the strokes of fortune: They both
complained of Almanzors vehemence of courage rather then of himself, but
presently resigning themselves to the will of heaven, which with so much ardour
they loved, and with so much respect adored: Almanzor (said they to me) has
given credit to a passion, and an age, which most commonly are very ill
Counselors. But we hope the infinite goodness of heaven will have compassion
on that Prince; and having already drawn him out of so many dangers, it will
not abandon him in those whereunto he has so inconsiderately cast himself.
When those good Princes had said thus: I told them my thoughts; and the next
day (taking my leave of them) I besought them in Almanzors name, to continue to
Osmin and his Lady the good entertainment they had begun to give them. The
same day I embarked me in that vessel which brought me out of Portugal; and
after a long voyage by Sea to hearken after my dear Master, I was so fortunate
as to find him in his Island, where he lived in continual melancholy for his
loss of Iphidamanta, and was preparing with his fleet to search and inquire
after her in all the parts of Africa. After I had been a while with him, I
resolved to return to Senega to hearken after Zabaim, and redeem the Queen
from her long captivity. That voyage I performed so fortunately, that I arrived
at Melly, in a time when Almanzaira's Guardian could no longer keep her. The
Queen has recounted to you how I got her out of the hands of her enemies; and
how, by a feigned death preventing her true one, I brought her into the Island
where you found her. Thus ended Almaid the pleasant recital of those Princes
adventures, and left Polexander in such meditations, as wholly taking him up,
would neither permit him to thank the Relator, nor yet make show of his
admiration.

The end of the third Book of the third Part.
THE THIRD PART OF POLEXANDER. The Fourth Book.
THe Sea and Wind which seemed to have had silence imposed them for the not
disturbing Almaid, broke it, as soon as he had ended his relation; and as if
they had been sensible of Almanzaira's sufferings and impatiency, would not
make her languish any longer in expectation of her happiness. The calm
therefore giving place to a more favorable season, the virtuous Queene's ship
was driven from North Southerly with a great speed, and the third day entered a
Gulf, made by two overtures, through which the river of Senega emptieth it
self into the Sea. Almanzaira troubled with hope and fear, every moment
changed countenance, and showing the love she bore her husband, by her
tremblings and disquiets, oftentimes questioned Almaid of such things as he
could not reply to: and sometimes holding her eyes fixed on Polexander, My
dear deliverer (said she) I begin to doubr of those things which your presence
has made me hitherto hold for infallible; and fear lest I come too late to
restore the unfortunate Almanzaira to her dear Zabaim. Put out of your
thoughts Madam (replied Polexander) such thoughts as proceed from nothing, but
the long custom of your hoping for nothing. Zabaim lives yet, or to say
better, Zabaim is no more; and in lieu of him you shall find that fair and
generous Palmira, who neither feared the severity of the King your father, nor
the rigor of your Countries Laws, nor death it self, to merit the honor of
entering the prison whereinto you were shut. Almanzaira sighing to remember her
former felicities; That pleasant time (said she to Polexander) is for ever slid
away: it will no more return then my youth; nor do I wish for it, but only
that I might once again enjoy the sight of my dear Lord, and not be
altogether unpleasing unto him. Whilst they thus intertain'd themselves, their
ship floated up the river of Senega with the tide, and flew (as I may say) so
swiftly, that in less then four and twenty hours, it came within sight of
that stately City which has given name to all the Province of Senega. Night
was far come on when Almanzaira, Polexander, Almaid, and their people went a
shore. They failed not to make an end of their voyage; and that which made them
most desire it, was a great light, which flying high in the air above the
walls of Senega, made the City seem as it had been all on fire. When they came
to the gates, they found them open, and noted when they were come in, that
there was as much people stirring in the streets, as it had been midday. Some
stood in one place as amated with grief, others walked along in a slow pace,
as expressing the excess of their sadness; and all by their sighs and
lamentations said, there had some mournful and dismal chance betided in
their City. Almanzaira having crossed many streets, and finding her self weary
(yet less of her way then of her fear) set her down on the staire of a
Pyramid which was in the midst of a crosse-way, and besought Polexander to send
some one so far as into the Palace Court to learn the news. Almaid would
needs go himself, and according to his manner (that is very wisely and
promptly) did what the Queen desired, and returned to her. Madam (said he) I
do not think you can credit what I have to tell you; for mine own, I
confess, I do not: yet have I not this news from two or three, but from above
a hundred Citizens, and even the Courtiers confirmed it to me. Almanzaira
trembling, entreated him to put her out of her pain, and tell her what those
incredible things were. Since it is your pleasure (replied Almaid) I will
satisfy your Majesty's command. Know then that the King seeing Zelopa dead,
carried her body into one of the garden Pavillions, and there abode many days,
not to be gotten away, either by the remonstrances of his chief Officers, or
the stench of that carrion. The high Prelates and Priests of Mahomet, the
Muhazzimins which vaunt the commanding of Spirits, and the Interpreters of the
Law of Eshari, being advertised of this prodigy, assembled in their Temples,
there made their public prayers, and then came to the Palace to try by their
exorcismes to vanquish the power of the Devils. In came they to the King, and
the noysomnesse proceeding from Zelopa's corpse as soon drove them out again.
The Calif, Sensul, Maharif, who passes for a Saint in his Religion, spite of
all the stench, entered the chamber, and found the King glew'd on the mouth of
that miserable carrion. Transported with a just fury, and a more ardent zeal,
he took Zelopa by one arm with an intent to pluck her off the bed where she
lay. Zabaim rose up in choler, and rudely thrust off the Calif; who persevering
in his charity, told the King the horrible estate of his soul, and drew again
Zelopa's corpse with an intent to throw it out at window. The King opposed him
the second time with fearful threatenings, but the holy man would not give
over; yet having not strength enough to resist Zabaim, he fell, and in falling
plucked with him a Ring that was upon one of the Sorceresse fingers. Attend to,
Madam, (if you please) a thing which is not credible: As Soon as the Ring was
from any touch of the body, the King made a wonderful outcry, and fell into so
long a swoune, that they had time to carry him into his chamber; and to cause
that carrion to be dragged to the common Laystall of the town. All the rest of
that day, they held him for dead, so was he watched all the night following,
and all the Priests abiding in prayers about him, deplored his mishap, and
implored the assistance of heaven and Mahomet. At break of day Zabaim
recovered, and casting himself out of his bed as one furious, began to run
about the chamber, tore all he had on, and cried he was all on fire. The
Muhazzimins made their conjurations, staid him, and taming his fury by virtue
of their charms, declared aloud, that the Spirit which tormented the Prince,
was of the first Order. In the mean while the Gentlemen of the Kings chamber,
got him again into his bed, and by direction from the Priests, took off a
little golden box which hung about his neck. In taking of which away, all the
force of characters and command the Spirits had over Zabaim, ended. He knew and
wondered at himself, remembered all he had done since your banishment, lamented
yours and your sons death, and melting into tears at the remembrance of his
faults; Zelopa, miserable Zelopa, cried he, into what fearful offenses have
thou hurried my unhappy Spirit? His Priests comforted him as well as they
could; but he growing desperate, cried out, It Is resolved on; there is no
pardon for me: for that pity which you say is infinite, should be more unjust,
if by an eternal chastisement it did not avenge the innocent blood I have
shed. His Priests hearing that blasphemy, forbad him to speak, by the power
which Mahomet had given them; and moystning his hands with their tears: Son
(said they with a great deal of affection) acknowledge by your despair the
malice of that enemy to whom you have given your self over. After he had cast
you down the precipice, he would keep you from rising again. The blasphemies
you utter, are his artifices he uses to hold you for ever under his tyranny.
He has not left you but outwardly: he governes yet within, and heaven suffers
it, to chastise you for your long obdurateness. The Priests have not since
that time given over to exhort him thus, and otherwise. I have heard, that in
show Zabaim believes them and follows their admonitions; but in effect, every
one holds, that he persevers in his despair, and if he be not carefully looked
after, will quickly follow his wives and childrens destiny. Almanzaira, sighing
to hear these strange accidents; Have not you (said she) learnt what the cause
is of these peoples going up and down? That Is it I have yet to tell you Madam,
replied Almaid. Zabaim, resolving to give you your last rites, and to witness
publicly his resentment for so great a loss, has given command to all the
inhabitants of this City, to kindle fires, to meet together in all the Temples,
and to pray for the rest of your soul, whilst himself and all his Court shall
be shut up in the principal Mosquy for the same effect. I asked, why this
solemnity was done by night, and I was answered, Zabaim had sworn never to see
the day more, nor the Sun; and that indeed the windows of his chamber were
always shut, and that he would not endure any other light (since he came to
his senses) then that of candles and torches. Almanzaira sighed again at this
pitiful relation, and arising even quelled with sorrow: Let us go (said she)
to Polexander, and free the King of this anguish. The Prince confirmed her in
the resolution, and got her to walk apace to have the better means to enter
the Temple before Zabaim came. She got in among the crowd, and Polexander with
the rest followed her, and ranked themselves in a place where they might be
concealed. It Is true the Mosquy was so full of lights, that but for the blackes
wherewithal it was hung from the high vaults to the feet of the pillars they
had infallibly been known. As Soon as the King came they began their prayers,
and Almanzaira, all alive, seeing her funerals performed, and notwithstanding
Mahomets forbidding to receive such honors as are reserved for men only, wept
as much for joy as grief, and even ravished to see how dear her memory was to
Zabaim. When the prayers were ended, Zabaim arose from his place (as pale and
wan as he had been ready to give up the ghost) and made a sign that he would
speak. Presently there was a great silence, and the Prince beginning his
speech with tears, continued with these words: I should rather let you know by
the effusion of my blood then my tears how guilty I am. All that former ages
have seen of cruelty, of barbarism, of inhumanity, cannot parallel but the
least part of my actions. I have violated all manner of Laws: I have by
execrable courses blotted out the Character which heaven had imprinted on my
brow, and the Majesty of Kings which has been hitherto the love and safety of
all Nations, is become, by being communicated to me, the terror of Innocents,
and abomination of all men. 'Twas I, my friends, 'twas I, who thrust the sword
into the bosom of the incomparable Almanzaira. I am the unnatural father who
consented to the death of him to whom I gave life. Yes, I have deprived you of
your legitimate Prince: I plucked him out of his Nurses arms, and to glut the
ambition of a wicked woman, have not trembled to abandon that Innocent to the
outrages of fortune. Had I alone contributed to his birth, as I have to his
misery, I would esteem you happy in being delivered from the race of such a
monster as I. But alas! Almanzaira gave him you, and you believe as well as my
self, she being the perfect rendezvous of all royal virtues, could produce
nothing but what was worthy to govern. Lament therefore and bewail that great
loss: make the Author of your misfortunes feel your just anger. Remember how
dearly Almanzaira loved you, and suffer not her executioner to be any longer
your master. At that word Zabaim was constrained to stop, because his weakness
being neither answerable to the vehemence of his action, nor the excess of his
grief, he stood suddenly without voice or motion. This accident causing a
great trouble among the people, every one arose to help the Prince, and the
noise increasing with the opinion they had of his death, Almanzaira left her
place, and thrusting her self in amongst the prease, without any other
consideration then to get near the King, made so good shift, that she came
close to the Kings throne when he came out of his faintness. Every body seeing
him recovered, took their places again, and Almanzaira hiding her self
behind some of the Guard, would attend till her Lord descended, to cast her
self at his feet. He in the mean time all dying and wet with tears: What my
friends (said he) have you no resentment? Will you let me live since Almanzaira
is dead? She is not (cried out the Queen) breaking forth from behind those
which hindered her from being seen: she is not; for heaven would not suffer her
to be so soon deprived of her Lord. Zabaim affrighted to hear that voice, and
to see a woman come creeping on her knees toward him, arose from his chair,
and presently fell back again, and there lay long without stirring. In the
mean while, those who were nearest the King, looked on Almanzaira, and knew
her, though she seemed to them much changed, and asked one another, if what
they saw, were not some new enchantment of Zelopa. Whilst Zabaim came out of
his insensibility, and that all the world pressed and cried out to see the
Queen; Almaid declared himself, and entreated them to make way for him. At
this new cause of astonishment, the multitude redoubled their acclamations,
thronged together, and seeing Almaid could not pass, lifted him up, and from
hand to hand carried him to the King. Art thou descended from heaven (dear
Almaid) said Zabaim, to confirm the good news I hear, and dare not believe?
He staid not for an answer, but certainly crediting that she before him could
be none other then Almanzaira; he fell on his knees, and taking her by the
hands, Do I then (said he) see you again dear Almanzaira, and have your
enemies been less cruel to you then I? But do you not return to upbraid me of
my inhumanity, and ask Justice for it from all the World? My Lord (replied the
Queen) forget (if you please) the griefs I have thrown on you, and let me see
that my return and life is not displeasing to you. All the assistants lifted
their hands to heaven, thronged about the King and Queen, to congratulate so
miraculous a reunion; and understanding it was an effect of Almaid's fidelity,
they called him aloud the Redeemer of Senega. This worthy Favorite, to satisfy
the King his master, and the rest of the company, declared in few words all
that we have known before. At which recital their admiration increased, and
the multitude which takes pleasure in framing to themselves causes of
astonishment, added miracles and prodigies to Almanzaira's adventures; to the
end, to give new nourishment to their greediness of deceiving themselves. In
the mean time, the Priests changed their prayers and requests into giving
thanks. They praised Heaven for this happy and unexpected success, and sent
back Zabaim with as much comfort and joy, as he had of despair and sorrow
when he came into the Temple. Almanzaira for all her being re-established in
her former fortune, and environed with such glory as any other but her self
had been lost in it, forgot not Polexander. She besought the King he might be
looked after, to render him what she ought, as the person whom the eternal
Providence had made use of, to denounce the end of her miseries. Polexander
straight presented himself, and doing reverence to the King, without making
known who he was, followed him to the Palace with Almaid, and many others of
the chief in Court. The people, on their parts renewed with their fires the
joy they had so long smothered, and running (as their manner is) from one
extreme into another, spent the rest of that night in sports, in feastings, in
music and other jocundnesse. Zabaim spent it more seriously; for as soon as
he had bid good night to all the Court, he shut himself in his privy chamber
with Almanzaira, Polexander and Almaid; and accusing himself in their
presence, of all those crimes his love had made him commit; asked the Queen
pardon a thousand times, and moved her so much by his submissions, as she
thought (so good she was) there was no body guilty but her self. But to divert
Zabaim from his sad thoughts, My Lord (said she) the same Goodness which has
preserved your Almanzaira from the power of all the Devils, has not only had
care of the true Almanzor's life, but has many times sent him you as a tutelar
Angel to defend you against your ill-affected Subjects Rebellion; and to
re-conquer those Countries which diverse tyrants had usurped from you. 'Twas he
who appeared in your Court under the name of Perseus, and who by a youthful
folly, renounced (but in appearance only) the amity he promised us. Is it
possible, cried Zabaim, that Perseus is my son, and that even he whom I would
have smothered in his cradle, has had so generous a spirit as to re-establish
me thrice in my throne, and twenty times to save my life? Truly Almanzaira I
believe it, when I consider the excess of your affection; and since the
effects take much after their causes, Almanzaira is such, as there can come
naught from her but what is extraordinary. But where is he, our dear Almanzor?
when shall I embrace him, and settle on his head all those Crowns which through
a just indignation he refuses? The Queen to increase his astonishment,
answered thus: Know, Sir, that love has made a Pirate of your son, and has
made you know him for such under the name of Bajazet, which he now carries. O!
my son cried Zabaim again, how heroical is thy virtue! how great thy courage!
and how many extraordinary things are to be reserved for thy wonderful fate!
Yes Almanzaira, I have known him under the name of Bajazet, and but for the
assistance he gave me to quench a Rebellion worse then the former; you had
seen Zabaim amongst the number of those unfortunate Kings with whom there is
left no remainder of royalty, but the grief of being despoyled of it. But let
us not suffer (my dear Almanzaira) that the heir, or to say better, the
conqueror of so many Kingdoms continue any longer the Captain to a company
of thieves. Almaid presented himself to carry the Prince news what he was, and
what had lately happened. Zabaim besought him to undertake the voyage, and to
restore again the person he had so happily stolen from him. Polexander offered
to accompany him if need were; and, I dare believe without vainglory, (said
he) that Almanzor loves me so well as he will not deny me such things as I
shall entreat from him. In this manner ended the first converse (now) betwixt
Zabaim and Almanzaira, and so presently withdrew, giving congey to Polexander
and the faithful Almaid. The public rejoycings (the while) being
sufficiently made show of, by all manner of liberties, left all the City of
Senega in so sound a tranquillity, that two or three days following were not
only festival days, but wholly consecrated to rest. Zabaim having satisfied
his conscience, and made an eternal peace with Axiamira, began to purge his
Kingdoms of all those pernicious spirits which Zelopa had made use on for the
establishment of her unjust authority. All the Peers of the Kingdom came to
the Palace to congratulate the return of their good Queen, and renewed even
to Zabaim the assurances of their inviolable fidelity. Almanzaira, now free,
went through all the Temples to give thanks to heaven, and to be seen of the
people, which earnestly desired it, was carried (after the manner of that
country) through all the streets of Senega. When she had satisfied the Subject,
she would give content to her self, and thinking there was an infinite
obligation due to Polexander besought Zabaim to make him proffers great enough
in acknowledgement of what he had done for her sake, and to keep him in his
service. The King, who had no other will then that of his admirable wife,
presented such things to Polexander as were capable to tempt the most moderate
of the world But Polexander, astonished, and amazed to see himself so well
treated: I (said he) have never served you Zabaim; and you know, the Queen is
so good, that she makes no distinction between the wishes and the effects, and
by consequence is persuaded I have served her because I had a will to it. Yet
believe not, because I do not accept your Present, that I will avoid all
occasions of engaging my self. No, Sir, I owe you all I refuse, and the
possessing so great a fortune as you present me, would nothing add to my
affection of doing you service. Whenever you shall have occasion, I will
expose my life and those of my friends; and be ready to go whither you will
call me on so emergent a consideration. But now, (when the love of your
subjects, and the fear of your neighbors gives you time to taste in peace the
fruits of your conquests, and that the Queens return invites you to sit down
without any new undertaking) be pleased I may retire home, and after that
voyage, carry the Prince Almanzor news of his good fortune. Almanzaira was
present when Polexander spoke thus to Zabaim. She did what in her lay to stay
him, but being just as she was, she gave consent to his depart; and would not
(to please her self) that Polexander should receive any the least discontent.
He had sent his trusty Alcippus to the Port to look for Diceus and advertise
him of his coming. As Soon as he heard from them, he took his leave of the
King and Queen, and bidding farewell to all his friends, and particularly to
Almaid, departed from Senega to the Sea side. He had not been two hours aboard
his ship when an unknown man entered her, and entreated he might speak with
him in private. Polexander led him into his Cabin, and shutting the door,
Speak freely, (said he) you are in a place where none but I can hear you. The
stranger forgetting nothing of what civility instructs a Gentleman to practice;
Knight (said he) Almaid having made profession of a generosity which cannot
pass by the least wrongs, would think he had absolutely renounced it, if he
took no resentment of the injury you have done him. He therefore has sent me
to entreat you before you go hence, that he may see you with your sword in your
hand: and to the end you may not doubt of what I have spoken; see here a paper
which he commanded I should deliver you. Polexander believing the Messenger
took him for some other; Sir, (said he) you are mistaken. I have nothing to
decide with Almaid. I am his humblest servant, and ready to give him all kind
of satisfaction if I have chanced (through any imprudency) to offend him.
Almaid verily thought (replied the Gentleman) you would make me that answer;
and confessed to me he should not be extravagant or thought giddy braind
enough, to demand ought of you, if it concerned none but himself: but since it
touches the honor of a Prince (whose adorer he is) he resolves to avenge it
on his enemies. Be pleased therefore to read this paper, and satisfy Almaid by
the way of arms, since I assure you that your excuses will not content him.
Polexander smiled at the counsel he gave, and taking the paper, found this.

Almaid a Prince to the Christian Knight.
WIth an extreme grief I am obliged to be your Enemy. I have known so much
valor and virtue both in your words and actions, and your person has so many
charms, that it is almost impossible to be an honest man, and at discord with
you. But when I call to mind that you have offended Polexander, and by I know
not what secret Envy, endeavored to rob him of his victory o'rethe false
Almanzor; all your rare endowments slip out of my memory, and I find my self
capable of naught but revenge. You may say I have a long time concealed my
resentment. It is true: but the consideration of Almanzaira whom I prefer
before all others, forbad me to make it known till this time. Now when I may
without troubling her quiet satisfy my passion, I entreat you to approve of
it, and to believe all he shall say who brings you this Note.

Polexander having received this Challenge, wondered at the fantasticalnesse of
his fortune, and Almaid's humor. But it came presently into his mind that
Almaid might have learnt his name of Alcippus, or some other, and this was but
an invented match to bring him back to Court. Well (said he to himself) be it
what it may be, I will not reveal my self; nor will I commit an unsteady
action to satisfy Almaid. After he had taken this resolution, he spoke thus to
him that brought the Challenge. You may tell your friend, that for the present
it is not in my power to give your friend the contentment he desires; I will
send him my excuses and answer his Letter. With that he opened the door, and
calling Diceus, commanded for paper and inck, and all sitting being brought, he
wrote this Answer.

The Christian Knight to the Prince Almaid.
I Am Polexander's friend, but I am more the friend of truth. Do not any more
accuse me for being jealous of his fame. I believe he is courageous, but I
shall never be so observant as to give him an honor he has not deserved.
Truly he is too much obliged to you for your love to him; and if any occasion
present it self wherein you may need his service, I shall have a far less
esteem of him then I have now, if he do not as freely expose his life for
you, as you would have done yours for him. In the mean time, take it not
amiss that I come not where you expect me, and truly you shall be unjust, if
you be not contented with my Declaration.

Polexander, having sealed his Letter, would have put it into the African's
hands, but he often refused it, and would not have taken it at all, if
Polexander had not assured him he would not depart thence till he had news
from Almaid. Upon that promise the stranger went away, and within an hour
after returned to Polexander, and told him, how Almaid more offended by his
Letter, would see him with his sword in his hand, and follow him to the worlds
end rather then fail of his satisfaction. Let Us go then said Polexander, and
make Almaid know we are not so hardly to be persuaded as he. Hereupon he called
for Alcippus and Diceus, and enjoining them that his ship might be ready to set
sail presently upon his return; descended into a shalop with the African, and
so went on shore. As Soon as he was there, he followed his guide, and after he
had walked a mile, met with Almaid in a little valley, who expected him with a
great deal of impatiency. He ran to him with open arms, and embracing him
almost whether he would or no; How now (said he) my dear Almaid, will you for
a Polexander whom you know not but by another report, lose a person who
perfectly honors you, and whom you think not absolutely unworthy of your
friendship. Almaid putting on a more serious countenance, I know (replied he)
Polexander better then you imagine; and that Prince's reputation is so great,
that envy it self strives to increase it as often as she goes about to
diminish it. Polexander should be very happy (answered the Prince) if all the
world had so good an opinion of him as you, and his fortune were equal to his
reputation. Pardon me Almaid if I tell you, I know Polexander very well, and he
is nothing less then what you would have him go for. How! (replied Almaid)
it is too much, I must quit all respect and vindicate the honor of so great a
Prince from the outrages of envy. With that he drew his Symetar, and compelled
Polexander to do the like. What (said he, in warding) would you have me belly my
conscience? Almaid, you are too teasty a friend. Think what you are doing, and
engage me not to commit either a folly in flattering my self, or an injustice
in defending me against so dear an enemy. Almaid for all that, still pressed
on and would needs oblige him whether he would or no to esteem himself above
all other men. But whilst with too much fervency he prosecuted the Prince who
recoyl'd, he took not good heed to his footing, but sliding on the grass,
fell so rudely that his Symetar flew out of his hand. Polexander straight stepped
to him, and helping to raise him: Confess (said he) that your affection is
much blinded, and to make you know it, fortune has reduced you to such an
estate as you cannot contradict it. I will dye a thousand times if it be
possible (replied Almaid) rather then lessen the esteem I ought to have of
Polexanders incomparable virtue. But (said our Hero) the law of Arms is, that
the vanquished should conform himself to the will of the vanquisher. It Is
true, (replied Almaid) but I account not my self overcome, though I be at your
mercy. Fortune, by your own confession has given you the advantage over me;
and I hold you too generous, to employ any other arm then your own in the
subduing your enemy. Live then invincible, (said the Prince in restoring his
Symetar) and since it pleases you, continue in an error which is so
extremely advantageous to Polexander. Almaid, moved with so high a generosity,
confessed he owed him his honor and his life, and asked pardon for the
extravagancy whereinto a most just affection had drawn him. But if it be true,
(said he) as I will not doubt it, that my folly has nothing lessened your
love, I beseech you to affect Polexander, since he should be the love of all
eminent men, and to let me know to whom I am so much indebted. It should be no
hard thing (replied the Prince) to satisfy you in those your two requests. I
have a particular engagement not to hate him whom you would have me love: and
as for my fortune, believe me, I have more desire to tell it you then you to
know it. But (that it may not be done unseasonably) I beseech you be pleased I
may return where I have left my servants, and that your friend may go with
me, who shall bring you in writing what I am not permitted to deliver you by
word of mouth. Almaid yielding to so just a request, said many things to
Polexander, to perfwade him, that next to Polexander, he was the man whom he
most esteemud in the world. Our Hero often embraced him, and having much ado
to hide his resentment: and I (said he) Almaid promise to love you above all
the men I know, and even more then your Polexander. With that he took his
leave of him, and taking his friend along, came to his ship; where as soon as
he was in his Cabin he called for paper and Ink, and writ to Almaid the letter
following.

I Should be unworthy the affection you bear me, if I freed you not of your
trouble, and did not rid you of that error which the too advantageous opinion
of Polexander has cast you in. Assure your self, my dear Almaid, he is far
beneath what you value him. You have suffered your self to be persuaded by
fame, and yet you know she is a fool, who following the inconstancy of her
humors, raises mean things, overthrowes high ones, takes away the honor
from those that deserve it, and prostitutes it to them who have not courage
enough to make use with advantage of that blind ones injustice. But I must
speak more plainly to you, and to testify that I am not jealous of
Polexanders reputation, I tell you, I am the same Polexander. It may be you
will think me very cunning in concealing my self so long, and very
ungrateful in departing from you without rendering thanks for the obligation I
owe and shall do all my life to your credulity. But that only is guilty of my
faults. 'Twas that which made me conceal my name from you whilst I could not
my self, and would force me to hide it yet, if my cruel destiny did not seem
to presage to me, that I shall never see you more.

After the Prince had sealed this letter he gave it to the African, and
unwilling he should go away ill satisfied, bestowed on him a Diamond of a great
value, for an engagement to remember his liberality. The African amazed and
ravished with so good a fortune; witnessed by his submissions and talk, his
covetous inclination, and so took leave of his benefactor to depart to Almaid.
Polexander presently set sail, with an intent to search yet for Alcidiana's
Island, or at least to meet with some of her Pilots. But the end of his
misfortunes was not yet come. He had suffered but illustrious afflictions, and
it was resolved in heaven he should feel the most shamefullest. The season,
which was not yet very proper to sail in the Atlantic Sea, threw him under
the Line, and had almost cast him away on a desert Island directly against
Guinea. Yet he found a haven between the sholes of that Isle, and perceived on
the point of a rock (which on all sides was beaten by the Sea) some body, who,
I know not by what white thing which he turned in the air, seemed to implore
his succor. He sent Diceus, who taking him into his Shallop, with a great
deal of compassion assured him he had met with friends, and brought him to the
Ship. As Soon as he came aboard he swounded through weakness, and so lay a
long time. By diverse remedies they brought him again, and as soon as he had
recollected his spirits; O insatiable hunger of riches, (cried he) to what
misery art thou able to bring us! By those words Polexander knew he was a
Castilian, and conjectured him to be one of those whom the ambitious Isabella
sent under the conduct of Columbus to rob the treasures of the new world.
Though his curiosity urged him to question the Spaniard, he forbore, and had
the charity to call for something for him to eat, to shift his clothes, and
to disburthen him of two great chains of roots and black barks he had about
his neck. After he had been fitted with all things needful Polexander
intimated a desire to know his fortune, and engaged him to begin it thus: I am
a Spaniard, my fathers name Alphonso de Padilla, and mine Garzias. We were of
the first among the inhabitants of old Castile, and so much the happier, that
being rich we were unknown. A desire to equalize such, who having no higher a
birth then we, had a far greater fortune; made us resolve to employ the
favor of our friends, in obtaining from our Queen the permission of
discovering that part of the world which lay beyond the Islands of Jamaiqua and
Cuba. We got that unfortunate grant; and imbarking our selves, had so good a
voyage, that we discovered the Continent of the West Indies. But it cost the
lives of the greatest part of our company, for the Inhabitants of the country
where we landed, were a bloody and furious people which made continual war
with their neighbors, and laid waste all the provinces they passed thorough.
Their country is not less dismal then themselves. Theayre, the soil, the
trees, the herbs, the waters and the very fishes kill such strangers as know
not their malignity. My father there lost his sight, by sleeping in the shade
of some pestilentious trees, and I was taken by the Caribs (so are those
savages called) and reserved to be sacrificed to their gods, which are no less
cruel then themselves. My poor blind father, afflicted for my loss, retired
into an Island nearest hand, and employed his utmost both of means and
industry, to recover me from the hands of those savages. Yet was I detained
there above two years, and though I have brought nothing from that long
servitude but those black roots you saw about my neck, I should nevertheless
esteem my self more rich and happy then Columbus himself, if the mischance
of my being shipwrack'd, had not hindered me from rendering to the best father of
the world, that which I owe to his love and his care for my deliverance. I had
wherewithal to restore that sight which he lost by the venomous shade, and
wherewith to persuade him by the example of his own mishaps, that there is no
condition so miserable as theirs who are not content with their fathers
fortune. Polexander liked the Spaniards wit, and glad to pass some time with
him; Your misfortunes (said he) have been very profitable to you, since they
have given you so perfect a knowledge of humane vanities, and owe to them a
secret which is hidden from all men else. It Is true, (replied the Castilian) I
am bound so much to my miseries: and if I can ever return home with that dear
father which is all the felicity of my life; I would think my self a thousand
times richer in finding the secret of contemning gold, then if I had found
that, of possessing all there is in the new world. He had scarce ended his
Speech, when they heard strange shoutes from the Island, and noyses like those
which men make when they are at blows. Polexander drawn by the clamor, and
spurred on by his own nobleness, landed; and hastening right to the noise, met
with twenty or thirty men, which divided in two troops equally showed their
courage. When he was about to part them, an old man full of majesty and sorrow
presented himself, and intimating that his life was less dear to him then
the lives of the Combatants: If it be possible (said he to him) keep these men
from killing one another. I am the sad cause of their quarrel. Some of them
would have my life, the others are resolved to dye rather then consent to the
fury of their companions. Polexander not desirous to inform himself any
further of the cause of that combat, thrust among them, with Alcippus, Diceus
and his other domestics, yet could not do it so well, but eight or ten fell
before he could part them; of which number, two were of those that stood in
defense of the venerable old man, and the rest were of his enemies. The five or
six which remained of the worser side, laid down their arms, cast themselves
at his feet whom they would lately have murdered, and expressing to him an
extraordinary grief for their attempt: Command (said they to him) O thou our
visible Deity, that we be as well chastis'd as our companions, since we are as
guilty. Have no pity on us! and though your goodness has always gloried in
pardoning the most enormous offenses, at last let such miscreants as we feel
that you can punish them. The aged man in stead of following those wretches
counsel, cast himself on their necks, weeping, and assuring them he already
thought no more of their fault, To pronounce you guilty (said he) is to accuse
my self. I commanded you to obey the ungrateful Perseus, and not to witness
your loyalty toward me but in being faithful to him. Polexander at that name
of Perseus, remembered what Almaid had related; and conjecturing, the old man
might be Abrinzias, Shall I believe (said he) that the unnatural Perseus would
attempt against the life of his father, as he did against that of Almanzor? Ah!
(replied the old man) whoever you be, that know too well the misfortunes of our
family; do not oblige me to tell you I am the unfortunate father of a child so
ill borne. But if you desire I should confess it; be pleased likewise that I
make an end of accusing my self, and relate to you all the miseries have
betided me, since Almanzor left me to follow a person which he cannot meet with
whilst he is out of Benin. Polexander surprised at this discourse, would have
demanded many things at once from the venerable Abrinzias; but some just
considerations sotting his inquisitivenesse, he entreated that Prince to leave
the desolate Island, and refresh himself in his ship. Abrinzias consented; but
before he went aboard, he reconciled the vanquished with the vanquishers; and
entreated both parts to abolish for ever the memory of an act, black enough to
make their nation execrable to all others. Every one promising to observe his
prohibition, Abrinzias and Polexander left the desert Island; and our Hero
giving him the honors of his ship, welcomed the good King with all the
Ceremonies a Subject could yield his Sovereign. Abrinzias being well
refreshed, and desirous to pay his Host for so kind an entertainment: I
cannot choose (said he) but make to you a general confession of my faults, and
though I doubt you know a part of them, I will nevertheless tell you all,
since I am sure that those who spoake to you of me have stroven to conceal
such things as might blemish my reputation. I will therefore begin by the
greatest of my crimes, which were indulgency, fond love, and voluntary
blindness. They have hindered me from knowing the defects of miserable
Perseus, or at least from correcting them. I always looked on him with dazeld
eyes, and took him for such as my irregular affection made me imagine him. His
insolency seemed to me greatness of courage, and contempt of mean things; his
impiety, strength of wit; his pride, majesty; in brief, his vices appeared to
me virtues, and I was so witless, that in stead of reproving I flattered him
in his most wicked customs. The eternal Justice let me alone a long time in
my errors, suffered me not to know the malice of that serpent I fostered in my
bosom, but by the mortal stings it gave me. I hoped, the example and
conversation of great Almanzor would have quelled the pernicious inclinations
of Perseus, but he grew to hate what he could not imitate, and confirming
himself in all vice, in despite of virtue, had an intent (alas! must I speak
it?) to murder Almanzor. Polexander interrupting, to oblige him, Leave (said
he) that action out of the number of such things as have betided, and do not
imbrue your memory with the recital of that assassinate: I know all that
passed, and how Almanzor would not you should ever know of it. It Is true
(pitiful stranger) replied Abrinzias, and I had been all my life time without
the hearing of such a prodigy, if a second reviving the former, had not brought
it to my knowledge. Two months after Almanzors departure, the miserable Perseus
by the search and dexterity of his accursed spies, discovered Iphidamanta in
the most retired part of the Temple, where with the consent of Andromeda and my
self she had withdrawn and shut her self up. How (my Lord) said Polexander,
did not the Pirates take her away the same night when they forced your palace?
Abrinzias beginning again with a tone far different from his former
speaking: I have (said he) unawares told too much, but h^ven has suffered it
for some cause I know not, and therefore I will not fear to disclose to you a
secret which is hid from all save Andromeda, Iphidamanta and my self. Some few
days before the Pirates came to disturb the profound tranquillity of my
Country, Iphidamanta whom we may call the accomplished and perfect image of
virtue, made my wife perceive that she had received some sensible displeasure.
Andromeda took her apart, and conjuring her by the extraordinary affection she
bore, not to conceal the cause of her grief. Madam, (said she) were not your
goodness infinite, and did it not seem to invite me to the boldness I take
of troubling you with the accidents of my sad fortune; I should (me thinks)
have had power enough over my self to undergo them without making them
known. But since you have always permitted me to complain, and that even on
persons which are most dear to you, I will not fear to entreat your
protection against the pursuites of Almanzor. Osmin and his Lady who till now
have given me so great proofs of their amity, and who many a time have
hazarded their lives for the safeguard of mine honor, have been won by
Almanzors allurements, and they give him such freedom as begins to be
insupportable to me. You will (may be) wonder Madam, that (being reduced to the
unfortunate estate I am in, and who may rather be taken for some bold deceiver,
then for a Princess) I should find fault with the actions of the Prince your
Son. But I err in having so ill an opinion of so eminent a virtue as yours. No
Madam you will not mislike my disapproving of your Sons enticing discourses,
nor that I tell you his respects and civilities make me suspect him. Lady,
(replied Andromeda) I have already long since discovered Almanzors affection,
but his discretion and your virtue being equally known to me, I thought there
was no need of advising the taking heed either to him or your self. I humbly
kiss your Majesty's hands, (replied Iphidamanta) and am too much obliged for
your noble belief of me. I will strive Madam to give you cause to continue it,
and not to defer so good an intent, I beseech you humbly by these knees I
embrace (with that she fell down at her feet) to free me hence, to take me
from the sight of men, and to shut me up in some place where their humorous
affection, how extravagant soever, dare not trouble my repose. But how happy,
Madam, should I think my self, if by some invention which would carry
probability, I might be feigned to be lost, and by that means absolute get me
from the knowledge of Almanzor. Andromeda, ravished at Iphidamanta's
resolution, promised to second her, and getting her leave to communicate the
business to me, dismissed her with a promise to travel without intermission
for the accomplishment of her just desires. My wife and my self were eight or
ten days deliberating what way we should take to bring it to pass without
giving Almanzor cause to complain of us: and indeed we were not smally
troubled; when the eternal providence (which never loses an occasion of
favoring them which serve it as they ought) would make use even of the villainy
of a company of thieves to place the innocence of Iphidamanta in surety. Whilst
therefore Almanzor was in fight with the Pirates, Andromeda disposed all things
for the faigning Iphidamanta's carrying away and the business succeeded so
well, that in the same instant when the thieves assaulted the Palace Iphidamanta
was taken from the eyes of Osmin and his wife, and secretly conveyed by
Andromeda alone, into the Temple of their god of Purity. Almanzor in the mean
time returned after he had knocked back our enemies into their vessels, and met
with Osmin and his wife, who unadvisedly enough told him of Iphidamanta's
loss. The Prince who loved her beyond thought, returned to the Sea, cast
himself into a ship, and inconsiderately made after the supposed ravishers of
that Princess. Since that time I have not heard of him; but fear lest his
love and valor have cost him his life. Never trouble your self, (quoth
Polexander) for Almanzor lives; and now enjoys all the Crowns which Zelopa's
ambition has so often striven to deprive him of. But, Sir, (said he) go on if
you please in what you have begun, and I will relate afterward, (if you think
fit) the strange revolutions have betided in Senega. Abrinzias began again;
and hastening to know Zabaims alteration: Perseus (said he) being no more
restrained by his fear of Almanzor, overflowed with so prodigious an excess,
that he drew me out of the error I had long lived in, and made me see, when I
would have bridled his fury, it was not then able to be suppressed. Admonitions
profited as little as threatenings, and severity moved him no more then
mildness. Andromeda who never till then thought him guilty, was struck half
dead when she heard of it, and being generous suspended her motherly love, to
let that authority work which heaven has given to parents over their
children. I likewise became of the same just opinion though with a great deal
of grief. But we must confess to both our shames we were not able to
persever, but after a few slight corrections abandoned Perseus to his former
brutishness. Nay we did far worse, for imagining, by employing his mind in
the communication of business, he might be drawn from his debauches, we
proclaimed him King of Zanphara, the patrimony of Andromeda. We quickly
repented us for giving him that authority. He made no other use of it then to
sin more licenciously, and to make his faults more great and eminent. He
returned to Benin with the most desperate and abominable spirits that ever
Africa produced; and employing his days and nights in dishonouring the best
families, grew to such a height of abomination, that he broke the sacred
grates, and violated the sanctity of our Temples. He forced at midday all the
gards and defenders of the Virgins consecrated to Purity, upon the assurance
some had promised him of his finding Iphidamanta; and he was already gotten
into their Cloister with his Accomplices, when I came in with a greater power,
and hindered the violences of that detestable route. I caused some fifty of the
principal to be taken, and to avenge our violated Religion and give the more
terror to such miscreants, commanded them to be cast the next day into the den
of Lions. Perseus fled with an intent (as the event showed) to revenge his
Confederates deaths by those of his father and mother. He got an Army of
vagabonds, of thieves, and in a word, of the most imbrued and greatest
murderers amongst the Arabians. The inundation of these Monsters was in all
likelihood to have ruined my Estate; but heavens Justice, and my Subjects
resolution, in part, exterminated that public infliction. Yet was it not
without the effusion of much blood. All the chief of my Kingdom dyed in the
field, and had it not been for my guard who rescued me out of the midst of
mine enemies, I had been involved in the same ruin. Perseus, (though much
weak'ned) gave not over pursuing me, but knowing I was gotten into the City of
Benin, resolved to besiege me there. Andromeda thinking to allay his fury, went
out of the town with her principal Ladies, and meeting her Son in the head of
his troops: Whither go thou? (said she) What Perseus, art thou become such
an enemy to thine own greatness, that thou will exterminate by fire and sword
those who glory in being borne to serve thee? What will thou get by the
destruction of Benin? Certainly a misery so great and so visible, as I wonder
at that blindness which makes thee not see it. In stead of reigning over free
borne men, thou shall be no more then a companion of rascals which follow thee,
and when thou have no more for them to prey upon, thou thy self shall be the
quarry of their insatiable avarice. Come home to thy self Perseus! let the
horror of thy offense dissuade thee from continuing in it. Hearken to Nature,
hearken to blood. Respect thy fathers age, and intend not to proceed, unless
thou will trample under thy horses feet this weak and languishing body, to
whom thou owe both thy birth and thy Crown. Perseus as furious as he was,
yet was detained by those words: but the Arabians passing the bounds of their
wonted brutality and ordinary barbarism, hurried him away far from
Andromeda, and enforced him to keep on his journey. His Mother seeing her
self so ill respected, with much difficulty returned to the City, and relating
to me in what ill case our affairs stood, found no kind of comfort but in
bewailing the absence of Almanzor. In the mean time a great number of those
Arabian thieves which wander up and down Africa, hearing Benin was besieged,
ran thither for pillage. I, who foresaw the lamentable success of that war,
shipped Andromeda, Iphidamanta, the Nuns, and other chief Ladies of Benin,
to the number of toward eight hundred, and sent them down the River to a
fortress, which for its being built on a rock encompassed by the Sea, has by
our Predecessors been called the Palace of Safety. Within a few days after
the town was taken (through the treachery of some Arabians who dwelt in it) and
I reduced to a condition more miserable then death it self. I presented my
self to my ungrateful Perseus as soon as he entered the town, and opening my
breast, Sheathe here, (said I to him) sheathe here, barbarian, the murtherous
steel which reekes yet with thy brothers blood. I deserve that punishment,
since I am the author of thy life; and I beg it from thee as a favor, rather
then to see thee cut the throats of so many innocents, for whose preservation
thou art bound to expose, nay to lose thine own life. The enraged Perseus was
about to grant my request, but as he lifted his arm, a white Slave which
Almanzor had given me, stepped before me, and with his Symeter struck Perseus
such a blow on the head, that he fell from his horse; and presently addressing
his speech to that wretches Soldiers: Come ye infamous and cruel rabble,
(cried he) come and imbrew in my blood your hands accustomed to so many
murders. Imitate your accursed Leader, and permit not virtue to be one sole
minute in safety before you. The unnatural Perseus is not content to have
drenched his poniard in the breast of Almanzor, but he would have the King his
father try the same steel, and that his rage should be glutted on him, since
it could not be satiated on his brother. But heaven cannot suffer these
horrible murders. It makes use of the most weak instruments to instruct us,
that it can at pleasure confound the malice of the most strong, and is
continually the avenger of unfortunate parents. This Slaves speech had been
powerful enough to have mitigated Lions and Tigers, had they been capable of
understanding; but it wrought nothing on mine enemies. They fell on that trusty
and generous Slave, ran him through and through, and after they had hacked him
in pieces, took up Perseus who was sorely wounded, and to make my thraldom
more ignominious, loaded me with irons, and so brought me back to the palace.
There was I strictly guarded till Perseus was healed. Some few days after by
his command, I was taken out of prison, and brought to the Isle we came from.
It Is three months since I arrived, and was already resolved to end my miserable
life there, without laying the fault on any other then my self, or bewailing
any of my losses but that of my dear Andromeda. This morning, walking by the
Sea side, I saw those men land whom you have parted. They had order to kill me,
but there was only one part who came to execute that barbarous command. Of
thirty (which they were) fifteen of them intended (as they told me) not only
to save my life, but to take me out of that desolate Island, and carry me
either into Congo or Guinea. As Soon as they came on shore, they hastened to
me, and made known Perseus command. But when they were all come to the place
where you found them, those who had agreed to save my life, put themselves
before me, and made known their resolution to their Companions. That made them
enemies, and brought on the Combat which you have ended. In these few words
(brave Knight) you have the recital of my long afflictions: I can accuse none
but my self for them. Perseus their author, is less guilty then I. My
negligences, my flatteries, and my blind affection have been the fosterers of
that young man's most vicious inclinations, and bred him up in the practice of
all wickedness. Finish then, O heaven, finish my punishment! add new torments
to those I have suffered! I will accept them with thanks, provided they
satisfy thy Justice, and that they be great enough to expiate the offenses I
have committed either by my self or the to be deplored Perseus. Abrinzias
could not make an end without tears: for notwithstanding his great courage,
and the entire resignation he made appear, yet was he afflicted; not with the
thought of his miseries, but the grief for deserving them. Polexander to wipe
off his tears, gave his word not to forsake him, till he had brought Perseus
to an account, and made him quit the throne he had so brutishly usurped. These
promises might have comforted some other unfortunate Prince, but they could
work nothing with Abrinzias. He continually called to mind the ill breeding
of his Son, and repenting his more care taken for his fortune then virtue,
lifted every moment his eyes to heaven, and begged from thence afflictions
proportionable to the enormity of his offenses. Polexander, thinking it was
impossible to stop this torrent, let it run over with all its violence; and
when he saw a remarkable diminution, My Lord, (said he to Abrinzias) you are
not the sole father which resents the impiety and fury of his children. The
King of Morocco for being too indulgent like you, has as you, lost his Crowns
and liberty. The undutifull Nephisus has no less attempted against him then
Perseus against you; but by some mysteries which are not known but above, that
Prince in striving to satisfy his lascivious desires, is fallen under the
avenging sword of your dear Almanzor. Doubt not then, but Perseus leading the
same life will meet the like end, if heaven touch not his heart and draw him
from this obdurateness. Let Us hence presently (if you will be advised by me)
and suffer not your subjects, and (may be) your Queen to be any longer exposed
to the fury of that unnatural Son. Abrinzias thought he resisted the will of
heaven in not consenting to Polexander, and therefore besought him to do what
he thought fittest. Polexander, who had business otherwhere, presently
commanded his Mariners to steer for Benin, and in the mean while consulted
with Abrinzias, but far more with himself, to find means for the speedy
terminating the war betwixt the father and the son, and redeem his Sister
from those barbarous parts. Two days was he in these consultations, and the
third he descried the rock on which was seated the Palace of Safety. When he
was near enough to distinguish of objects, he perceived the rock to be
environed with a great many little boats. He showed it Abrinzias, and told him
that Perseus for certain had besieged the place. With that he went throughout
his ship, and commanded his Gunners to shoot betwixt wind and water, and not
make an unprofitable shoot. Next he gave order amongst his Soldiers, and
giving them advantageous and thick plancks, with holes in the middle for their
shot to play through, told them for their encouragement, they were to fight but
with poor Arabians and other vagabonds, which had neither skill to defend
themselves, nor courage to assail any resolute Soldiers. After he had fitted
all, he returned to Abrinzias, and unperceivably getting him into his Cabin,
there left him when they were ready to fall on. The Enemy no sooner descryed
his great vessel but they thought themselves lost. Their confusion was great,
but nothing in comparison with that the Cannon made when it began to thunder
amongst them. The more valiant made a little resistance, but the one half part
of them being slain, and the rest mightily terrified, they abandoned their
boats and the Siege, and retired toward Benin. Perseus hastening along with
the run-awayes, strove to get to the City; yet could not make so much haste but
the rumor of it was quicker, which had published in Benin, how Almanzor was
returned with a mighty Army to reestablish Abrinzias in his throne, to free the
Queen his mother, and to punish Perseus his rebellion. These news being
easily believed, because they were exceedingly longed for, put generous
resolutions into the inhabitants of Benin. They all instantly took arms, and
making the word Liberty to resound again, hacked in pieces those whom Perseus
had left them in Garrison, and shut their gates against him when he would have
entered Benin. Polexander in the mean time with wind and tide at will came up
the River even to the town, and being taken for Almanzor, was invited to
enter, by the shouts and acclamations of all the people. Abrinzias presently
coming out of his Cabin, was acknowledged and received by his Subjects with all
the demonstrations of love and joy, which the return of so good a King could
cause in his people. In the most convenient place he landed and followed by
Polexander and all his, ascended (without effusion of blood) the throne which
Perseus had besmeared with so many massacres. Polexander leaving him there, got
together some thousand or twelve hundred men of the town, and joining them to
his own Company, (few, but invincible) went and charged Perseus before he was
recovered from his astonishment. He defeated the remainder of his Arabians, and
as he pursued those that fled, Perseus was brought to him all bloody and
distracted. Those by whom he was taken had disarmed him, and minding more his
rebellion then his birth, dragged him along as an offender ready to be
sacrificed to the public vengeance. Polexander made them give over their
violences, and desired to consider and look on the Prince, to see whether he
might so come to know whence proceeded the irregularity of his mind. Soon he
perceived that Perseus had naught in him of those famous ambitious ones, which
have introduced into the world (amongst others) this pernicious Maxim, that
all laws whatsoever are to be violated for a Kingdom. On the contrary, he
found in him a great deal of weakness and stupidity. His look or
countenance was rather that of a thief which fears the hangman, then of one
valiantly ambitious who can endure no Superior. Polexander, who would have
settled him, and had an intent to subdue his barbarous disposition; bid him be
of good courage, and expect from the King his fathers goodness, that pardon
which he had obtained from him as often as he had desired it. When by this
speech he had a little recollected his spirits, he brought him to the Palace,
and thinking it not fit to present him to Abrinzias, left him in his lodging in
the keeping of Alcippus and Diceus. That done, he went to the King and coming
up to him with the mirthsomenesse of a man that brings good news, You have no
more enemies, said he, nor will the Arabians any more vaunt the devastation of
your Country. Abrinzias at those words waxing pale, But what is become (said
he) of the unfortunate Perseus? He is out of danger (replied Polexander) and
could you but work so much on your self as not to see him yet these fifteen
days, I am persuaded you would find a great alteration in him. I can do more
then that (replied the King) for a far less happiness then what you propose
to me. Leave then (said Polexander) the managing of a business so nice as this
is to me. Send you (if you please) to the Queen the while, and advertise her
of your return, and let me go my self to conduct her from a place, where she
cannot have been so long without a great deal of inconveniency. Abrinzias
after many thanks and excuses, gave way to Polexanders request, and went along
himself with the Prince, to the place where he was to imbarke for the Fort of
Safety. Our Hero took none with him save his own servants, but Gartias the
Castilian, and arrived the same day at the Fortress. When they within had
notice that he came from Abrinzias, he had freedom of entrance; and being
brought before Andromeda, he accosted her with that grace and sweetness, which
instantly made him ever to command over those minds that were the most
untractable. Madam, (said he) I bring your Majesty such news as questionless
will be most welcome to you. The King is in the City of Benin, and in that
little time since he returned, has not only enforced his enemies to raise
their siege from before this place, but defeated them in the open field, and
may now say, there is no King of Benin but himself. Andromeda received this
news as she ought, but the remembrance of her Son repelling that joy which had
seized her: What (said she) poor Perseus is then fallen with those traitors
that ruined him? Heaven loves you too well (replied Polexander) to afflict your
Majesty with so dismal an accident. Perseus is safe, and if it be true that
maladies are ordinarily cured by their contraries, your Majesty may hope that
your Son will find his recovery in his adverse fortune, since his prosperity
has been the cause of his ruin. Whilst Polexander was talking thus,
Iphidamanta (in spite of her self) kept her eyes fixed on him; and thinking
she knew him, blushed and grew pale almost altogether. For himself, he knew
her at first, and had much ado to contain himself, and make his affection
give place to his respect. Iphidamanta who passionately loved her brother, came
nearer Andromeda, and scarce being able to speak, Madam (said she) you would
never pardon me the fault I should commit, if I concealed my joy any longer,
and did not tell you that Abrinzias Ambassador is my brother. At which news
Andromeda's overjoyednesse was no less then Iphidamanta's. She saluted
Polexander as a King, and retired with her Ladies, to give the brother and
sister leave to witness to one another the contentment they received in that
happy meeting. As Soon as their first transports and mutual imbracings were
ended, Andromeda came again to Polexander, and presenting Iphidamanta to him,
I restore to you (said she) this amiable one half of my self, but give me to
tell you, it is with a great deal of grief. This Princess virtues, and her
attractive wit, are the happiness of all that know them; and I confess to
you, though my afflictions have been extraordinary, yet through her company I
have not almost been sensible of them. Both my sister and my self (replied
Polexander) are infinitely obliged to that extreme goodness wherewithal you
hindered the sequel of our misfortunes. I say ours, Madam, because those of my
sister being far more mine then mine own, you have made me happy in not
permitting her to be disastrous. Andromeda replied to these complements.
Iphidamanta thereto added, with a great deal of wit; and Polexander who was as
well the example of courtesy as valor, made the Queen confess, she had
never known two so perfect and so like. Her content yet was crossed by her
longing to see Abrinzias; and the tide no sooner began to make the River
navigable, but she went aboard Polexanders ship with Iphidamanta and all her
Ladies; and by the favor of a fresh gale; came the next day to the King her
husband. That good King, after he had long held her in his embraces; My dear
wife, (said he) for your seeing me again after so cruel an exile, for your
Enemies defeat, for your own Liberty, for being unpersecuted again by
Perseus, and (if it so happen) for the finishing the rest of our days in
peace, you must attribute it, and give thanks for it to this invincible Knight.
You should say King (said Andromeda.) I see well, you are ignorant of the
Author of your happiness, and therefore you seem to be yet in doubt of the
truth of such things as he has done. But your doubts and astonishments will
end when you know this is Polexander, the Conqueror of so many Nations, whom
heaven, good and merciful, has as it were miraculously sent to save at once
the father, the mother, the son and their kingdom. Abrinzias, ravished at so
rare an adventure, in stead of congratulating with Polexander, addressed
himself to the Princess his Sister, and spoake to her all that a wise and
grateful Prince could express on so extraordinary an occasion. The time for
rest separating these Princes and Princesses, Polexander withdrew to his
lodging and went to Perseus, who during his absence had been kept rather like
a sick Prince then a captive Enemy. He related to him all that had passed, and
laying before him the excessive goodness of Abrinzias and Andromeda, assured
him of a general pardon from them, and to restore him to their loves, as soon
as he should make known he desired it. That black and brutish soul was no way
moved with these hopes. On the contrary, he became the more proud and savage,
and showing his stupidity by his reply, answered Polexander, that he was not so
guilty, but that he should be better used then he was; and that the King and
Queen did so little affect him, as they would be glad of his death to
establish Almanzor in the throne. You little know (said Polexander) either of
their inclinations; and that is your misery: for your pernicious Counselors
had never won you to those facts you have committed, if you had not been
absolutely ignorant who they were against whom they persuaded you to turn you
Arms. Now, since you find to your displeasure how detestable their counsels
were, I entreat you to hearken to better, and to fit you for it, I will cure
you of that jealousy which your self confessed to me has been the cause of
all your unrulinesse: Know, that Almanzor is not your brother, and the King
your father never intended for his sake to deprive you of what is yours by
birthright. Almanzor is borne King of many kingdoms, Guinea, Melly, Senega,
and many other Territories watered by the River Niger, already acknowledge him
for their Lord. Leave then your envy and choler, and acknowledging the offenses
your flatterers have made you perpetrate, go and cast your self at the King
and Queens feet, and beseech them (now you ought no more to wrong them) to
continue the testimonies of their love and clemency. Perseus by this was not
wholly converted, but at last he made show he was likely to be so. Polexander,
who was not wont to conquer by halves, redoubled his persuasions, added
consideration to consideration, and so lively imprinted in Perseus thought the
fear of losing both Crown and life, if he did not reconcile himself to his
father, that he promised him to submit to all he would command him. Our Hero
to continue and confirm him in that mind, lay with him, and handled him with
that dexterity, as I might say he tamed him; and by the virtue of his eloquence
made a man of a furious beast. The next day he would needs see whether Perseus
were constant in his good resolution, and finding him absolutely settled, went
to carry Abrinzias and Andromeda the best news they could ever receive. There
needed no choice words to persuade them. Those who love well, are easily won
to believe such things as are advantageous to what is beloved. Polexander
seeing in them an entire disposition to resettle him in their favors, went to
fetch him, and instructing him by the way of what, he had to do, brought him to
Abrinzias and Andromeda. Presently he fell at their feet, and speaking only by
his tears, made appear by their excess that they were not counterfeit. The
King and Queen being as unable to speak as he, fell on his neck, and wept so
long, that Polexander was compelled to stop that overflowing of natural love.
Abrinzias recollected himself, and addressing him to our Hero, There remained
(said he) only this miracle for you to do, to take you wholly from the
condition of men. Yes Polexander, you are something more; and I shall not
think I blaspheme, should I say that heaven seemed to have given you a nature
more approaching its own then is that of mankind. And to remarke and consider
things well, who would believe, without believing you a Semi-god, that in so
little time you have been able to cure a spirit infected with so many
distemperances, as they were judged incurable, so inveterate were they? With
that he fell again on his Son, and bedewing him again with his tears, Arise
my Son, said he, and let us together give this Prince the thanks he meriteth
from our acknowledgement. It Is he truly that should be called thy father. I
have given thee so ill a birth, as I confess thou have cause to hate me; and
Polexander having altered thee as he has done, has given thee one so
transcendent, that he binds thee to serve him more then thine own father.
Andromeda interrupting the King her husband, made appear by her discourse that
a mother speaks from the intrails, and that their affections are more quick
and tender then those of the father. This private reconciliation being ended,
Abrinzias desired the joy for it might be public. He commanded therefore all
his Subjects to give thanks to heaven, for so many happinesses befalne him in
so small time, and for the better example, he himself went on foot from his
Palace to the great Temple of Benin. Perseus was betwixt him and Polexander,
and drew on him the benedictions even of those who not long before with just
cause had ardently besought heaven for the punishment of his offenses.
Andromeda and Cydaria came after the three Princes, and were followed by all
the Court and people. These actions of piety being ended, they proceeded to
their rejoycings. The City and Court of Benin were two Theaters, where many
days together was presented, all that a hearty joy was able to be made
invented by men endowed with the greatest happiness. Their joys were
increased by the news Abrinzias received from Zabaim; and but for Polexander
and Cydaria's departure they had far longer continued. Osmin and his Lady
embarked with their dear daughter, and though they promised to themselves
far less then they should have expected from Polexanders nobleness, yet
they were confident that after so many troubles and agitations their old age
would at last find a safe harbor. Our Hero in that voyage found, that
fortune is not less inconstant in her hatred then in her love. He sailed along
all the coast of Guinea with as favorable a gale as he could wish, and as soon
as he needed it, the wind which was Easterly changed and became South. Whilst
he went off from the Continent to get to the Isles of Cape Verd, he entertained
himself sometimes with Cydaria, sometimes with Osmin, and then with the
Castilian Gartias. But these diversions were not prevalent enough to master his
longings. Alcippus who knew his melancholy, besought him to remember the
promises which so many eminent and extraordinary men had made him; and to
believe that at last Alcidiana's Isle would be no longer Inaccessible to him. I
will no more flatter my self with these vain hopes, replied Polexander. All
thy false Prophets (my friend) have in their predictions consulted with no
other heavens or Stars then our two desires. In this only they have been good
Divines; they have foreseen, that to please me, they must necessarily deceive
me. They have done't; and simple as I am, I have contributed as much as they to
that delusion. Thou see too Alcippus what is come of it. I am brought to that
pass as not to dare even to attempt such things as seem not to me absolutely
impossible. Sir, said Osmin, whilst you give way to such a timorous and
distrustful passion as love is, you shall be perpetually assaulted with new
troubles and new fears. I have seen Almanzor in his fits. I have marked how
he tormented himself even then when he had cause to think him very happy; and
by that great example, I have known, that Lovers are a particular kind of men
which are condemned to deceive themselves eternally. Add to it (said
Polexander) and to pass their whole lives in effective pains and imaginary
pleasures. This discourse had continued longer, but Osmins Lady came to them
much troubled, and said in an affrighted manner that Cydaria was extremely
sick. Polexander ran to the Princess Cabin, and found her not much better then
Osmins wife related. She had neither pulse nor heat, and her eyes half turned
in her head witnessed how much nature was oppressed. She was almost five or
six hours in these imperfect convulsions, and but for Dicens remedies she had
not (may be) gotten out of them. He imployd all his skill for her comfort, but
all he did could not take away the disease. When she had recovered her senses,
and overcome the malignity of such vapors as infected the heart, she fell into
a violent fever. After three days Diceus judged by the redoublings, it would
be very dangerous and long; and besought the King his Master (to avoid the
danger wherein the Princess his Sister was) to land on the first Isle he
should discover. Polexander opposed not so good an advise. He was too good a
brother, not to lay by all his own occasions for the preservation of his
Sister. He made his will known to the Pilot, and the next day he cast anchor
in a road of an Isle which some Geographers put amongst the Hesperides.
Presently he sent some of his Officers ashoare, with all was needful to lodge,
and himself landing, set up his pavilions in a very commodious place. That
done, he went for Cydaria, and causing her to be very gently brought on shore,
carried her into the Tent he had provided for her. For seven or eight days he
stirred not far from the sick Lady. But seeing her fever begin to yield to
Diceus experience, he walked into the Island with Alcippus, Osmin and Gartias.
One part of it he discovered, and finding no other Inhabitants there but wild
beasts; (to pass away the time) he began to make war with them. Almost every
day he came to a wood which was not above three short miles from his tents, and
under pretext of hunting, got away apart to meditate more at liberty. Now one
day straying too far in the wood, he was feign to pass there all the night.
After he had long ruminated on his misfortunes, he lay down and slept at the
foot of a tree, but startlingly awaking, he thought that he heard some one
bewailing, to which lending an ear, he heard these words: Weary thy self at
last with so much unprofitable sorrow, and leave all sighs and tears to those
which are unhappy, but not desperate like thy self. If thou could one day
find some remedy for the malady whereof thou so much languishest, I would
advise thee to endure longer, and enterprise nothing against thy life. But
since the gods and men are incapable of comforting thee; break through this
hard strait, and at last give over the being an useless Spectator of thy
Princess miseries. What say thou cowardly and disloyal Enemy to thy duty?
Would thou (to free thy self from the pains thou indurest) abandon a
personage which should be more dear to thee then thy self? Live then, since
thou can not dye without being perfidious: but live as an offender should,
who only knowing his offense, is also alone both his own Judge and hangman,
and boldly executes on himself the punishment to which he is by his own
conscience condemned. The man had no sooner ended his lamenting, but he arose
and made thence so fast, that Polexander could not stay him. He therefore ran
after, and often called to get him tarry. But all his hallowing and calling was
as bootelesse as his footing. At last, wearied with so long and vain a walk,
he lay down again under a tree till 'twas day. O how to his content did he
employ that time! He thought continually on fair Alcidiana. He blessed his
labors, since they proceeded from so noble a cause. He wished he might yet
endure more; and pondering every foot the sentence of death she had pronounced
against him: By what action, illustrious enough, (said he) fair Alcidiana, can
I merit the punishment wherewithal your goodness rather then your Justice
will recompense my most humble servitude? Why am I not permitted to find a way
to attain to that supreme happiness? But, miserable vagabond that I am, I
may well wish, and make known my longings, but I shall never obtain the
favor of dying before her fair eyes! By this time 'twas day, yet was it not
able to bring Polexander out of his meditations. Alcippus after his searching
for him all night, by chance found him and disturbed his cogitations. Presently
he arose and returned to his tents, where he found a great amendment in his
Sister; and to divert her, recounted the adventure he had met withal. Cydaria
took pleasure in it, and wished him to send five or six men into that wood to
discover the aboade of that unfortunate man which had such brave thoughts.
Polexander having spent almost all the day with her, withdrew, and accompanied
with Alcippus and Gartias, returned to the wood with an intent to lie there
once more rather then not satisfy his curiosity. He came to the same place (at
least he thought so) where he had heard him he sought after, and passing
through many paths, at last met with an alley so covered that in the greatest
heat of day, there was coolness enough not to be incommodated under so
burning a climate. When he came to the end of it he saw the Sea, and perceived
two women which with a slow pace were walking on the sands. He would have gone
to them, but as soon as he was discovered, one of them began to cry out as loud
as she could, and drawing her Companion after her, made her run whether she
would or no. Polexander seeing it, stopped short. Presently there appeared at
the end of the alley a man, who going right to the women, and understanding
from them the cause of their flight, straight left them, and came toward our
Hero with his sword drawn, who put himself in a posture to receive him. But
as soon as he was near enough to be known, he gave a great shout, and running
to him with open arms, showed an extraordinary contentment in meeting him. The
other instantly cast down his sword, and embracing our Hero with a
gentilenesse and meekness showing his admirable temper: Do you (said he) yet
know an unfortunate man, who had been more so then he is, but for your
exceeding pity? Polexander embracing him again, By what chance (said he) do I
meet you in a place so far distant from that where I thought you? When I left
you (replied the other) my intent was to get to this Island, where I found the
party I sought: but to the end you may know my complaints have been always
just, come and see how extraordinary their cause is. With that he took up his
sword, and led Polexander to the place where the two women were retired. When
he came near them, he addressed his speech to the youngest, and before
Polexander saluted her: Madam, (said he) here is that Prince, without whose
help I had never had the happiness of seeing you again. This is he of whom I
have so often spoken to you, and whose misfortunes are able in their repetition
to put off a while the feeling of your own. At those words the Lady lifted up
her eyes, and Polexander noted, that though they were very fair, yet she was
blind. He made no show of remarking it, but admired her wit and judgment by
the Speech she made him: At least he who was her Interpreter, spoke in her name
so excellently to our Hero, that he was ravished at it; and witnessed it aloud
by the answer he made her, and entreated his friend to interpret. This
intertainement having lasted above a quarter of an hour, the fair blind Lady
stood a while silent, and thinking it time to retire, took leave of the two
friends, and left them in an equal admiration of her virtue, and almost a like
sorrow for her misfortune. Polexanders grief was on the point of breaking out,
but seeing the plenty of tears which fell from his friends eyes, he suppressed
his own compassion, that he might not increase the others sorrow, and be
inhumane, by being desirous to appear sensible. You should (said he) accustom
your self to your misery, and think for your consolation that it is far
less then you imagine it, since you have recovered the best part of what you
thought was all lost. I should be ungrateful (replied Zelmatida) both toward
the gods and Izatida too if I did not confess, I am infinitely bounden to
them, and that they have extended their excessive bounty in that which
concerns my own person. Nor is it mine own mishap I bewail. It Is Izatida's
misery that draws these tears from mine eyes, and forbids me the sensibility
of that contentment which is given me by the happiness of seeing her again.
No, no, Izatida, I shall never be happy whilst thou art not so; and the
pleasure of being near thee will never have power enough over me, to divert
those sorrows which thy blindness has cast upon me. How do I abhor thee,
thou accursed aboade, which have for ever clouded with darkness the only
light of my soul! Those last words touching Polexander in a particular manner,
O heaven, cried he, where is my mind, and what is become of my memory? With
that he left Zelmatida, and running to Gartias, was a while talking with him:
which done, he returned to Zelmatida, and showing by his countenance, he
brought him good news: I have called to mind one thing (said he) which may
(if the heavens will so favor you) make a great alteration in your fortune.
But not to give you any hopes, which proving false, may make you more afflicted
then you are; go to Izatida, and entreat her she will make trial of a remedy
which comes from that very place where she lost her sight. How Polexander!
(replied Zelmatida) that cannot be a remedy coming from so venomous a place,
it is rather some new poison, which doubtless will cause me to lose the
remainder of Izatida. I do not condemn your fear, (said Polexander) but I
will accuse you for not contributing all that you can for your own comfort, if
you do not hazard on my word, a remedy, which can do Izatida no other wrong
then to leave her as she is. Zelmatida, loath to contradict Polexander, for
fear of failing Izatida, and hu^ing himself, went to the Princess, and
besought her by the greatness of her courage and excess of her patience, to
try a remedy which Polexander had proposed to him for infallible. You both
deserve (said she) that I should give you that vain contentment. Yes
Zelmatida, you shall have your request. Give your remedy to my Governesse, and
I promise you, this night we will make experiment of it. Zelmatida hereupon
returned to Polexander, and he had scarce told him that Izatida had yielded to
his petition, but Gartias came to them with a violl of very clear water. He
had been at Polexanders ship to make the receipt, and omitted nothing of what
he had seen practiced by the Savages of the new world. He instructed the
Prince how he should apply that water, and so gave it him; who presently went
to Izatida's lodging, and suffered himself to be so flattered by his own
desires, that forgetting quite what he had spoken against that remedy, he durst
assure Izatida, that it would infallibly restore her sight. She smiled at his
credulity, and to send him away satisfied, you shall see to morrow (said she)
the operation of your medicine. Zelmatida straight gave the old Mexican the
violl, and conjured her with an extreme affection that she would not fail to
put some of that water on Izatida's eyes so soon as she should be laid. The
gods grant (said the Mexican) that your medicine have as much virtue as I will
have care in applying it. Thereupon the Princess bad^ him good night, and
prepared her self though she hoped for nothing from it, to suffer the
incommodity which accompanies all kind of medicines. Zelmatida the mean while
came back to Polexander, and earnestly entreated, to tell him from whom he had
his receipt, and what assurance he had of its virtue. Our Hero who knew by his
own experience, how dangerous and cruel it is to give false hopes to those
which are (as it were) accustomed to hope for nothing: Before I will satisfy
your curiosity, (said he) let us see what effect the water has. If it have
good success, Gartias shall give you all the light of it you can desire; if
not, you may well pass by the knowing the particularities of a thing which
has but wronged you. But Polexander (replied Zelmatida) if this remedy should
have the virtue of restoring the sight, if it could cure Izatida, how happy
should I be, and how great my obligation to your assistance? Truly I will
presently engage my self, to raise to you in Cusco a Temple even more stately
then that of the Sun, and to make your name as venerable amongst our Nation, as
the names of those whom they adore. Yes Polexander, you shall be a Deity to me,
and in all places where Fortune leads me, I will leave eternal remembrances of
your blessed act and my acknowledgement. Our Hero interrupting Zelmatida, What
(said he) are you not afraid that the jealous Deity which hears you should
punish your impiety? and to be avenged on your Idolatry, suspend not the virtue
of that remedy whereof it is the Author? Zelmatida affrighted with these
menaces, entreated Polexander to appease the anger of that Deity, and obtain
the remission of his offense, since he had committed it out of ignorance. This
confession (replied Polexander) will be of more efficacy then my prayers.
Before that Power which is not less pitiful then jealous, he may be termed
innocent who repents for his misdeed. Go on in it, and resigning your self to
the will of that Sovereign Being which is solely to be adored, be assured your
fortunes and my remedy will have a happy success. Zelmatida, converted by this
Speech, solemnly renounced his zeal to all his imaginary Divinities, and made
a vow, if Izatida recovered her sight, for ever to adore that Deity which
Polexander had learnt him. This while it grew to be night, and that parted the
two Princes. Zelmatida went to Izatida's Come, and was all night waiting about
the door, not daring (so respectfull he was) to inquire of that which he
expected with so much impatiency. Polexander who longed as much as he, passed
all the night very restless, and returned the next day to hear news of his
Receipt. He found Zelmatida softly walking and attending the hour of the
Princess waking. They continued their walk together, and their discourse
having brought them into a geeat alley which was right against Izatida's lodge,
there they made some turns. At the fourth, they saw the Princess come forth.
She held the old Mexican by the band, and leant on the head of little Galtazis.
At which sight Zelmatida became cold and wanne, and scarce being able to stand,
Alas! Polexander, said he, your remedy has been no better then the rest, and
that Deity whom I have offended, will not have thanks from a tongue so profane
as mine. Izatida is as she was yesterday. You imagine all that you say,
(replied Polexander) let us go near and see whether your fears and griefs
are just or no. Zelmatida would have walked, but his legs so trembled under him
that he was forced to lean against a tree, and do Polexander what he could to
resettle him, yet his fainting still increased. By little and little he lost
all sense, and so swounded and fell down on the grass. Alcippus and Diceus
ran to Polexanders call, and went for water to recover Zelmatida. Galtazis
perceiving the stir, imagined straight what the matter was. Something (said
he to the Princess) is misbefalne Zelmatida. All his friends are troubled, and
run (questionless) for some remedy. I infinitely bewail that poor Prince,
said Izatida. The agitations which his heat of spirit brings on him, are the
only enemies which he yet could never vanquish. But let us not suffer him
longer in pain since we canfree him from it. With that she kept on her way,
and came to the Prince before Diceus had recovered him from his swound.
Polexander who was on his knees to hold up the others head, arose when he saw
the Princess within some twenty paces of him, and going to meet her, noted so
much neatness and grace in her dressing, that he conjectured what was betided.
She had on a robe and bodies of those fair Mexican stuffes which by the
shadowings of feathers mingled with silver and gold threads resembled to the
life all kind of flowers. [This garment after the fashion of Mexico came but
to the half of her leg, which had nothing on but buskins imbroidered with
pearls and rubies.] Her sleeves were of a kind of silver tiffany cut in
bands, and joined together with Diamond buttons. Her breast was covered with a
very thin and white cobweb Lawne, on which her hair waved black and full. Her
head dressing not so rich as delicate, was of ropes of pearl and plumes, which
making a kind of crown on the top of her head, fell backward and on the sides
with so much gracefulness, that it seemed to make Art dispute with Nature for
those advantages she had bestowed on that Princess. Polexander could not look
on her without admiration, and did to her the same civilities he would have
done if he had certainly known she was not blind. But being not able to make
himself understood, he spoke to her by signs, and invited her to go nearer
the Prince. Garruca who was come to aid his Master, perceiving the Princess
so adorned: My Lord (cried he in Zelmatida's ear) open your eyes, and see the
wondrous remedy which heaven has sent you. O what happy moments do you lose!
Izatida bade Garruca be silent, and inly touched with the Princes affliction,
Must (said she very softly) this Prince be for ever in woe and misery, and must
that which he most wishes for, no less torment him then what he most fears?
With that she entreated Garruca to let her know how this fit befell his Master,
and he having heard it from Polexander, Madam, (said he) as soon as my Master
saw you between Mexiqua and Galtazis, he thought Polexanders receipt had taken
no effect, and that belief brought him into the case you now see him. Izatida
answered not Garruca, but turning away her head strove to hide those tears
which just pity drew from her eyes. In the mean time Diceus with much pains
got Zelmatida's spirits from their deep dullness, and gave them part of their
usual function. The Prince opening his mouth sooner then his eyes, let them
know by a confused talking what disordered things (during his fainting) had
presented themselves to his sick imagination. It Is then resolved (said he) that
your fair eyes shall be for ever shut up in darkness, and that my soul
which had no other day but what it received thence, must vainly hope to see
the period of that night wherewith it is inveloped. O thou Prophet of my
misfortunes, how true are thy predictions! and what monstrous Imposters were
they, who assured me that I should one day recover that treasure which Quasmez
has lost! Thou see not at all, Izatida, and perfidious that I am, I take
pleasure in light. Garruca hindering the prosecution of his discourse; My Lord,
(said he) come out of those imaginations wherein your misfortune retains you;
come to your self, and look on the Princess who assures you of her recovery.
Those words wrought so great an effect on Zelmatida's spirit, that he arose,
and perceiving Izatida, cast himself at her feet, to render thanks for her
care of him. The Princess raising him, At last (said she) your prayers have
been heard, and Polexanders remedy has restored you that sight which you have
so long wished for. I see Zelmatida, and to witness how dear all is to me
that concerns you, I have dressed my self expressly to bring you that good
news. Do you then see Madam? (said Zelmatida) O that happiness is too great
to be believed. With that he grew pale, and his excess of joy causing new
troubles in his spirit, deprived him instantly of his sight, strength and
knowledge, and so he fell again into his former fainting. But since the
resentments occasioned by grief, grapple more strongly with our souls then
those of joy; Zelmatida was less while in this swoune then in the former. He
came absolutely to himself; and looking on Polexander, with eyes which were
not only witnesses but Companions of his contentment: Yes, (said he) you shall
have those Temples I promised you, and shall be adored as a Deity in all places
where the Yuca's reign over the minds of men. That Sovereign Being, whose
Justice you have made me fear, would be avenged of my ingratitude, if (having
made me happy by your means) I should not look on you as the Dispenser of its
favors, and a supernatural Instrument by which it works miracles. He gave
not Polexander time to answer him, but returned to Izatida, and spoke to her
words so near approaching impiety, that she thought heaven would punish them
by a second blindness, yea even by some worse chastisement. But that Eternal
providence which knows all humane frailty, and has suffered them, for the
exercise of its love and pity (which holds there the place of Justice) toward
us mortals, would not punish such faults, as were more worthy compassion then
anger. Yet would it by new disquiets which it cast into Zelmatida's thoughts,
hinder the continuation of his errors, and temperate the excess of his
contentment. Scarce therefore had the Prince time to taste the joy he received
in Izatida's recovery, but Quasmez afflictions and Xaira's captivity coming to
his remembrance he fell into his former displeasures. He felt in himself, that
he had not, either his violent grief, or that urging despair which Izatida's
blindness threw on him; yet he suffered very much, and the remembrance of
Quasmez and his daughter took from him the most delectable sense of his
felicity. Izatida took notice of this alteration, Polexander was too clear
sighted not to perceive it, and the aged Mexiqua standing opposite to him, not
only had heard him sigh, but thought she had understood him pronounce the name
of Quasmez. Presently she came to Izatida, and intimating she would discover
some important secret to her. Give me audience (said she) and quickly preparing
your selves to believe a verity which at first will seem to you incredible,
drive far from you all heaviness and griefs wherewithal an ancient error
has so many years crossed the happiness of your days. And thou O Prince
which art arrived to that fatal point, where thou shall see the entire
recompense of thy long fidelity, (with that she turned to Zelmatida) put an end
to those conflicts which the love of Izatida, and thy hearty well-wishing to
Quasmez renew in thy mind. I here make known, that you shall all three have
your desires; and that the same day wherein Izatida was to recover her ^ight,
Quasmez was to have his daughter again, and Zelmatida equally satisfy both
the one and the other. Do not think I invent fine fictions to divert your
sorrows. If Montezuma were here, he would confirm what I tell you; and if
you, Izatida, call to mind the last words of cruel Hismelita, you will not
doubt of the verity of mine. Is it not true, that a while after you were
imprisoned in the lake of Mexico, she came to tell you, and calling you the
fatal torch that should set all her Empire on fire: Go (said she) thou
stranger, go, and lose thy life by other hands then mine, since the Power I
worship will not have me imbrew them in thy blood? This Speech savouring naught
of a mother, how inhumane soever, makes it appear plainly, that Hismelita
never considered you otherwise then as an enemy on whom her gods would not
permit her to be avenged. But I am too slow in contenting your longings, and
publishing your happiness. Know then that Izatida is the same Xaira, who being
stolen away in her cradle by Montezuma's servants, was delivered to my custody
as soon as she was brought to Mexico. Zelmatida heard this narration with such
a trouble and such an over-joy, that after she had done, he thought he had
dreamt of the wonders he had heard. He tried to speak, to entreat Mexiqua
that she would relate it him over again, but he could not frame a word; and
a while stood so extremely tortured with his happiness that Polexander
pitied him. For Izatida she showed her joy, (but with a great deal of
moderation) for not being Montezuma's daughter, and lifting her eyes to heaven,
her eyes that were not yet well accustomed to revive the light; O
incomprehensible Wisdom (said she) which by admirable secrecies, and counsels
of love and sweetness disposest soveraignely of all thy creatures fortunes;
give thy self thanks for the benefits I have received thence; for I am as
unable to do it, as I was unworthy to receive them. These are effects of thy
eternal power, which in one day has redeemed me out of all my blindnesses. I
know now to whom I owe my life; and by that knowledge, see those fears
dissipated which Hismelita's maledictions threw on me. I did ever believe
(quoth Zelmatida, interrupting her) that weak Montezuma and cruel Hismelita
had contributed nothing to your birth. She is too fair to come from them -- As
he was going on Izatida stopped him, and her goodness not enduring any should
speak ill, no not of her very enemies, Confess (said she) that Montezuma has
been very merciful, and Hismelita had much power over her self, since they
suffered not themselves to be transported by the just causes they had to hate
me; but rather chose to hazard their Crown then deprive me of my life. 'Twas
brutishness and superstition (replied Zelmatida) which restrained Hismelita's
fury, or rather, it is the hand of all powerful heaven, the Protector of
Innocence which has disarmed that of our enemies. The threatenings they had
from the mouth of their Prophets, were too terrible for Hismelita not to be
affrighted at them, or not defist from her cruel resolution. I am obliged
(said Izatida) to publish every where, that I do not only owe her my life,
but the quality of Princess, since she might (if she had listed) have given me
no other breeding then the worst of her Slaves. Zelmatida perceived well that
he was not to go further with that discourse. He therefore replied not out of
respect and complaisancy, but turned to Polexander to invite him to take part
in his joy. Our Hero forgot his own disasters, to be sensible of his friends
contentment. Garruca had told him the cause in interpreting to him Mexiqua's
narration, and won him to receive this great and good chance as a presage
that he should not be always unfortunate. Zelmatida discoursing a while with
him, began again to intertaine Izatida, and finding himself stung and put on
by so^e new desire which he durst not discover to the Princess; to give her
some notice of it, Do not (said he) suffer a Prince and Princess (to whom I
owe almost as much as to your self) languish any longer. The good Quasmez is
my father as well as yours, and if the Queen your mother had not looked on me
as her Son, the great Guina Capa would never have acknowledged me for his. Your
desires are just, (replied the Princess) and mine which should have prevented
them entreat their accomplishment. Restore to Quasmez that Xaira which has
cost you so much trouble, and hasten as much as you can to discharge your self
of a burden which should now begin to be troublesome unto you. Zelmatida had
not been without an answer on so fair an occasion, but that the Princess
(the second time) imposed him silence. Polexander, unwilling to leave these
lovers any longer in their great solitariness, invited them to walk to his
(...): and the more to egg on Izatida, told her (by Garruca) all that had
betided him in the kingdom of Benin, and the accident which had engaged him ^o
la^d on t^ Island. No soo^ ^id she hear of Cydaria's sickness, but showing
her (...) and (...), (...) go with them and assist ^er. When she sa^ (...)
make so^ (...) of ^iving her proffer, she entreated (...) to g^ ^is conse^, ^o
telling (...) that his civilities were unjust, he obeyed after many (...) ^o
(...). S^e passed the way from her li^le Cote to Cydaria's (...) with an
i^edible co^, ^d received a great deal more, when (after the first
complement^) she k^w that Cydaria was no less discreet then fair. Her
arrival gave so great comfort to the sick Lady, that after three or four
days of her company she found her self perfectly recovered. They were yet ten
or twelve days together, and not only tasted such incredible sweetness in
their communication, but made the two Princes partake so much of it, that
Polexander might have termed himself happy, if he could have been so, and
been out of hope of reseeing Alcidiana. Zelmatida (in the mean time) thought
of his return, and how extraordinary soever his joy was, he never gave him
self so much absolutely over to it, but that he hast'ned his workmen to put
his ship in case, to make once again a voyage to the new world. But before he
parted, he would needs try (by Polexanders means) an affair, which he thought
of himself he was not able to resolve on. To that end, he besought our Hero,
to fit his Sister so (by an Interpreter) as she might sound into Izatida's
mind, and (if it could be possible) get her a little to unfold her self.
Polexander promised him to do his utmost for his contentment; and indeed put
it on so earnestly and with so much affection, that Cydaria yielded to what he
desired. One day therefore being with Izatida, she made her by little a^ little
fall into Zelmatida's discourse, and passing from the greatness of her birth
to that of her happiness, told her that she wanted but two things to make her
perfectly happy. The one was, to be with her father and mother after so long an
exile, and the other, to end her life in the company of Zelmatida. For the
first, (replied Izatida) it is so necessary to my happiness, that in failing of
that, I shall never be so. For the other, I confess, that without ingratitude,
I can find nothing which should trouble me in the company of a personage, who
for these five years has done nothing, nor thought of nothing but for me. But
when I call to mind, that to satisfy him, I must prepare my self to lose my
parents, as soon as I have found them, I cannot be of your opinion. Izatida
thus ended, when the two Princes came in where they were. At sight of them, she
repented her of what she had said, for fear lest if Zelmatida should come to
the knowledge of it, he might find new cause of affliction. She was therefore
desirous to prevent that mischief, and Polexander giving a fair occasion of
explicating her thoughts: I take to witness (said she to Zelmatida) that Deity
which with his presence fills all the parts of nature, that I wish your
contentment with the same fervency of affection wherewithal I desire to see
those who gave me life. Next to them two, you shall have the first place in my
heart. I will bear you the same respect, and hold you in the like esteem as
Nature injoynes me for them: and promise you in presence of this Prince and
Princess, that I will beseech them (as soon as it shall be fitting) never to
dispose of me, unless that disposition be first pleasing to you. Zelmatida
transported with joy at such obliging promises, fell at Izatida's feet, and I
(said he) here swear by the same Deity you invoked, never to wish any thing
more then to see you perfectly contented. Polexander and Cydaria, much pleased
that their negotiation had so good an issue, congratulated with the one and the
other the union of their affections. And would needs before they parted,
celebrate the feast of these spiritual Nuptials. For two days together there
was nothing else done: but on the third, a new sorrow succeeded their joy. They
were to part. Polexander and Zelmatida, though they were to take leave, never
to see one another again, found in their discretions, and in the strength of
their souls, so much constancy as was necessary for so cruel a separation.
But the two Princesses being of a more mild nature, and less capable of a
high resolution, had all the pains that could be to win themselves to it. A
hundred times they bad farewell, and as often weeping, renewed the same ^ents,
and had the same irresolutions. At last the wind, and the Mariners shouts,
inviting both to their last Adieu^, they embraced one another, and moystning
their cheeks with their tears, bewaild as much as if they had been to be led
to their deaths. Polexander took his Sister out of Izatida's arms; and
Zelmatida having lead his Princess to the Sea, and then over a bridge the
Mariners ^d made, the more easily to imbarke her: one same wind, separating
the vessels of those four admirable personages, Zelmatida steered West, and
Polexander North-Easterly.

The end of the fourth Part of the third Book.
THE THIRD PART OF POLEXANDER. The fifth Book.
POlexanders ship was fifteen days under sail with so favorable a wind,
that he crossed that large extent of Sea which severs the Isles of Cape verd
from the Canaries, and came happily to an Anchor at that Isle where the young
Almanzor had chosen him a place for his glorious Sepulcher. Our Hero presently
called to mind the lamentable end of so generous a Prince. And to acquit him
of that which he owed his memory, landed, with a resolution to visit his tomb.
He made his intention known to Cydaria, and invited her to that action of
piety. But the Princess who knew but one Almanzor, was so startled to hear of
his death, that her grief betraying her discretion, she grew pale, and withal
entreated Polexander to relate, by what accident that Prince dyed so far from
his own Country. His extreme generosity lost him, (replied our Hero) and
himself turning against himself that great courage which has made him so
famous, chose rather to lose his life, then to live and not see the fair
subject of his passions. Cydaria strove extremely with her self to resist the
effects of this sad news. Yet could she not hold that command over her first
agitations which she was wont to do on other occasions; and showing she was
subject as others to the weakness of humane condition. How do I (said she)
grieve for Andromeda, and pity Abrinzias? At that word Polexander perceiving
his Sisters error; Do not bewail those Princes, (said he) that Almanzor of
whom I speak is indeed the Son of Zabaim, but not of Almanzaira. He whom you
think on, is living, and if appearances deceive me not, at this time reigns
over almost all those provinces which we have coasted along by since we came
from Benin. Cydaria, angry with her self, for appearing so weak on an
occasion wherein she would have showed her self strongest, condemned her ^o a
long penance for that fault; and thinking on Almanzor as he had been guilty of
it, did what she could to blot him out of her memory, or at least out of her
heart. She was loath Polexander should perceive these last emotions; she
therefore went ashore with him, and accompanying him to Almanzors tomb,
intimated an extreme desire of hearing the particularities of his History.
Polexander gave her that contentment, and going back to the Source of all,
related to her the amourous errors of Zabaim, the power of Zelopa's wit and
beauty, the br^eding of both the Almanzors, and the tragical end of the
youngest. He had scarce ended his discourse when he entered the wood of weeping
trees, in the midst whereof was the stately tomb of the African Prince, and
giving to Cydaria's curiosity that which he would not have done to his own,
began to consider the rich monuments of his Rivals love. He went near to two
black marble columns which stood at the entry into the Tomb, and staid to
read that which was written on a great table of brass, which two Doves flying
from the tops of those pillars, seemed to carry away with them. He straight
knew it to be Almanzors Epitaph, which the trusty Almandarin had caused to be
graven on the brass: and because it was in a language which Cydaria understood
not, he translated it thus: (...)

WHOEVER THOU BE THAT LOOK ON THIS TOMB, BE NOT LESS SENSIBLE THEN THE
TREES WHICH INCOMPASSE IT, BUT AT LEAST MOYSTEN WITH SOME TEARS, A PLACE, THAT
HAS BEEN BEDEWED WITH THE NOBLEST BLOOD WAS EVER SHED FOR LOVE. ALMANZOR WHO
WAS BORNE TO COMMAND THE GREATEST PART OF AFRICA, IS DEAD, BECAUSE HE WOULD NOT
SURVIVE THE LOSS OF A SERVITUDE WHICH WAS DEARER TO HIM THEN ALL HIS CROWNS.
ADMIRE PASSINGER, THIS PRODIGIOUS EXAMPLE OF THE POWER OF LOVE. WITH TREMBLING,
ADORE SO DREADFUL ADIVINITY ON EARTH. LOAD HIS ALTARS WITH SACRIFICES AND
PERFUMES, AND GET HIM BE PROPITIOUS TO THEE; OR RATHER, TO BLOT THEE OUT OF THE
NUMBER OF THOSE, WHICH, BY AN ETERNAL TRIBUTE, HE EXACTS FROM TIME AND BEAUTY.



Cydaria was so nearly touched with these words, that giving them the tears
they demanded, and mingling them with Polexanders, yielded to Almanzors virtue
an homage which his memory shall rec^ive from all those which shall be sensible
of the darts of love or nobleness. The heavens have done well (said
Polexander) only to show thee to the world, since they had no intent to lose
those prerogatives which they have above it. With that he opened the golden
grate which shut up the Tomb, and entering with his Sister, stood a good while
fixed, contemplating the marble which covered Almanzors body. He curiously eyed
the Statues, marked the Emblemes and Mottoes, and saw every where, signs of a
great courage, of an incomparable love, and a desperate melancholy which had
nothing in it of base or brutishness. Amongst all these things he saw some
Arabic characters; and calling Cydaria to interpret them to her: Hearken (said
he) to Almanzors brave thoughts when he had lost all hope of seeing Alcidiana.
He has caused it to be engraven on this Tomb. Judge whether it be not fit to
be observed. YE MISERABLE WRETCHES WHO NOT KNOWING HOW TO LOVE AS YE OUGHT,
DARE PLACE IT IN THE LIST OF THINGS PROFANE, COME NOT NEAR THIS TOMB. IT IS
THE ALTAR OF THAT DEITY WHOM YE KNOW NOT. IT IS BUILT ONLY FOR YOU O BLESSED
SOULS, WHO RECKON THE DAYS OF YOUR LIFE BY THOSE OF YOUR LOVE; COME THEN
BOLDLY AND LEARN THE MYSTERIES OF A PLACE CONSECRATED BY THE BLOOD OF THE
GREAT ALMANZOR. THAT PRINCE IS DEAD; IT IS A DISASTER WHICH ENGAGES YOU TO
BEWAIL HIM. BUT HE IS DEAD FOR ALCIDIANA, IT IS A GLORY THAT COMMANDS YOU
WHETHER YOU WILL OR NO TO ENVY HIM? YOU WOULD HAVE ESTEEMED HIM MOST HAPPY IF
THE PLEASURE OF THAT PRINCESS SIGHT HAD PRESERVED THAT BRAVE LIFE HE HAD
BEGUN: HOW MUCH MORE SHOULD YOU ESTEEM HIM, SINCE THE ONLY FEAR OF NEVER
SEEING ALCIDIANA WAS ABLE TO MAKE HIM DYE.

Whilst our Hero was making amourous Comments on Almanzors testament; Cydaria
went to see a little Altar which was in the chief front of the Tomb. Upon it
were four statues of marble. Some lay along, and others sat. Two represented
the Pleasures as well by their youth, their mirthsomenesse, (somewhat alaid
with a kind of sadness) and their Crowns of roses, as by the Instruments of
Music which lay at their feet. And the two other, by the many Crowns on their
arms, and the Diamonds, Pearls, and other Jewels which they carelessly let
fall from their hands, plainly enough intimated, they were Magnificence and
Majesty. They, all four, held a great heart of Albaster, and speaking by a
Roll of brass hanging down from the same hands which held the heart, thus
seemed to express their thoughts: (...).

IN LIEV OF THIS HEART NOW IN OUR HANDS, WE SHOULD HAVE HAD THAT OF THE GREAT
ALMANZOR, HAD HE NOT SCORNED TO HAVE LIVED FOR ANY OTHER THEN ALCIDIANA. FEW
HEARTS HAVE PREFERRED SLAVERY BEFORE COMMAND, OR DISCONTENTS BEFORE ALL
PLEASURES. FEW HEARTS TOO CAN BE COMPARED, WITH THAT OF SO GENEROUS A PRINCE,
AND FEW SHOULD WITH JUSTICE EXPECT FROM OUR RESENTMENT THOSE TEARS WHICH SO
GREAT A LOSS SHALL ETERNALLY DRAW FROM OUR EYES.

(...).



Polexander and Cydaria unwilling to stay longer among so many causes of
sadness, retired into the most obscure part of the Sepulcher; and not thinking
it an offense to implore heaven for a miserable soul, besought it with tears,
to convert its justice into mercy, and save him, who like a mad-sick man had
taken poison in thinking to take a wholesome potion. Their prayers once ended;
they came out of the Tomb, where they found Osmin and Alcippus, who by their
action made known how much they were astonished. Osmin spoke first, who
showing his admiration, proceeded from somewhat else then Almanzors Sepulcher:
This Isle (said he to Polexander) may rather be called the Isle of Tombs, then
the Isle of Fer. I cannot conceive through what urgency so many unfortunate
people should be compelled hither to graspe with death. About fifty paces
hence, you may see if you please to walk thither, four Monuments, under which
are interred so many Spaniards, which are called by the Inscriptions, the four
Lovers of the Princess Benzaida. A little further we have seen a Sepulcher,
as mean, as this is stately. The outside, which is painted black, and powdered
all over with flames and tears, made well guessed what horror there might be
within. In the midst is an Inscription, which neither Alcippus nor my self can
understand. Cydaria besought her brother to go see this novelty, and getting
his consent, marched foremost to satisfy her longing. Polexander, after he had
seen the four Spaniards Tombs, went to the last; and presently spied the
Characters which neither Osmin nor Alcippus could decipher. He thought it not
strange, for 'twas Slavonique, ill enough done, to puzzle more understanding
men then they in the knowledge of languages. He turned to Cydaria, after he had
twice or thrice read it over; and assuring her she was to hear some very
strange thing: Do you see (said he) the letters drawn on that linen which two
Cupids crowned with myrtle and Cypress, hold in so mournful a posture, and
look on with so much grief that the tears fall from their eyes? they tell
us, that Sepulcher is the Monument of two Sisters. The other Inscription which
is encompassed with trophies of love, trodden under foot by death, and cruelty,
and sown with golden flames and silver tears, is the Epitaph of those two
Princesses. This is the Explication word for word: TO THE ETERNAL MEMORY OF
HISTERIA AND MELICERTA'S MISFORTUNES. AND TO THE PERPETUAL SHAME OF THE
INSENSIBLE SOLIMAN.

ONe same instant brought us into the light, and one and the same Destiny
giving us equal inclinations, made us alike misfortunate. Death has not
severed those, who by birth and fate were knit in so strong a ligament. They
are buried in one grave, and have done that by Election which Nature had done
by Chance. Thy curiosity (Reader) is not (may be) satisfied with these general
notions. See wherewithal to content it. Yet, if causes exacting tears, comply
not with thy humor, turn thine eyes away from these following lines, and give
way no more to a desire that shall be so mournful to thee. But for all this,
thou will weep, and no admonitions can cool thy charity: Well then, read on;
and mark seriously with what rigor and command, both the senses and passions
do tyrannize over all rational souls. The greatness of our births, raising
us above all the Princesses of the world, seemed to have established us in a
felicity which could not be traversed by the injuries of earth or heaven. But,
O the vanity of humane condition! what all the strength of the Universe could
not execute, weakness alone has done it; and Fortune, to surprise us, made
use of that which we neither ought to fear or foresee. A Slave has triumphed
over our liberties; and he whose life was at our disposal has seen us at his
feet, shamefully begging the continuance of our own. It Is true, the merciless
Solomon has seen us implore his clemency and with tears beseech him he would
afford us the honor of living his slaves. Neither birth, beauty nor love, no
nor virtue it self, could obtain any thing from that rock. He saw the
constant Hysteria dye, and was no more capable of pity then he was of love.
Melicerta survived her Sister, but 'twas only to outlive all her hopes. She
has been enforced to intombe her self alive within this Sepulcher, to find
in death that compassion, which she could not meet withal in ungrateful
Solomon. It Is enough (Passenger) we should be as merciless as he, if we kept
thee longer in the affliction of reading this. Go then in peace, and if it be
possible, obtain from heaven, that our second life may be more happy then our
former.

After Polexander had read this Epitaph, seeing his sister so much moved at it,
was willing to withdraw her from those mournful places, though he deprived
himself of the contentment he received among the Monuments of so many
desperate lovers: But Alcippus entering on a sudden with an affrighted
countenance, engaged Polexander to inquire of him the cause of his
astonishment: it is so strange said he, that the more I call to mind, the more
I doubt of it; mine eyes and ears which assure me of it, cannot persuade me;
and I should believe I dreamed, if the thing were not yet before me. And whence
come you (said Polexander) that in so short a time you have seen that which is
so prodigious? This Island (replied Alcippus) is not only dreadful, for the
tombs we see in it, but far more for the frightfull apparitions: Without
doubt (said Polexander to his sister) Alcippus has seen the soul of some one
of those poor lovers which are interred in these Monuments. Alcippus
perceiving by Polexanders words as well as by his countenance, that he jeasted
with him: You may think what you please (said he) of my fear and belief; but
I am either still asleep, or I saw but just now within this Sepulcher, (showing
that of the two sisters) a spirit, which walks up and down, and talks. How,
(said Polexander) for heavens sake Alcippus, relate that strange adventure, and
in what shape that spirit appeared to you: Your Majesty (replied Alcippus)
asks me that questions only to laugh at my fearfulness; notwithstanding I
will make appear by my obedience, that all your Commands are sacred to me, and
so tell you, That there is something I know not what of very strange, but of
very true in my vision. Whilst you were busy in decyphering the Characters,
which are painted on the wall, I had a great mind to make a turn about the
building, to see whether there were any overture by which it was to be entered:
I looked so narrowly, that at last I found a little door, which (as it were)
opening of it self, to punish my curiosity, (at least I think so) showed me
such things, as I have much ado to believe, though I saw them: The inner part
of this building is lightened with some few lamps, whose gloomy light seems as
afraid to drive thence the darkness; by the light of those little fires I went
in, and though fear somewhat hindered me from well remarking what was about
me; yet I saw a great Hearse covered with cloth of gold, and railed in with
ballisters of silver: I gazed on these rich ornaments very heedfully, when I
saw come behind that Hearse, a pale shadow, disfigured, and covered with a
long black vestment: this Ghost drew near me so slowly, as it seemed not to
walk, and when it was come near the rail, Who e're thou be (it said with a
weak voice) which dare disturb the peace of the dead, and profane the
sanctity of Monuments; art thou not sent by cruel Solomon to see whether his
insensibility be not felt of us after our deaths, and his tyranny extended to
our Sepulchers? If so, return to that inhumane wretch, and tell him, that
though we left to live, we gave not over to love. That Histeria preserves yet
that fire which has reduced her to ashes, and Melicerta as an amarous and
lamenting shadow, wanders about her sisters tomb; and in sullen darkness
expects when the fire, which by little and little burns her, shall make an end
of consuming her. I must truly confess to you (said Alcippus) I was stricken
with such a terror, hearing this Ghost speak, that I was not possibly able
either to answer it, nor get from the place where my affright had (as it were)
fixed me: this Ghost, seeing I stirred not, gave me a blow on the breast, and
so terrified me, that my tongue which had (by my first scaring) been locked up,
got at liberty by this second. If (said I then trembling) it be true, that
Spirits, disrobed of their bodies load, know the most concealed intentions,
and even penetrate into the thoughts of the living; you then see, O unfortunate
soul, that my designs are innocent, and if I am guilty, it is but of a little
curiosity. Get then (replied the Shade) out of a place destinated for none but
offenders; and if thy heart belie not thy tongue, publish out of these Islands,
that the two Grandchildren of the great Bajazet in one same tomb, do a long
and a cruel penance for their love to the insensible Solomon. With all my
heart I obeyed the Spirit's command, and wishing it a happy end of all its
violent disturbances, got out of the Sepulcher with such an affrightment, as I
am scarce yet come to my self. Polexander was the more astonished at Alcippus
relation because it entirely agreed with that which was contained in the
Epitaph he last read. In this admiration he resolved to try the adventure of
the tomb, to see whether that amorous Ghost would appear as well to him as to
Alcippus: yet would he not have his resolution be taken for any thing serious;
therefore addressing himself to his sister, Let Us (said he) see all the
rarities of this Isle, and do you show Alcippus that you are more courageous
then he: It shall be (said she) if you please upon some other occasion, that I
will dispute courages with Alcippus; in this I yield him the victory, though
his affright tells me he is not hard to be conquered. Well then (said Polexander
smiling) I will try alone whether I am more valiant then you both; with that
he left Cydaria and went to the little door by which Alcippus got into the
tomb: He opened it and being come so far as the rail of pillars, first heard
a many sighs, then a little while after, a voice, which in all likelihood came
from within the Hearse; Solomon (said it) hard-hearted Solomon, whom neither
the beauty of Hysteria, nor affection of Melicerta, was able to move; and who
more hard and impassible then the rocks of these cliffes, have with a dry eye
beheld the shedding both of the tears and blood of these two miserable
sisters; Wilt not thou at last put on a humane nature? Shall that beauty and
grace of thine (which has inflamed even within the Grand Signior's Seraglio)
be for ever of those unanimated sweetnesses which the Sculpters art gives life
to, in brass and marble? No, no, thou shall not triumph unpunished over so
many liberties which thy allurements have subdued; Heaven's Justice reserves
for thee some great chastisement; our tears shall be avenged, and thou shall
feel what it is to love without a reciprocal affection. And if my hopes
deceive me not, I will not make an end of dying, till I have the happiness of
feeding mine eyes on that inhumane heart, which like a Tiger, hungry after
others hearts, never takes them but to devour them. But o thou comeliest and
fairest of men, and the most worthy to be beloved, pardon a troubled soul,
those reproaches and threatenings she makes thee contrary to her own heart! She
begs for it forgiveness from thee, and beseeches that all-powerfull Spirit,
which presideth over all worldly events, that to save thee from those miseries
she wishes thee, it would reserve them all, to increase (if it be possible)
the number of those which she has already suffered. There the voice ended; It
was followed with a great many sighs, which seemed to come from all corners of
that sad abiding. Polexander had not so much power on him self to suppress
his first agitations, but that he felt a kind of chillnesse, which running
about all his body, made his flesh to tremble; yet so, that it neither troubled
his mind nor judgment. He thought a while on what he had heard, and made a
little noise, that he might as well satisfy his eyes as his ears: presently
he saw come out from behind the tomb, an apparition like to that Alcippus had
described to him; he was extremely pleased at that sight, and not doubting but
it was a Spirit, resolved to ask it news of what was to come; and to know
whether he should give over the hope of seeing Alcidiana again: when therefore
he saw the Ghost near enough to him, Be not offended (said he) fair soul,
(who even in the grave retainest thy love and fidelity) if I disturb the peace
and silence of this sad abode: unfortunate lover that I am, I seek every where
for some one, that may instruct me by what way I may return toward the
glorious and worthy cause of my flames and afflictions. If pity have any place
in thee (amorous Spirit) be favorable to a man full of love! Help a wretch
which wanders sea and land without regaining the bliss he has lost; and tell
him, whether Time reserves naught for him, but death for the end of all his
miseries. Tho^ art deceived (replied the Spirit) I see no clearer then thou
do into future things; and though my abode, my habit and countenance, make me
pass for a Ghost, know yet, I have only the resemblance of one, but am indeed
a most unfortunate maiden, who in this tomb bewaileth a bloody and
precipitated death, and a life far more worthy of compassion. This speech
amazed Polexander more then the former had done, or the thought he had of that
miserable maiden: and looking on her, as on something more strange then a
phantasme: Who will ever believe (said he) that your love to an ungrateful
man, has been able to work in you so prodigious a perseverance, as to make
your self an enemy to light, life, and your self, only to preserve your heart
for an unmercifull man who contemnes it? Go not on in these revilings (replied
the maiden) I love the cruel Solomon too well to suffer him to be censured;
his rigours are pleasing to me, his insensibility augments my passion; I am all
fire, because he is all ice: But let us break off a discourse which neither
merits thy pains nor mine. Since thou art in love, get far away from these
aboades which are so mortal to Lovers, and trouble no longer the unhappy peace
of two poor Sisters, who have met with none from the time of their birth. I
wish (Madam) replied Polexander, it were fitting to obey you. I should then be
far from interrupting by my presence, the repose you find in your
selfe-persecution; for I know by a long and rigorous experience, that
consolations are new griefs to afflicted souls; and the greatest enemies the
misfortunate meet withal, are, those indiscreet Counselors, who would
persuade them, they should leave to be sick as soon as they should cease to
refuse the remedies. But when I call to mind what my birth and profession
binds me to, I find my self compelled to continue troublesome, and to
entreat you, by that ungrateful man you too-much love, to let me know if there
be no means left to you to be avenged of his ingratitude. I have vowed (said
the desolate Lady) never to discover my grief, but on a condition, to which I
think it not just to engage you. How strange soever that condition be (replied
Polexander) I subscribe to it, provided I may execute it, and not be faithless
and disloyal. Your generousnes (quoth the Lady) revives those hopes which were
with me buried in this tomb. I imagine you may bring some ease to my
afflictions, and I may find their end, if I left to you the guidance of my
fortune. I therefore accept your offer; and even now, make you the Judge
betwixt Solomon and my self, and condemn me voluntarily to finish my
miserable life, far from those fair eyes, which sometime enlightened my
Soul, if my pretentions and prosecution appear not as equitable as they may
seem strange unto you. After the Lady had ended this Speech, she opened the
place enclosed by the ballisters, and taking Polexander by the hand: Let us
(said she) go hence into another place not far off: we shall there find a
place more fit to entertain our passions; she walked whilst she spoke thus,
and Polexander who led her, saw come from out the sides of the tomb, two
maidens, clad like the former, which slowly and softly followed her, and seemed
by their action, they were not loath to abandon so sad an habitation. As Soon
as Polexander was out of that obscurity which shaded the beauties of the
desolate Lady, he found them so extraordinary, as he began, in good earnest, to
hate the ungrateful person that had despised them: He took too from thence a
new occasion to entertain the Lady, and intimating to her his admiration; That
barbarian (said he) who could look on so much attraction, and yet preserve his
infamous liberty, was surely borne among those horrible rocks, which an
eternal winter covers with ^akes of ice and snow. It Is doubtless some monster
whom angry nature produced in some extreme corner of Scythia. Turks are
naturally cruel and unpitifull, but they are not insensible, and the furious
tyrants, who in their unjust anger spare nor age nor sex, yet have hearts
capable of love, and to please their slaves, can sometime lose the title of
master and conqueror. If any allurement (replied the afflicted Lady) could
have moved the heart of insensible Solomon, it must have been more powerful
then my sister's or my beauty: neither have we pretended thereby, to gain to
us that great heart, who as obdurate as he is, can neither be accused of
savagenes nor barbarism. He is no Turk but by the injustice of his fortune,
nature has made him born from a Prince who was no less polite then
courageous; and both France and Greece which have equally contributed, to his
birth, publish, who shall most, that if Solomon had not the great Polexander
for his brother, he should be held the first of men. Madam (said the Prince)
you amaze me, to have so much love and goodness for one so ungrateful, as
should have exhausted all: But who should that Solomon be, half Greek and
half French? Was it not the son of the unfortunate Periander, whom the
cruel Usurper of Constantinople, even feared in his fetters? You know (replied
the Princess) the amiable author of our long afflictions. It Is that Prince
happy in his misfortunes, who changing his name of Iphidamantus for that of
Solomon, exchanged his prison for the favor of the redoubtfull Bajazet; and is
found susceptible of all kind of alteration, excepting that which may be
advantageous to my sister or my self. Polexander had more particularly
informed himself of his brother's adventures, had he not seen Cydaria, who
all affrighted with the seeing him conversing with that fair apparition, drew
back still as he came toward her: He beckned to her to stay, but her mind
preoccupated by a false belief, would not let her know the truth. Polexander,
willing to divert the Princess whom he led Here (said he) you see the sister
of the insensible Solomon: but one of my servants persuading her that you were
a Ghost, she is so affrighted with it, that she even dares not be so hardy as
to come near you. At the words of Solyman's sister, the desolate fair one ran
to embrace Cydaria, and to see in her face some resemblance of him she so
desperately loved. But Cydaria imagining the Phantasme came to catch hold of
her, began to run away; and if Polexander by his calling had not staid her, and
the afflicted Princess not stood still, there had bin cause enough of laughter
among so much of joy. The Prince went first to his sister, and in few words
bringing her out of her error, won her to meet the Princess whom she had
taken for a Ghost, and to let her know that she was Solymans Sister, by
something else then neglect. Cydaria, although she were not absolutely
recollected, obeyed her brother; and when she was come within a few paces of
the sad Lady, turned up the veil which covered her face. No sooner did the
afflicted Lady look on her, but she gave a great shrieke; O heaven! (cried
she) this is not Solymans Sister I see, but Solomon himself. This imagination
was so powerful over her, as coming up nearer to Cydaria, and speaking to her
as she had been Solomon: Amiable but insensible Solomon, (said she) come
thou under this strange habit to see whether my affection be true or fained?
But, O how well this question shows that I know thee not yet? Thou would have
some sense, if not of love, at least of humanity, if thou were curious enough
to know whether thou were beloved. No, thou come not hither with that
innocent intention. Thou would feed thine eyes with the tragical end of the
youngest as well as with that of the eldest. Thou art afraid that she either
wants strength or courage; and charitable enemy as thou art, thou come to
offer thy sword and thine arm, to take away from her all pretext of longer
preserving that lifewhich is so odious unto thee. Cydaria, who knew nothing of
the disconsolate Ladies love, was not in a little perplexity how to answer her.
But Polexander replied, and assured the Princess, that Cydaria was indeed
Solymans Sister, and were so like that they had already been often taken the
one for the other. Cydaria, to confirm what her brother had spoken, came and
kissed the sad Princess, and out of pity letting fall some tears: Forget
(said she) that Solomon, who through his ingratitude has showed himself so
unworthy of your memory, and who doubtlesly has taken on him the nature of a
Turk as well as his habit. I make no more question of it (said the
desolate-loving Lady) but think you are not Solomon. That cruel man has
never had pity enough to be so sensible as you seem; nor to mitigate (by his
suffering with me even by one sole word) those fearful afflictions whereto
his love and rigor have so often exposed me. With that she took Cydaria by
the hand and brought her (with Polexander) into a house, about a hundred paces
from the tomb, there she led them into a chamber hung with black, and after a
little silence: I must of necessity (said she) relate to you all those
accidents wherewith Love and Fortune have traversed the live of the father and
his daughters; to the end I may have this miserable consolation in my
misfortunes, to hinder the memory of them from perishing with me. You shall
hear so wonderful occurrences that if you have not in your self felt the
strange and mavelous events to which the ^ves of Princes are particularly
subject; I am most certain, such that those which I s^l relate will be
incredible to you. Love, but that love armed with darts as in piercing the
heart, troubles the spirits, and drives them to their utmost extravagancies,
begun the miseries of our family: the valiant and generous Antenor our father,
seemed to be ^rn for the sword and buckler of all Christendom, and to free his
dear Sclavonia from that weighty yoke under which the victorious Ottomans had
made it groan late years. He was in the flower of his age feared of the Turks,
adored of the Sclavonians, and recommendable by diverse victories, when he went
into Servia, to swear a strict League between the inhabitants of that
Province and the Sclavonians. But whilst he employed his best wits to deliver
his Subjects from the Ottoman slavery, he took not heed, that a greater Tyrant
more cunning and cruel then all the Turks together, was provi^ng a servitude
far more dismal for him. The Despote of Servia had a daughter perfectly
fair. The admirable luster of her complexion even made that of the Grecian's
pale again. She had a fire on her cheeks, whence it seemed her eyes borrowed
their light wherewithal they dazzled all others. In a word, 'twas a beauty
worthy to be extremely beloved. And so she was by my dear Antenor. He served,
solicited, and at la^eclar'd to her the greatness of his affection, and added
so much respect and modesty to the violence of his Suit, that he got her
willing to permit it. At the same time the Beglerbeg of Buda gave command to
the Sangiac of Senderovia to besiege Novograde. He came before it with thirty
thousand men; but my generous father desired to defend the Siege, that he might
show his fair Astalia, he did not unjustly aspire to the honor of possessing
her. The Sangiac was defeated before he was well entrenched, and forced to
return to Senderovia for new forces. The Despote delivered (as by miracle)
from so great a danger, prevented the demand his Defender would have made him,
and to bind himself in a stricter Alliance then that of the interests of
States, offered him the incomparable Astalia. He fell at his feet to thank him
for that offer, and besought him not to defer the accomplishment. The Despote
referred it to himself, and the amorous Antenor presently sent a dispatch to
Chersach Prince of Montevera his father, to consent to so fair and
advantageous an Alliance. Chersach agreed, and desired the solemnity of the
marriage might be at Montevera. Astalia with a stately train was brought into
Sclavonia, and as a Queen received in the Palace of Chersach. The day being
come wherein my dear Lord hoped to reap the fruits of his travels and
perseverance: the irrational and brutish Chersach fondly taken with the beauty
of his daughter in Law, took her away from amidst all the great Ladies of
Sclavonia which a^mpanied her, and notwithstanding all their prayers, and
tears, and resistance of his Son, forced her from him, and took her for his
wife. Antenor was like to lose all the resect which Nature had imposed on him
to observe toward his father; and giving himself over to his grief, would
have converted the nuptials into a funeral, and the marriage bed to a tragical
Scaffold. But being diverted by his friends, and hemmed in the hall where all
the Nobility of the Province were assembled: he turned now toward ne, and then
to another, and speaking sometimes to the Lords, and otherwhile to the Ladies;
See, (said he, your selves) and judge if the unnatural Chersach after the act
he has done, deserves that I look on him as my father? It Is true, I owe him
my life, but it is as true, that this day he has robbed me of it: and the ill
his last voluptuousness has done me, is infinitely beyond the good his first
love has givven me. Cruel father! turn thine eyes on me, as well as on the
fair Astalia. Think with thy self that I am not less sensible then thou;
and that the heat of mine age joined with that of my love, is but too
powerful to force from me the little reason I have left, and that I can well
forget the name of a child, since thy incontinence alone makes thee throw off
the quality of a father. The murder is no less when a father assasinates his
Son, then when a son kills his father. If thou gave me my li^e when thou
thoughtst not of it, I have given it thee twice, not only on premeditation,
but even then when I was to hazard this life to preserve thee, that same which
is now the cause of my death. I have paid thee with use. Exact no more from me,
but permit that I enjoy in the fruition of my wife, that life which I owe to
chance rather then to thy self. But what do I, fair and dear Princess? I
lament in vain, and in the mean time you are brought to your prayers, tears
and cries, and it may be to something more worthy compassion. Your Tyrant
sollicites you, presses, forces you, and not able of himself to vanquish
your just repulses, imploies against you the same hands he uses to strangle
his Enemies: And makes, of his hangmen, the Spectators as well as the
Instruments of your martyrdom and my dishonor. He would have said more, when
an extraordinary noise, far above that he made in complaining on his father,
flew into the hall, and put them all into a fear and disorder. After the
noise, many people came in, and all denouncing by their gesturrs and tears,
that accident which their mouths durst not utter, obliged Antenor with his
sword drawn to fly out of the hall. His friends followed, and brought him
back again whether he would or no, and then sent to know what had happened.
One of my poor fathers Pages came in all bloody, and addressing himself to
his Lord, told him (with tears) the Princess was dead. Before she resolved to
lay violent hands on her self, she spoke and did, all, she thought fit to stop
the violence of your father: (say Chersach, cried Antenor, and make an end of
killing me.) But (went on the Page) when she saw her self in the hands of
four servants to Chersachs lust, and that her women were enforced to undresse
her. Well, my Lord (said she) I yield and give way to your excessive love. I
shall not altogether lose my lover, since in his loss I win the affection of
him who was the Author of the others coming into the world. Use me then as thy
wife, and forbid these In^olents to continue their outrage. I shall grow
despe^ate if ^hey touch me again. If thou love me, let them instantly be
gone; and give me all the liberty which my birth, and the honor of being thy
wife requires, in thine own house. Chersach deceived by these words, sent
away his Panders; and himself withdrawing from Astalia, told her, she was
where she had absolute command, and that his desire to make her as happy as she
deserved, had engaged him to take her from his son, since he was neither
prudent nor powerful enough to make good use of so great a fortune. Astalia
seeing her self at liberty, ran into a Balconi which looked over a precipice:
and before Chersach or any of us which were left with torches in the chamber,
could withhold her; Dear Antenor (cried she) it is to keep my faith to thee
that I dye. With that she flung her self down the precipice. Her body was
broken against the rocks, and the blood wherewithal I am besprinkled, came
from the torn face of that generous Princess. As Soon as I saw her fall, I
ran out of Chersachs chamber, and descending to the bottom of the downfall by
the di^ches of the Castle, I saw her dye repeating thy name. I was bringing you
her body, when Chersachs guard met me, took it away and carried it back to the
Castle. My afflicted father, hearing of Astalia's death, would have spoken a
thousand things at once, but the extremity of his grief would not give him
leave to utter only one. His eyes became two Comets, and his bloud-heated
countenance, too true forerunners of despair and death, made all the Assembly
fear more tragical accidents then those which had already betided. The
venerable Moceniqua reading in my fathers face all that he was about to
execute: Hearken (said he) to a friend that shall never be so unjust as to
approve of thy fathers violencies, nor to condemn the resentments of the Son.
Thy complaints are lawful, and Chersachs act cannot be too much censured. If
the severity of Laws were not suspended as often as the faults of a Sovereign
come in question, I should be the first would have recourse to their
assistance, to the end, so extraordinary a rape and no less a murder should
not remain unpunished. But when our Laws and Magistrates trample under feet
the respect due to the living Images of the Deity, and would with all their
rigor make a great example of a great Offender, they must either cut off his
liberty of justifying himself, or see themselves reduced to a necessity of
absolving him. To judge according to your opinion, Chersach is extremely
guilty; but to weigh that which has been perpetrated in the same balance
where we so exactly weigh the lives and deaths of men, we shall find Chersach
to be very unfortunate, but not very guilty. Whosoever shall be chosen to
accuse him will exaggerate his violence, and maintain with a great deal of
likelihood, that he is a Ravisher and a murderer. But what will not he reply
who shall take on him his defense? Chersach, will he say, confesses he was
capable of as much love as his Son, and that Astalia's beauty had no less
power over his white hayres then over the flaxen locks of Antenor. His blood
which age had cooled became all on fire at the sight of that admirable
Princess; and those hot boiling desires which the Son borrowed from the heat
of youth, the father feels out of the greatness of his affection. In a word,
he would have her for his wife whom Antenor had chosen for himself. After the
example of many fathers who have voluntarily deprived themselves of such whom
they passionately loved, to satisfy the desires of their Sons: Is it a wonder
at this day to see a Son put off his strongest passion to content that of his
Father? But I come to thy self Antenor; and enquire, whether thou have not
often run in hazard of thy life to save thy father; and whether thou have not
often prayed to heaven, that thou might by the shortning of thine own days
prolong those of Chersach? I know, even though thou will not now acknowledge
it, that thy piety has often put those words in thy mouth. Why then, at this
time, belying that same goodness, would thou not wish thy father happy,
since thou only could make him so? I would willingly, thou will say, have
given my life for my father. What, is wife more dear to thee then thy life?
Thou will answer, she was, and far more. Thou art deceived inconsiderate Lover.
Thou could have lived without the fruition of Astalia, but without life thou
could not enjoy Astalia. Why giv'st thou not then willingly to thy father, a
thing which was of less value then that life which thou would have given
him? Know at once, to shut up thy lips for ever, that neither interest,
pleasure, life, nor honor it self, have ever been put in the number of such
cases for which the divine Laws dispense with childrens obedience to their
fathers. Cruel reasons! (cried Antenor) Injustices well colored! I yield to
you whether I will or no; and leave Chersach's crime unpunished, to the end
that it may never by another be blotted out of the memory of man. Live monster,
live to thy perpetual misery, and by a long and cruel decrepit age do penance
for thy abominable impudicity. After these imprecations, my unfortunate Lord
went out of Montevera, and within a few days after not only forsook his own
Country, but changed Religion and Sides: and attained to the greatest honors
of the Ottoman Empire, under the name of Achomat. Bajazet growing weary of
Isaac Bassa's government, and taking from him (with his life) that mighty
authority which made him terrible to his own Master, cast his eyes on Achomats
virtues, and withal called to mind his many Services. His valor which had
won him so many victories, and his fidelity which had held him so constantly
linked to that Monarchs interests, called him to that Office. Of Beglerbeg he
became a Basha, and from a Basha to that height of honor as to marry the
fairest and best belovedst daughter of the Emperor. That Princess was the
daughter of the Sultane Queen, and as well for her beauty as for her wit,
deserved to be called from her birth the Eastern Sun. Bajazet who loved her
far more then his Sons, gave her an Arabian name which signifies in your
language Immortal Rose. This fair Princess was conducted to the house of the
Basha her husband with that pomp and great train by which the Ottoman Princes
(who without contradiction are the prime Monarchs of the world) are wont to
make their slaves admire their power and richness. If some occurrences more
worthy to be known then my mothers nuptial ceremonies did not bind me to
conceal them, I should make you wonder at the infinite number of Jewels, and
household furniture where withal Bajazet the great would all at once witness
the love he bore his daughter, and the pleasure he took in enriching his dear
Achomat. That Rose which indeed deserved to be immortal, found an Adorer in
lieu of a husband; and indeed by the charms of her beauty and sweetness of
her disposition, she made her affectionate Achomat forget the mishap in his
first love, and his being forbidden to Idolatrize. He imagined to himself that
there was something beside heaven to be worshipped lawfully; and looking on the
Sultan his wife, as on one of those fair draughts of that first and eternal
beauty, held Mahomet's commands but for vain dreams and impious institutions:
he sent for a Greek which was an excellent Painter, and as if his eyes were
not fully enough satisfied in having for their object but the living beauty of
the Princess my mother, caused diverse Copies to be taken of it, and could not
even in the Divan, nor in the most important deliberation refrain from looking
on it. This love being so ardent, could produce nothing but flames
andincendments; My sister and I were the only fruits, and if I dare say so, the
twin daughters of that reciprocal and violent affection: We were borne with
such an inclination to love, that though it be a shame to confess it, yet I
must acknowledge that love was as natural and essential to us as our lives
and senses. We were but eight years old when the virtuous and incomparable
Axiamira came to Constantinople, to obtain on the day of Achmets Circumcision
the liberty of her invincible Periander; she had what she requested, as you
know better then I; but what said I? No, she had nothing less then what she
desired, she was used after the same manner as the Sultans are wont to treat
their slaves, and Bajazet kept his word with her, in that cruel interpretation
wherewithal he knows how to free himself from his scruples of conscience.
The very day wherein Axiamira for ever lost the Prince her husband, she was
robbed of Iphidamantus who was but two years elder then I; Bajazet caused him
to be taken out of her ship, and even against his custom, in lieu of shutting
him up in his Seraglio amongst the other Azamoglans, gave him to my father,
with express command to breed him like a slave, and so make him lose with his
memory of Christianisme, that of his birth. Achomat in part obeyed Bajazet, but
being himself a Christian, and professing it amongst his confidents, he bred
up his fair slave by a Greek Renegado, in show, but indeed a Christian, and a
Priest: Iphidamantus lost his first name for that of Solomon, and was so
tutored, as he went for what he was not; that young Prince his beauty and
comeliness, which cannot be worthily enough expressed, if it be not compared
with yours (said Melicerta addressing her to Cydaria) won the Sultanesse my
mother to breed him among that great number of fair maidens which her father
had given her, and to cloathe him usually as they were: we saw him every day,
and that seeing drew us insensibly into a snare we saw not. Histeria, so was my
dear sister called, was the first that felt what she knew not, and unable to
divine the cause of certain unknown desires which began to trouble her, was
compelled to discover her passion to me: I know not said she (innocently to me)
what it is the fair slave has in his eyes, but as often as he looks on me
he wounds me; I feel I know not what sting at my heart which tickles me in
hurting me; I turn mine eyes from him when I feel the smart, but in spite of
me, I am forced to look on him again; and I perceive that my grief which is
very sore when I look on him, is far worse when I see him not. Sister (said
I) though I am the last that speak, I am not the last that suffered; I have
long since examined my self of the reason of that change I noted in me, and
how I should feel my self sick, and yet not discover the cause nor the
quality of my malady: but your discourse has freed me of my ignorance, I know
now that my sickness comes from the eyes of the fair slave; the delight I
take in seeing him, is followed with so sensible a grief, that whether I see
him or see him not, I find my self divided betwixt a delicious torment and a
disquieted contentment. See the first discourse that a growing and almost
unknown passion made two Maidens of thirteen hold together; Age, which is a
great master in love, chiefly when it is seconded by those which of old have
been instructed in it, quickly taught us, both by the example of our parents,
and the conversation of those fair slaves which waited on us, not only what
we should call our sickness, but how strange the effects of it were: Solomon
in the mean time, not only seemed ignorant of it, but showed himself so
extremely insensible, that he was neither moved with our looks, our
blandishments, no nor with our speeches; amongst many other proofs of his
insensibility, I remember one, which as young as we both were, made us see that
our affection prepared strange afflictions for us. The Sultanesse our mother
being retired from Constantinople (during a voyage of Achomat's into Egypt) to
a Seraglio which the Emperor had given her on the Channel which runs into the
black sea; we in that pleasant solitude, passed our time in all the sports and
merriments our Governesses thought fit for our exercise: The Sultanesse our
mother, was usually a Spectatresse of our pastimes, and noting that my sister
and I passed them over with a negligence and pensiveness not befitting our
age, was afraid left it might presage some great fit of sickness. Had she been
a little more informed, she would have known our disquiets were not the
presages but the effects of that ill which she feared: Notwithstanding, we
concealed it not only from her, but even from those that were our greatest
confidents, and did our utmost endeavors to communicare or at least to
discover it to the impassible Solomon. His respect to the Sultanesse having one
day (whether he would or no) forced him to stay betwixt my sister and my self;
that Princess who took much pleasure in hearing the first proofs of our wit,
commanded us to speak to him, and he had the like to answer us: Our discourse
at first was of mere franknesse of humor, and principally of the neglect of
men; to which Solomon answered, with so much discretion and vivacity, that the
Princess confessed aloud, she could not hear any thing more witty; but being
diverted by a Post from her dear Achomat, she left my sister and my self in
that liberty we had so oftentimes wished for. As Solomon was about to follow
her, we staid him, (against his will) and my dear Hysteria spoke thus; You
have good cause to quit us if you believe we spoke as we thought: our
misprising of men might make you do the same to us: but do not believe
Solomon, that we are so wicked as to offend that All, whereof you are a
wonderful part; our injuries were but a sport, and we cunningly made use of
that artifice to conceal from our mother, the too true affection we bear to
the fairest of men. With that poor Histeria blushed, and her languishing eyes
stood fixed on Solomon, to let him comprehend that he alone merited that
glorious title. Solomon blushed too, either for his own shamefac'dnesse or
Histeria's; and unwilling to answer a speech that troubled him, did what he
could to get from us; yet his discretion not suffering him to goethence by
violence, he saw himself obliged to stay yet a little longer with us. I then
began, and casting down mine own eyes, as to not see my self, Why flyest thou
us Solomon, said I? Are we so unworthy thy company, or is thy mislike of us so
great as thou can not endure our sight nor hear us speak to thee? Thou may
be valuest thy self by the miseries of thy fortune, and quite forgetting the
greatness of thy birth, wilt observe that low submission which thy Tutors have
prescribed thee, and slaves should owe to their masters. Is it not out of fear
of making thy condition worse then it is, in trying to make it better? If such
a timidity seal up thy lips, and casts thine eyes downwards, thou art as
weak a valuer of our thoughts as thou art of thy self: we could look on
thee, as on a Prince which should one day sit on a Throne, and not as a slave,
who has lost for ever all hope of his liberty. But our affections are too
purely sublimed to fix themselves on such gross and base considerations; we
love thee because heaven would have it so, because thy gracefulness forces,
and thy virtue obliges us: We entreat thee now, to divide that love betwixt
us, and to be pleased (that by kind and mutual exchanges) thou will give us a
part of thy servitude, and accept as much of our liberty. Histeria hearing I
expressed her thoughts so well, Dear Solomon (said she interrupting me) accept
(I beseech thee) my sisters proposition; command with us, and we will be slaves
with thee. Solomon would have been overjoyed to have heard us speak on,
(though it pleased him not) because at least our continual talk had freed him
from the trouble of answering us; but we imposed our selves silence, of
purpose to hear what he would say: sometime he was consulting with himself,
at last seeing he was forced to an answer, Fair Princesses (said he) you have
shut my mouth even by that which you have made use of your selves, for the
liberty of breaking the silence is commanded me; you say I am thought on and
regarded by you as a Prince, which should once govern, and that consideration
tells me, I am but a wretch, who with the title of Prince have lost all the
privileges of Principality: though your proffers came from a true feeling you
have of my miseries, and that you should be so good as to contribute somewhat
to the consideration of my birth, yet believe not I beseech you that I can by
such a charm beguile the knowledge I have of my misfortunes. You may faigne,
being as you are, to be slaves, without making trial of any of the rigours of
servitude, but if the strength of imagination deprive me not of that of
judgment, it is impossible for me in conceiting my self to be among the sweets
of liberty, that I should forget the bitterness of slavery. Give over then
fair Princesses, give over the presenting me with imaginary good, since it
does but put me in mind of those true ones I want! Would to heaven (replied
Histeria a little angry) that you were sensible as much as you strive to
persuade us! You would then take into your thought, two personages who are more
slaves then you, and would hearken to their entreaties in lieu of deluding them
with your vain and subtle evasions. The Sultanesse then coming, broke our
discourse, and as much vexed us, as she pleased the disdainful Solomon: As Soon
as he was got from us, he made a solemn vow not to be so caught again; and
indeed, from that day till Achomat's return, 'twas impossible for us to speak
with him in private. In the meanetime our love increased with our ears; we
not only forgot all things for Solomon, but forgetting our selves, were so
foolish as to be jealous of one another: we broke off our wonted
communications, we concealed our intentions, and each of us working our
projects apart, we went so far, as that our Governesses took notice of our
ill correspondency. Nature, who had made but one of us two, could not long
endure this disunion; she knit again that which was not altogether broken, and
after she had let us know our idle extravagance, made us conceive so great a
sorrow for it, as we were many days continually asking one another
forgiveness. After this reciprocal fault had obliged us to a mutual
repentance, we discovered all our thoughts to one another, and being rejoined
not to be separated again, we promised each other to be together both Rivalls
and Confidents: some few days after this reconciliation, the Emperor resolved
to perfect and bring to some good issue an enterprise wherein his predecessors
and himself had failed. He would all at once, conquer Egypt, set on the heirs
of the Estate, and rebellions of Scanderbeg, and his principal design was to
avenge him of the Venetians and the Knights of Rhodes: He therefore raised four
mighty Armies, and sent the greatest into Egypt, under the command of Basha
Herzecogli (that was the title whereby my father was known:) He took Solomon
to that war, and depriving our eyes of that only and dear object, made us
make so many earnest prayers against the prosperity of his arms, that many
times since thinking on our amorous impiety, I believed it to have been the
cause of the unhappy success of Achomat's expedition. He encountered the Sultan
of Egypt, and after a fight of two entire days (wherein above two hundred
thousand lay dead on the place) he fell from his horse, was taken alive, and
carried in triumph to grand Cairo. Solomon in that occurrence did such deeds of
arms, that it was not to believed at a less rate then by loving him so much
as we did: He was not then above seventeene years old, but his great heart
giving him a strength beyond his age, he had redeemed Achomat, and put the
Egyptians to the loss of that victory they had gotten, if the Asians cowardice
and the Europians disorder, had not abandoned that victory which was assured
them. Solomon not knowing what else was to be done upon the routing of his
party, strove to die; but his enemies having more care of his preservation then
himself, staid him, and made him the partner of his second father's fetters.
Imagine (if you please) when these news came to Constantinople, how they were
received, the Emperor witnessed more grief for Achomats imprisonment, then
for the loss of all his forces: He presently sent a Messenger to the Sultan of
Egypt to pay the Princes ransom, and the other prisoners, with menaces, that
if he did not deliver them, he would go in person to make a second Nile of the
Egyptians blood. Lividarus, a great Officer to that Souldan, not thinking it
best to drawall the Turks on his Masters hands, for the keeping away of two or
three of them, sent back Achomat and Solomon with all the civilities the state
of business so standing could permit; and remonstrated to the Emperor by the
bold Thenor, that they ought to make a League together, and join their arms
to make war on the Christians, their common Enemies. The Emperor who had
sworn the Souldan's ruin, contemned the advice of his Officer. But why do I
fall to perplex you with business of State, as if our fond love were not
sufficient enough to trouble you? Know then that during Achomat and Solyman's
imprisonment, Histeria plotted such designs as were more proportionable to the
thoughts of some great Captain, then of a young Maiden. She told me a hundred
times she would disguise her self, and under the habit of a Janizary, go stab
the Souldan, for keeping in prison whom she held more dear then all the world:
my timorousness staid her valor, and laid before her, that after she had
made many shameful and unprofitable endeavor, she would get nothing by her
loss, but the death of her father and lover: but the news of their liberties
making her lay by these fancies, the hope of soon seeing them, especially the
fair slave, gave her others clean contrary. Whereas a little before she was
all furious, and seemed able enough of her self to conquer all the An order of
valiant Horsemen in the last Empire of Egypt
Mamalukes, at the sight of Solomon, she put on a spirit of meekness, of
submission and servitude, and meditated long before, how she should entertain
that insensible man. Sometimes she would talk to him of his valor, then of his
imprisonment, and again extolling the dangers he had escaped in striving to
redeem Achomat; Be not less generous (said she, in his absence) to the
daughter then thou have been to the father! Let that brave heart which has
made thee hazard all for Achomats safety, oblige thee not to neglect that of
Histeria. Whilst she made these preparatives on her side, I forgot not, on the
other, what I was to do; I resolved to employ, if not of the same things my
sister had prepared, at least some others which in my judgment should have as
good an effect; I advised with the best skilled in the roll of the Eye, the
sweetness and true time of the Voice and Action, and in brief (if I dare say
so) in the imbellishing of beauty it self; and all this, to join the forces
of the body to that of the mind, to give a general assault at Solyman's
return, to that strong and well defended place. He arrived sooner then we
expected, and filled Constantinople with so great an admiration of his valor,
that he had by this time enjoyed the supremest honors of the Port, had he not
contemned them. After the Emperor had kept him and Achomat diverse days in the
Seraglio, we were permitted to see him, but not to speak the brave Orations we
had studied to move him; he scarce gave us time to congratulate his freedom;
he had no thoughts nor desire but for war; he solicited Achomat for nothing
but to return into Egypt; and he was seen to have such a deep sadness in his
countenance, as often as he was told of the brave acts he had done there, that
they well imagined his disgrace of being taken prisoner, was more sensible to
him, then his honor of killing so many enemies. The Emperor, on the other
side that would not sit down with the affront he had received in the person of
his Lieutenant, put a terrible Army into the Field, divided the Generalty
between Achomat and Haly Basha, and gave the command of the Janissaries to
Solomon: this second voyage was more glorious and favorable then the first.
The Souldan of Egypt was reduced shamefully to ask peace of his Enemy, and
constrained by Solyman's incredible valor, to abandon many places he had
taken. But o how fatal was the honor of your insensible brother to my poor
sister and me! And what powerful baits did his palms add to the charms and
allurements of his person! We looked on him no more as on the fair slave, but
as on a victorious Prince, who by his valor and fortune might aspire even to
the Empire of the Othomans. My sister, who all her life time bore an
extraordinary love to all extraordinary virtues; and who had a courage no less
high then her father and her lover, was perpetually fixed in contemplating the
exploits of the latter: and for his valor's sake excusing his insensibility,
Thou do well, (said she, sometimes) thou do well generous Solomon, not to
hearken to such requests as would stop the current of thy great actions: Pursue
them with the same boldness thou have begun, and leave us alone in our
solitude, to waste our miserable days in griefs, vexations, and unprofitable
desires. I was alone with Histeria, when she thus talked to absent Solomon; I
interrupted her, and beginning to be angry at our bootlesse perseverance,
Truly (said I) we justly merit the sorrows we undergo, since we are so great
Enemies to our selves, as so much to applaude our tyrant. What wonderful thing
has this ungrateful man done who scorns us, that we should with so much joy
entertain his disdaines, and bless the hand which cuts the thread of our
life? Believe me my dear sister, Solomon laughes at our easiness and
infallibly holds, that only because we so submissively solicit him, we
deserve to be slighted. Why (replied Histeria) speak you so boldly, since you
find in your self that your heart and thoughts disavow it? Do not flatter
your self Melicerta, but freely make known your resentment. Is your reason
able to make good the revolt it advises? Are you sure it will not forsake you
when you must come to the decision? Consult with your self, and examine
whether you have courage enough to resolve in good earnest to scorn him that
neglects you: No, no, you cannot break the fetters you wear; all your
endeavors to compass it, do nothing but multiply your sufferings; you
resolve on many things, but you cannot nor will not put them in execution: make
no doubt of it Melicerta, you shall all your life time love Solomon, with his
indifferences, his coolness and his insensibility; For mine own part I must
cease to live when I would give over loving him. Nature and inclination which
have brought on my affection, have made me love him without condition or
reservation: Neither disdain nor ingratitude can release me from that
necessity. Love Solomon says my Inclination; But if he be insensible, if he be
unrespective, if he be even an enemy to my passion, have I replied oftentimes?
For all that (it has answered) love him still; and know that thy amity shall
be the more perfect, because its existence depends on nothing but it self, and
has less commerce with things without it. Alas! Histeria (said I) dear
Histeria, I am enforced to my great grief to confess, my thoughts are
conformable to yours, and that I vainly strive to res^ the most unjust passion
wherewithal our souls could ever be persecuted. I love the ungrateful
Solomon, and I would dare say that I love him against my will, if at the same
time when I think so, my will did not disavow it, I should never make an end,
if I passed not in silence the most part of those discourses begotten and
produced by our younger errors. But I leave them, and let us see the victorious
Solomon enter Constantinople as much covered with Palms and Laurets as we
were full of flames and impatiency. The Emperor willing to gratify his great
services, made him a Basha, and enriching him beyond his hopes, gave him one of
his fairest Palaces, and this way took him out of the power of Achomat. The
liberty he had recovered, and the great means he had acquired by so
honorable ways, had been the greatest part of our joy, if that Prince's good
fortune had not been the ruin of our own. I will not tell you to what an
extreme torment we were brought by his absence; his prosperities were to us
new causes of sorrow, and when we came to think they hastened our destruction,
we day and night cursed them, and at one same time wished Solomon, Emperor of
the Turks, and that he might still be a slave. These different wishes ruining
themselves by their mutual extravagancy, we knew not at last what to eschew or
what to desire. The very evening, that ungrateful man arrived, only advised
by our frenzy, we resolved to let him see in writing, what we had no hope to
let him know from ou mouths. Presently, we severally writ to him, but neither
of us being pleased with our letters, we threw them into the fire, and were of
opinion we should better express our thoughts if we did enclose them in one
same paper. Histeria therefore began to write for us both, I did so too; and
after many alterations we approved of the letter I will now rehearse to you,
and sent it to our enemy: It was thus, if my memory fail me not.

The two Sisters to SOLOMON BASHA.
WE should be guilty of that crime whereof we accuse others, if we were not
sensible of your honor; and it is to witness the pleasure we take in it, that
we have hazarded these lines to you; your good fortune would have taken from
us the use of prayer if it had cured you of your insensibility. We beg
nothing from heaven but the end of that ill, after our obtaining the period of
others: do not make it incurable Solomon, but let pity work the remedy: We
would say Love, but we fear lest that word should offend you: yet give us
leave to tell you what we do, and read without anger, that time and absence
which ruinate things the best established, daily strengthen our affection. We
have made a progress from the Love of Inclination, to that of Understanding;
and that, which at first had no reason at all, has now such strong ones, as
you must absolutely deprive us of judgment, if you go about to make us alter
our resolutions. Do not imitate such ill examples as those, with whom, the
Princes favor has filled up the History of this Court. Do not forget your
self because you are fortunate, and if you have not altered your mind, change
at least your excuses, since those you made to us hereto fore, would (in the
condition where you are now) witness rather your scorn then respect.

Soliman received this Letter by the address of an old Jewish woman, who hoped
for a great settling of her fortune if our loves had a happy success. He
advised long whether he should answer us. At last he resolved to it; not to
entertain us in our errors, but to make us lose with the hope of their good
success, the intention of continning in them. See those cruel words which
gave the first mortal; blow to poor Histeria, and have handled me more
rigorously, since they make me languish far, far beyond her.

The Slave SOLIMAN to his two. Princesses Histeria and Melicerta.
PArdon me Ladies, if I begin my Letter with accusations, in live of most
humble acknowledgements and thanks which obliege me to your incomparable
courtesy. You censure by appearances as well as vulgar Souls; and think I
have changed my condition because I have changed my bonds. No fair Princesses,
I am not what I seem to be. I am still a Captive, I am still unfortunate; and
therefore I must yet make use of the same excuses, which served me as often as
you (forgetting what you were borne) had so much goodness as to deigne to cast
an eye on your Slave. I will never lose that quality, because I hold it more
glorious then all that fortune can give me. Withal, I will inviolably reserve
for you those respects, and yield you the same duties which the law of that
Servitude commands me.

THis Letter, so respectfull in appearance, but so proud in effect, did but
increase our afflictions. We therein found an absolute refusal of our
affections, and an infallible assurance of being eternally scorned. Yet would
we not believe our malady to be absolutely desp^ate. We entreated, we
importuned, we writ; in brief, we let pass no occasion to thaw that heart of
ice. But we lost all hope, when Solomon departed from Constantinople, on that
great design which the Emperor had on the territories of the Venetian
Commonwealth. The navall Army being gone out of the Channel, came to
Nigroponte, and a little after to Romagnia. I will not relate the particulars
of that war. Far more strange events call on me, and passing by all fights by
Land and Sea, would have me come with the insensible Soliman to the siege of
Lepanto. I will dispense with you for this present for not crediting all the
truths I have to tell you, for they are so extraordinary, as they are beyond
the belief of the most credulous. Solomon was no sooner gone from
Constantinople, but my Sister and my self were almost our of our wits. We were
no more restrained either by the consideration of our birth, or the interest of
our honor, or by the fear of death. We resolved to follow our Enemy. I
confess, had I been alone I should never have put on that resolution; but I
was swayed by the violence of Histeria's love. We stole out of the Sultannesse
our mother^ Seraglio, and disguising our selves so, as it was very hard for any
to know us, we mingled our selves amongst those troops were embarked for the
Venetia war. We came to Lepanto a few days after it was besieged. The first
thing we did after our landing was to go to Soliman's quarter, and to
endeavor by all means to be entertained in his Service. Our design did not
absolutely succeed well. Yet we had leave to lodge in his quarter, and to see
him at several hours in the day. Histeria who had not told me her last
resolution, strove to bring it to pass without engaging me in it. After a
furious sally, wherein the Soldiers of Lepanto did all that despair could
advise men of courage to: Solomon saved a part of the Imperial Army, and
unawares gave the rash Histeria her life. The night following that fight, my
poor Sister seeing all things opposed her Design, and that Soliman himself
took pains to preserve that life she desired to lose; resolved to speak to
him. Finding therefore a convenient time to discover her self, she aborded him
with an extraordinary constancy, and without faultering in her Speech; I do
not (said she) give thee thanks for saving my life, since those good deeds
which are not voluntary, obliege not those to whom they were done. No, I will
do what I never resolved. I will thank thee for a good which thou never
intendest to do me; and if thou do not repent thee of it, 'twill be too much
for me to be eternally indebted to thee. Thou see (Soliman) here before thee
the most unhappy Histeria, who unable any longer to endure thy denial or thine
absence, has in her strange resolution feared nothing but to find thee yet
insensible. Thou wondrest at this declaration, and seem to doubt whether my
words be true. But being never yet capable of love, thou art no more neither of
conceiving to what extremities Love is wont to carry such as affect truly. Do
not doubt of my being the same I tell thee. My Sister, whose alike passion has
made her undertake the same voyage, and other testimonies less suspected, will
clear thee when thou list, of those doubts wherein thou art very willing to
abide. Soliman amazed and affrighted at so strange an adventure, was a great
while ere he could speak to my Sister. At last he enforced himself; and
raising up that disconsolate Princess: Would to heaven (said he) my death had
accompanied my fathers. We should then both have enjoyed that peace and quiet
which fortune alike denies us. O how hateful hence forward shall that life be
to me which has hitherto been so troublesome, since it is by it that I see my
self guilty of such crimes as cannot be too rigorously punished! I deprive all
at once, my generous Master of all content, honor, and may be of life; to whom
alone I owe my life, honor and fortune. What shall I say to you Madam? What
will become of the Basha your father if he knows of this vagary? Nay, what
will become of your self? In what corner of the world will your Sister escape
the fury of a justly enraged father? What can I do that may avail you? Tell
me, (I beseech you) for you have brought me into such a maze, that I even
scarce know whether I am my self or no? Only love me (replied the poor
Histeria) with a voice able to mollify a rock; or if it be too much for thee,
yet at least give leave that thou be beloved; and that being granted, we shall
have found remedies against all those ills which thou fear. Soliman had no
reply to that proposition; but stuck in a silence which proceeded more from his
modesty and confusednesse then his natural insensibility. Histeria perceiving
she wrought nothing on him, raised her voice a little, and adding many tears
to every word, At least (said she) impassible Soliman, if thou be not capable
of love, be capable of hatred, and continue not so unmercifull as to suffer me
to live. Soliman extremely perplexed with my Sisters speech, called for five
or six Eunuchs whom he trusted with his most important affairs, and committing
Histeria into their custody; Have (said he) a special care of this Soldier,
and be accomptable to me for him on your life. He will bring you to his
lodging, where his brother is. Go, and bring them both to one of the Tents
next mine own. This command was executed as it was enjoined; and we were shut
up where Soliman had appointed, and served by his Eunuchs with so much care,
that we thought his noble entertainment had been an infallible presage of the
end of our miseries. In that error we lived eight or ten days; but when
Histeria saw that Soliman neither came nor sent to visit us, she resolved to
dye; and told me, her constancy was at the last gasp; and she could no longer
endure Solimans insensibilities. I was of the same opinion, but had not the
same courage. I wished with all my heart to be out of the world, but all the
ways to it seemed hydeous and fearful to me. I see my dear Auditors you
grow weary of my laments, and the relation of our miseries begins to be
irksome. I am now ending it, by a bloody Catastrophe. Know, at the general
assault which the Turks gave to Lepanto, Histeria finding a way to deceive her
keepers, fought above two hours in the first rank of the Janissaries, and even
in sight of our father and her Beloved. She then received many mortal wounds,
and the assault being ended, entreated two of her Companions to carry her off
into Solimans Tent. That insensible man came in almost as soon as she, and
knowing her, was so inly touched at that tragical spectacle, as he commanded
all his followers to withdraw. When he was alone with her, he would have said
something, but she imposed him silence, and though she spoke with a great deal
of pain; Of so many requests (said she) which I have made to thee since I was
borne at least grant me one: I will ask no unjust thing of thee. It Is, that
after my death thou will be a little more humane then thou have been whilst I
lived. Thy prayers are heard Soliman, see, this is the last time the
unfortunate Histeria will importune thee: she has obtained from her self a
great deal more then she desired from thee; But she laments not the losing her
life to please thee, for it is the least loss thou have made her suffer. O
happy, among so many miseries, if she can by her death purchase her sisters
felicity. Thou weep'st Solomon, since when began thy stony heart to change
nature? Has my blood had the virtue to mollify it? If it be so, o how
precious are my wounds to me, since in bringing my death they end my miseries,
and melting that congealed ice within thee, promise some peace to my dear
Melicerta! What more could she add to these words? truly nothing: but ending
them she died, and seemed to die joyfully because she thought it would be the
price of my redemption. Alas! my dear sister, thou died'st with that generous
thought, and I unfortunate and coward that I am, dare live with that knowledge!
give Melicerta, give somewhat else then vain tears and Iamentations to her
that has bestowed her blood and life on thee. I yield to it my dear Histeria,
and am fully resolved to follow thee, for I feel in my self I know not what
strange motion which assures me my death is at hand: and that the insensible
Solomon shall not much longer triumph over my unreasonable perseverance. But
return we, my dear Auditors, to that unpitifull man: Histeria's death, almost
made him desperate, not that he had lost her, but that he had been the cause
of it, and by consequence of the most sensible sorrow his Benefactor Achomat
had ever resented. He was about to have slain his Eunuchs: yet weighing that
their diligence how exact soever, could not be sufficient enough to hinder the
resolutions of a furious Lover; he enjoined them for penance to take better
care and charge of me then they had of my sister; he sent me a little after the
body of that unfortunate Princess, and a Jew Physician, entreating me (by him)
to imbalme it: I gave her those sad duties that very night, and helped to
enclose her in a cedar Coffin covered with plates of silver, which Solomon sent
me, with a great many excuses in that he could not himself give me that
respect he was obliged to, by my birth, his duty, and our common affliction. I
knew too well for my quiet, he had not changed nature; and that the tears he
had shed at my sisters death, were rather tears of ceremony then pity. The
next day he sent me a new Messenger, and told me by him, that to what place
soever I would retire, I should find a Tartane ready in the haven to carry me
thither with the body of Histeria. He who brought this message, said, he had
command not to leave me, and he would not only perform it, but being Captain
of the Vessel, would either hasten or retard his voyage as I pleased. I have
no more to do here said I, but to take leave of Solomon; That will be a hard
thing for you to do (he replied) since he is busied about the batteries, and
it is thought the Venetians will this day come to a Treaty about the reddition
of Lepanto. What he said proved true; Solomon, who has ever been the good Fate
of his Masters (o happy Histeria and Melicerta if he had been so of his
slaves!) took the Town by composition, and accompanied Bajazet into it at his
glorious entry. The day of triumph being passed, Solomon without any man's
knowing or so much as suspecting the cause (with a few of his followers) left
the Camp, and renouncing all the honors, riches, and supreme greatness, which
the Emperors favor and his important services might justly make him hope for,
stole away in the dark of night from all the Turkish Fleet. The flight of a
man of so great a consideration, was soon noys'd abroad after it happened, but
diverse days passed in the Camp before it was believed. The Emperor, my father
and many others filled with the love and admiration of that Prince, lamented
his loss, as the greatest could a long while betide the Ottoman Empire.
As Soon as the news was brought me, I embarked, with Histeria's body, and
entreated my Pilot to land me in some part of France or Italy: I thought I
should find Solomon there, for since he was a Christian there was no safer
retreat for him. I was almost six months in quest of him, but all my care and
diligence was fruitless; sometimes I inquired for Solomon, sometimes for
Iphidamantus, and seeing ^was all in vain, I thought then to ask for
Polexander's brother. That Name which is known through all Europe was my guide
to bring me to Solomon. I was told that Polexander was lately become Lord of
the Canaries, and being crowned King of them with the consent of all the
Islanders, I should infallibly find his brother with him. I therefore passed
the Straits, and came to the Isle of Teneriffe; there I understood that
Polexander was lost at Sea, and saw the Inhabitants of three or four other
Islands, so passionately amorous of his virtue, that though he were dead as
they believed, yet they held him for their King, and obeyed his name and memory
as religiously, as they would himself. I inquired in all the Islands of the
Prince Iphidamantus, and every where heard that they had not seen him: at last
wearied with leading so miserable and to be bewailed a life, and the carrying
about the body of my dear sister, I landed in this Isle, where finding
Almanzor's Tomb with many others, I thought it a place destined for the
burial of unfortunate Lovers. Here then I got that Tomb to be built which we
came from, and therein laying Histeria's body, resolved, with it, to end my
days, and to divide all my tears and lamentations betwixt my too loving
sister and my insensible Lover. Scarce had the desolate Lady ended the sad
recital of her adventures, but Polexander (not thinking of any thing but to
blame Iphidamantus for his ingratitude) cried out, Our misfortunes have their
source from thine insensibility, o brother, unworthy to be named, and the
afflictions which Cydaria and my self have undergone, proceed from naught else
but the just anger of heaven, who moved with the blood and tears of two so
rare Princesses, avengeth on our heads thine iniquity! How (said Melicerta
interrupting him) is Iphidamantus your brother too? We may be ashamed to own
him (replied Polexander) yet (...) acknowledge him (Madam) and beseech you
humbly to avenge your self on me for some part of those wrongs he unmercifully
has made you suffer. I thought till now (said Melicerta) that Iphidamantus had
no other brother then Polexander: no more has he not (Madam) answered Cydaria,
and he whom you see, is the same Polexander, whose fame has related to you
such wonderful things. Melicerta understanding that verity, turned to our
Hero, and looking fix'dly on him, It is very hard (said she) for you to
conceal your self long; there is something, I know not what in your
countenance which is not seen but in extraordinary men. As Soon as I saw you,
me thought you brought me the remedy which Heaven has reserved for the cure
of all my miseries, and that my long misfortunes should by your assistance
find that end, which Iphidamantus has always denied me. I am neither so much
beloved by heaven, nor powerful enough (said he) to do you any profitable
service; but I again engage my self, to avenge you on Iphidamantus
ingratitude, and oblige him to give you all the satisfaction which your just
resentment ought to expect from his; I would gladly assure you of his love, but
you know (Madam) that love does so absolutely depend on our will, that even
Tyrants who can do all, by the fear and terror they imprint in our minds,
have never been able to impose it on us. It may be, Iphidamantus has cast off
his Turkish severitie (in which he has been bred) with his Turbant; and his
Spirit casting by those austere ways of life wherewithal his education has
as it were diverted the course of his nature, will betake it self to the path
she first delineated. I hope for nothing from Iphidamantus (replied Melicerta)
I know too well his aversion from me, and though his insensibilitie may be
overcome, I am most certain 'twill never be by my affection: And when I talk
of remedies, of help, of the end of my misfortunes, I mean only such as are
met with in the grave; and which by a merciful effect of Heaven's goodness,
happen, when they are least expected. I confess it to you Polexander, I am so
inured to tears, to griefs, and torments, that I could hardly live among
contentments; and have so deeply impressed a belief of my never being happy
but in death, that Iphidamantus himself would have much ado to make me alter
mine opinion. Yet I would feign see him though I cannot tell you why; my
blinded and uncertain affection flies from what it desires, and seeks for
that which it would not meet vvithall: It is guided by some other, who
stronger then it self, swayes, and makes it follovv the variety of his
motions. In a word, I feel what I cannot express, Heaven intends some great
matter, but it gives me only ^n imperfect and confused knowledge of it: I
shall without doubt see Iphidamantus again, and see him (as me thinks) quite
altered from what he has been hitherto, yet for all that, I am constant to my
old opinion, that death only shall be the end of my miseries. Hope better
(Madam, replied Polexander) and be assured, that your long being accustomed to
sad and dismal imaginations, produces all those mishaps you figure to your
self. You shall be happy, because Heaven is just; and assure your self, that
your happiness (as I may say) steals from your thoughts and belief, to the
end that coming on you at unavvares, it may make you taste those delights,
which are extremely diminished, when they have been alvvayes hoped for, and
too long time expected. Cidaria, who was silent, had her eyes fixed on
Melicerta's face, and noting there such sweetness and attraction as she could
hardly resist, began (in her self) to be moved against Iphidamantus; and after
she had accused him of stupidity and blindness, rather then of coldness,
vvish'd, she might be his Judge, to condemn him to such tortures as were
proportionable to his offenses. Their long converse being thus ended, Melicerta
was enforced to take a later resolution; Polexander and his sister vvooed her
to it, and she seeing her self pressed to it by her own thoughts, at last
consented to leave her sisters Tomb, and once again to try fortune, and
contest with Iphidamantus insensibility. Our Hero assured her, the voyage she
was to take would be more hapy then her former, and so by degrees drevv her
from her lodging for an undelay'd imbarking. They went all three in company to
the haven, where going aboard, Polexander presently commanded his Pilot to
make for the Isle of Teneriffe, which he did; and after five hours, landing
Polexander there, restored to the Inhabitants all that joy they had forgone
since the sad news of that Princes loss. They forgot nothing whereby Subjects
are wont to witness their loves, and besought him, they might now at leisure
taste the comforts of his presence: He granted their requests, and whilst he
was with them, spent his time in such necessary reformations, and profitable
institutions, that those Islanders had cause to bless so just a reign, and to
multiply their Sacrifices and Prayers for the continuation of it. Polexander
took his leave of them with tears in his eyes, so much was he moved with
their affection; and with the same success visited the grand Canary and the
fortunate: at last he arrived in the new Isle of Alcidiana. The good order he
had left at his departure continued still, the Viceroy had neither abused his
Authority nor his Masters absence; and though he thought him dead, he opposed
all kind of alterations. Our Hero welcomed Melicerta and Cydaria into a
Palace which had been finished since his depart, and which by the managing of
the intelligent and trusty Bias, was adorned with all those rich ornaments
which make weak minds admire the quality of Kings. The news of that Prince
his return flew straight into Spain, and stayed in the haven the navall Army
which the ambitious Ferdinand had provided for the reconquering the Canaries.
France which had a share in Polexanders adventures, since he was of the blood
of her Kings, welcomed the news of his return with a great deal of joy; and
Jews the Twelfth was advised by the great Cardinal of Amboise to send him an
Ambassador to congratulate his good fortune, and offer him his alliance and
power. The Princes of Africa, friends and foes, testified either their loves or
fear by their many Embasses. Amongst others, those of Zahara sent Deputies, to
entreat him to accept of their Crown: They had lately freed themselves from a
tyranny, which was insupportable, and when they were about the election of a
new King, they were so divided, and so exasperated that to uphold those whom
they had chosen, they would have hazarded a battle. But the news of
Polexander's return, presently made the weapons fall out of the hands of both
parties; and they began all to cry, Heaven save the King of the fortunate
Islands! And straight strangling both those they had chosen to command them,
sent with all humility to entreat Polexander to cross the sea, and come
receive that new Crown which his incomparable merits had in his absence
acquired him. The principal of that Deputation was a Priest of Mahomet's Law,
no less a Politician then a great Theologist: He was to speak in the name of
the Province; and indeed when he came before Polexander, he made known by his
demeanor as well as by his words, that he well merited the first place in a
Council of State. These were the motives he used to dispose our Hero to the
accepting the Crown of Zahara: If it were a fundamental Law in Elective
States, that none should ascend the Throne, but such a one as was called to it
by unanimous suffrages, and the universal consent of all private men, I dare
maintain (Sir) before your Majesty, that such a manner of choosing Kings would
be a means of never choosing any. The multitude which is but seldom in accord
with it self, has no great mind to be so, in a matter whereto they have not
much less repugnancy then love, and we must therefore go against the option
of the most, when the question is of choosing a Master to a whole Nation. You
are the first, Sir, and I shall not speak a falsity, should I say the sole
person who by your incomparable qualities have put an exception to this
general rule, which is no less glorious to your Majesty, then beneficial to
your new Subjects. They have had but one mind, but one same voice, and i^ I
dare say it, but one and the same soul as soon as I proposed to them the
electing you for their King: Their ancient enmities and hatreds which seemed to
be irreconcilable, have ceased, even in the beginning of battle, so much did
they fear lest their disunion might retard their common felicities. It Is your
virtue great King which has wrought this miracle in the minds of a people,
who, not to flatter them, seemed not capable of so much wisdom: the Zaharians
come to you as to their deliverer; have pity on the many miseries they have
endured: and since Heaven has given you to the world, to distribute without
favor, those treasures it has left in your hands, dispose of them every where
equally, and conforming your self to that will which gave you them, reserve
not for one Nation alone, that which is destinated for the general good of the
whole world. Polexander finding his speech so rational and so urging, was
troubled what answer to make, and neither oblige himself, nor discontent a
Nation which had testified so much love to him: His brave spirit, which like
his courage had surmounted always the most difficult obstacles, presently
furnished him with this judicious reply.

The Obligation which binds me to you for your coming so far off to offer me
the Crown of Zahara, is no common tie, but your judging me worthy is
infinitely greater. I will not by a confession which should be true and yet
seem to you artificial, show you I am not the man you deem me; but, since you
will have it so, leave you in your errors, and accepting with joy a Present
you so frankly give me, I will strive to live in such a manner, that my
government shall give no cause for you to repent of your election.

The Ambassadors of Zahara obtaining this favorable Audience, and seeing
their negotiation succeed so well, dispatched one of their company to carry
home the good news: in the mean time they were entertained with an
incomparable magnificence, and after eight or ten days refreshing, some of
them took their leaves of Polexander, and the rest abode with him as well to
instruct him in the Affairs of the Kingdom, as to hasten his journey. That
famous Priest of whom we have before spoken, was one of those which stayed. As
one day, Polexander entertained him in the presence of Cidaria and Melicerta,
he fell to talk of the Africans Wars; the Priest who was perfectly instructed
in them, Sir (said he) it is not long since your Kingdom was threatened by the
Arms of Morocco: Ambitious Abdelmelec had an intent to place the bounds of his
command beyond the River of Abernia, and to get to himself by his power, such
Nations as he was not able to acquire by his virtue: our AIarums and his
Enterprises vanished both together. Of an Invader, which he would have been, he
has been enforced to stand on his own defense, and at this very present, is
besieged in Morocco with his father, and by two such Captains as are not wont
to vanquish by halfes. Pray (said Polexander) tell me what those Captains be,
and what design has engaged them in this Siege. Sir (replied the Priest) it is
not past three months, since that generous and invincible Commander of the
Pirates, called Bajazet, was informed, that Hely the father of Abdelmelec has
gotten into his custody a slave, or as others assure us, a Princess which he
beforetime passionately loved: but whether it be that this valiant Pirate be
enamored of that beauty, or out of a true effect of his noble and great
courage, that he will deliver her from that dangerous slavery; so it is, he
has drawn his most forces out of his Island, and assisted by a puissant
succor from the Kings his allies, has even cast anchor in the very River of
Tensif; and after many skirmishes, wherein Bajazet's valor has disheartened
the most daring Africans; Abdelmelec and Hely have been compelled to shut
themselves up in Morocco. The Rovers have there besieged them, and but for that
miraculous arrival of a Knight which will not at all be known what he is, the
Siege had been ended above a month since by the sack of the City. On the
other side there is arrived to Bajazet a great aid from Constantinople: This
may seem very strange to you, but 'twill be far more when you know the cause
of it. The Basha Herzecogli, son-inlaw to the Grand Signior, has gotten leave
of him, to come with a great navall Army, to avenge himself of another Basha
called Solomon, who has stolen from him two twinne daughters, and who to keep
them to himself, has left the grand Signior's service. and put him into the
protection of the King of Morocco. This Basha Herzecogli, which is esteemed the
valiant'st man in the Ottoman Empire, animated with the grief of the loss of
his daughters, and with a desire of revenge, so presses on Morocco, that if it
be not already taken, it is infallibly on the point of being so. This Priest
very likely would have added more news to this, but he noted so great a
trouble in the countenances of Melicerta and Cydaria, that he thought it not
fit to proceed. Polexander who well knew the cause of the Princesses agitation,
arose to leave them at their liberty, and took with him all such as might
hinder their freedom. He was no sooner gone out, but said Melicerta (to
Cydaria) all pale and trembling, My dear Sister is there in the world a more
unfortunate creature then I? I have forsaken the tomb wherein I had buried my
self alive, as the most doleful place could be chosen, and I see that by the
incomprehensible cruelty of my destiny, this Palace wherein I began to taste
some comfort, is in an instant turned into a hell where all my pains and
torments are renewed and augmented. What have I heard? What must become of me?
Soliman is shut up in Morocco, and my father, alas! most ignorant of the truth,
besieges him, and seeks to be avenged of a crime whereof to my infinite grief
Iphidamantus is too innocent. Cydaria was not less perplexed then Melicerta,
but her discretion being far more scrupulous, she held her peace, or if she
spoake, 'twas to her self. What (said she) does Almanzor then with so much
fervency prosecute the liberty of a Slave? Be persuaded who list that he does
it out of mere nobleness, Cydaria will never be so simple, nor so much
overreacht as to believe it. Finish Almanzor, finish boldly what thou have
begun. Burn and consume thy self for an unfortunate Slave, since all kinds of
objects are able to please thy fickleness. That Axiamira whom thou sometime
lovedst, will never disturb thy designs, no more then she will ever hear
spoaken again of thine affection. Polexander, as Cydaria thus ended her
upbraidings, came in alo^e. He went right to Melicerta, and knowing what need
she had of comfort; Madam (said he) if I should condemn your being thus
perplexed, I should be ignorant of that which is most just and most powerful
in nature. Your affrights and fears are extreme, that is, they are effects
proportionable to their causes. Yet despair not. This is without doubt the
Crisis, the alteration of your disease: And if so be Morocco can yet hold out a
few days, I hope to put a happy end to such adventures as seem to promise
themselves but a tragical period: We must lose no time. Resolve your self
therefore to go to Morocco with Cydaria, and be pleased to let me be both your
Guide and Counselor. Melicerta thought it no hard proposition, but Cydaria
directly opposed it, and in her concealed anger, gave the fairest reasons that
could be to dissuade the voyage. Polexander knew well his Sisters sickness,
but would not let her perceive it, for fear of adding to her affliction; he
contented himself with answering to her reasons, and so plainly to remove all
the difficulties she had framed, that at last overcome by her self as well as
by the persuasions of others, she yielded to the Journey, on condition yet that
she should not be seen of any. Melicerta entreated Polexander the same, and
obtaining it, went to prepare for their departing. Our Hero who extremely
longed to be free from others business, that he might follow his own,
embarked the next day, and taking with him the Ambassadors of Zahara gave
charge to his Pilot to make to the mouth of the River Abernia. At Sunset he
came thither, and making his arrival known the next morning by break of day,
all the two sides of the River were covered with horse and foot. Never did a
captivated Nation welcome their Deliverer with so many demonstrations of love
and joy, as the Inhabitants of Zahara did Polexander. Men, women and children
made the air resound again with their shouts, and ran into the water as far
as they could, to come the soonest nearer the King. When he was ready to show
himself, he went into a Shallop, and taking none with him but Osmin and the
Ambassadors, landed amongst all the people. The infinite multitude following
him from the River, cast themselves flat on the earth, and renewing their
shoutes and applauses seemed they were at the height of their happiness. In
the mean time, Polexander causing a little Theater to be raised of turfes
whereon he and Osmin only mounting, he commanded the people to stand up.
As Soon as they had environed the place where he stood, and had imposed them
silence; Polexander advanced, and spoke thus: I come (my friends) to give you
thanks for the benefit you have done me, and to offer you for it, mine arm,
my counsel, and my life. I accept of you on such conditions as shall please
you best, and swear to you by that Power which we adore, that nothing shall
unlinke me from you. But in as much as fortune compells me whether I will or
no, to wander from one Country to another, and will not permit me neither to
stay long with you, I have chosen a Lieutenant to govern you in my absence:
His virtue is so well known to you, and his blood which has been always
held holy, and venerable amongst you, should make him so dear to you, that
infallibly you will approve of my choice; and I doubt not but you would have
chosen him for your King, had you not thought him in his grave. It Is Osmin, (my
friends) it is that legitimate heir of the great Abuchar Ischias, the Founder
of your Monarchy; it is that Prince I say, who preferring your safety before his
own, and your ease and solace before the favors of the Tyrant that would have
ruined you, voluntarily banished himself from his home, that he might not be a
confederate in those mischiefs which he could not hinder. After he had thus
spoken, he took Osmin by the hand, and showing him to the people, Can you
(said he, my friends) behold this face which has been always so pleasing unto
you, and not witness your joy for his returning? Lose, lose, those
considerations which detain you, let your contentment ring again; and if you
are sorry for not having any thing worthy your acknowledging the incomparable
virtue of this Prince; cease your just sorrow, and know that Polexander
accepted not the Crown of Zahara, but to have the honor of replacing it on
his head who only ought to wear it. The peoples affections after this Speech
were much divided, and their minds so contrary, that some who had been
witnesses of Osmin's brave deeds, wished him the Crown; others, which had a
blind love to Polexander could not resolve with themselves to revoke their
election. After diverse conferences and much factiousnesse, at last one same
motion thrust them on all to cry, Let Osmin reign, but let Polexander reign
too, the one as Father, and the other as Son. Our Hero approving the peoples
wishes, took the royal Turbant which the Zaharians had presented him, and put
it on Osmin's head. Osmin who till then had been (as 'twere) out of himself,
(not so much for the good fortune was betided him beyond his hope, as at the
generousnesse wherewithal Polexander had procured it) came out of his
astonishment, and without any regard to his new dignity cast himself at
Polexander's feet. You shall reign (said he) over a people which by a rare
happiness meet all their wishes and felicity in their affection; they love
you, and it is Justice, not to slight their amity: do not make them alter their
former resolutions, since they are so advantageous for them; and be pleased,
that joining my prayers with theirs, I lay at your feet a Badge which is too
illustrious to be worn on my head. With that he took off the Turbant which
Polexander had placed there, and would indeed have laid it at his feet, had he
not hindered and enforced him, by his persuasions and entreaties, to receive an
honor which his virtues had so justly merited. Osmin, overcome by the Princes
reasons, and acclamations of the people, at last consented to be King, and was
so acknowledged through all the Assembly: The Priests and Knights presently
conducted him to the great Temple of Albernia, and crowned him according to the
ancient customs of the Country. Polexander had no sooner seen the new King
established, but he sent notice of it to Cidaria, who presently leaving the
ship came ashore with Melicerta and Osmin's Lady, and overjoyed at the hapy
fortune of a Prince which had been to her so long time in lieu of a father,
made every place resound with her just and excessive contentment: She cast her
self on Osmin's neck before all that encompassed them, and left him not, but
to give Polexander thanks for those favors wherewithal he had both prevented
her Petition, and recompensed all those pains and travells whereunto the care
of her preservation had exposed that good old Prince and his Lady. Two days
she stayed with them, to make them savor the more the pleasures of Regalitie;
and had she not been (as well as Polexander) earnestly solicited to make haste
to the Siege of Morocco, she had kept them far longer company. The day of
their depart arriving, there was of necessity, that, to be giving to love and
custom, which they exact even from those which condemn it; their farewels
were accompanied with sighs and tears, and though Polexander and Cidaria
promised the virtuous Osmin and his generous Lady, to be soon back again,
yet they showed as much grief for their departure, as if they had been
certain never to see them more. Polexander, Cidaria, and Melicerta, went
aboard, and after five days happy navigation, descri'd the Pirates Fleet,
which lay at anchor in the mouth of the River of Tensiff.

The end of the third Part of the History of Polexander.
THE FOURTH PART OF POLEXANDER.
The first Book.
POlexander seeing two ships of War which were in guard at the mouth of the
River of Tensiff to weigh anchor, either to fight with him, or to see what he
was, commanded his Mariners to strike sail, and his chief Squire to go meet
those vessels, and inquire news of Bajazet. Presently Alcippus took a
shallop, and observing those ceremonies used at sea, in token of Peace and
friendship, rowed to the nearest ship to them. She was commanded by a Rover
called Cady Hamet, to whom Polexander had before-time given his life; as soon
as Alcippus saw him he knew the man, and intimating his joy for meeting him,
Hamet (said he) the King my Master intreates thee to send him news of thy
General. The Pirate overjoyed with seeing a man he extremely loved; Dear
Christian (replied he) I am infinitely grieved that the strictness of our
Discipline makes me fail in what we owe thee: but if thou love me as much as
I believe, let thy affection sway something as well as the necessity of my
charge, and come up hither, that I may embrace thee and fully inform thee of
all which Polexander would know. Alcippus, desirous to satisfy his friend and
his Master, took hold of the ropen ladder which the Pirate had thrown out,
and went straight up to him. The embraces and civilities once done, the Turk
led the Christian into his Cabin, and putting every other out; The King thy
Master (said he) may be is ignorant of the cause which has engaged us in the
Siege of Morocco. He is not altogether so (replied Alcippus) for being at the
Canaries, he understood, how Bajazet fallen in love with a slave of the King of
Morocco had proclaimed war against that King to get her out of his hands.
This is not altogether false, (said Hamet) but thou must know, that this
pretended slave of Hely, is that fair and virtuous Princess which my General
lost in the Kingdom of Benin: these three months almost has he bin with all
his forces before Morocco, and has made a solemn vow to put the Town to fire
and sword, if that Princess be not quickly restored to him. I will not relate
to thee the brave incounters have been since the beginning of the Siege; Let
it suffice I tell thee there is to be one this day, which is to decide the
War. Not long since there came to the King of Morocco a Knight, which calls
himself the Unknown: It Is the most expert, the most courteous, and the most
valiant Gentleman, next Polexander, of all those that honor the Cross. This
Knight, and Abdelmelec the Prince, desirous to spare the lives of a great many
Innocents, have resolved to end the Siege, by a Combat, of two against two.
Bajazet and Achomat have accepted their challenge three days since, and the
conditions of the Duel being agreed on of both sides, we shall this day see
for whom fortune has reserved the victory. As Soon as Alcippus had heard of
business so important, he took leave of Hamet, and sailed on with an extreme
quickness to advertise the King his Master of it: He found him with Melicerta
and Cydaria, and by his recital of Bajazet's Combat, equally astonished them
all three: Melicerta made openly appear the fear she had of her father;
Cidaria concealed that which she had for her Lover, as inconstant as she
thought him; and Polexander thinking not on fear but how to prevent the
mischief, It Is not fit (said he) nor must it be, that four such valiant men
should hazard their ruin for a thing merely imaginary. Straight he commanded
to set sail, and entering the River with wind and tide, made himself known
to all such as were aboveboard in Bajazets ships, to avoid his being stayed.
When he saw himself in a commodious place for landing, he cast anchor, and
whilst they were carrying ashore his arms and horses, he withdrew the two
Princesses, and entreated them in that occasion to show they were exempted from
their Sexes weakness, They promised him to overmaster themselves, and though
their fear had a little troubled part of their judgments, yet had they enough
left to surmount all those sad imaginations, which thronging on the neck of
one another, came to assault their generous resolutions. Polexander left them,
and taking none with him but Alcippus and Diceus, landed where his horses and
arms were: He there armed himself, and getting to horse rid on an easy
gallop, to the Lives which had been drawn out between the Camp and the Town
to enclose the place wherein Bajazet, Achomat, Abdelmelec, and the unknown
Knight were to decide the fortune of Morocco. He entreated those who kept the
entrance to let him pass, and to win them the rather, told who he was; the
Pirates did him all honor, and relating their command, humbly besought him not
to do Bajazet so much wrong, as to hinder his Combat. Our Hero unwilling to
offer violence to the Guard, or to make known his intention, placed himself
before them, and thought ere they were well heated in the fight, some occasion
might present it self to stop the proceeding: it happened according to his
forecast, for he saw two Knights come from the gates of Morocco, who armed at
all points, and riding as fast as they could, made all judge, they had aminde
to be of the match. Polexander showed them to the Pirates, and intimating how
Bajazet and Achomat ran a hazard if they were not seconded; Friends (said he)
it is no longer time to deliberate: the order you received is altered by the
arrival of these two Knights; do not betray your General by an indiscreet
obedience, but at least permit him to have a third, since there are two more
come in to his Enemies. The Rovers persuaded by these few words, opened the
Lists to our Hero, who fearing he might come too late flew in like lightning
among the six Knights: He who came to meet him, accosted him in a very warlike
manner, and entreating the King fairly to take him to task. These Knights
(said he) are resolved to send me back shamefully to Morocco; judge whether I
should not be extremely sensible of that affront! It lies in your power to free
me from it; let me therefore brave Knight be so much obliged to you, and let
your friends see, that you came not hither no more then I to be an immovable
spectator of their Combat. My intent (replied Polexander) is to separate, and
not to set them on. I am the most deceiv'dst man of the world (said the Moore)
or you are not a person likely to break off such a match. I should be glad
(answered Polexander) the opinion you have of me might be preserved without the
obliging me to alter my resolution. It Is impossible (said the Moore.) Since you
then enforce me (added our Hero) I will satisfy you, but on condition, that
he of us two which has the better of his companion, shall go part the rest.
The four Princes began to laugh at Polexander's proposition, as thinking it to
come from a man who had a great opinion of his own courage; and being severed,
as soon as they had sent away Polexander's and Moore's Squires, rid to take the
distance behooved them for a fit careere. Abdelmelec's third man, by the furious
encounter of our Hero, receiving a shock as if it had been a blow of thunder,
was borne man and horse to the ground. The Prince of Morocco broke his lance on
Bajazet's shield, but with more slight then vigor; the illustrious Rover made
him otherwise feel his strength, for having pierced his armor, he left a
truncheon of his lance in his arm; and had made him fly over his horses
crouper, but that he caught hold of the mane. Achomat came against the unknown
night with all the impetuosity which accompanies hatred and the desire of
revenge, and broke his lance to his gantlet. For the strange Knight, he was not
a little shaken by his enemies violent encounter, but being restrained by some
powerful consideration, in passing by Achomat, he bore up the point of his
lance, and made so fair a careere as it could not be compared but with
Polexanders. Achomat, incensed at the courtesy he had received, returned with
his Symeter drawn against the unknown Knight, aiming at his face; Do not think
(said he) ungrateful and perfidious Solomon, by thy respects to assuage my
just anger. My good deeds, my care, my love should have filled thee with these
considerations, and not thy remorse of conscience. But go on disloyal man, go
on as thou have begun; and for fear thy crimes should be imperfect, add (if
thou can) murder to thy ingratitude, to thy rape and treason. The unknown
Knight, in lieu of being offended at his words, It Is true my Lord (said he to
his Enemy) Solomon is ungrateful, a Ravisher and a Traitor; but he is not
sufficiently impudent to maintain his offenses, nor coward enough to fear
their punishment. Take from him then that unhappy life, which is the cause of
all your afflictions; and has produced all the miseries of your family. What
stops you Sir? What hinders your anger so justly provoked? Why is your revenge
so slow? Sheathe your sword (my Lord) in the traiterous heart of Solomon; give
no ear to your Goodness if it speak for him; but call to mind that he has
stuck his poniard in the bosoms of Histeria and Melicerta. Whilst the stranger
Knight spoake thus, Polexander made his Enemy feel the weight of his arm, and
to acknowledge there was no proportion betwixt his courage and his strength. In
an instant he put him beside his postures, and a little after (unable for
fight) brought him to the extremity of asking his life. Polexander gladly gave
it him, and went presently to the unknown Knight, whom he found continuing his
accusations, and entreated Achomat to take his life: Strike, (said he) strike
Sir, and suspend that greatness of courage which suffers you to assault none
but such as defend themselves. You are not here in the quality of a Combatant,
but of a Judge, and a Master. Consider then what Justice would have you do
with an offender, and the authority of a Master with a fugitive slave.
Polexander interrupting the unknown Knight, Solomon (said he) either be
silent, or speak so as you may clear Achomat from that error whereinto you
have brought him. Make known to him by what unfortunate chance he lost
Histeria and Melicerta. But I shall do better to speak for you. With that he
turned to Achomat thus: Generous Basha (said he) Solomon is guilty, but it is
not of too much love, as you believe; it is of neglect and insensibility. If he
be the Author of the disasters befalne in your family, it is as the Sun is the
cause of darkness. I will say he has ruined the Princesses your daughters, in
refusing what they requested from him, and if I may say so, in hiding from them
that light, without which their young hearts were persuaded there was none at
all. But not to hold you any longer in expectation of the clearing a doubt,
which must either appease or at least alter the face of your displeasure; I
will in few words declare what your daughters affections were, and what the
insensibility of the Prince your Slave. Know, that those Princesses, Twins in
their affection as well as in their birth, turned at once their eyes on
Solomon; and though he always insolently neglected them, yet was he so happy
as to be desperately beloved. Some other less skilled in the power of that
passion then I am, would justify Solomon, in telling you, that his duty and
respect forbad him to cast his eyes on the daughters of his Master. But I
intend not to bring you such excuses. If Solomon were so indiscreet as to make
use of them, I should be the first would condemn them either as absolutely
false or more criminal then his own insensibility. In a word, this young
Prince has been ignorant of what is known to beasts and plants; and all
Nature which cries out that we must love, and inspires that passion when first
our life is breathed into us, has found a monster in your Slave, who in the
very height of his blood, in the fire of his youth, and in the midst of all the
allurements and beauties of your daughters, has belied his birth, and made
appear to the shame of his Sex, that a man might be borne incapable of all
love. Histeria and Melicerta could not endure this prodigy. The one died of it
with grief at the siege of Lepanto, and the other is buried alive in a tomb,
that she may never more see that unjust heaven which knows so great a crime
and does not punish it. Achomat, who had diligently hearkened to all that
Polexander had said, was a while without answering, as if he was asking
himself, whether all that which the Prince would persuade him could be true.
At last thinking well that this accident was not impossible, he addressed his
speech to our Hero, and interrupting it with sighs: You have (said he)
judiciously forseene that your narration would change the face of my
afflictions; I perceive Solomon is not so guilty as I thought him; but withal
I know that I am not less miserable then I imagined. Whilst these two Princes
were talking thus, the unknown Knight took off his helmet, and displaying his
admirable countenance which could not be seen without wonder: You (said he,
coming nearer to Polexander) are not deceived; It Is true my Lord, I am that
monster, who by my ingratitude and insensibility have violated the most holy
and sweet laws of nature; and who in stead of acknowledging Achomat's favors
and goodness, have by my excessive contempt hastened the tragical end of the
Princesses his daughters. But by what chance have you come to the knowledge of
things so private, and for what cause does Achomat defer his revenge? The
Basha's indignation seeing it self stripped of all that which had so long time
nursed it, yielded at last to Iphidamantus Innocence; and reason taking her
place which passion had usurped, made Achomats weapons to fall out of his
hands. With tears in his eyes he turned to Polexander, and witnessing to him
his sorrow and nobleness, Since (said he) at last I know Solomon to be
guiltless, and that it is the cruel destiny of my race which alone has
produced my misfortune and shame; tell me, I entreat you Sir, where I shall
find my daughters bodies, that by rendering them to their desolate mother, I
may give her that deplorable consolation which she can expect from so sad and
lamentable a restitution. Since your equitable love (replied Polexander) makes
you alike wish for your two daughters, dry from henceforth the half of your
tears, or let the one part testify your grief, and the other be an evidence
of your joy. Histeria is dead, but her sister lives, and were it not for the
obstinacy wherewithal she opposes all that may conduce to her happiness and
avenge her of Iphidamantus insensibility; she would have, as well as I, the
content of seeing her dear father, and that lover who as barbarous as he is,
is no less wished for. At those words Iphidamantus showed well, he had not so
hard a heart as Polexander upbraided him withal, but made known by his sighs
and tears, he knew how to love; and casting himself at Polexanders feet,
sadly besought him to discover where Melicerta was, and what he was to perform
for the freeing her from her miseries. Is it (replied our Hero) an intent to
be a spectator of the ills thou have made her undergo, that thy curiosity
breeds that desire in thee? or to say better, by a humanity too inhumane to
stick thy poniard in that Innocents breast to free her from her further
languishment? Ah (my Lord) said Iphidamantus, be more indulgent to an offender
that repents him! And since I had the honor as well as you to have the
generous Periander for my father, do him not that wrong to believe he was the
Author of producing a creature monstrous in all his qualities: I confess I
have been long incapable of that desire they call Love, and I have laughed at
Achomat, Bajazet, at the King of Morocco, and at your self, as often as your
passion has made you act something not conformable with my opinion. But if I
have been impassible, and (to use your own words) disdainful, and without
pity; yet have I never been cruel nor unjust: I have endeavored many and
many a time to suppress Melicerta and her sister's madness; I offered them
all the remedies reason furnished me withal; I have not taken pleasure in
their sorrows, but if I had thought my death could have made them happy, they
had long since been so: I will not yet by these justifications lessen the
enormity of my offenses; whatsoever I have done, I have deserved death, since
the misfortune of two the fairest Princesses of the East had their Original
from me; and I would finish before you what Achomat has begun, if my desire of
restoring Melicerta to him did not imperiously command me to live. Achomet
(interrupting the two brothers discourse) If (said he to Polexander) I could be
happy, the sight of you which I have so long wished for, would be the end of my
misfortunes. The name of Polexander which has stirred in me so much emulation,
and that high virtue, which I have proposed for the Idea of my actions, would
fill my soul with such delights as would not be found neither in the favor of
Princes, nor the reputation and fame of a great Command, nor the possession of
riches. But I am too miserable to taste of any felicity, and therefore 'twas
necessary my daughters loss should betide, that the pleasingnesse of meeting
with you, might be as it were poisoned by so great a sorrow. I accept your
civilities (replied Polexander) since they are so many witnesses proclaiming
your generous soul has preserved her purity in the corruption of a Court,
where the greatest fortunes are not usually raised, but by villainies far
greater. But what do I^ in lieu of contemplating you by what you are, I
consider you by what you seem: Achomat is but the mask under which is hidden
Antenor the Prince of Montevera. The favor nor alliance of the Turkish
Emperor have not been able to pervert that incomparable heart which nothing
has been able to conquer but love; and I know well these alterations, which
some indiscreet man would construe to be ambition or lightness, are signs of
his moderation and constancy. But since love has swayed the father to things
so incredible, could he without injustice condemn that, which the same passion
had made his daughters undertake? You are just Achomat; do not then punish
that in another which you approve in your self; and think, two young Ladies
being but weakness, ignorance and infirmity, were not able to resist the most
sweet and contagious of all maladies: since he could not do it, who by his
valor as well as by his wisdom had infallibly ruined the Ottoman's, if the
misfortune of Christendom had not armed them for their preservation. Attribute
therefore to Fortune, or if you will, to Nature the disasters of your house,
and bury in eternal oblivion the errors of two young Ladies who could not
almost avoid them, since they had the amorous Antenor for their father. Would
to heaven, (replied Achomat) that Histeria and Melicerta were in case to
receive that pardon you entreat for them; you should get it, though nature and
blood would not force me to that indulgence: but death makes your entreaties
and my love effectlesse, and (may be) you would have me believe Melicerta
alive, to accustom me to a misery before I know the greatness of it. I have
(said Polexander) related to you matters as they are; Melicerta lives, and
since my brother is become rational, I doubt not his redeeming her from the
hands of that Tyrant who to tire her constancy, puts her daily to new tortures.
At those words the fire flew into Iphidamantus face, and his action full of
impatiency witnessed sufficiently he was no more an enemy to love; I shall
believe (said he to Polexander) you are of intelligence with that insensibility
wherewith you upbraid me, if you do not without delay let me know where
Melicerta is: For the Tyrant that keeps her his captive, either he is
invisible, or I am most certain that Princess shall be revenged for his
wronging her. That Tyrant (replied Poleaander) is to be seen, but he is almost
invincible: He goes always armed, and lives in a place so strong, and so well
furnished with resolute Soldiers, that of those which have hitherto assault^d
him, some have lost their honor, others their lives or liberties, and
generally all have repented their undertaking to vanquish him. The success
(said Iphidamantus) will make it appear whether I am happier then the rest;
but hap what hap may, be confident I will not repent me of my enterprise: The
only grief that ^ickes by me, is, that I have but one life to lose, and out
of my poverty, I cannot acquit my self to Melicerta, but I must remain in
debt to Histeria. But that fair soul which amongst the etern^ll lights that
inviron her, may be penetrates into the obscurity of our hearts, and discovers
their secret'st thoughts, knows Solyman's intention and repentance, and no
more accuses him of his forepast ingratitude; she already receives for a full
satisfaction my will, which has no bounds, nor sees no impossibilities, and
considers not my power which is limited by obstacles too powerful to be
surmounted. Why defer you Sir? (said he, addressing him to his brother) Why
conceal you Melicerta from me? Are you become jealous as soon as you saw me
sensible? And have you not presented me with my happiness, but then when you
thought me incapable of knowing it? No brother (replied our Hero) I am neither
jealous nor cunning, but will give you even more then you could hope: Yet shall
I but vainly intimate how you may be happy if Achomat consent not to your
felicity. My Lord (said Iphidamantus) let not the thought of that hinder you, I
think not of enriching my self, my intent is only to pay my debt: Let
Achomat do what he pleases with me; I owe him all that I owe not to
Periander; when he shall use me as his slave, he shall do nothing unjustly:
leave therefore in his hands my good and ill fortune, and let him dispose of
either as he pleases: whatsoever he shall deliberate, I can never be unhappy
if I but once suppress Melicerta's miseries. Achomat was about to speak, and
may be to testify to Iphidamantus, that he held him not in the quality of a
slave, when Bajazet, who had left Abdelmelec in as ill a case as Polexander had
the Moorish Knight, came to know the cause of so long an interparley, and who
the stranger Knight was: but he no sooner looked on him, then he alighted, and
with open arms (astonished and overjoyed) went to embrace him with all the
kindness his accustomed nobleness could cause any to expect from him. A
hundred times he kissed him, and had not given him over, but that the fair
Prince said Polexander was jealous of his embraces. Straight he left him to
salute Polexander, and because he had heard from Hydaspes and Almaid, what that
Prince had done for Zabaim and Almanzaira, he c^t himself at his feet, called
him his protector, and said aloud, he had saved his Parents lives, preserved
his State, and ruined the fatal cause of all the disasters befalne his house.
Polexander not enduring him in that posture, nor to hear him speak so, took
him in his arms, and willing to make known he had heard all his life; Is it
possible (said he) that you reserve yet some cause of hatred against Zabaim,
and that the love of incomparable Almanzaira has not been more powerful over
your resentments, then the ill nature of the King your father? Had you seen him
as I did, ready to expiate by the effusion of his blood, those faults which
Zelopa had made him perpetrate, you would be more sensible then you are of his
repentance, and not deny him the comfort he expects in your return. But what
do you here? Are you not satisfied with the death of Nephisus, and (may be)
with that of Abdelmelec? Would you have their unfortunate father to be ranged
in the number of those sacrifices which Axiamira demands from your amorous
anger, and that it shall be deadly for all Princes to have had any affection
for that happy unfortunate one? Bajazet deeming by this discourse that
Polexander knew all his designs, would again have fallen at his feet to have
asked pardon for the love he bore the Princess his sister, but Polexander, who
looked on him as on something more then a King, retained him in his arms, and
after often calling him brother, If (said he) your discretion had not so long
time contested with your quiet, and not given to Iphidamantus and my self,
thoughts unworthy to be related to you, we had both contributed all we could,
and may be more reclaimed the untractable humor of that Princess, which
sometimes under the name of Axiamira, then under that of Iphidamantus, or
again, of Ennoramita, set on fire all the Kingdoms of Africa. Is not she the
cause of this war too? have you not mistaken her brother for her? Bajazet
waxing pale at that question; There is no doubt of it (said he) my misfortune
is as great as ever, and I know too well for my peace, that Almaid being
deceived next the King of Morocco, took Iphidamantus for Axiamira. This
discourse had infallibly continued, but the Sentinels seeing a great Troop of
horse sallying out of Morocco gates, advertised the Princes they were to be set
on. Achomat instantly commanded four Squadrons of foot to advance, which had
stood to their arms since the beginning of the combat; and placing himself
in the front of a Troup of Cavalry, rid to force the enemy back again into
the Town. The three Princes got on horseback to assist him, though he had no
need of them, and were Spectators of that incomparable valor which had raised
him to the supreme greatness of all the Ottoman Court. Assoou as fear and
night had shut up the last Enemy within the walls of Morocco; Polexander and
the three other Princes returned to the place of their Combat, and scorning to
intermingle ought of base or cruel with their victory, commanded fires and
torches to be lighted, to see in what case Abdelmelec and the Moorish Knight
were. Our Hero found the last sighing for his misfortune, and cursing the
stars which seemed to affect the dishonor and ruin of the Princes of Grenada:
by the same charming humanity he comforted him, wherewithal he was wont to
suffer himself to be overcome by such as he had vanquished; and without any
importunate soliciting, either to tell him his condition, or name, commanded
some Arabians to take him up, and carry him into Morocco. In the mean while,
Bajazet, who found Abdelmelec dead, lamented, that the chance of War was not
able to make him a vanquisher without depriving so valiant a Prince of his
life. Iphidamantus came just as he was bewailing, and seeing his friend all
over wounded and drowned in his blood, was almost at the loss of his judgment
and life: at last, reason recollected him, and then his sorrow breaking forth;
Unfortunate Prince (said he) how fatal have thy fathers errors been to thee!
And what a dangerous Enemy have thou had of thy great courage! Thou art dead
Abdelmelec, and I live and avenge not thy death! But the same law which seems
to engage, imperiously forbids me to undertake it. My duty is opposed by my
duty, my friendship by my friendship, and my faith by my faith. I am
Polexanders, I am Achomats; I owe my self to Bajazet, I cannot be thine. Thou
know it now dear Abdelmelec, and thy soul which reads my heart, sees well
whether I be so perfidious as to fail of my word: I have sworn to thee an
amity not to be terminated but by the one of us; thy misfortune has
disingaged my word, and ^y interests ceasing by thy death, give me the liberty
on thinking on mine own; Farewell then Abdelmelec, and since it is the will of
heaven, enjoy for ever the glory thy virtues have deserved. Achomat and the two
other Princes were extremely sorrowful for the loss of their Enemy, and
would not have been so indisconsolate, but only for taking off Iphidamantus
discontent. Bajazet, by the advice of the rest, sent the body of Abdelmelec to
the King his father, and intimated by Hydaspes, they had been both deceived,
and their errors being equally lamentable, the grief of the one should not be
less then that of the other. Hydaspes performed his Commission; but whilst the
too amorous, and enraged Hely bewailed the loss of his pretended Ennoramita,
more then the death of his son; and ruminated in his long watchings all the
tragical events wherewithal the beauty of one same person had laid waste his
Estate: the four Printes retired into the Camp, and without giving themselves
any rest after so much travel, meditated on the execution of some new
designs. Polexander, that thought on nothing but how to see Alcidiana again,
would not cause Bajazet and Iphidamantus to languish any longer, nor put off
till any other time the contentments he was able to give them: But how extreme
soever his own longing was, that of the two other Princes was no less.
Iphidamantus came and cast himself at his feet, and embracing his knees, My
Lord (said he) if without impudence I may dare take the boldness of calling
you brother, and if any one action of my life, has made me worthy that
honor, I entreat you even by that, or rather by Alcidiana, not to leave me
any longer in my offense and infamy. Let me not be guilty even after my
repentance, nor let Melicerta continue her reproaching my ingratitude, when I
have given over my being ungrateful. Get leave of Achomat (replied Polexander)
to go and free that Princess; and assure your self, you shall no sooner have
that granted, but you shall obtain all the rest too. Achomat overheard what
our Hero spoke to his brother, and desirous to witness to them both, that he
remitted all his resentments to their merits and his affection: Go, (said he
to Iphidamantus) go, my dear Solomon, gather up (if it be possible) the
remainder of my shipwreck, and assure your self, that what you can save of it,
you preserve that for your self. After this declaration, which not only
included the leave Iphidamantus requested, but withal a clear assurance of
enjoying her whom he was to deliver; he took Achomat's hands, and moystning
them with his tears, My Lord (said he) is it possible that you will forget
those offenses which my mishap has made me commit against your goodness; and
that in lieu of treating me as malefactors which are not quit for their being
penitent, you will daigne to add your bounty to your mercy, and give me with
my life, that which can make it most pleasing unto me? Achomat, having embraced
the Prince, Your birth and virtues (said he) are such, that all I can offer you
is below what they should make you expect: But were they less glorious and
eminent, the name of Polexander is to me so venerable, that it alone can oblige
me to me more then I do. Defer not then Melicerta's deliverance, but give a
happy end to those adventures whose beginnings have been so mournful: No
sooner had Achomat ended his speech, but Iphidamantus turned to Polexander, and
casting himself down again, besought the Prince to have pity on him. Brother
(said our Hero) you shall have your desire, but I must first return to my
ship, and by a Prisoner which I have there in hold, learn what means you are
to use, for getting the upper hand of that Tyrant which persecuteth fair
Melicerta. Iphidamantus (to whom his lingering was a new torture) besought our
Hero, not to have so much care for his preservation, but to let him run the
hazards of an enterprise, which must needs be most honorable unto him. No, no,
(said Polexander) it is fit to keep you now you are grown rational; give not
so absolute trust to a passion which you have not yet had time to know well,
and assure your self, you shall very quickly be a happy man, if you will leave
to me the disposal of your fortune: Iphidamantus being with this speech
silenced, cast down his eyes sighing, and yet he knew him self bound to doubt
no more of his happiness, since the King his brother had resolved it. Bajazet
looking on him with tears in his eyes, O (said he) too happy Iphidamantus,
thou have but scarce wished, and art presently put in possession of what thou
desire: Glory, that thy fortune is particular, and not like other men's, and
that Heaven in inspiring thee with life, bound it self by an irrevocable oath,
to heap on, and accomplish it with all that was of most delight and value. But
I, borne in misfortune, and who from my life's first days have not been able
to avoid an assured death but by a cruel exile, what can I expect in growing
elder, but an increase and growth of my miseries? All prosperities shun me,
they are to me but dreams and illusions, and vanish as soon as I am persuaded
they are in my full possession. Axiamira, fair Axiamira, that were proposed to
me by my hopes as the prize for all my dangers and pains in this Siege, thou
disappearest in the very instant when I should have seen thee; and
Iphidamantus after his long abusing the credulous Hely, tells me that I abuse my
self. In what corner of the world have mine enemies hid thee? Toward what
part of the Universe should I turn my hopes and sails, or how shall I get
predominance over the malignity of those Stars that will not have me fortunate?
Polexander staid Bajazets complaints and told him, Fortune was not of those
base Enemies who either become reconciled to execute more surely their revenge,
or have no heart but for hatred or to love by halfes. She has not (said he)
given you the knowledge of your parents, she has not (as it were) miraculously
plucked from the throne the person that hindered your rising to it; in a word,
she has not so much furthered your happiness to leave it imperfect. Call to
mind, she has restored to you those things which you had lost, one after
another, and by consequence makes ready to render you that Axiamira which only
seems wanting to fill up all your list of felicities. With that our Hero
entreated that Prince and Achomat too, to permit him to make a turn to his
ship for the giving order to such things as concerned their common
satisfaction. The Princes unwilling to offer any troublesome ceremonies, let
him go as he came; and went to entertain time with Iphidamantus who seemed to
accuse his brother to be (in good earnest) jealous of his contentment. In the
mean while our Hero got to his ship, and finding himself divided betwixt the
love he bore to Cydaria, and that which he owed Melicerta, he stood some time
before them, ere he could resolve to which of the two he should first make
known the good news he had learnt. At last he governed himself by necessity,
and began with her that had most need of comfort. Prepare your self (said he
to Melicerta) for the most incredible and the least to be hoped for adventure
you are able to imagine. I am afraid to discover it, so strange do I find it;
and so greatly do I fear lest your spirits dissipated at the recital of so
great an accident be not strong enough to support it. Put your selves then to
the most trial you can; and as you have rendered many testimonies of that
constancy we ought to have in afflictions; see likewise, and ask of your
selves, if you have so much power over the agitations of your mind, that you
can receive an extreme joy without running the hazard of your life. The
greatest of joys that can trouble me (replied Melicerta) is the happiness of
seeing once more the insensible Iphidamantus, and then, those which gave me
life. Is it possible (replied Polexander) that your joy can extend no farther,
and that you conceive nothing whereby it may be augmented? No, (said Melicerta)
See the bounds of all my hopes, and by consequence, my joys cannot be larger
extended. What (replied our Hero) say you had made Iphidamantus sensible, that
he were passionately in love with you, if he were all on fire out of his
longing desire to see you, if he would expose himself to the extremest
dangers, and give his life for the preservation of yours; would not your joy be
infinitely more then that you promise your self by his mere sight? The
impossibilities you propose (replied Melicerta) being no more able to deceive
me, cannot neither make me conceive those prodigious joys which have
heretofore (as some feign) been the deaths of some mothers and lovers. I fear
lest you may be an addition to those examples (said Polexander) and therefore I
beseech you again, by some necessary preparation, to dispose your mind, which
now is familiar with naught but sadness and affliction, to welcome a joy which
as a remedy too violent, may kill in lieu of curing her. Melicerta not being
able to refrain from smiling at Polexanders serious discourse; Fear not (said
she) to tell me those good and dangerous news. I am not in case to dye for
joy, and that which you are about to tell me, must be very extraordinary, if it
can either diminish or charm my afflictions. Our Hero, imagining the sad Lady
had time enough given to hear without danger the change of her fortune: told
her, he had found her father and her love, in such a case as had been deadly
either for the one or the other, and may be for them both, if obligation and
respect had not bound Iphidamantus hands. Afterward he related in what manner
he made himself known to them, and had drawn the one out of his
insensibility, and the other from his error; notwithstanding all Melicerta's
extreme strivings, not to be transported with her excess of joy, yet could
she not be Mistress over her first perturbations. Her spirit forsook her do
what she could, and made her feel an universal disquiet in all the parts of
her body: her tongue was tied up, or at most but fumbling in her mouth, O
heaven! said she diverse times, that is not possible, and so fell down in a
swoune on her bed; Cydaria and her women ran to her to stay her fainting; but
there was no remedy, it must have his course, and Melicerta was not excepted
from that rigorous Law, by which Love as well as Nature would never have up
pass without danger from one extreme to another. At last she came again, but
so weakened with that fit, that she looked as she had been long sick,
Polexander laying before her, her former constancy, and that strength of spirit
with which she had dared not only to defy death, but also happiness,
besought her to believe him more then she had done, and by degrees to prepare
her self for the reception of Achomat and Iphidamantus. After that, he left
her only with her women, and that she might be at more freedom, took Cydaria
into his chamber, and being shut up with her; Sister (said he presently) if I
did not approve of that judicious severity in which you have lived to this day,
and if I liked not those thoughts which made you fear the service and love of
Almanzor, far more then the ill usage and hatred of your enemies; I should
have forgotten what the virtue of your Sex ought to be, and how scrupulously a
beauty more divine then ordinary, should, (to preserve her from calumny) not
only be rigorous to such as converse with her, but even cruel to her self. I
commend you therefore for cutting off all hopes wherewith the quality of
Almanzor, and your adverse fortune might flatter his young desires; and chose
rather to put his life in hazard, then to lay at stake your reputation. But as
in what you have done, you have shown your self a worthy inheritrix of
Perianders magnanimity as well as of Axiamira's wisdom; you should now much
degenerate from the virtues of them both, if being no longer in your ill
fortune, but on the contrary, able to grant or refuse any thing with that
independency which is annexed to the quality of Princes; you do not conform
your self to the laudable intentions of Almanzor. Cydaria, prepossessed by a
false opinion, stopped her brother, and having humbly besought him not to go
further on with his discourse: I know my Lord (said she) that since the loss
of Periander and Axiamira, Heaven enjoynes me, to look on you as on one that
represents them; and to believe my intentions are not just, if they be not
wholly subjected to yours: this being so, it is forbidden me to have any
aversion or liking, but as you shall think for my good, that I am obliged to
love or no; and how good soever my election might be, it cannot be lawful
without your approbation. Doubt not then (if you please) but (being ruled by
these thoughts) I have a blind obedience for all that you shall prescribe me,
but knowing you perfectly just, and truly debonaire, I will take the boldness
to make my humble remonstrance to you, and say, That if I come once to be in
the power of Zabaim's son, I run the hazard of becoming a second
Almanzaira. Polexander, perceiving that Cydaria's discretion permitted her not
to make known her truest thoughts; Sister (said he) being so well assured of
my love as you are, give me leave to complain a little of your modesty, and to
accuse you for not using me as a brother, but as a stranger. I fear hence
forward to speak freely to you, yet I will, since my affection commands me to
lay by a while my complying, to tell you without chiding, that what you seem
to fear most, is what you fear least: your foresight extends not far enough
to make you fear Almanzor's future inconstancy: it is the present that
affrights you, or to speak more truly, which holds as it were in suspense the
resentment which you ought to have of those services which that great Prince
has done you. I remember very well the time and place, when and where your
little anger began; an opinion which an ambiguous speech wrought in you of
Almanzors sicklenesse begun this spleen: it has been fed by such new
thoughts as your grief and jealousy could contribute; and you have believed,
that he deserved to lose your affection which had neglected it for that of an
unfortunate she-slave. Cydaria blushed at the truth of this discourse, and
could well have wished for strong reasons to repel it; but Polexander giving
her no leisure for such injustice; I will (said he) take you out of the error
you are in, and show you how dangerous it is to give credit to their talk, who
relate to us such things as have not been well examined. Know then that
Bajazet, understanding by his Spies that you were fallen into the King of
Morocco's hands, instead of returning to Senega, where he was earnestly wished
for, in lieu of satisfying the entreaties and love of Zabaim and Almanzaira, in
lieu of going to receive the Crowns of so many Kingdoms assured to him, he
left the Pirates Isle, and with all his forces came and besieged Morocco. The
Combat he was in to day, in making him victorious, has made him lose all the
happiness he expected by his victory: I let him know that his servants had
taken Iphidamantus for you; Iphidamantus confirmed him in the same truth, and
presently cast him back into the same grief he felt when your fained being
stolen away, made him go seek for you in the Pirates Island. To speak truth,
you must be altogether insensible if you be not moved with the love and
perseverance of that Prince, and you have not any reason at all, if for false
suspicions, you leave Almanzor in such vexations as the belief of your loss
casts him into. Though Cydaria was overcome by this remonstrance, yet she would
but half show it; and putting on the countenance of a personage that would not
grow obstinate against a verity: Time (said she) and occasions which have not
your obsequiousness for Almanzor, will teach me what I must think of him. As
she ended these word, she heard a great noise, and thought it came from
Melicerta's cabin, whither she ran and found her fallen into a fainting, whence
no remedy of theirs could draw her; at last our Hero gave her of an Essence
which Diceus had made him, and she presently recovered her sight and speech.
As Soon as she saw the Prince and Cydaria, she made known to them by her
languishing looks, and strange sighs, that she was not strong enough alone,
to overcome the disorder of her agitations, and that she need^d the presence of
Achomat and Iphidamantus to overruled their rebellion. If the miseries I endure
(said she to Polexander) move you to pity, be a means to bring hither my
father and Solomon, and though I fear them both alike, win them to see me in
that mournful case I am brought to; that their presence may at least* speedily
make an end of killing me, if it have not power enough to preserve my life:
with this she grew pale and shut her eyes, but Cydaria kept her from fainting
again, and with her words, as well as by Polexander's cordial, strengthened
her a little, and made her able for the seeing of Achomat and Iphidamantus. Our
Hero went to them, and related to what extremity Melicerta was brought: those
Princes were so overjoyed to see themselves so pleasingly deceived, that they
were within a little of running the Princesses fortune. Ah Polexander! (said
Achomat) with how much interest do you pay me the care I have taken in the
breeding of Iphidamantus: he for his part embraced his brother, and with a good
grace upbraiding him for his malice to him; O how rigorously (said he) have you
punished me for my contempt of love! yet can you not execute too cruel a
revenge, for my offenses are beyond all others. But what do I? I complain on
you, and yet am indebted to you for my life, since I am for Melicerta's
safety: let us go quickly and free her from the rest of her miseries: with
that he turned to Achomat, and continuing his speech; Do not (said he) let
that sweet Lady die, nor suffer Solymans inhumanitie to be infectious enough to
corrupt your good nature. To all this Achomat made no answer, but sent to
Bajazets tent, and understanding none knew where he was, got to horse with
Polexander and his brother, and rid in all haste to the haven: our Hero got
him into his shallop, with himself and his brother, and commanding his
mariners to make all haste, they were in a trice at the ship. Achomat went
first aboard, and the two brothers followed him; their coming could not be so
private but that it caused some noise in the ship: Melicerta heard it, and
doubting not whence it sprung, was so violently moved with it, that her spirits
dispersing again, she fell into another trance; at that very instant the three
Princes entered her cabin, and found her for dead on her bed: Achomat being not
with held by any respect, cast himself on his daughters face, and moistning it
with his tears, Melicerta (said he pitifully) my dear daughter, know thy
father and increase not my griefs in renewing, when he thought them ended:
Iphidamantus was at the beds foot as immovable as a statue, and having his
eyes fixed on Melicerta: Alas Madam (said he) will you have me believe that I
am ever deadly to you? My insensibilitie has oftentimes gone near to bring
you to your grave, and must my love now give a period to your days? Thus said
Iphidamantus, but out of consideration he spoke it so softly that no body heard
him. Presently Melicerta came to her self, and seeing her self in the arms
of a man, thought it had been Iphidamantus, and that beliete made her ashamed;
she was about to thrust him away, but lifting her eyes up more fixtly, she knew
'twas her father, and so fell back half dead with confusion and joy. My dear
daughter, said Achomat, can thou not endure the end of thy miseries? Must
both good and ill make thee alike wretched? Open thine eyes, know thy father,
and be not more cruel to thy self then either love or fortune: both of them
at last accord what thou desire, and if my consent be necessary for thy
contentment, doubt not but it will be conformable with theirs. Melicerta heard
one part of this speech, and forcing her self to answer it, My Lord (said she
very softly to her father) if you will promise me your favor and forget my
folly, I have yet courage enough to overcome my weakness, and preserve to you
the unfortunate Melicerta. I have forgotten all (replied Achomat kissing her)
and protest thou can desire nothing from my love which it will not grant
thee. If the enjoying of Solomon can contribute ought to thy life's happiness,
I give him thee by that sovereign Law which permits me to dispose of him.
Melicerta blushed at those last words, and not daring to answer, contented her
self with casting her eyes on Iphidamantus. Achomat got him come near, and
speaking to him with the mildness of a father; If you yet (said he) remember,
that I bred you as mine own son, show me I entreat you in the saving of
Melicerta, that you have some resentment of my care: kill not him that has
preserved your life; and since Melicerta's love is worth more then the most
glorious Crowns, make appear to us now, that your mind is too generous to
give an ear to ambition, when it whispers to you against duty and justice.
Melicerta never moved her eyes, but keeping them fixed on Iphidamantus,
expected his an^wer to know what should become of her. Iphidamantus imagining
there needed something else then words, to answer Achomat's winning
propositions, cast himself at his feet, and looking on Melicerta, When (said
he) I think on what I owe to the goodness of the father, and the love of the
daughter, and besides revolve in my mind the prodigies of my forepassed life, I
acknowledge my self unworthy the favors which both have afforded me: but since
you measure by the greatness of my ingratitude, that of your benefits; and
that you propose to me rewards in lieu of the punishments I have deserved, I
cannot but stand amazed at my happiness, and tell you, that as I have lived
the most ungrateful of men, I must needs die so too, by the impossibility
(whereto you have reduced me) of acknowledging your incomparable favors.
Melicerta had an extreme desire to speak, but her discretion shut her lips,
and her fathers presence permitted her not to take the freedom which her love
advised her. Cydaria who judiciously had avoided her being present at these
passages, entered Melicerta's cabin with an action and habit conformable to the
present state of her fortune; and having gracefully done her complements, came
to the fair Turk to congratulate with her. Achomat knowing her by
Iphidamantus, did to her all the civilities she could expect from a man
perplexed as he was, and led her to his daughters beds-head. Then did Cydaria
make known her excellent ingenuitie, for taking Melicerta for the subject of
her discourse; It Is a great while since (said she to Achomat) that the
Princess your daughter has wished for this day, amongst all the torment which
that absolute power presiding over us with so much tyranny has made her
undergo, she felt none so cruel as to be absent from you. A hundred times in
my hearing has she wished her self able to give her whole life for one
instant of your sight; and sometimes, when the excess of sorrows had reduced
her to an extremity: O death (has she cried) how sweet should thou be unto
me, so that thou would not take me hence, before I had regained the favor of
my honored Achomat. Cydaria spoke those words in a tone so fit to move
compassion, that the Basha could not refrain from tears: but whilst he gave
this tribute to nature, Iphidamantus rendered far greater to love; he was come
up to Melicerta, and standing in the posture of an offender, which strives to
get pardon for his faults: Fair Princess (said he in kissing her hand) scorn
not this fugitive slave who prosecuted by the remorse of conscience, offers
himself voluntarily to all that your anger shall denounce against him. It Is
not the insensible Solomon you see at your feet, that monster has long ago
been out of the number of things existing: it is the repenting and sensible
Solomon, he yet intreates you to be less good then the Basha your father, and
not to forget such crimes as would make Mercy it self worthy to be punished
had she sealed them a pardon. Melicerta in lieu of answering to this,
incessantly sighed; she took Iphidamantus hand, put it to her mouth, and with
kisses, or (to speak things as love has inspired me) with characters of
fire, imprinted on it, the pardon which Iphidamantus believed he had not
merited. She contented her self with that mute eloquence not only to assure
her lover of the extremity of her affection, but to have him believe that all
the miseries she had endured, were dear and pleasing to her, since they had
produced such a height of felicity. Achomat interrupted the mysterious
interparley of those lovers, and to refresh the spirits of all in Melicerta't
cabin; I wonder now no more (said he to Cydaria and Iphidamantus, which stood
one before the other) at those errors which have been occasioned by your two
faces: The King of Morocco is not so blind as we believe him, and for my own
part I confess, that were I from you but one quarter of an hour, I should not
know which were Solomon. Melicerta desirous to give to Cydaria all that she
owed to her affection: This days miraculous accidents (said she) command you
to give thanks to the King of Morocco's mistakes; you had been as well as I in
your discontents, had that Prince been more clear sighted, or Bajazet's spies
not less deceived then that amorous old man. But fitly (said she, changing her
voice) now I talk of Bajazer, what important reason of State hinders him from
coming to taste those sweets for whose fruition be indures so many ills and
exposes himself to so many dangers? Achomat replied, had not our care of you
daughter put by all others, we had either been yet in quest of that Prince, or
he here with us. When Polexander came and intimated how extreme ill you were,
we sent to Bajazetstents, to let him know the cause of your sudden departure,
but our Messenger found him not, nor could any of his guard or slaves tell to
what quarter of the Camp he was gone. The haste we made to see you, may be our
excuse, if not toward this fair Princess, (he spoke it, turning to Cydaria)
yet at least to others, why we forsook that Prince in his discontent. As
Achomat ended his speech there arose a mighty noise in the midst of the Pirates
fleet. The trumpets and other instruments of brass, which serve to warn the
Soldiers what to do, disturbed the silence of the night, and the calmnesse of
the elements. They cried, Arm, arm, on all sides, and the mariners whose
toil is all in confusion, blended their clamours and cries with the Soldiers
uproare. Polexander not knowing what the cause of this Alarm should be, sent
Diceus to inform him, who was no sooner out of the Kings ship but the noise was
hushed; yet loath to return with nothing, he got to the place where the Pirates
fleet was yet in battalia: he staid the first he met, to know what had
happened, some told him the arrival of the King of Senega, whom they thought
friend to the King of Morocco, had engaged the whole navy to put themselves in
order to fight with him; Others told him, but uncertainly, of Bajazets loss,
and gave him a great desire of clearing so important a news: as he was in that
trouble, he met with the Rover Hamet, who knowing him in the dark, Hoe, Diceus
(said he) if thou love Bajazet, bring me quickly to the King thy master:
Diceus told him he was in his ship; and for himself, he was come by his
Masters command to know the cause of the Alarm. It Is a strange one (said Hamet
sighing) but thou may know that Bajazet is dead, if Polexander save not his
life. Diceus imagining Hamet to be too much afflicted to speak, got him into
his shallop, and so carried him aboard the Kings ship. As Soon as he was in
Melicerta's cabin, where Cydaria was with the Princes her brothers and Achomat,
he cast himself at the feet of our Hero, and witnessing his fear by his
faultring speech, Sir (said he) you have gone near within these two hours to
lose Bajazet, and if your company get not the suppressing of his resentments, I
verily believe he will meet with that death between the arms of Zabaim and
Almanzaira, which he would have found in the sea. Know thou what thou say
(asked Polexander) in a tone expressing his affright? Yes very well, replied
the Rover, and know more, that the only grief of meeting with Iphidamantus,
where he thought to have found Axiamira, has made him to confine by a quick
despair his vain and long hopes. Relate that strange resolution (replied
Polexander) whilst we go to succor that desperate man; presently he called
for Diceus, and commanding him softly, to cause his ship to be steered near to
Zabaim's, bid him withdraw, and he himself shut the door to Melicerta's
cabin: whilst he was speaking to Diceus, Cydaria was stolen behind the sick
Princesses bed, and set her self on it, to hear Hamet, and not be seen. Our
Hero thought it so, and believing the Pirate's relation might contribute much
to his sisters satisfaction, entreated him to make known very particularly what
he knew of his master's misfortune. Hamet being a little recollected, began his
discourse thus; Some quarter of an hour after the news of our General's
victory came to our Navy, our Sentinels gave us notice there were a many sails
descri'd at the mouth of this River; this being confirmed by the fires on the
coast, and by those in guard at the entrance, our Admiral made ready, and put
the ships in battalia. But this alarm lasted not long, as you have heard; for
presently two ships brought our Admiral news that the discovered fleet was
the King of Senega's, who as Bajazet's friend had for his aid armed all the
vessels he could make ready. Our Admiral who was absolute in his command, sent
not to Bajazet for his direction, but presently dispatched Telisman and my
self to Zabaim. We made to him, and coming aboard, performed those complements
whereto his assistance and quality obliged us; he seemed very sad, and
perceiving we took notice of it: Pardon me (said he) if I entertain you not
with all the joy I ought to show you. As you came, my wife and my self were
busied about the clearing (to our selves) somewhat which even now makes me not
able to speak to you but with some disturbance: the adventure is such, as you
must bear a share in it, but that you may the more freely understand it, let
us retire to some room in the place where we are, both more commodious and
quieter then here among so many Soldiers and Mariners equally affrighted.
Zabaim having received us with these civilities and excuses, brought us into
his cabin, and spending not long time in speaking of his forces and the cause
of his getting them together: My ship (said he) with some few others, staid at
the foot of that dangerous rock which overhangs the entrance into this River,
and I attended the Moon rising for my setting sail again, when I heard a
voice over my head which in words the most lamenting I ever heard, besought
heaven and earth, things sensible and insensible, to be witnesses after his
death of his faith and constancy. Whilst I was attentive to those complaints,
there grew a great bustling among the sails and ropes of my ship, and running
to see what it was, I found a man hung in the tackling: I commanded to have him
straight taken down, and seeing that the height from whence he fell had
deprived him of his senses, have caused him to be brought into a cabin near to
this; no sooner cast I mine eyes on him, but I know not what remembrance filled
me with fear and horror; my wife coming in to practice that charity which
has gotten her the name of Mother to the afflicted, earnestly looked on him,
and was no less troubled then I. We have for these two hours done all we can
to get out of our astonishment, and overcome the long trance of that
unfortunate man, but as effectlesse in the one as in the other; this is the
cause you have not been entertained as you might expect: When Zabaim had ended,
Sir (said I) may it is fit our General were advertised of the accident,
therefore we both beseech your Majesty to let us see that desperate person. My
thoughts (said the King) which are not yet well settled, made me forget that
which particularly I had a desire to tell you; it is, that I am much deceived if
the man we have succored be not one of the principal of your Army. By
something he wears he seems to be a man of command, and if my wife mistake
not, it must necessarily be your General himself. Here Zabaim stopped, and we
who found no likelihood in this conjecture, besought him to let us see the man,
and to put him out of the opinion he was in, we related to him what Bajazet had
done that very day: but as soon as he showed him to us, lying yet stretched out
as dead, I knew him and cried out 'twas my General. My companion as much
afflicted as my self, thinking Bajazet had been dead, cast himself on him,
and kissing his hands, began to call to him in his ears, as all the Sectaries
of Mahomet use to hollow in the ears of their dead. In the mean while whether
Nature after it had been so long time dulled, awaked suddenly, or the
Princes strength recalled by their applying of remedies had disengaged his
spirits which his fall had as 'were suffocated, so it was that Bajazet came to
himself. The first signs of life he gave us, were his sighs, which being not
well perfected perished in the place of their conception, and were not
perceived but by their heavings about the seat of his heart; These
halfe-sighes were followed by others, which seemed to fly headlong to get
forth. At last, after he had a while muttered what none could understand, yet
came he out distinctly with this: I will no more depend on the injustice of
fortune, and my soul unloaden of the weight of my body, may freely go in
quest and find thee fair Axiamira in what corner of the earth soever my
cruel destiny has hidden thee. Almanzaira recovering from her deadly sorrow
by degrees as her Son came out of his swoon, ceased not to invoake that
eternal Pity which had so often and so miraculously redeemed her out of her
afflictions; and to beseech thence with her tears, an end to those miseries
which continually traversed her life. Her prayer ended, she oftentimes kissed
Bajazet, whose head she kept on her breast, and calling him sometimes Almanzor
and othertimes Bajazet, entreated him to know her and to come out of his
reaveries. To strike his imagination with some name well known to him, she
entreated him to look on Almaid and Hydaspes who infinitely grieved for him:
At those names he strove to open his eyes, but the brightness of the lights
forcing him to shut them again; Almaid (said he) and Hidaspes are with me, for
their fidelity would not permit them to survive my death. You are welcome,
dear Companions of my many miseries; and since in your lifetime you have
loved nothing more dear then my company and contentment; continue that
affection, and joining for ever your shadows with mine, let us go together in
quest of fair Axiamira. Whilst Bajazet moved all that heard him to compassion,
and Zabaim with Almanzaira melted into tears, I came to that incomparable
lover, and so talked with him as he came out of his musing. Yet no sooner was
he come to himself but he began to cry out as he had felt some great torture,
and afflicting himself for being alive: How Bajazet (said he) thou liv'st
then, and yet have for ever lost the hope of finding Axiamira! Ah Polexander!
Ah Iphidamantus! what will you say of me? To get him from this new affliction.
I said you were in great care and searched for him every where. With that I
came away, and had so good fortune as to meet with Diceus when I was out of
hope of finding you. If therefore you regard the friendship of Bajazet, save
his life while it is in your power. Here Hamet ended; and Polexander replied
(to comfort him) that his General should soon have satisfaction. But what do
you the while, fair Cydaria? You sigh in secret, you bear a part in the
griefs you confer on the loyal Almanzor, and repent for suspecting so
wonderful a constancy. I see well your scrupulous virtue grows angry with
your disposition, and it is not less grieved then your lover, to be compelled
to receive so sensible a blow, and not have sufficient arms to defend it self
from it. But let her not believe, that in giving way to so powerful an Enemy,
she lessens her reputation. It Is true your severities are overcome, and
abandoning a place they had so courageously maintained, they would exhibit to
your thought, your being accused of weakness or cunning. But let not your
fair soul fear these calumnies. You yield way when it is both just and
glorious not to defend your self. I could not refrain from this exclamation,
seeing what transports and anxieties the news of Bajazets despair wrought in
the fair and discreet Cydaria. Certainly her virtue strove incredibly to hide
her resentments, and not let her self be overcome by this unlooked for
accident, but the weaker part of her soul, suppressed the stronger, and
wisdom was enforced to give place to love. Polexander who seemed to be
ordained by heaven to be the comforter of all afflicted, and the Lovers
Mediator betwixt Love and Fortune; understanding his Ship was come up to
Zabaim's, left Cydaria with Melicerta, Achomat and Iphidamantus, and went alone
to prepare Bajazet for the receiving that happiness he came to present him.
When Zabaim and Almanzaira knew him, they were so much overjoyed, that they
seemed to have no more thought of the danger wherein their own son yet lay:
O my dear deliverer (cried Almanzaira) turn your eyes on a miserable mother
which has no life but in the life of her son; and now perfect that which you
began in the Isle whereinto Fortune had exiled me. Heaven promised me at that
very instant you arrived there, that the period of my miseries should be the
work of your courage and extreme charity. Perfect a promise which should be
infallible, and since you have preserved the mother in her self, save her
again in her son. Madam, replied Polexander, the spectacle here is such a
wonder to me, that I can scarce believe what mine eyes and ears inform me;
surely the ill Angel, Enemy to the greatness of your race, has driven
Bajazet to a resolution, which in all likelihood was not to be expected, either
from the vigor of his spirit, or from the power of fortune her self. It Is not
past five or six hours since he came off victorious from a Combat, whereto he
had been challenged by the Prince of Morocco; and Achomat, Iphidamantus, and
my self, were preparing our selves, to see him triumph over his enemies, and
the Town he has besieged; when Hamet brought us news of his despair: If
Madam, I divine right, I know the cause, and can by consequence promise your
Majesty to give an end to it. I do not doubt it, (replied Almanzaira) and how
great soever our afflictions are, I hold them not past remedy, if you undertake
the cure. A fairer hand then mine (said Polexander) must be employed in so
great a restoration, let it suffice that I know where it is to be had; and you
have naught to do but to render the patient capable of receiving what shall be
prescribed for the assuring of his recovery. 'Twas thought Bajazet heard these
last words, because he presently opened his eyes, and made plainly appear, he
had absolutely forgotten all he had done since his parting from Polexander. He
arose, and knowing the Prince among so many strange faces, You see (said he)
how fortune continues the signs of her hatred: Abdelmelec is dead, Morocco is
brought to the extremity, I have forced out of her Kings hands, that which made
me proclaim war against him, and yet am I more miserable then I was before
my victories: the happinesses I desire not, come headlong tumbling in at my
pleasure; and that which I wish for, runs from me in what part of sea or land
soever I follow it. Put out of your mind (replied Polexander) a belief which
may be was true in times past, but is not now: you shall find at Morocco, what
you seek, there. Hely who deserves not the fruition of Axiamira, could have
only her picture, but Almanzor, whose virtue can never be worthily enough
recompensed, shall when he please possess Axiamira her self. Bajazet, scarce
giving Polexander leave to end what he had begun, and besides not taking
notice of one of them that were about him, embraced our Hero, and calling him
often his Lord and Deliverer, Do not (said he) defer the execution of your
promise: the happiness you propose to me is so great, that you must give me
leave to doubt of it, till mine own eyes assure me. I refuse not the condition
(answered Polexadder) but what will the King your Father say, or the Queen your
Mother think, if you go hence without rendering them that to which nature and
their goodness binds you? Bajazet started at those words, and looking about
him, he not only knew Zabaim (for he had often seen him) but believing who
Almanzaira was, both by Almaids relation, and instinct of blood, he cast
himself at their feet, and besought them to pardon his present and forepass'd
extravagances? It Is I (my son) said Zabaim that should ask to be forgiven
for mine, and entreat you by my repentance, (which is the only thing can
win you to a forgetfulness of my faults) to blot out of your memory all that
I have made you suffer since the day of your birth. And I my son, said
Almanzaira, (casting her self on Bajazets neck) beseech you to lay all the
accidents of your life on the secrets of that Providence which cannot possibly
fail, and to believe, that no finister thing has betided you but for your
better avail. Bajazet had many good things to say, but the imperious object of
that beauty he wished for, not permitting him to have a thought for any other
then her self, made him contract them into submissions and excuses.
Almanzaira, who was incomparable in all her endowments, desirous to confer a
part of her contentment on her sons passion, entreated Polexander to acquit him
of his promise, and not defer a pleasure which might be the ruin of many
others. Bajazet shall be satisfied (replied our Hero) and his satisfaction
shall be the more perfect, in that for the receiving it he shall not lose the
pleasure he takes in the sight of the King his father and your self. What must
I do to be so happy? (cried Bajazet) with the impatiency of a man truly
passionate? nothing (said Polexander) but to go from this ship into mine.
Zabaim, who had at least gotten this advantage over his extreme amorous
inclination, to be the most civil of all men, said, That though Almanzor
should once again be jealous of him, he would be the first to see his ancient
Mistress. Presently there were plankes laid between the two ships, and not
only Zabaim but Almanzaira, (whom Polexander led) and the timorous Bajazet,
went aboard our Hero's ship. Achomat and Iphidamantus came to welcome them,
and their complements ended brought them into the cabin where Melicerta and
Cydaria were. Almanzaira, who went in first, first saluted the two Princesses,
and Polexander presenting his sister to her; See here madam (said he) the cause
of all your sons discontent, I deliver her into your hands to be punished in a
way proportionable to her offenses. Almanzaira in stead of answering
Polexander, addressed her self to Cydaria; I do not (said she) believe you so
guilty as your brother would persuade me; nor do not think you are a stranger
to me; it is long agone since I knew you, and if Polexander call to mind what
he saw in my hermitage, he can tell you, how you kept me company there, and
your picture was one of my principal ornaments. Cydaria, showing her virtue by
her modesty, and her wisdom by her answer; I was (said she to the Queen) most
happy in a time when I esteemed my self the most unfortunate Maiden alive; and
by that which it has pleased your Majesty to let me know, I acknowledge,
fortune did justly handle me so cruelly, since in lieu of being thankful for
her favors, I accused her for want of pity and justice: I ask her pardon
heartily, or rather, to show my thankfulness for the good I have received, to
the person to whom I owe it, I persever in my continual contempt of fortune,
and cast my self at your feet to render you my humble acknowledgements for
your exceeding favors. Madam (replied Almanzaira, having staid her from
kneeling) I mean not that you shall so easily be acquitted of the debt you owe
me: I desire you would give me the Original, for the care I took in so well
preserving the Copy; and that you will contribute somewhat to the safety of him
that would have hazarded his life so often for you. Cydaria could not answer
the Queen, because Zabaim, Achomat, Bajazet and Iphidamantus, entering the
cabin, they were engaged to begin new civilities. The King of Senega blushed in
seeing again that face which had power to overcome all Zelopa's enchantments:
Cydaria grew red too at the remembrance of some former passages; but she
presently grew pale, and had much ado to stand upright when she saw Bajazet
between Achomat and Iphidamantus. Zabaim, as reformed as he was, left not to be
very pleasant and gamesome, and told Cydaria (after he had saluted her) he
repented him not of his former perceptions. I found you fair in Guinea, (said
he) I find you fair in Morocco, and if I may speak it with awaking the
jealousy of any that shall hear me, I love you no less now then I did then:
yet there is this odds, (he added, smiling) then I loved you with an intent to
enjoy you my self, and now I love you that another may be happy in your
fruition; I am certain the person will not displease you, for if my memory
fail me not, I call to mind that you had no great mislike to him I would
bestow on you. Cydaria, that had a flexible and pleasant wit, and who
gracefully altered her discourse and humor, according to the diversity of such
personages whom she would oblige, smiled before she would answer Zabaim, and
casting her eyes down a little. I do not remember (said she) ought of what
your Majesty talks to me: The accidents which are befalne me since I came out
of Guinea, have so wronged my memory, that I have scarce enough left to keep me
from not knowing my self. Zabaim in lieu of answering, went to take Bajazet,
and presenting him to Cydaria, Here Is one (said he) will put you in mind of
those things you have forgotten: I am sure he has not; and there is nothing
that betided you whereof he cannot give you an exact account. Bajazet would
feign have borne a part in this franknesse of humor, but he was not master of
his fancy: Love which is a severe God would* not have him jest with his
mysteries; he appeared there before Cydaria, overjoyed, but abashed and
confused. If he had hope, he had fear too; no sooner did any heat appear in
his face, but it was called back to its center, and forced to give place to a
chillness, which ftoze his blood and made him as pale as death. Almanzaira did
the part of a good mother in her sons extremity; she spoke to his Mistress
for him, and said so much, that she must have been far less inclined then
she was to believe it, if she had not been persuaded: after the father, the
mother, the brothers and friends had laid the foundation of this easy
recomplement, they thought it best to leave the remainder to love. Bajazet had
never a Second left to serve him against Cydaria, and Iphidamantus was alone
with Melicerta; whilst these four lovers swumme in such delights which cannot
be known nor expressed by those that love not; Zabaim, Almanzaira and Achomat
equally satisfied, consulted together about the accomplishment of their
childrens desires. Polexander's Officers, who well knew their charges, had in
the mean time prepared a feast worthy the company in their masters ship: the
neatness and magnificence of it strove for priority, and though the sea have
not those commodities which are found on land; the place yet where those
Princes were entertained, made them see that Polexander was able to master all
kind of difficulties. During the repast, diverse discourses were on foot, at
last Iphidamantus was entreated by the company, to tell them by what means he
fell again (under the habit of a maiden) into the hands of the King of
Morocco. Melicerta who had a far greater desire then the rest to hear her
lover, imposed silence as soon as any one would speak, and showing an
attention even before Iphidamantus began his relation, anticipated the pleasure
she was to receive by it. Iphidamantus, loath his Mistress should stay any
longer in expectation of what he desired, began thus the sequel of his
adventures.

The Continuation of Iphidamantus History.
THis is the second time the King of Morocco's eyes, (as ill judges of beauty
as his old years are unfit for love) have taken me for Cydaria. The first was
when I left the service of the Grand-Signior: as I was in quest of Polexander,
I was ship-wrack'd on the coast of Morocco, but never was shipwreck accompanied
with so strange an adventure; for no sooner was I got on shore, but a many
Soldiers of Guargetsem Fortress took me up with extraordinary shoutes, and
making the places about to resound with the name of Ennoramita, brought me
right to their Kings chamber. That Prince over-joyed to see me, a hundred times
repeated the same name, cast himself at my feet, kissed my hands, used me like
a Goddess or an Angel, brought me into a chamber royally adorned, and left me
among many women and black eunuchs. To this Iphidamantus added, that which he
before related to Polexander; and coming to his departure from the Pirates
Island, till this time (said he) no man ever knew, no not Polexander, the true
cause that made me forsake Bajazet. I must now declare it to you, and not fear
to confess my faults, since I have so exceeding mild judges; I was enjoying
the delights of Bajazet's Isle, and (I confess it to my shame) never thought
on Histeria's death, nor Melicerta's miseries, when the quietness of my mind,
and the mirthsomenesse of my humor forsook me without any apparent cause.
That which till then pleased me, began to be distasteful, and the pensiveness,
sighs, and Bajazet's disquiets, which I could hardly endure, became my most
pleasing diversions; I found delights in solitude; company was irksome to my
melancholy and restless thoughts; I learnt to sigh in earnest, and found
pleasure in it; sleep left me; and I knew by my long and troublesome watchings,
how cruel the nights are to the sick and unfortunate. Though I grew angry at
this new manner of living, yet I found some sweetness in it; one night, when
certainly I slept, though I thought my self awake, a great flash of light
dashed all obscurity from my chamber, and struck into mine eyes: at first I
took it for lightning, but the same luster having (as it were) dazeled me the
second time, I opened my bed-curtaines to see what it was, and perceived
walking with an incredible sadness and slownesse, a young maiden which had her
breast opened with some blow of a sword: the blood gushed out in great clots
from the wound, and the fair apparition, inlieu of being terrified, looked on
it running out, with a great deal of pleasure; holding her eyes thus fixed on
her wound, she drew near me, and showing it to me with the point of her bloody
sword, Look on it (said she) as well as I, insensible Solomon, we have no
less contributed to it the one then the other: 'Twas indeed this hand and this
sword that made it, but 'twas thy disdain and inhumanity, which drove both to
this desperate action: Make thy self drunk with this blood, since thou have
so thirsted for it, draine out all that rests in my veins, I will endure thy
cruelty, so it extend no further, and that my poor sister who languisheth in a
desert Island, be not compelled to have recourse to my violent remedy for the
cure of that malady whereof thou art the inflicter. With these reproaches the
Ghost vanished, and I awaking found my self as cold as ice, and as wet as if I
had newly come out of a river. Alas! (cried I presently) fair soul, which
accusest me of thy death, thou know well that I am but a far distant
cause, and though my inclination would have drawn me to love thee, yet my
reason must have hindered me from it. I confess yet that I am guilty, since
thou condemnest me, and would to heaven my ruin could restore thy life again;
thou should see me run to my death with joy and alacrity; but since these
wishes and vows are but bootlesse and vain, I will make one more just and
solid, and from this day engage my self, never to be at rest, till I have
given Melicerta satisfaction. I cannot tell you whether it were the effect of
the vision, or my vow that wrought my alteration; but presently, of impassible,
I began to be all passion; and felt all those torments which Polexander and
Bajazet had so often described to me: I cast my self out of my bed, and scarce
having the patience to dress me, went to Bajazet, not knowing well what I did:
Brother (said I, all amazedly) I love, and my desire to find the worthy object
of my affection, will not permit me to stay longer with you. Bajazet will tell
you if you please, that hearing me talk thus, he thought me out of my wits,
and asked oftentimes to what end I held a discourse with him so out of all
appearance? It Is very true though, said I, and that you may not doubt of it,
hearken to such things as I never yet disclosed to any. Thereupon I related to
him all which had happened to me at Constantinople and Lepanto; and ending with
the vision I had lately seen, I filled him with as much astonishment as
commiseration: Besides, knowing my sickness by his own experience, Away, away
(said he) defer it no longer, it is not justice that you should be exempted
from the fate of your family. He gave me a good tall ship, with all such as I
would choose to accompany me, and taking his leave; My dear brother (said he) I
will quickly follow you; and but for Almaid and Hydaspes whom I daily expect, I
would be as well a companion in your voyage as I am in your fortune: thus we
parted, and 'twas after our separation that all those accidents betided me
which I have recounted. After I had been some while with Polexander, and saw
him (as well as my self) in a longing to attempt his fortune again, I left
him steering for the inaccessible Island, and bore up for the Straights of
Gibraltar, to get into the Mediterranean Sea, and enquire after Melicerta
either in France or Italy. The wind driving me on the coast of Barbary, I
landed in the territory of Argier, and went into the Town with an intent to
see whether Melicerta had not been so unfortunate as to be taken by those
Barbarians, and enchained among their slaves: But my search was as effectlesse
there as it had been in other places; and for being too curious in those parts,
I lost the hope of seeing Melicerta again. That Town being peopled with a
many several Nations, and of all kind of wits, amongst others feeds a great
sort of men and women which make profession of calculating nativities, to
divine of things lost, and foretell of what is to come: I went to one of these
Cheaters which was of most reputation; 'twas a Marabou called Cid Amatonis,
which dwelt without the gates of Argier: after that false Prophet had done a
thousand superstitious Ceremonies wherewithal he was wont to deceive poor
people; he told me, that which I searched after, was not to be found but among
the dead. Polexander interrupting his brother, Had you (said he) understood the
true sense of those words, you would not accuse your Mirabou of ignorance and
lying: for it is very true (insensible Solomon) that the treasure you looked
for, was shut up among the habitations of the dead, and the constant and
generous Melicerta had chosen for her retreat the Tomb of her dead sister.
Melicerta was a little moved at Polexanders reproving his brother, and
therefore speaking with her accustomed sweetness; My Lord (said she to our
Hero) you know that Iphidamantus has made his peace, and by consequence we
must not revoke to memory things passed. The company could not hear these
mild remonstrances, without admiring the goodness of that Lady that made
them, and ravished with Iphidamantus strange accidents, entreated him to
proceed; which he did (from where his brother had interrupted him) thus: I
confess (said he) when Cid Amatonis had made me this fatal reply, I laughed
at his art; and told him I was sure the person was alive whom I sought for. My
art (said the Mirabou) deceives me not, and however assures me, that personage
is enclosed in a Tomb; and for confirmation of that verity, Know with young
man (too fair to be happy) that this face so full of allurements shall quickly
find greater then its own: there are Sorceresses in this city, that trouble
not themselves as those of old did, with drawing the Moon down from her
Sphere, in spoiling with hail their enemies harvests, nor to change the
course of Rivers; their employments are far more mortal and sad toward such
whom nature has endowed with any loveliness and beauty. Those they bind in
unperceiveable chains, and by their sorcerie, depriving them of all
understanding, sell them to rich voluptuous women, who find no pleasure truly
high, if they change them not every day. Look to thy self young man, this
misfortune threatens thee; it hangs over thy head; it is done; thou art lost. I
went (with that) out of Amatonis hermitage in such a choler, that I scarce had
any feeling of my miseries; and had not gone a hundred paces into the Town,
when a women, covered with a great veil, and holding a long Chaplet after the
Turkish manner, staid me by my arm. What (my son, said she) 'twas sure your
ill Angel that led you to the Cell of the abominable Amatonis. Bethink your
self well (said she) affrightedly; Do you know what you are? Do not you take
your self for some Tiger or Lion, or other such beast? For it is the custom of
that wretch to trouble the minds of all that consult with him: I confess, I
was so weak as to stop at the words of that old Phantasm, but finding no
alteration in my self: Mother, (said I) the man you speak of, is not so good
a friend as to deprive me of all reason and knowledge: but on the contrary,
has (for all my life time) made me miserable in conserving it to me, and robbed
me of that little hope which kept me alive. He has taken nothing from you, but
he may be glad to restore it, replied the old woman: Believe me (my son) his
predictions are all false, and many times already he has for his impostures
given satisfaction under the cudgel of the hangman to the indignation of the
most eminent in this Town. Ah, Mother, said I, if you would bring me to some
one that could tell me news of the good which I have lost, I promise to make
you forget the incommodities of your old age. My son (quoth the Sorceresse)
it is my custom to do good to every body, and receive no requital. Come along
and assure your self how extraordinary soever your affliction be, I will find
a remedy for it. My grief and passion which made me more senseless then I have
been fince, through that old woman's enchantments, won me to follow her, to
the end I might learn the situation of that Island where the Ghost of
Histeria had showed me Melicerta. I should be too tedious, if I related to you
the richness of the house, whereinto the Witch brought me: without it seemed a
little one, but within there were stately rooms and lodgings, with furniture
of silk and gold, and a garden wherein many fountains mingled their sweet
murmurs with the perfumes of Orange trees and Jessemines. As Soon as I was in
this delightful lodging, Thou art welcome, child of my heart, said the old
Sorceresse; and being thus entertained, she led me into a Closet which was all
hung with the pictures of the fairest Ladies in Africa. Mother (said I) if that
pity which you lately showed me was not fained, and if ever another miseries
have sensibly touched you, do your utmost endeavor to give some comfort to
the most unfortunate of all men. I extremely love a Lady, as great by birth as
incomparable in beauty, and my misery is such, that I know not to what part of
the world she has betaken her self: She is in no less care for thee my
son, (replied the Witch) then thou art for her; cheer up then, and assure
thy self, that ere long you shall both receive the contentment you seek
after. This discourse was a wonder to me, nevertheless, since we easily
believe what we wish, I imagined this woman would not have promised me a thing
so assuredly, if it had not been in her power. I entreated her to let me see
as soon as she could the effect of her promises. How (said she) what? do thou
not see it? I with that turned my head, and saw at the closet door a young Lady
very lovely and richly clad, whom I thought to have othertimes seen; but I knew
it was not Melicerta, and as I would have found fault with the Witch for
deceiving me, that Lady cast her self about my neck, and moistning me with
her tears, Is it possible (dear Solomon) said she, that thy insensibilitie
should continue still? Do thou not repent thee of the griefs thou have made
me suffer by thy neglect and flight? It is almost a year that I have sought
thee, and neither the thought of my birth, the fear of dangers, nor the duty I
owe my father, have been able to detain me. I have crossed all the
Mediterranean, got into the Ocean, and finally not knowing where to find thee,
retired to this Town: For these eight days I have enquired diligently after
thee, I have employed all the Sooth sayers and Magicians, to learn what place
hid thee from my inquiry, but none could satisfy my passion. This aged woman
only moved with my affliction kept me in hope of seeing thee again; and as
one day (to please me) she showed me thy amiable face in her enchanted glass,
on an instant she snatched away that powerful crystal, and cried to me,
run; for at this very time Solomon passes by the windows of your chamber.
My love making me forget what was seemly, made me run not only to the window,
but into the street to embrace thee; thou vanishedst from mine eyes, and for
all that I could do from that day hitherto, it has been out of my power of
seeing thee again: This faithful companion of my miseries seeing how extreme
they were, was willing to mitigate them by her art; and going forth hence this
morning, Daughter (said she) give over your tears, and put on again your
former blithenesse; this day thou shall fee thy insensible fair one; I gave
credit to her words, and see they were not frivolous. I hold thee now my dear
Solomon, and protest that nothing but death shall separate me from thee. The
kindnesses and talk of that Lady had so disturbed the little sense was left
me, that all I could do was to look on her with mine eyes, all threatening and
full of anger. She on the contrary cast her amorous glances on me, and
beseeching for some pity on her afflictions; Alas (said she) is it possible
that the unfortunate Ennoramita must eternally entreat and never be heard? At
that name, I remembered that she who spoke to me was the same daughter to the
King of Tunis, whose young errors I have related to you, and found my self
extremely pusled; yet faining not to be so; Rather (said I) Ennoramita is it
possible, that so great a Princess as your self, should so abandon the place
of her birth, and taking on the trade of a vagabond and lost one, have so
little care of her reputation? Let some other then thee (cruel Solomon,
replied she) upbraid me for that fault: For thine own part, thou should like
it, and can not with justice deny it a recompense; I confess, the anger of
seeing my intentions crossed by this fatal meeting, carried me beyond what was
fitting; I laid on her a thousand more imputations; I condemned her fury and
blindness, and having often threatened the old Witch, I strove to get my self
out of the hands of these two enraged creatures. Dear Solomon (said
Ennoramita) forsake me not in the estate I am; I have not much longer to live,
since thou can not endure that I should love thee: stay but a little and thou
shall see thy self freed from this miserable wretch. The old woman, who as I
have heard since, had been the Princess nurse, and had made her undertake her
voyages with an assurance of finding me; had rather see me perish then not
content Ennoramita's passion. I cannot tell you whether it were by words, by
soft feelings, or other witchcraft; but in the very instant that I went out of
the closet into the chamber by which I came; I felt my self stricken as with
the stab of a poniard, and losing all knowledge, fell in a swoune on the
floor. I cannot tell you what Ennoramita and the Sorceresse did during my
trance; but when I came to my self, I found me in a bed, without any memory of
what had passed. I forgot Melicerta, I remembered not my voyage, I had cast mine
own self so far in oblivion, that there remained no more knowledge of it in
me, but that me thought I was not the same I had been. Notwithstanding,
Ennoramita' charm had a success far differing from that which Dirce (so was
her Nurse called) had promised her. In stead of loving and sighing for her, me
thought I saw (when she appeared) something most horrible; and often times
taking her in my visions for the bloody and mournful Ghost of Histeria as I
had seen her; Alas! (cried I) follow me no more! I confess fair Princess I am
guilty of death; I have stroke that poniard into thy breast, but be satisfied
by my ruin, and expose me no longer to these cruel serpents which continually
burn me, but kill me not. Ennoramita grew almost desperate to see how I was,
and wished every day that her Nurse could break the charm she had given me:
but being less able to suppress the ill then to cause it, she advised the
Princess to carry me to Tunis in a maidens habit; to which Ennoramita
consenting, and making preparation for all things needful to the voyage,
departed, as soon as she saw a little diminution of my frenzy. By her return,
she restored to the King her father, the life she had almost deprived him of by
her flight. That Prince, who without doubt had by his example contributed to
his daughters follies, treated her as his companion, rather then as if he had
been her father. He was pacified in keeping her more carefully then before
times, and to divert her immodest affections resolved to visit her every day
after dinner. For my self, who passed from my former frenzy into so deep a
melancholy, that I did nothing but sigh and weep, and made Ennoramita's life so
irksome, that she had infallibly slain her self if the Nurse had not at all
times assured her, that as my frenzy was turned into a melancholy, so that
melancholy waxing away by little, I would become such a man as she had always
wished me. In the mean time, the King of Tunis casting his eyes on me, took me
for what I was not, and would needs know of his daughter where I was bought:
she fitted him a leafing, and said, That seeing me at Argiers in the market
where they sold slaves, my comeliness gave her a mind to buy me; and were it
not for the grief which disquiets her, she were the most pleasing creature in
the world. Alas! what ailes^ she (asked the King her father?) It Is a strange
grief replied Ennoramita: she has so passionately loved a Canarian, that
losing him by a tragical accident, she has never since given over her fighes
and lamentations. This melancholy, in lieu of lesning by time, still
increases; and from time to time so disquiets the poor maiden, that none
without pity can see her actions or hear her complaints. Hear I beseech you a
strange example of our fantastiknesse; That King who was no more master of his
wits then Ennoramita, had seen me diverse times, and though he thought me a
maiden, and believed me fair, yet had he not intimated any affectation toward
me: but no sooner had he heard the tale his daughter invented, but he took a
particular pleasure to entertain me, and employed all his best Rhetoric in
the Essaying to sweeten my sorrows. He spoke to me of my pretended lover, held
his condition happy, since it made him receive so great proofs of my love; and
protested to me he would not complain of his fortune, if by his death he could
bring me to the like resentment. To this I answered with fighes and tears, and
that frantic Prince found loveliness in my melancholy: he pleased himself
in it, and stirred not from me; at last he was constrained to let his passion
break forth, and to satisfy it, to take his Rival (I would say his daughter)
for his confident. Imagine whether I were not happy in having but one part of
my reason at that time; and what a redoubling of tortures it had been to me, if
being perpetually to oppose the folly of the father and the love of the
daughter; I had besides been afflicted with the remembrance of Melicerta.
Ennoramita's Nurse labored on one side to annihilate her former charm by a
second, but not being able to do it without putting me to extreme violences,
she so altered the body to comfort the spirit, that I fell ill of a sickness
which all the Physicians of Tunis at first held incurable. After a continual
fever of forty days, and a weakening of all parts of my body, so general,
that there was nothing left me but my sight, I began to feel some small
ease; I then began fully to know my self, and asked (alone) where I was; since
when and how I fell sick, and why I had given over the quest of Melicerta. By
little and little my memory came again, and though it showed me, one after
another, the Idea's of such things as had betided me before I fell into the
hands of Ennoramita, yet could it not make me call to mind what had befalne me
since: As I troubled to know the sequel of my adventures, Ennoramita came to
see me, and commanded all those that were in my chamber to withdraw. When she
was alone, she fell on her knees, and taking my right hand which was out of the
bed, By this hand which I kiss, said she, and by this submission wherewithal
I implore thy goodness, dear Solomon, pardon me those faults which the
excess of my love have made me commit against thee. I confess I am unworthy
thy love, since I would have purchased it by other charms then those of my
affection and perseveranee: but if I have judges a little more pitiful then
thy self, I shall find mercy. For tell me lovely Soiyman, what faults are
pardonable, if that of too much love deserves to be punished? The Princesses
speech did renew in my memory, but confusedly, some particularities of my
sickness, and that reiterating the desire I had to know all: Fair Princess
(said I) the unfortunate Solomon knows too well theeffects of love, to condemn
as criminal the actions to which he enforces us. All that his absolute power
make us undertake is just, and if some one think otherwise, he knows not what
love is. After this, fear not fair Princess to declare what you have done to
me; and know that we never understand better how violent a passion is, but when
it puts on such as it possesses to actions extremely violent. May I believe,
replied Ennoramita, that it is from thy self, and not the virtue of some new
charm, which gives thee so favorable thoughts, and makes thee so pitiful? If
it be so, let Fate do its worst, I will never think my estate unhappy.
Ennoramita, having put on this resolution, related to me all that I have told
you, and the means she made use of, to try the overcomming my insensibility.
Afterward she acquainted me with the causes of my last sickness, and
suddenly casting her self on me; Dear Solomon (said she) I say not, if thou
love me, but if thou have pity on a Princess who is even mad for thy love
hinder me (since it is in thy power) from losing mine honor with my life. Thou
have both in thy hands. Deal with them as a man truly generous, and strive to
constrain thy self a little, that the King my father may not discover how I
have beguiled him. I ask thee nothing, but that thou faigne thy self to be a
maiden, and enduring the love he bears thee* be so noble as to draw me out of
a labyrinth whose intricacies thou only can wind through.

Instead of answering the Princess, I began to reflect on her miseries and
mine own; and exclaiming against heaven; Justice eternal (said I) which
raignest over us, why intendest thou to inflict such strange punishments on
poor miserable creatures, which are but the play-toyes of our passions, and
the examples of a deplorable weakness? And thou unfortunate Princess, (then
I addressed my self to Ennoramita) what pretend'st thou by thy obstinate
affection? Thou love a wretch that cannot love thee. I must needs confess
it, I love as well as thee, and my love as well as thine, is accompanied with
so cruel a destiny that it cannot attain to what it aspires. Thou follow'st
me, and I follow another. I fly from thee, and by another am as fast fled
from. Thou intreatest I would have pity on thee, I grant it, provided thou be
not unpitifull to me. Let Us do the like one for another; and since our diseases
are equally dangerous, let us run both to the same remedy. It Is fit I should
conform my self to your opinion (replied Ennoramita) but it is impossible for
me. I wish thy peace, and yet I cannot choose but disturb it. Yet I am not
desperate of being able to please thee, but thou must give me a great deal of
time to perform a matter of that difficulty. Grant me that which I request
thee, and I will yield to what you desire. This last word so seized on the
Princesses heart, that she was near suffocated in pronouncing it. The tears
fell abundantly from her eyes, and her sighs impetuously driving out one
another, resembled the impetuous course of a torrent which had overflowed the
damme that opposed it. No sooner was she a little resettled, but the King her
father came into my chamber, and accosting me with a countenance that witnessed
how dear my life was to him: Now (said he) I perceive my prayers have been
heard, and heaven has granted to my Sacrifices the recovery of fair
Philomela, ('it was under that name Ennoramita made me pass for a maid.) And
truly (said he) it had been too rigorous, had it condemned to a precipitated
death, or to a perpetual languishment, a beauty, which for its own glory,
merits not only to live long on earth, but to be there perpetually happy. Sir
(replied I) if ought could give me comfort in my sad fortune, I had met it in
the entertainment I receive from your Majesty and the Princess your daughter.
But alas! the misery I am fallen in is so great, that not only it can have no
end, but it even deprives me of the capacity of being comforted. Melicerta is
dead, and by consequence there is no more happiness left for me in the world.
The dear name of Melicerta renewing within me the sense of those miseries
whereunto I had exposed her, drew such abundance of tears from mine eyes, that
Muley Hassen could not doubt the truth of my loss. He thought it fit, (seeing
me so sensible of my misfortune) not to discover any grief of his own. He
therefore contented himself in making appear to me by reasons and examples,
that 'twas a thing unheard of among men to love that which had no existence.
But (he added) I hope, the same hand which has redeemed you from the grave,
will free you from these mournful and funeral cogitations which are so fatal
to your repose. Many other words he used which I will not repeat, and 'twas
very late ere he went from me. As long as my extreme weakness forced me keep
my bed, all the day and part of the night I had with me either the father or
the daughter; as soon as the one left me, the other took the place, and both
of them speaking to me of their affection, in lieu of afflicting (as you may
imagine) they comforted me; since they represented to me mine own. I uttered
boldly before them both, the dear name of Melicerta: I besought her to hear
my laments, to think how my constancy was assaulted, and to give it the
virtue of continuing victorious. When I spoke thus before Ennoramita, Shall I
(said she) make my prayers contrary to thine, or implore heaven not to hear
thee? In one same instant my affection commands and forbids it, it would have
me love thee own for mine sake, and by the same reason wish the loss of
Melicerta: on the other side, it would have me love thee for thy sake, and by
consequence pray for Melicerta's safety. Thus that happy enamored Lady is
not only beloved by him she affects, but is affected by what she
persecuteth: Again, Solomon in this contestation meets both with his content
and glory; he satisfies his passion in resisting what opposes it, and by the
power of her allurements, makes Melicerta triumph on her Rival. Thou art
alone, o unfortunate Ennoramita, the person on whom Heaven powers all its
choler, and Love has chosen as a victime which must be sacrificed for the
happiness of Solomon and Melicerta. The Princesses passion still furnished her
with so many new thoughts, that I had need of a wonderful memory to retain
them: The King her father produced no less, and seeing in the declining of my
sickness, that my mirthsomnesse came again with my strength, he thought
Melicerta began to be worn out of my memory. That opinion gave him the
boldness to discover his love to me, and intimating that he would not treat
me as other beauties which he kept shut up for his pleasure; he at first
promised me the Crown of Tunis. Your virtue (said he) and beauty which are
both extraordinary, exempt you from the Law of indifferent personages. I will
suspend the customs of the Kings my Predecessors, to teach all Barbary, that
a merit without comparison, may work something without example. Philomela
shall be placed in the Throne, without fear of companions or Rival; and if
her virtue cannot endure in my Palace, any subjects of impuritie, from this
hour I break open the doors of my Seraglio, and give both liberty and
honor to so many fair slaves as the chance of war has given me. To all
these fair promises I continually opposed my inabilitie of accepting them, and
the loss of Melicerta. 'Twas a great deal worse when I had absolutely
recovered my health, and that the beauty (which I will believe I had for fear
of disobliging Cydaria) taking new vigor, shone in the eyes of Muley Hassen
(as he told me) like the Sun when after his leaving the Tropicke of
Capricorn, he ascends toward that of Cancer. But leave we at last these
extravagancies of love, and (since it is the will of Fate) end this Comedy by a
tragical Catastrophe. Muley Hassen and Ennoramita, meditated on nothing but
how to become masters of a place which they had so long and vainly assaulted;
when they themselves were set on by the Garrison of Argiers, who had
correspondencie with some inhabitants of Tunis: The Town was instantly won,
and the Palace beset, before Muley could resolve whether he should defend
himself or fly; the Turks (who knew his cowardice) urged him to yield, and
after two days battering won it by force. See what love can do? Muley,
fearing more my loss then his own, no sooner saw the Turks enter the Court
of his Palace, but he ran to my chamber, and staying at the door with his sword
and buckler, made them see, that he who wanted a courage to defend his Crown
and life, had an extraordinary one to maintain his passion and protect his
pretended Mistress. The most resolute Turks gave ground before the blows of
that Prince, and seeing their obstinacy to contest with him, did but serve to
ruin them, they talked to him of his safety, and that he should not hazard
with his own person, his daughter, and people. Ah traitors cried the Prince,
you have not violated your faith, and forced my City, with an intent to have a
care either of me or mine; No, I will die like a King, and not do as those
infamous Princes, who to prolong an unfortunate life, cowardly present their
neck and arms to the fetters of your Tyrant. With that he flew among the
Turks, and though they had command not to kill him, yet the necessity of
defending themselves, made them neglect that order. As Soon as I saw him fall
at the feet of his enemies, I was touched with an extreme shame for
counterfeiting so long the maids part. In a rage I flung out of Ennoramita's
arms, who besought me, not to hazard my self, and seizing on a Cymitar and
Target which were fallen from a dying Turk, I flew on those that were entered my
chamber: some of them I slew, and drove out the rest; I think verily that the
respect to my sex, bridled the Turks fury; for exposing my self as I did to
their arrows and swords, it had been very easy for them to have given me my
pasport with Muley Hassen. Ennoramita, seeing me in that danger, forgot what
she was, and the fear of my loss causing a neglect of her preservation; she
ran after me, and as my buckler boldly defied death which environed her on all
sides. One while the Turks in respect to of her, retaining their fury, she
fell on her knees, and imploring their pity; Take my Crown (said she) and
leave me this companion of my miseries; but as she would have gone on with her
petition, an arrow, shot at random stroke through her tongue, and passing on,
so dangerously hurt her, that she fell down half dead: presently she cast her
eyes upon me, and calling me with a weak and pitiful voice, Dear Solomon
(said she) what a favorable shot was this, since in depriving me of my life,
it has taken away my fear of losing thee? As she ended these words, the blood
choked her, and I (who thought I could not live without shame, did I not
rerenge the death of the father and the daughter) so provoked those which would
have spared me, that they lost all respect, and left me for dead between Muley
and Ennoramita. The Basha Aladin who commanded the forces of Argier, hearing
that one only Lady resisted a great many Turks, sent word, they should beware
of wronging me, and presently after came to see me; but he found me among the
dead, and witnessing he was extreme angry at it, would have had all those
Soldiers undergo the edge of the sword, whom he thought authors of my death.
He drew near, to see whether I were absolutely dead, and perceiving in me some
remainder of life, commanded his guard to take me up, and brought me into the
chamber of the too generous Ennoramita. His extraordinary care of me saved my
life, and the wariness wherewithal I concealed what I was, thrived so
happily, that I was always taken for a woman and so looked after. The Turks
being absolute masters of the Town, and not weeting from whence any force
could come strong enough to trouble them in their conquest, gave themselves
over to all kind of liberty. But when they thought least on it, they were set
on by a Cozen to the late King (called as himself) Muley Hassen, and whom the
jealousies of State had banished into Mezila, which is on the confines of the
Numidian deserts. That Prince understanding the devastation of his country,
got together a great many Arabians, which usually frequented that Town, and
assembling all the souldier-like of Distef, of Necan, of Thefas, and of
Thebessa, fell, unlooked for, into the City of Tunis, cut part of the Turks in
pieces, and compelled the rest to retire shamefully to Argiers. Thither was I
convay'd by the Basha's Eunuchs, and so carefully guarded, that when I strove
to escape, I found all means deprived me, and all ways shut up: but love who
had brought me to this precipice found a way to draw me out again. A little
while after Aladin's return to Argier, the same Abdelmelec whom Almanzor
lately slew, came thither with a glorious train, and having treated about
diverse things with the Basha, acquired his love so far as to live with him
like a brother. The Basha desirous to give him an extraordinary testimonial of
it, brought him one night into my chamber, and having given him time enough to
look on me; Her valor (said he) is no less rare then her beauty. Abdelmelec
presently knew me, not for Iphidamantus, but for Cydaria; I knew him too, and
instantly plotted to make use it; nevertheless I feigned as I had never seen
him, and he did the like by me: We had besides lived long enough among the
Turks, to take notice how suspicious they were, and how jealous of what they
loved. Abdelmelec after he had dispatched all with the Basha, returned to
Morocco, and Aladin being called back to Constantinople, made ready for a
voyage that must cost him his life. The very day Abdelmelec was to go thence,
a Blacke-Moore woman, who went for a fool in the Basha's house, coming (as she
was wont to do) into my chamber for my diversion, as she danced about, let
fall at my feet a Cane which she held in her hand. By the sign she made to me,
I presently understood by her letting it fall, there was somewhat in it; I
therefore took it up, and keeping it in my hand till I was in bed, I broke it,
(when my women were with-drawne) and found a paper with these words: If the
fair Ennoramita prefer not the inglorious servitude wherein she lives,
before the honors which are assured her in Morocco, she will contribute
somewhat to the enterprise now in hand for her deliverance.

Ravished with this advertisement, I spent the whole night waking, and did
nothing but invent means to make good use of the occasion was offered me; I
found no way better then to leave my self to be guided by those that labored
for my liberty. As Soon therefore as it was day, I made this answer to the note
I received: To believe that a Captive delights in his irons, and refuses an
honorable liberty, is to suspect him of folly or stupidity: Who ere ye be
charitable friends to the distressed, go on in your design, and expect from
me all the assistance I owe my self.

This Ticket I put into one piece of the broken Cane, and when the Black-moore
came again, I threw it at her head: she took up both the pieces, and after
she had sufficiently railed at me, went away. In almost eight days I heard no
more news of my fool, nor knew any thing of those which had promised to
assist me: In the mean time the Basha gave order for his voyage, and so
hastened all things, that he was ready to be gone fifteen days sooner then was
thought on. The day of his departure being come, I leave you to imagine to what
pass I was brought, I saw the furniture taken out of my chamber; I noted my
being watched by almost twenty Eunuchs, and seven or eight old women that
seldom forsook me; I perceived my self ready to be shipped and carried to
Constantinople. In this extremity, my resolution was (if all other help failed)
to throw my self headlong into the sea. On the instant, some ill news the
Basha received from his friends at the Port, so astonished him, that he forgot
his accustomed care of his Mistress; and 'twas well seen by his perplexity and
disquiet that the Divan made ready a strange welcome for him. Every one
embarked in a hurry; they brought me to the haven, and already had I one foot
in the skiffe that was to carry me to our gally, when some twenty or thirty men
coming out of a back creek, with their Cymiters in their hands fell on the
weak and fearful troop that were with me. They quickly dispersed my Eunuchs
and women, and having taken me, conveyed me into a Galliot, which lay close
within the creek. Presently the alarm was given on shore, and in the Basha's
ship; every one cried that Ennoramita was taken away, but their cries were in
vain, for the little Galley wherein I was, sailing with an incomparable
swiftness, quickly got out of sight of Aladin's ship, and the coast of Argier.
I thought on nothing less then on my Negro, when she came and fell on my neck:
she asked me whether those of her country had any wit, and whether she had not
been cunning enough. I replied, her service deserved a good reward, and that, I
did promise, with her liberty, so soon as I could get free my self. She
answered me, that she had already in part received what I promised, and then
falling to play with finger-knackers, and doing a many more fooleries, she put
me off from thinking on matters of more consequence. My Galliot sailed into the
straight, and yet I could not learn into whose hands I was fallen; but entering
the maine Ocean, I descried two ships which made up to ours. At a sign was
given our Mariners by a cannon shot, they gave over rowing, and when the
greatest was closed with us, they cast out a ladder to have me come aboard: I
was received by Abdelmelec himself, who in his own name and his fathers, made
me such a welcome, and used me with such entertainment, that Cydaria is very
unthankful if she do not one day acknowledge it. Cydaria, unwilling her
brothers jeasting should go unanswered, You should (said she) have told
Bajazet of it, for (may be) he would then have done so much for my sake and
your good friend Abdelmelec, that he should not have lain in so ill case as he
now is; but be not you so incivill as not to render that Prince the ceremonies
he did you. Iphidamantus going on again: If (said he) I was well entertained
by the son, I was not less but better by the father: Assooneas I landed, he
came to welcome me with a preparation which might be compared to a little
triumph. The name of Ennoramita resounded every where, the flutes, the cymbals,
and all other instruments of music used by the Africans, invited every body
to dances and other rejoycings. At first, I was (according to the custom of
the country) brought into those stately bathes which I have described to you,
and put into the hands of some of those women which had before served me. From
the bathes, I went into that famous closet, which was as a Temple consecrated
to the Portraict of Cydaria. To the Portraict of Cydaria? said Almanzor, red
either with jealousy or choler. How! by what means came Hely by it? By a way
which I will tell you at more leisure replied Cydaria: He shall restore it
(said Bajazet) or it shall cost him his life and the ruin of Morocco. All the
company not disallowing this amorous agitation, Iphidamantus proceeded thus;
Being then in that chamber all enlightened with gold and jewels, Hely, who had
put on the habit of a young man, and painted himself to regaine what age had
robbed him of, came to see me, and used the same language he had done, the first
time he mistook me for Cydaria. In finishing his speech, he turned toward the
Princesses picture, and pointing to it, See (said he) what has preserved my
life during your absence; when my grief has spent my spirits, and overcome my
resolution, I had recourse to this fair picture, to refresh both the one and
the other: I there found wherewithal to resist my longings, to keep my desires
in vigor, and even wherewith to pass over your contempt and aversion. Heaven
which knows the innocence of my affection, after its trial by so many
crosses, has at last resolved to recompense it; give your consent to so just a
decree, and disarming those eyes of their usual disdain, which never appeared
mild to me but for my ruin, requite at least by some favorable aspect the
long torments your beauty has made me undergo. The goodness of that Prince
(which indeed deserved an acknowledgement) made me resolve to disdeceive him; I
therefore besought him to give more credit to my words, then he had
before-time, and to suspend a while that passion which had twice almost cost
him his life, that he might so the better consult with reason, and no more
contradict a known truth. He smiled, and shook his head when he heard me say
so: I am very sorry (said I) that my misfortune in bringing me hither, makes
you call to mind again, a person, that does but perpetuate your afflictions;
could I have found any other way that might have freed me from mine enemies,
how irksome soever, I would have attempted it rather then have had recourse to
your assistance: Not, but that I am glad to be obliged to so great a Prince as
your self, but owing you so much already, my conscience upbraides me every
moment, that my resolution to cast my self again into your hands, was the
most ungrateful part could be acted. The reason is very forcible, I knew (it
told me) your error, and to bring into his sight again, that fatal face
which disturbs the peace of your age, was wittingly to continue you in it: but
since it has not been in my power to divert this inconvenience, I will stop
the progress of the mischief it works, and freely tell you, I am the brother
of that Ennoramita who is only fair for your affliction. Ah (replied Hely) if
you love me, I beseech you dissemble no more, for it will not work the
success you hope by it. It Is not much less then a year, since you thought by
such a device to cure me of my passion. But dear Ennoramita what got you by
that cunning? Nothing but the augmenting my torments and almost the ending my
days. If in lieu of humbly entreating you as I do to be somewhat favorable
unto me, it were permitted to make you some few upbraidings; in your conscience
should I have not have just cause to blame you for your flight? and being your
own judge, may I not accuse you, for putting your life and honor in hazard,
rather then to endure the company of a Prince who has had no other design
then to bestow both himself and his Crown on you? Reflect (if you please) on
all the misfortunes which seconded your flight; think on the dangers you have
run, the slavery whereinto you have fallen, and if your life be not
considerable, think at least into what hazard you have engaged your honor:
after that, (what mislike soever you have toward me) you will be enforced to
confess that it had been far more easy to bear with the afflictions of
poor Hely. I see well (said I) there needs somewhat else then words to free
you from those errors you have no mind to leave, exact from me therefore all
that you can imagine most prevalent to give you an absolute manifestation of so
important a truth; and at last pluck off the cause of your voluntary
blindness. Hely loved so modestly and so respectfully, that fearing to offend
me, he withdrew, and in going out of my chamber, told me, he rather desired to
be miserable all his life, then once to contradict me: two or three days he
left me in quiet, and though all his happiness consisted in my fight, yet had
he rather lose that contentment, then to run the fortune of displeasing me. At
three days end, (whether he would or no) he returned to his former
solicitations, but as soon as I spoke of freeing him from his error, he flung
away, and saw me not, or if he did, 'twas by some secret chinkes or holes which
he had made in the walls of my chamber. In that manner did I live near three
months, and endeavored to win some one of the slaves which waited on me, to
get me the apparel of a man, and some arms, and by his means free me from the
hands of the senseless old King. The Negro woman that came along with me,
seemed to be fit for that purpose, but Hely had too much pleased her, for
fearing the like turn she had played the Basha Aladin: I had no sooner then
spoke to her of my escape, but she rudely chid me for it; and assuredly by her
advertising the King of Morocco, I was more strictly guarded then before A few
days after this mild detention, I understood, that all the Court was in an
uprore, and that a great many sail of ships were discovered at the mouth of the
River of Tensif: This alarm increasing by the arrival of some Ambassadors,
Hely came to me one evening, and delivering me a paper; Read this (said he) and
afterward (if you can) persuade me that you are not Ennoramita. I took the
long Scroll, and if my memory deceive me not, there was written in it, thus:

BAJAZET General of the Pirates, to HELY King of Morocco.
HAd I not far more regard to what I owe my self, then I have in considering
those violences wherewithal the unrulinesse of thy passions dishonours the
later years of thy life, I would not solicit thee (as I do) by Ambassadors;
but instantly employ the justice of my arms to compel thee, by a severe
chastisement to a repentance of thy crimes. Thou should blush Hely, to have
in thine old age those raging agitations, which are not allowed to young men,
but that nature permits them not to be wiser; not that I declare my self
against love, or by an indiscretion too common, blame that in another, which I
think honorable in my self: I disallow such vices, which to be approved of,
insolently put on the face of virtue: I utterly condemn all impurity, and I
abhor all disordinate affections and violences. In a word, I detest that
madness by whose intemperance thou treatest like a slave a Princess, that can
raise in arms all Europe and Africa, for the subversion of thy tyranny. For
mine own part, who am the meanest of those which have dedicated their arms
and lives to her service, I here protest to avenge her oppressed innocence, if
my Ambassadors have not persuasion sufficient to prevent thine own
destruction, and give liberty to so many Princes as are fettered in the same
irons wherein the fair Ennoramita is enthralled.

After I had read this Declaration of Bajazet, I cast mine eyes on Hely, and
thinking to give him such counsel as he would not neglect; It shall not cost
much (said I) the preventing those disasters which threaten you, send me to
Bajazet, it may be his affection will make him as clear sighted as your self,
and win him to believe he has found what he sought, when I am once in his
hands. Rather cried Hely, let our great Mahomet perish from the memory of the
living, let me rather see mine Empire desolate, and the miserable Hely crushed
under the ruins of his Palace! With that he left me, and his natural
quickness rekindling I know not what remainder of fire in his frozen veins,
he called for his arms, and denying to hear Bajazet's Ambassadors any
further, gave command they should presently depart from Morocco. Those Rovers
accustomed to cast forth their andacious threatenings, stormed and thundered even
within Morocco against her own King; and one of them throwing down his Cymetar
in the market place, I vow (said he to those that were about him) never to
wear any again, till I see my self and my Companions Masters of this City.
This threate affrighted part of the Spectators, and gave the bold Pirate a
brave passage through the astonished people. As Soon as Bajazet understood how
his Ambassadors had been treated, he called his Council, and desirous more
and more to engage the Pirates in his designs, It Is no more (said he) my sole
interest that obliegeth you to besiege Morocco. It Is the honor of your former
actions that calls you to its protection. The insolence of this barbarous King
has of a private quarrel made a public injury. You are all wronged in the
persons of your companions. Your honor, of which they were depositaries in the
qualities of your Ambassadors, complains of it by me, asks you Justice for
Helie's impudency, and accounts you unworthy to live if instantly you run not
to be avenged. The Pirates animated by so powerful a speech, all at once swore
the ruin of Morocco, and without delay came in a wonderful order to land on
both sides the town. The Cavalry which was fallied would have opposed their
landing, but the Rovers artillery thundering among the Squadrons, soon left the
shore free. If Bajazet could endure to hear his own praises, I would tell
you how valor and Judgment wholly possessing him, triumphed both on the power
and wiles of Hely. The very first day the City was blocked up, and in less
then fifteen more, (contrary to the general opinion) it was so enclosed, that
even the Arabians, which make their way any where, were not cunning enough to
get in. I will not relate to you the many brave combats were had during the two
first months siege. I will only speak of what concerns my self. The City
was hard laid to, and the most part of the Inhabitants wanting what was
necessary to maintain life, murmured against Hely's folly, and spoake aloud,
that 'twas fit to drive from the town that secret plague which would quickly
wholly ruin them. For my part I besought Hely to bethink himself, to stop
the torrent of the public calamities, and not to hazard his people, his
Crown, and his life for an extravagancy. To these remonstrances, he was as
deaf as he had been to others, and said, that if he had not taken arms for
my defense, yet would he have done it, to correct a company of thieves, who for
sport sake were come to offend him. When I saw I could do no good on the old
man, I sent for Abdelmelec, and told him, I held my self guilty of his
Countries ruin, and the loss of his father, if I concealed any longer from
him a thing that might put an end to the war. Know therefore (said I) that I
am not Ennoramita or rather Cydaria. I am Iphidamantus her brother; and Nature
has made us so like, that in many places where fortune has led us, we have
been taken one for another. What I say is so easy to be proved, that you may
instantly clear the doubt. Give me such a habit as I ought to wear, bring me
armor and before night I will show you my actions shall not be those of a
maiden. When you shall be so far assured, I will go to Bajazet, and obliege
him by my arms, or entreaty to acknowledge his error, and not to do an
injustice out of a desire to resent an injury. Abdelmelec showed a great deal
of judgment and courage in his answer. I believe (said he) that you are
Iphidamantus rather then Ennoramita, and ask no other proofs of it then those
you gave at Tunis. If the King my father think it fit, I am of opinion you
should be set at liberty, but shall never consent to your going to the General
of the Pirates for an end of the siege. We have been too much wronged, to
hearken to an accommodation. We have been beaten, and are so daily; it is fit
we should have our turn too on our enemies, and repel by force the insolence
of these thieves. I speak not this to hinder you from prosecuting your
inclination. If the General of the Pirates be your friend, I advise you to do
that which friendship expects from you. I will engage my self to give you
clothes, arms, and horses, and to conduct you safely into his Camp. But
as soon as you shall be there, I will hold you as one of my enemies; and in
such occasions as the war shall offer us, I think we have no consideration
of one another. Abdelmelec (said I) your generousnesse makes me go from my
proposition. I will speak to you no more of peace or Bajazet; but expect for
whom the chance of war will declare it self. For mine own part, I swear to
you to think on no man's interest but yours, to vanquish or die with you; and
betide what may, not to forsake you, till the death of one of us dispense with
my promise. As Soon as I had made this Declaration, Abdelmelec embraced me, and
witnessing his resentment of my profers, I now (said he) believe indeed that
you are a man, for your resolution cannot come but from a masculine heart. But
keep this business secret, that my fathers humourousnesse cross it not: The
next day Abdelmelec sent me clothes and arms, and both of us making use of the
occasions offered by Hely's sudden sickness, we made diverse sallies, in all
which I went by the name of the unknown Knight. I should be very
vainglorious if I told you my presence raised again the affairs of Morocco;
but since you command me to relate my adventures, I will not conceal my
fighting so happily in diverse conflicts, that Bajazet was constrained to recall
the troops he had lodged on the side of Fez, and toward mount Atlas, as well
to hinder any succor from the Moors, as to oppose the incursions of the
Arabians. We seldom sallied but we brought in prisoners or much incommodated
Bajazet's Camp. When a company is reduced to the like extremity as those of
Morocco were, there needs no such wonders to be done for the getting a
reputation among them. By this means, the unknown Knight made himself so
famous in so short a time, that his name came to the ears of the ficke King.
He would needs see me, and Abdelmelec must bring me to him, even with the
hazard of being no more unknown. But sickness had so altered the good old
Kings senses, that he neither knew me by word or countenance. Many times he
embraced me, and calling me the tutelar Angel of Morocco, sent at need by his
great Prophet, entreated the taking into my protection the safety of his
people; and to expect from Abdelmelec those acknowledgements which death might
perchance hinder him from rendering me. I gave him many thanks for his profers
and well-wishes, and told him, I hoped his age would not always be crossed,
but that Heaven reserved for him a peaceful and contented issue out of all his
troubles: in the mean time I advised Abdelmelec to send to Fez for succor.
But Granada's desolation, and the mortality or exile of that Kingdoms
Subjects (before-time so flourishing) had so abated all the Moors courages,
that they were far more miserable in Africa then they had been in Spain.
Their misfortune was still in their sight; they thought continually Ferdinand
and Isabell were imbarking for Africa, and that great name of Cardinal of
Spain was a perpetual cause of astonishment and fear. They still privately
sent us victuals, and in such plenty, that from thenceforward the Citizens of
Morocco believed Bajazet would be enforced to raise his Siege. Some little time
after, one of our Spies, (ill informed, as most commonly are such kind of
people) gave notice, that Bajazet was reinforced by a mighty succor, under
the command of one of the prime Basha's belonging to the Grand-Signior.
Thereupon Abdelmelec and my self resolved to make a powerful sally, to
discover their new aid, and know whether it were composed of Turks or
Africans. There was not in all the Siege so brave a conflict as at that time;
we were in fight from morning till night; Abdelmelec incountred Bajazet, and I
(not knowing him) buckled with my benefactor Achomat. Night only severed us,
after the loss of more then two thousand men on both sides. At last, wearied
with the Siege, and perceiving the succors from Fez failing us; we must render
our selves to their mercy, I got Abdelmelec to a resolution of determining all
by a Duel. We therefore sent our Defye to Bajazet and Achomat, which they
accepted; and each party being agreed on the conditions, we waited with equal
impatience for the day on which this great difference was to be decided. Two
days since I sent an intelligent Spy into Bajazet's Camp, and commanded him
not to return till he knew certainly who the Basha was with whom I was to
change blows: last night he came back, and related, that being stolen into
Achomats Tents, he had learnt who he was, and for what cause he was come to the
Siege of Morocco: This news so surprised me, that when Abdelmelec this morning
came into my chamber, to conduct me to the place appointed for our Combat, he
found me still in my bed. He began to chide me for my sloth, and embracing me
with a great deal of love; Dear Iphidamantus (said he) I have long time
wished for this day: 'Twill tell me what shall be my fortune, and one way or
other, I promise to my self before night, I shall have no more to long for.
Whilst he talked thus, I got ready, and armed me; not for my defense, but to
oblige Achomat to take his revenge of me, and to hide my design from the
Prince of Morocco. You know (without doubt) this daye's success, and how far
happier it has been to me then Abdelmelec; I will therefore trouble you no
further. Thus Iphidamantus ended the relation of his strange and sad Adventures.

The end of the first Book of the fourth Part of Polexander.
THE FOURTH PART OF POLEXANDER. The second Book.
IPhidamantus left his Auditors in such an admiration of the wonders he had
related, that they were a while unable to break off that silence they had kept
during his discourse: At last Almanzaira spoke, who not being fully satisfied,
though she had her eyes fixed on that son she so tenderly loved, would need
make him speak, that her soul as well charmed by the ear as by the eye,
might receive all the contentment it was capable of. After Iphidamantus
narration (said she) addressing her to her dear Almanzor, It is not hard to
guess at the cause which caused you make war on the King of Morocco.
Nevertheless, I think you will much pleasure the company, and particularly
the King your father, if you will relate to him to me of the most remarkable
accidents of your life, and in particular, th^se which be^ided you, (...) Love
made you change the condition of a slave for that of a (...). ^et, (unable
(...) refuse any thing to so good a mother, and marking besides that the (...)
Princesses were on him, and joined their requests with Almanz^ (...) began to
^nt his Adventures. The sole misfortune at my birth (...) having (...) the
(...) my (...), plucked me out of the arms of the Queen my (...) ^e (at
least in appearance) lose the love of the best father living; I regained in
(...) and fidelity of Almaid, part of that which fortune had forced from (...)
related how he had been brought up by the King and Queen of Be^, and (...)
other particulars you have read in the three former parts of this Story. When
(...) the occasion that made Iphidamantus go from the Pirates Isle, he cast
his (...) Cydaria, and beseeching her humbly to be pleased, he might acquaint
the company to what extremities his affection had brought him, thus prosecuted
his History. When I was left alone (for so I may say I was after the departure
of Iphidamantus) there was nothing that hindered me from continually meditating
on the loss of Cydaria: she had been constantly in my thought, but she was
never so there, as she was then. I fell into such impatiencies as no
consideration could moderate, and though I had put on a resolution to expect in
quiet Hydaspes and Almaid's return, yet was I tempted to abandon the
Generall-ship of the Rovers, and put my self again in quest of Cydaria. After
three months absence, Hydaspes returning, he intimated that he had sailed
along all the coasts of Africa, landed in all the principal maritime Towns,
searched all the Isles from the Cape of good Hope, even to Denmark, and all in
vain. Imagine what grief this general ignorance of the world cast on me, and
to what extraordinary means it made me run, to know at least whether Cydaria
were alive or no: I confess I refused none, and meeting (among our Pirates)
with an Italian, which bragged of his great familiarity with Spirits, I pressed
him to consult with them for me, and to learn what I was to expect for the
future: he promised to satisfy my curiosity within three days, and indeed, at
the hour appointed, he came and led me to the mos^ ^ncouth and dreadful place
in all our Island; he brought me under a rock which could be no fit
receptacle for any but for Spirits, and lighting five branches of Pine with a
tinder-box he had brought, and laying them on a little table before which he
had spread a sheet, told me, I should see pass along between the lights and
the sheet such figures, as should truly represent to me the good or ill
success of my designs. I stood very earnestly heedfull, not to lose any one
of the apparitions, and presently saw a sea covered with many ships, and a
land-skip very little differing from that about Morocco. In the midst of that
Country description, I saw a City besieged both by land and sea: After many
conflicts, I noted one, wherein a Knight having often changed his arms and
clothes, sometimes seemed to me a m^n, and sometimes a woman. At last he drew
very near to me, and ^ttering somewhat which I understood not, presented to me
a picture which I instantly knew to be the lively portraict of Cydaria. Whilst
I was ravished with that object, a thick cloud robbed me of it, and presently I
heard, or at least thought I heard some deaf sounds, and plaintive
lamentations which bewailed the death of a father, a daughter, and a lover.
Those complaints were no sooner ended, but diverse peales of thunder coming from
a far off, broke over the besieged City, and orewhelmed under its ruins the
most of them that were within and without: in a moment, I saw the sheet covered
with dead bodies, at which sight I was st^en with an extreme fear for my
Princess. Whilst I sought for her amongst the dead, I saw her come from the
sea side all sad and desolate, making signs to me, to forsake so dismal a
place: wherewithal* all those figures vanished, and I found my self so weary,
and so little satisfied in my curiosity, that I went thence with a resolution,
never to have any so ill again: Nevertheless, not knowing what to conceive of
such things as I had seen, I did some while neglect them; but by little and
little fear making them pass for truths, melancholy made them more horrible
then they were. I thought I should be suddenly besieged in mine Isle; and after
my being killed in some Combat, my vanquisher would bring me to see Cydaria
again; I mean, that being dead, I should go again to meet with the shade of
that fair Princess: So black a fancy having long time rolled up and down my
imagination, I held for certain that Cydaria was dead, and that belief made
such an alteration in my health, that by little and little; I lost the strength
which I had recovered after my last sickness, and I fell into a languishing,
that made me undergo for three months together, more cruel deaths then
death it self. I had no more left then my speech and my sight when Almaid
arrived, and knowing well there was but one way to save me, he was no sooner
come but he put it in trial: he therefore related that he had seen Cydaria,
and how the King of Morocco forcing her from Tunis, had brought her to his
Court, but so guarded, that it might at once ^e said, she was a Queen and a
prisoner: So good an information had all the effect Almaid could promise
himself. The desire to free that Princess, and my jealousy of the King of
Morocco, surmounting my weakness, and staying my continual faintings, I
presently designed ^n African war; to that end, I sent for the Captains of
the Pirates, and making known to them the abatement of my sickness and my
intention, they engaged themselves to serve me, and to dispose their companions
to that expedition. They failed not of their promises; the next day was their
Assembly called, and all things passing therein according to my wish, some were
deputed to me to let me understand all their resolutions: two days after, I
went into their quarters to thank them, and perceiving their affection, I
appointed the general musters to be the day following when all the Army was at
the place destined for the like actions, I came out of the Fort with my
Principal Officers, and taking a review of all the battalions, I stepped up
into the place whence I was wont to speak to them: I made known to the Rovers
my resentment of the last proof of their affection, and when I would have come
to the point, and excited them to war through the hope of booty, they shut my
mouth with their acclamations and clapping of hands. Which done, they drew
their swords, and holding them over their heads, began to cry out, that I
should lead them whither I listed, that they had no other will then mine, and
that they would always value my content beyond their own profit. I returned
thence to the Fort so satisfied with their conformity, that the remainder of my
melancholy and my weakness gone on a sudden, I found my self in better case
then I had been all my life: Almaid, (desirous to raise my joy to the height)
told me, I was not the ^nne of Abrinzias and Andromeda, but of Zabaim and
Almanzaira, and spent part of the night in recounting to me particularly those
accidents from mine infancy, whereof I was ignorant. As Soon as he had ended
his pleasing narration, I promised him to return to Senega, and casting my
self at the feet of the King my father, to beseech his pardon for my
extravagant actions; but my duty and honor obliging me to put a period to
Cydaria's tears, before I gave any beginning to mine own quiet: I embarked
two days after, and arrived at Morocco, so, as Iphidamantus has related. Thus
ended Bajazet, and presently Zabaim and Almanzaira retired into their ship;
Cydaria and Melicerta abode in their own, in company of their Lovers: For
Polexander and Achomat, they caused themselves to be wasted to shore, and
mounting on horseback, came to the camp a little before daybreake. They
enquired of what had passed in their absence, and understanding there was an
extraordinary silence in the beleaguered City, imagined that Hely was fled
thence, and the Citizens would no longer hold out. This opinion made them
resolve for bed, to take that rest which their enemies gave them. They slept as
long as their disquiets would give them leave, and awaking after many
interrupted slumbers, went to Iphidamantus and Almanzor, who loath to trouble
them, were walking before their tents: thence they went all four, whither the
Laws of war called them, and having sent diverse Cavaliers even to the gates of
Morocco, and seeing no man come out to charge them, they were confirmed in
their opinion, that there was not any of defense left within the City. After
they had made the round of the Entrenchments, and given fitting orders, they
returned toward the river, and went aboard Zabaim's ship. where they found
Cydaria and Melicerta with Almanzaira, and forgetting all their warlike humor,
made appear by their civilities and discourse, that they were no less
pleasant then invincible. Zabaim inquired of the state of the Siege, and
understanding how 'twas, entreated those Princes to send and offer peace to the
King of Morocco, and not tie him to conditions unworthy his birth and courage.
Bajazet promised to send an Herald that very day, and to treat him as a King;
in the mean time, their dinner being brought in, the Princes and Princesses
set them at table, and after their repast, Achomat was entreated by the rest to
recount the particulars of his life, which fame had divulged for something more
then the ordinary life of men. The Basha blushed at those praises, and when he
was resettled; If (said he) I durst dispense with your command, I would (surely
during a time of victory and joy) keep me from intertaining you with a subject
so mournful and unfortunate as is the destiny of Achomat: But since you desire
by that recital to moderate your contentment, for fear their excess may be
somewhat irksome, I will tell you, that I come from the most unfortunate lineage
that ever was adorned with the ornaments of Sovereignty. An unfortunate father
begot a more unfortunate son, and that to be bewailed son becoming a
father, to perpetuate the miseries of his house, gave life to two Princesses,
which without a wonder could not be but most wretchedly unhappy. Achomat, by
this preface, having prepared the minds of his Auditors for things so
infinitely tragical, briefly related the same disasters which Melicerta had
made known to Polexander and Cydaria, and after he had repeated the loss of
his daughters and Iphidamantus flight, thus he proceeded: The victorious
Emperor of the Levant, no sooner heard that Solomon had forsaken the Army, but
he thought (like a second Castriot) he was revolted to the Christians, to
avenge him of his long slavery, and the death of his father; thereupon he sent
for me, to make known his resentment, and take on such resolutions as were
answerable to the greatness of his indignation. I did what I was possible to
moderate his fury, and retard the fearful desolations wherewithal he
threatened the Christians. No, no, (said he) since those dogs neither regard the
mildness under which they live in mine Empire, nor the power I have to ruin
them, they shall feel how fearful my corrections are: They have robbed me of
Solomon, as they did the great Monarch (to whom I owe my life) of the
ungrateful and perfidious Scanderbeg: And they shall feel too, that mine arm
is no less redoubtfull then great Amurath's. Let Us do more (my dear Achomat)
and not be satisfied by the ruin of a part of the guilty, but on with fire and
sword to the laying waste of all Christendom; and by an universal ruin,
raise our vengeance far above the injury we have received from them. After
the Sultan had spoke thus, he commanded I should bestir me for the execution of
his commands; I retired without replying, yet with an intent to mollify his
rage, and turn away from over the heads of so many Innocents the dreadful
thunder which threatened them: but fortune presently gave me cause to follow
that Princes inclination, and (if I dare say it) to inspire him yet with far
more cruel ones. I was no sooner entered my tent, but Posts came and presented
me letters from my dear and desolate Rozelana; by them I understood, how
Histeria and Melicerta were stolen out of her Seraglio, and to follow Solomon
whom they passionately loved (as a Jewesse informed her) had disguised
themselves in the habits of men, and been shipped away with the Proponticke
troops. Imagine the height of my sorrow, my shame and rage: I tore my hair,
rent my clothes, and cursed my birth: I even stormed at Heaven, and thence
asked reason for the rigor of it is judgment; as if my conscience had not
incessantly upbraided me for my parricide, and the daily denying my ransomer in
the Mosquo of his adversary. After I had vented all manner of blasphemies and
imprecations, I read again the incomparable Rozelana's letter, and finding at
the end, that she besought me to have pity on her daughters, and to regaine
them from the hands of their ravisher; Yes (said I) fair Princess, thou shall
be obeyed; the traitor Solomon shall not glut his bestiall desires without just
punishment; this very hand which deigned to give him his first nourishment,
shall not be afraid to force his dearest life from him. With this resolution I
went to the Emperor, and casting my self at his feet, Sir, (said I) I come to
ask your Justice on the ungrateful Solomon; he has not only violated in the
person of your Majesty, but in those of the Princesses your Grandchildren,
those so holy and inviolable Laws which command us to adore the blood of the
Ottomans: he has robbed me of Melicerta and Histeria, and that merciless snake
which I have bred in mine own bosom to kill me, more then once, has stung me
in all those parts where he thought his sting would be deadly. Justice asks
from your thunder-darting-hand the punishment of this monster, but what said I?
No my Lord, profane not your blows in avenging me on that caitiffe; he has
questionless perpetrated this act, to make himself renowned by the correction
he expects from your royal hand: but command this unfortunate father to
chastise him, and give not that thief time to find a Sanctuary where his
crimes may be victorious and at quiet. That traitor shall die for it (replied
the Emperor) in what place soever of the world he has made his retreat; Go
Achomat, go, whither our common griefs call thee; and by prodigious
chastisements, teach the Christians, that though many treasons prove happy, yet
the traitors are continually miserable. By these words, the Sultan having
given me command to dispose of his Army, I staid some few days to let him
know the several enterprises I had on Italy. When he had fixed on that, which
he imagined to be the most glorious and easy, he prescribed me the order for
execution; and some few days after, leaving the Town and coasts of Lepanto
all waste, he took the way of Constantinople with only fifteen Galleys: the
next day I set sail, and with forty thousand fighting men, landed at Calaurea;
presently I won the Town of Cariatha, and made my exceeding fury be felt, not
only by men, but even of women and children. All indifferently passed by the
sword or fire, and I make no question but all Italy had been the prey of my
victorious Army, if the love I bare my daughters had not made me forget what I
owed to Bajazet's affection. Among the sea faring men that were taken about
Calaura, there was a Pilot, who seeing himself at the point of losing his life,
told them that had laid hands on him, he had somewhat to say to me of more
importance (for my own particular) then the conquest of Italy: though they
believed him not, yet for fear of an error, they brought him to me; I make no
doubt (said he to me presently) but that the loss of Solomon Basha, i^ the
principal cause of your voyage; and to get him again, you would even give
part of your life: you may be satisfied at a lower rate; grant but to a wretch
(who has not offended but by compulsion) a life, which he will preserve for
your service, and he will guide you to Solomon. I made the Pilot arise, and
promising him far more then he had desired, I understood how Solomon was
gotten away, and whither he was gone, but I could hear nothing of my
daughters. The love of revenge made me resolve to forsake mine Army, and to go
alone where Solomon resided: I therefore reimbarked all my troops as speedily
as I could, and leaving with the General at sea, a letter directed to the
Sultan, for his approbation of my action, I steered toward the Canaries. I
heard in the Isle of Teneriff, that Solomon (whom they called Iphidamantus) had
been there almost a month with Polexander, but was gone thence fifteen days
past; and to heighten my affliction, they told me he was put to sea again in
quest of a Turkish Princess which he had lost: hereupon I presently left
Teneriff, and without inquiring after Solomon in the other Islands, repassed
the straights, and sought him under a strange name and habit in a thousand
places of France, Spain, and Italy. After a year spent in those voyages, I
put me again into the Ocean, and about a month since, by good hap, I met on
the coasts of Fez, a skiffe, in which there was none but Moors and Granadians:
I inquired news of the Country, and understood that Morocco was besieged by
the Pirates of Cape Verd, and was defended by Abdelmelec, and a Knight which
called himself the unknown Knight. I got him to describe that Knight to me,
and as soon as I heard of his exceeding comeliness and valor, I imagined it
was Solomon. The next day I came into Bajazet's Camp, and concealing the true
cause of my coming, feigned others to him probable enough to take away all
suspicion he might have of me: he used me after his manner, that was with
incomparable civilities, and offering me the command of his Army, made me
repent my dissimulation. With an extraordinary freeness he declared to me the
cause which had engaged him to this Siege, and by that Declaration, wiped off
all my grief for the dissembling mine own business; for I leave it to your
thoughts, to what he had been obliged, had he once known I sought his
Mistresses brother of purpose to kill him. I waited therefore (without
discovering my self) the occasion of seeing Solomon with his sword in his
hand. Yesterday it happened as you have heard, indeed the success was not such
as I hoped, but so, as I was to expect from that eternal Mercy, which by an
incomprehensible wisdom, out of the greatest ills produces the greatest
happinesses. Thus Achomat ended the recital of his fortunes, and filled the
hearts of his Auditors with so much pity, that even the most contented there,
were for that time incapable of feeling their own happiness. This converse
had lasted longer, had it not been disturbed by a great noise which came from
the land, and by an alarm given as well in the ships as in the camp. Bajazet
and Achomat knowing how necessary their presence was in the like occasions,
took leave of the company; Polexander and Iphidamantus followed them, after
they had entreated Zabaim not to forsake the Princesses: They got to the Camp
before Bajazet had got together again the troops which the enemy had driven
out of the trenches. Polexander's arrival inspiring the valor, nay the
temerity of the most cowards, all the Pirates went on furiously against the
besieged, and after a conflict which lasted far within night, forced them to
retire for shelter behind their bastions. The four Princes were much troubled
to know who had animated the enemy with that bold resolution, when they brought
them thirty or forty prisoners: A Knight among them of a very brave aspect,
making way through his companions, stopped before Bajazet, and thus spoke to
him: I am of the Princes of Granada, and the eldest of the Abinzeragues, which
have survived the ruin of their Country. The unfortunate Boabdilez not
enduring the slavery of his people, nor the pride of his conquerours, has
lately left Spain, and passed into Africa with all the remainder of his
forces. Ten thousand Moorish Knights, and forty thousand of his Subjects have
followed his fortune, and found a safe retreat in the goodness of the King
whom you so much injure, without any wrong done you. The miseries from whence
we but newly came, had so quelled the courages of our most hardy soldiers,
that finding themselves to enjoy some quiet in the places appointed them by the
King of Morocco, they could not till now resolve to the taking on their armor:
But the King my Master, ashamed to see that Prince running the hazard of being
ruined, who had saved him, got to horse with a hundred of his Knights, and
stirring from place to place, to incite the Granadians to the defense of their
Protector, so urged them, that they forsook their wives and children, and
under the conduct of the King himself, fortunately cast themselves into
Morocco. Boabdilez and Hely thought it fit, that to honor the succors, I
should sally with some troops and somewhat trouble you, which I instantly
obeyed; and my act had been very fortunate, if the end had answered the
beginning: that which I have more to say, is this; If you are stimulated as
much by your generousnesse as valor, after your overcoming me, you will do
the like on my adverse fortune, and send me back to the King my Master, since
you will not have much to boast on in detaining, that had so little honor in
taking me. That mischance which cast me under my horse, is to have all the
glory of my being prisoner; let not that vaunt of it, or dare share in your
actions, for which you should be beholding to none but your own virtue.
Bajazet would gladly that Polexander and the two other Princes had answered the
prisoner, but thinking it not fit to treat them with so much ceremony; he did
what was fit, and resuming the principal points of the Abinzerrago's speech;
The King (said he) whom you have justly termed unfortunate, should not believe
that my companions and my self have so little courage as to suffer the injury
he has done us. We had naught to decide with him, nor had our actions given
him any pretext to denounce war against us; yet comes he to cross our
designs, and beget to himself enemies, in a time when he has need of
Protectors: he shall feel how powerful they are, and find in Africa
conquerours, no less cruel then Ferdinand and Isabella. You think to
justify what he has done, in publishing, that honor compelled him to assist
the King of Morocco, and without failing in the most just resentment that can
be among men, he could not deny him aid. I cannot believe him so acknowledging
to a stranger, since so poorly abandoning the defense of his Country, he both
witnessed his ingratitude to his own Subjects and to himself. The
Abinzerrague gave an extraordinary ejaculation to hinder Bajazet from going on
in his speech, and forcing himself out of the hands of those that held him:
Command (said he to Bajazet) command them to kill me, and give over to treat a
King so unworthily, who though extremely unfortunate, and utterly ruined as he
is, yet remains a King still. With that he flew at a partisan, and in the
fury he was, had certainly killed himself, but Bajazet seized on his arm,
and after he had disweapon'd him, promised, in regard of his generousnesse,
thenceforward he would forgive Boabdilez weakness. To repair the fault I have
commitied (said he) I set you at liberty; but on condition, that to morrow you
make appear to us whether you are worthy the favor you have received.
Return therefore to Morocco, and tell Hely that my good fortune has restored
the treasure he had stolen from me. That the fair Ennoramita has regained the
liberty he restrained her of, and but for that Princesses picture which he
keeps without her consent, I had already raised the Siege, and made appear by
my retreat, that I came not to oppress the weak, but to chastise the
oppressors. Let him therefore be sure that neither my self nor my companions
will stir hence, till he has given us that fatal picture; since it cannot
be in his keeping, but we must (one way or other) think the divine Ennoramita
to be still a prisoner. I add another condition to this, and it is, that
Boabdilez depart presently out of Morocco, with all those he brought into it,
and return to the place whence he came; to the end, the honor we have
acquired receive no diminution, and that all the world may know, the sole love
of justice, and not the fear of enemies, has made us forgo a more certain
conquest. The Abinzerrague either affrighted or ravished with Bajazet's
courage, thanked him with a great deal of submission, for the liberty he had
restored him, and promised faithfully to deliver to the two Kings the
conditions of peace which he had proposed to him. The Moore was then safely
conducted to the gates of Morocco; at his entrance met the two Kings, who
thinking he had been slain, were preparing for a shameful flight. Whilst by
his coming he resettled those affrighted and timorous souls, and yet amazed
them with the conditions presented from the besiegers; our four Princes
returned to Zabaim's ship, and there found the Princesses who had passed the
afternoon in those apprehensions which accompany love and favor. The Heroes
return having restored to their minds their former quiet, and the recital of
their conflict filling them with admiration; Polexander who affected all
occasions whereby he might extol Bajazet, I must confess (said he) that
Almanzor surpasses in the art of well-loving all those which to this day have
gone for the most perfect lovers in the world. He is not content with the
depriving the King of Morocco for ever, of ever reviewing Cydaria, but will
even have away her picture, and as if he were jealous of the frivolous pleasure
which a portaiture may give his Rival, has sent him word, that he must
resolve either to send him that picture, or to be buried under the ruins of
his City. With that Almanzaira began, and said, the extremity was ill, and
'twas to he feared lest the eternal Justice grew weary of permitting those
youthful offenses. Cydaria contrived the discourse, and casting her self at
the feet of the King and Queen of Senega, humbly besought them, in this
occasion to show the power they had over Almanzor, and not permit a resolution
which for an imaginary good might bring on a certain mischief. Melicerta was
of her opinion, but Zabaim rejected it as proofs of their Sexes fearfulness,
and the two brothers intending not to cross a thought so conformall with their
own, entreated Bajazet not to let himself be overcome by the only
persuasions of Ladies. After these pleasant contestations the Princes and
Princesses set themselves to table, and spent part of the night in the
sweetness of their incomparable communication. A little before midnight
Polexander and the three other Princes, fearing some new Sallyes, took leave
of Zabaim and the Ladies and came to the Camp. They had not been long there,
where the Moors desirous to regaine by force what force had got from them,
fell on the works that were most advanced, and cutting the throats of the
Guard, cloyed twenty pieces of Cannon, fired their powder, and retired with
very little loss. This success raising their courage, and dissipating their
fear of the Pirates valor, they grew persuaded, that if they offered them
battle they would compel the Rovers to a shameful reimbarking. Hely and
Boabdilez suffered themselves to be blinded as well as their Subjects with the
flash of this adventure, and egged on by the Abinzerrague, resolved in full
earnest to come to handy blows, and force the Pirates to raise their siege. To
that end, the two Kings (alike unworthy their condition) sent a Herald to
Bajazet, and to revenge by an extreme contempt the small esteem Bajazet had
made of them in the presence of the Abinzerrague, they commanded the Herald to
speak to him as to a thief; That Officer, who with his milk, had sucked the
insolency natural to the Moors, came to Bajazet, whom he found in his Tent
with Polexander, Achomat and Iphidamantus. He presented himself before him
with a pride worthy of laughter, and without asking leave to deliver what he
had in charge: I come, said he to Bajazet, from the great King of Fez, Morocco
and Trevisan. I command thee in his name, that within four and twenty hours
thou depart from these coasts; and since the unworthiness of so many Kings
whom thou have engaged in thy robberies, give thee forces and retreates in lieu
of prosecuting thee as a public enemy; Go on; and on the Seas pillage such
unfortunate Merchants as cannot defend themselves. But if thou will not have a
hangman to avenge all Africa for so many murders and thefts wherewithal thou
have even made her desolate, take heed how thou set'st foot again on the
Territories of the King my Master. Bajazet showed a great deal of moderation
during his insolent Speech, and even preserved it when he was oblieg'd to
answer. At last (said he to the Herald) judge how far my Companions and my
self are from those violences which the King thy Master upbraids us withal.
Return, and tell him that scorning his injuries and force, we will not part
hence till we have reduced his whole City into cinders, if he do not speedily
come with the portracture of Ennoramita, and on his knees ask the lives of his
subjects and a pardon for his insolences. The Herald seeing what fortune he
was to run, for his too much impudence, made a very low reverence to the
Princes, and retired so extremely affrighted that when he was got within the
gates of Morocco he thought himself not free from the hands of the hangmen.
The answer he made to the King his Master in the presence of the King of
Granada, filled them both with fear and astonishment. But the Abinzerrague,
and the other Moorish knights promising them to bring Bajazet alive or dead,
and to cut the throat even of the last Pirate, made them at last consent to a
battle. All the day was spent for that preparation; and our Princes
understanding the resolution by one of their Spies, drew from their Ships, all
their fighting men. They then sent Zabaim notice of it, who (the most valiant
of his age) desirous to make it appear that his years had not brought him to
the weakness of quitting his arms, set six thousand men on shore which he
had in his fleet, and putting them into a battalion, marched himself in the
front, and so came and joined with Bajazets Army. His troops were much
admired, and lodged in the most commodious part of the Camp, and appointed to
make a body for their last Reservall. Bajazet the same day reviewed the whole
Army, and after he had given order for the battle, left all the rest to the
Marshals of the Camp. After dinner he chose the most eminent risings where to
lodge his Canon, and gave notice through all the Regiments that next day every
one was to perform his duty. Whilst the Officers acted their commands, Zabaim
and the four Princes thought they had time sufficient to give the Ladies the
good night. To them they went with an extraordinary diligence, and found the
Queen of Senega in Polexanders ship. She was gone thither to comfort
Melicerta, who having been much troubled all night with dreams and fearful
visions, awaked in a fever. Achomat seeing her so wan and dejected, cast him
self on her, and melting in tears; Is it possible (said he) my dear
daughter, that heaven will give no period to our miseries? My Lord, (replied
Melicerta) Heaven of whom you complain, has by infallible advertisements
assured that that end is near. The last night I saw the Sultannesse my Mother,
environed with a glorious light, yet with a melancholy countenance, and her
eyes full of tears. She held out her hand to me, but turned her head aside, as
if she had a horror to see me, and plucking to me with violence: Come
Melicerta, (said she rudely enough) and flatter thy self no longer with vain
hopes. Thou must follow me, and we must reunite for ever. With that me thought
I gave a shreek as loud as I could, and that brought you to me and
Iphidamantus; but presently the heavens opened, and with a clap of thunder
struck you both dead at my feet. My dream was not yet ended when Cydaria
awaked me, and asked why I made such lamentation? If now (said she) my prayers
can obtain any thing from you, if the preservation of your afflicted daughter
be dear unto you; in brief, if I be able to comfort you for the losses you
have suffered through me, I beseech you by that Deity which you have made me
worship from my infancy, to withdraw from the dangers of war, and win
Iphidamantus to prevent by a little fear, the misfortunes wherewithal his
valor threatens him. Daughter (replied Achomat) those who are better seen
then I am in the interpretation of dreams, may free you from that apprehension
yours has given you: for mine own part, who give no credit at all to them, I
can say nothing, but that the visions you have seen are the remains of that
deep melancholy you got by living among the dead. Iphidamantus came to
Melicerta as her father ended his speech, and taking her hand, which burnt, Do
not (said he) fear the accidents of war, but rather those of your fever:
It Is that thunderbolt which your dream should make us doubt of, and without
question if you strive not to divert the blow by giving way to your cure, but
your father and I shall suffer under it. Your persons (replied Melicerta) are
so dear to me, that I must with a great deal of pleasure resolve to
whatsoever can be for their preservation; and I would to heaven, the small
remainder of my life might put yours in surety; but since it is your will, I
will refuse no remedy, prescribe all you think fit for my health. Presently
Diceus was called, and after some consultation with Bajazet's Physicians, let
Melicerta bleed, which somewhat quieting her fits, she grew more mirthsome, and
less troubled. Iphidamantus perceiving so great an amendment, and seeing he
could not be permitted long with that Princess, was willing to make his best
use of the happy moments; he sat near an hour (alone) at her beds-head, and
asking pardon for his former insensibilitie, besought her to give his affection
some sign that it was well accepted. Melicerta thereupon gave him her hand to
kiss, and entreated him to have a care of his life. Could I give my whole age
and thoughts to that amorous couple, I should recount to my Reader so much
sweetness produced by love in that converse, that I am most certain, the most
severe, and most insensible that can be found out, would not be able to keep
himself from falling in love, after its due consideration; But I dare stay no
longer with these two lovers: Bajazet and Cydaria accuse me for my not
disinterested pen; and Polexander, to whom I wholly owe it, justly u^braides me
for quitting the proper and essential parts of his life, for strange
embellishments. Know then, that Iphidamantus and Melicerta, after they had been
more then an ho^e in such pleasures, as had nothing of distaste, but what his
valor and her fever intermingled, ended their intertainment with reciprocal
assurances of an eternal lo^ and mutual gifts. Iphidamantus put on
Melicerta's wrist, a bracelet of pearls of a distinct form and extraordinary
greatness: Melicerta commanded one of her women to bring her a scarf wrought
with a Spanish stitch, linck'd with rubies, which she cast ore Iphidamantus,
but in putting it on, her arm was unswath'd and so bloudied the scarf: at
which sight Melicerta gave a great shreeke, and affrighted with the presage,
would have taken the scarf from Iphidamantus. But the Prince humbly beseeching
her to leave it him; Do not believe Madam (said he) that the loss of your
blood is an effect of fortunes ordinary malice; it is an act of love's
goodness: he is not satisfied with my wearing the tokens of your favor, but
would have me the depositary of one of the most precious parts you can call
yours, that so in the conflict, I might remember you fight with me, and should
fear nothing, having a second that is perpetually victorious. Heaven grant
(replied Melicerta) that your interpretation may be truer then mine, and that
it may be only the excess of my affection that fills me with such extreme
affrightings. Melicerta, seeing her lover upon parting, cast her arms about
his neck, and gave her faith to live and die with him. Iphidamantus promised
the like, and those two fair souls ratified the accord more strong, and
solemnly then all public contracts by such kisses, as were by virtue of
their promises, made innocent and lawful: This short content was followed by
long sadness, at least, counting the time, not according to the course of the
Sun, but the computation of such amorous Souls. They broke from one another
with a like violence, and whilst Melicerta gave her self over to new griefs
Iphidamantus went to Bajazet. He was with Cydaria, and tasted such pleasures as
till then he was ignorant of. He related to her the particulars of his Rovers
life, and during the recital, took those civil liberties, which the
scrupulous virtue of his Mistress permitted him. When he was forced to take
leave of her; Madame (said he) assure your self that fighting for your honor it
is not possible but we shall come off victorious. In speaking it, his
countenance, action, and words, were as so many infallible presages of the
approaching victory. Cydaria, so took them; yet seeing her lover depart, could
not refrain from tears. Zabaim, Polexander, and Achomat, at the same time
taking their leaves, retired to the Camp, and spent part of the night in rest,
that they might not sink under the travel the next day provided for them. At
day-breake the four Princes arose, and having offered their hearts and lives to
the all-powerfull Deity, mounted on horseback and rid to see the order and
number of the Troops. Their Army consisted but of twenty or five and twenty
thousand men, but all so valiant and well disciplined that there was not an
Army how numerous soever was able to overcome them. The Infantry was divided
into two and thirty battalions which by their distance might succor one
another without running the hazard of intermingling or disordering one another.
The Cavalry was placed on the wings, and lead by Polexander and Alcippus. The
Moors marched out of Morocco in good order, and had placed themselves in a
place very advantageous, had not Bajazets Canon hindered them. Their Cavalry
began the skirmish. The Granadians came on horse as well managed as theirs, and
made their Enemies confess, there were not better horsemen to be met withal.
After the Cannon had played and the horse met, the battalions moved. Bajazet
fought on the right wing with six thousand Pirates. Achomat on the left with
four thousand. Iphidamantus led the battle, and Polexander who was every where
with a thousand horse forsook none that had need of his great courage. The
first discharges fi l'd the air with fire and smoke, and covered the earth
with blood and dead corpse. The Pirates who were used to fight by dint of sword
as soon as they had given their first volleyes, taught the Moors a manner of
fighting, as new to them as harmefull. Polexander, with his body of horse
transpierc'd all that came before him, and reserving his sword for illustrious
blows, killed none but such men as were extraordinarily remarkable, either by
their quality or valor. Achomat who did no less wonders, passed even to the
Rere-guard of the Moors to meet with the King of Morocco or of Granada: but
they had no mind to be there, but were placed on the walls, from whence under
the covert of a Scarlet Pavillion they beheld the voluntary sacrifice of so
many men, whom their private interest exposed to the violence of sword and
fire. The valiant Basha fretting at the Kings cowardice discharged his choler
on the first he met, and at that time his Cymeter might be compared to thunder
when it lights in a forest. Bajazet as the most interested in the battle was
likewise the more eager in the fight, he searched every where for the bold
Abinzerrague, who had bragged he would fight with him, and met the Granadian
after he had beaten down many of their party: as soon as he came up to him,
It Is (said he) now at this time, that thou must make evident to us, thou
know how to make much of the liberty we have given thee; The Abinzerrague
knew him, and came on so bravely, that he doubted not but the strength of his
arm would answer the boldness of his speech; they fought almost a quarter of
an hour, without advantage, yet they saw the Moore was inferior to Bajazet,
as much as a hardy Faulcon to that always victorious bird which finds his
element in that fearful region where the thunder is bred. The illustrious
Rover was near assured of the victory, and his Enemy reduced to the quitting
his arms or life, when above two hundred Moorish Knights came to aid him, and
forced Bajazet to think of his own preservation in lieu of prosecuting his
victory. Iphidamantus, who had put to flight the King of Morocco's troops,
and beat them into the gates of the city, brought back his forces where the
Granadians yet disputed the victory; one squadron of the Moor^ he routed and
put to their heels, and so came to the place where Bajazet was engaged: these
two great courages being met, and followed by a small company of the most
resolute pirates, made the stongest battalions to stagger, and by wondrous
valor which terrified the valiant'st Granadians, compelled, maugre their
ancient pride, to leave to them the honor of that day. The slaughter was
great, and had been far more, but for the approaching night, and neernesse
of the Town: there fell in the field but fifteen or sixteen hundred of the
Pirates; Zabaim neither left his station nor fought; of the four other
Princes, three were lightly hurt; the fourth which was Achomat, returned from
the fight covered with wounds and blood; he took heed of naught but to
overcome, and that care took good effect, as you have heard, but so
unfortunately for him, that after he had put off his armor, and Diceus had
searched his wounds, two of them were found if not mortal, at least most
dangerous. Polexander, Iphidamantus, and Bajazet, went to visit him, and
witnessing their sorrow to see him in that case complained of their fortune,
and detested so dear a bought victory. Why my friends (said Achomat) did you
think me invulnerable? I confess I am wounded, but I have life enough left me
to fight again to morrow, if our Enemies have courage enough to come once more
out of their walls: give over then that sadness which hinders you from
savoring so great a victory; and for fear of making your selves unworthy of
so brave a day, cast your thoughts on him which is the author of it, and go
presently to render to his protection the thanks he expects from your
acknowledgement. The Princes being by a sacred advertisement put in mind of
their duty, returned to the place of the battle, and according as they had bin
bred up and instructed, vowed; some Temples, others Mosquys to the same Deity
which they acknowledged all to be the Author of their victory: Polexander and
Iphidamantus caused a Cross to be erected on a hillocke in the midst of the
Plain, and adorning it with spoils taken from the Enemy, fixed an
Inscription of Gratitude on it.

These actions of piety being ended, the news of the battle was to be sent to
the Princesses; Iphidamantus and Bajazet took on them that charge: Melicerta
startled with joy and fear when her lover entered the chamber: Come dear
Iphidamantus said she to him, and tell me where is my honored Achomat? Madam
(replied the Prince) he stays behind with Zabaim and Polexander, to give new
orders to our Army, and (if I be not deceived) to make them ready for another
battle. If it be so (said Melicerta) I shall see my good father this night, but
I fear much he is not in case to come hither. Iphidamantus was urged to make
many protestations for the quieting the mind of that Princess; at last the
believed him, but 'twas to comply with the extreme love she bore to
Iphidamantus. An hour and more he stayed with her, and Bajazet was not less
time with Almanzaira and Cydaria; he related to them how matters had happened,
and spoke not but by the way of Achomat's hurts, for fear of intermingling
ought of sadness with the mirth of their conversation. The good fortune of
war giving him a little more boldness then he was to take, he besought
Almanzaira to perfect her happiness by obtaining from Cydaria a declaration,
which he was not so overbold to ask, nor deserving enough to merit. I have
(said Almanzaira) prevented your entreaty, and knowing well you could not
enjoy your full happiness without this Princess assent, I have besought her
not to oppose a Fate which has been writ even by the hand of Heaven: she has
initmated to me, that my entreaties were prevalent with her; she for my sake
has even cast aside her intention, and if Polexander ruins not your
happiness, I see not what you are to petition more. Cydaria blushed at the
Mothers speech to her Son, and yet by a smile she showed she was resolved not
to contradict her; Almanzaira desirous to oblige Bajazet to the height, took
Cydaria by the hand, and clasping it with her dear Sons, I wish (said she)
your hearts were as strictly joined as your hands; and that future time give
you as much content as you have endured afflictions in the former. Cydaria drew
away her hand so hastily, as if she had feared to engage her self, and
looking on Almanzaira with a pleasing amazement; What do you please to do
Madam? said she, Had you that powerful Character by whose virtue that which is
bound on Earth, is confirmed presently in Heaven, I should be now in the power
of Bajazet. Lady (replied the Queen) I shall never love Almanzor so much, as
to submit you to his discetion; his greatest glory is in acknowledging yours,
and in that little time he had the honor to hold your hand, he made an
irrevocable oath, never to be dispensed from serving you. Bajazet durst say
nothing, for fear of speaking somewhat that might displease Cydaria; only by
his humbled countenance, he told her, she was acknowledged by him, for the
absolute arbitratour of his good fortune as well as his life. Cydaria would not
abuse that Sovereign Authority; she turned to Almanzaira, and the color
coming into her face, It Is fit Madam (said she) that you be obeyed, and
Almanzor treated as a personage far beyond others. I refer all that
concerns my self, to the disposal of your Majesty and Polexander. It Is too
much, cried Bajazet, transported as a man that could give no bounds to his joy;
all the hazards I can expose my self to for your service, cannot make me
worthy of the least word you have spoken in my favor: be pleased withal, that
in kissing your hand (which he did in saying so) I may swear, as if I touched
our Altars, that I desire no other honor, then to merit by all the actions of
my life, the continuation of my most humble servitude. Bajazet had no sooner
ended his generous protestation, but he took leave of the Queen and his
Mistress, and went with Iphidamantus to Zabaim, Polexander, and the
unfortunate Achomat. In the mean time, Melicerta no more troubled by the
powerful charms which were inseparably annexed to the fair Iphidamantus
person, called to mind her father, and her propheticke spirit representing him
to her wounded as he was, she called one of her women in whom she most trusted;
Eliza (said she to her) I can no longer live in these afflictions; in this
extremity thou must needs testify to me, how justly I love thee, and (without
being stopped by any occasion whatsoever) go secretly, and learn whether my
honored father be alive or dead. Iphidamantus surely deceived me, when he
protested he was not wounded: the extraordinary agitations of my mind force
me, not believe him, and to think that my Lord the Basha is reduced to an
estate very deplorable. Eliza accustomed to obey, and not dispute her Mistress
commands, went to put on a man's habit, which she had formerly made use of in
the like occasions, and came to the Camp unknown of any: there she inquired
for Achomat's quarter, and finding it, entered his tent a little after
Iphidamantus and Bajazet were got thither. A great disorder there was by means
of the generous Basha's wounds, and every body indifferently came in, that the
^rt Prince might at least have the comfort of seeing how much he was lamented.
Eliza came so near to his bed, that she heard him speak of Melicerta, and
besought Iphidamantus to go and prepare her mind for the constant receiving
the news of his misfortune: Eliza, no sooner heard Iphidamantus answer, but
she slid out in the crowde, and returned with the same diligence she came. When
she was alone with Melicerta, Madam (said she) the Prince your father is alive,
but he is wounded in so many places, that he is forced to keep his bed; the
Surgeons are of opinion that his wounds are dangerous, yet they despair not
of healing them: for the rest, Achomat infinitely desires to see you, and
entreated Iphidamantus (when I came thither) to repair to you, that by the
power of his advice, he might suppress your first agitations, and by some
slight make you swallow so bitter a potion as he brings you. O bloody decrees
of the eternal Justice (cried Melicerta, interrupting Eliza) see the beginning
of such things as it has resolved! My dreams have the same dismal
interpretations I always dreaded, and I learn thence, but most cruelly, that
in vain the unfortunate take pains todivert their destiny. Unprofitable
words, vain considerations! why keep ye me in my bed? It Is not a fit time now
to talk of rest and health. Let Us hasten Eliza, o let us run whither our piety
calls us, and not be husbanding a miserable life, which (may be) must this day
be taken from us: With that Melicerta flung out of her bed, and scarce gave her
woman time to cloth her; she went privately from her ship, and without taking
leave of Almanzaira, nor her dear Cydaria, was carried in a chair to
Achomat's tent; she entered that wherein he lay, without giving notice of her
coming, and so surprised Polexander, Iphidamantus, and Bajazet, that as amazed
they cried out all at once. The wounded man raised his head, and about to ask
what was betided, saw Melicerta, who unable to speak, or uphold her self, fell
down on his bed: My dear daughter (said he) think on me! and consider that
thy griefs wound me a new: curb then those too violent witnesses of thy love,
and give over at last to wrestle with a Power that cannot be surmounted. Though
Melicerta was extremely transported, yet she heard what her father spoke; and
to conform her self to his will, so much forced her self, that one might
say, she in a moment passed from an extreme anxiety to an extremity of quiet:
she arose from her father's bed, and having kissed him with an admirable
constancy; My Lord (said she) I could not be your daughter, and do less then
grieve for your misadventure; not that I think it dangerous, for if your
friends countenances dissemble not, nor deceive me, I see no cause we have to
fear; set your mind therefore at rest, and be pleased that I share with you,
at least in such ills as you had never tried, had you never been father to your
unnatural Melicerta: With that she grew pale, and but for Iphidamantus who
held her, she had fallen flat on the ground; she was so weak with her former
sickness, and strove so exceedingly to hide her sorrow, that without the
wonderful courage wherewithal she had always used to oppose her miseries,
she had even then forgone that poor remainder of life which was left her. She
had not been there much above an hour, when two of Bajazet's Officers entered
Achomat's tent, and told their General, they brought him some Eunuchs which
were taken in the camp, and being forced to speak, said, they belonged to the
Princess Rozelana, wife to Achomat. How subject is the judgment of men to be
deceived! I say so, because Bajazet rejoiced at the coming of Rozelana's
Eunuchs, and thought their bringing news of that Princess would not be a
little comfort to Achomat. He went therefore to the Basha's bedside, and
assuring him his wounds were not mortal, promised, he should shortly receive
such consolation as would much further his recovery: Whence can it come? (said
Achomat.) From the person you love best in the word, replied Almanzor. Alas,
said the Basha, my dear Rozelana knows not where I am, and what afflicts me
more, is, that thinking me lost with her daughters, she laments, and spends in
tears and fighes the best days of her life. She must needs be better informed
(said Bajazet) then you imagine, for two of her servants are newly come hither,
and desire to have the honor to see you. Let them come in (said Achomat) let
them come quickly, and in saying so, he put himself in such a posture as made
Diceus believe his wounds were not so dangerous as he thought them. The Eunuchs
presently came in, and because they were extremely black, and very unseemly,
they could not judge by their countenances, whether they brought good or bad
news. Achomat took the letter they presented him, and without giving ear to
his daughter or the Princes, who entreated he would not strain himself, called
for a light, and read what follows.

Rozelana daughter to the greatest of the Ottoman Emperors, to her dear Lord
Achomat.
BY my former Letters I intimated the cause, by this I advertise you of my
death. Our perfect love seems to tell me I am too cruel to send such tidings
as will heap so much affliction on you; but withal, I confess it would not
have me part hence without assuring you, that death it self cannot raze you
out of my thoughts: I die then my dear Achomat, but I die contented, since I
could not live any longer but in affliction, and by consequence you could
expect nothing from me but tears and trouble. I do not entreat you to be
insensible of my loss. On the contrary (my dear Achomat) I desire thou
would never be comforted for it; yet if it be true that you love me, I, even
dying, entreat this favor, that you will live as long as the eternal
Providence has appointed. I can no more, Death forces on me, and were it not
staid by that victorious hand which triumphed over it in the grave, I should
not have time enough nor strength to assure you that I die a Christian.

WHen he had read over the Letter, he sighed, but so weakly, that they thought
not he had received so sad news; he turned to his Eunuchs, and calling one of
them by his name, Narcissus, said he, did thou see her die? Yes, my Lord
(replied the old Eunuch) and these unfortunate hands (with that he lifted them
up) have for ever closed her eyes. He had no sooner said so, but he tore that
little hair remaining on his head, and casting himself on the earth, began
again to lament and weep with his companion. Melicerta who had always
prophesied her afflictions, anticipated those contained in her mothers Letter,
and forgetting all her high resolutions, O heaven! (cried she) must there need
so many blows from thee, to kill so miserable a wretch! With that Achomat
reached her her mothers Leter, and then fell back on his pillow: she scarce
took time to read it all, but cried out, O detestable creature that I am! O
monster twice a parricide! blinded passion! unjust, or unpowerfull heaven! We
are all three alike guilty: the one has permitted the mischief, the other
advised it, and the last could not defend her self from it. Her respect to
Achomat and the other Princes, staid the current of her laments for that
misfortune, but it could not stop that of her despair. The presence, the
tears, and entreaties of Iphidamantus, could obtain from her no other then a
feigned complasency. For Achomat, he was silent, and though his love to his
daughter made her ever extremely dear to him, yet he never troubled himself
with forbidding her lamentations, nor entreating her to live. In this manner
was the night spent, at day-breake, Zabaim, Polexander and Bajazet, called on
by their troops, with much grief left the father and the daughter, and would
have obliged Iphidamantus to stay with them; but in the very instant Almanzaira
and Cydaria came into the tent. On the news they heard of Melicerta sudden
going away, they imagined Achomat was dead; and not to abandon that Princess
in her extreme affliction, were come to the Camp. Iphidamantus leaving his
Mistress again in the hands of Almanzaira and Cydaria, humbly be sought her
permission to follow his brother and friends; Go dear Iphidamantus (said she)
go, since thou will, and my ill fate suffers me not to forbid thee: with those
words she grew speechless, and her scattered eyes gave apparent singes of her
souls disorder. Iphidamantus stayed till she was recollected, and when he
thought she had no more need of his being there, he went to the place where
they were to fight; there he found Polexander, Zabaim, and Bajazet, examining
one of their Spies, a crafty fellow, if there were ever any; he informed them,
how he had been all the night in the palace of Morocco, and that both the Kings
resolved to fly, when a great noise was heard on that part next to Mount
Atlas, and presently there came in a Knight, who advertised them of the
arrival of twenty thousand Arabians; I saw them enter (said the Spy) and
though the number be great, their equipage and order are both so ill, that I
make almost no esteem of that succor. The Princes without much relying on
that man's opinion, or neglecting their accustomed providence, took care to
put themselves in case good enough to receive their Enemies, and to repel them
how valiant soever. To that end they changed the manner of their battle, and
presently called their enemies to combat; the Moors on their side, reinforced
by the Arabians, marched into the field, and put themselves in battle-array:
Polexander causing his vantgard to advance to a special piece of ground whence
they could not be dislodged, and seeing some of them a little foiled with so
many combats, thought it was not amiss to speak to them; My companions (said
he) do not believe your toil or danger this day will be comparable to such as
you have gone through; all that you have to do, is to perfect that fight which
night interrupted, and assure your selves of the victory you had already
won: those who are to meet withal, with a boldness that seems not to know
you, are the same run-awayes whom but last night you forced all in disorder to
fly into their town, and to preserve their lives with the loss of their
honor; I confess they have some succors come to them, but I leave you to
judge what they are, being composed of Arabians, that is, of so ill Soldiers,
that all Princes who would well wage war, cashiere them from their Armies;
they are thieves, who never set on any but such as will run from them. On then
my companions, fall on, where victory (aloud) calls for you, she declares her
self once more on your fide, and asks from your hands but a few Palms which
are wanting to dress her Crown withal. After this Speech to his Soldiers,
Polexander fell in among the Enemy; with the first encounter of his lance, he
overthrew the Abinzerrague; Iphidamantus slew him who only survived of the
Morocco Kings race; and Bajazet ran through and through the Arabian General.
These first incounters affrighting the Moors, they apparently staggered, and
but for a Body of Granadians, which kept them from flying, the fight had been
ended in the very beginning. Iphidamantus made himself a way amongst their
Cavalrie, and not considering whether he were followed or no, passed furiously
through their fire, pikes and lances. Polexander on his side, having no more to
act, turned otherwhere, and asking in every place for Iphidamantus, hasted to
that part where he was said to be fighting; he could not come to him by means
of a battalion of Moors which stopped his passage, and coming on with much co
fidence, engaged him to fight; he showed them to such as followed him, and
speaking without scarce any stay, My friends (said he) there are only these
men that dispute with you for the victory; teach them they are no more
invincible then those you have already defeated; your valor receives a
diminution to suffer them to be so long in case to resist you; give way then to
be governed by your just anger; they must, nay, it is fit they should be
inveloped with the fortune of their companions, and not contest any longer with
you for the honor of this day: But what said I? they must? they are already
overcome, since I see you are resolved to set on them. Though these words were
persuasive, yet they were more true; for the pirates fell on as if they had
been untoil'd and fresh, and without any other care then to die honorably,
(with their incomparable Leader) passed through that mass of men, arms and
horses. The valiant Abinzerrague had promised his ambition to conquer some one
of our Heroes, but it was far easier to make such a vow then perform it; he
came full gallop to meet Polexander, and calling to him afar off to defend
himself, ran against him with a firm belief, that at least he should unhorse
him: Polexander stayed for him, and turning aside with his sword the point of
his lance, with the same weapon ran at his throat, but it did only raze the
skin; the Abinzerrague began to accuse Mahomet for his misfortune, and casting
away his lance, came with his sword drawn at Polexander; never was combat more
furious, nor accompanied with more spectators, for as if it had been a thing
agreed on by both Armies, all those that were fighting, forgot one another in
the heat of the battle, and standing still with their swords drawn expected
the success of the Duel, which was such as my Reader imagines: the
Abinzerrague at last sinking under the strokes of invincible Polexander,
received two deadly blows, and fell almost presently under his horses feet.
The Granadians seeing their General dead, looked like those enchanted bodies
which have no other motion then what they take from the Demon which animates
them; they presently threw away their arms, either to fly the more lightly,
or to be the sooner slain, and by their cries and disorder, were the first
that proclaimed the Princes had won the battle. Bajazet, who had cut in
pieces almost all the Arabians, and followed them above a league, returned from
the chase with a gallant troop, when he met those whom Polexander hardly
pursued: He put all to the sword to free himself from the trouble of a third
day, and by that slaughter made an end of all was to be done. Those who have
most exactly spoken of this war, have written, that either during the siege
or in the two battles; the pirates were almost wholly exterminated, and that
Bajazet found not above two thousand remaining after the taking of Morocco.
There were slain above thirty thousand Moors, more then ten thousand
Granadians, and twice as many Arabians. As Soon as the battle was won, there
was so general an affright in the Town, that the two Kings fled thence by
night, and staid no where till they were far gotten into the hideous
Sanctuaries of Mount Atlas. Polexander and Bajazet, who knew as well how to
make good use of a victory as to overcome, fell into the gates of Morocco
before the inhabitants were recollected from their former fright; they found
them open and abandoned, and entered the Town with all the discretion
experienced Captains use to temper their earnestness in so nice occasions.
Those few pirates which remained alive, desirous to revenge the deaths of their
companions, ran through the streets with fire and sword, and made such ravage
and havocke, that to this day may be seen to what excess their inhumane
courages drove them; whilst they abused the privileges attributed to their
condition, Polexander and Bajazet rid out of the Town, and not knowing where
to find Iphidamantus, posted into the field where they had fought the battle;
they found him not there, and thinking he was returned to Achomat and
Melicerta, rode toward their tents. In their way, they perceived Zabaim who
was extraordinarily sad, they demanded the cause, and he told them that in the
last fight of the Granadians, he had thrust in among them to disingage
Iphidamantus, but that his assistance could not save the Prince from falling
under the number: at this lamentable news, Polexander could not refrain from
tears, and besought Zabaim to bring him where he had seen Iphidamantus fall;
they went all together, and by the light of the City on fire, searched the
dead, and found that Prince (the fairest and most valorous of his time) drowned
in his blood, environed with a great many Moors whom he had (infallibly)
slain. Polexander fell down on him, and interrupting his complaints with his
sighs, Ah! my brother (said he, lifting him up) see then the fatal
accomplishment of such things as thy poor Melicerta has so often and so
vainly foreseen; thou art dead dear Iphidamantus in the flower of thine age,
and Heaven either for love or envy was only pleased to show thee to the
world. Bajazet was not to be comforted, he took on against the stars and men,
and accusing himself for Iphidamantus death, Wretch that I am, said he, it is I
that have covered this fair body with all the wounds that disfigure it, and
that conspired with the Moors to ruin that valor which I could not equalize.
Zabaim, whose age and experience made him less sensible then the other two
Princes, intimated to them, that unless they would forget their profession,
they could not with justice lament Iphidamantus death, since the like disasters
were inseparably annexed to the use of arms; besides, Iphidamantus dying so
gloriously, and in seventeene years of age having razed out the memory of all
that had been great and admirable in former times, he was rather to be
perpetually extolled then any thing at all lamented. Polexander suppressed his
grief that he might not be seen to affect a virtue so troublesome and vulgar,
but thinking on the deadly wound Melicerta was to receive, Poor Princess
(cried he) thou said right always, that there was no true felicity for
thee, and that those favors by which Fortune seemed to reconcile her self to
thee, were but treacheries and snares of which she would make use to make thee
the more sensible of her inhumanitie; shall I conceal from thee the loss of
thy dear Solomon? Nay, shall I make known his death, which will be thine?
Polexander could not go on with his complaints, Bajazets lamentations hindered
him, and Zabaim's remonstrances obliged him to return to the Camp. He
therefore commanded Diceus to carry off Iphidamantus corpse privately, and
taking Bajazet forcibly away, came to Achomat's tent; all was there in
confusion and tears; the news of Iphidamantus death had been brought
thither, and no body knew the anthor. Melicerta at the first hearing of it,
giving her self desperately over, flew as she had been distracted out of her
fathers tent; If Almanzaira and Cydaria had not withheld her, she had run to
search for Iphidamantus among those that lay scattered and slain on the place
of battle, as so many sacrifices offered up to victory. As Soon as she saw
Polexander, Give me my Solomon (cried she) restore the treasure you have stolen
from me; and thou ambitious and adventurous Bajazet, wer'st thou not content
with the robbing me of Achomat? must Iphidamantus death be added to his, as a
second trophy raised to the honor of thy bloody and furious passion?
Almanzaira strove to appease her, Cydaria wept, Almanzor tore his hair,
Polexander sat settled and mute, Achomat all-dying as he was, bewailed
Iphidamantus death, and entreated Melicerta to moderate her sorrow, but she was
deaf to all counsel and entreaties; sometimes she cast her self on her
fathers bed, and then again flinging through the company in Achomat's tent,
besought them (at least) to give her leave to go search for her husbands body.
Achomat called our Hero, and entreated that last contentment to his daughter
and himself; Polexander besought him to think on what he desired, and to
conceive what a fury his daughter might fall into at the sight of a body made
so dreadful and disfigured with wound. There are (replied Achomat) some sick
persons to whom many things are denied, because many things may wrong them; but
there are some other again who are to be denied nothing, because their
diseases being incurable nothing can hurt them: my daughter and my self are of
the latter sort, there is no more thought to be taken for our preservation; all
that our friends can do for us, is to let us die in quiet, and (since poison
is no more dangerous for us then physic) give us the one as soon as the
other. Polexander, won by those reasons, but more by Melicerta's frightfull
actions, commanded Iphidamantus body to be brought, and laid it on a bed near
to Achomat's. The Basha would needs see it, and making a worthy reflection on
that great example, of the frailty of Princes lives; Greatness of the world,
(said he) sensual delights, momentarie beauties, come and see what you are in
a portraict so truly representing you! And thou fair soul too soon dislodged
from so fair a prison, fly not hence alone to the place of thy eternal rest!
Achomat and Melicerta would follow thee, and participate of those promised
incomprehensible joys. No body heard Achomat, for Melicerta made such a noise,
that nothing was to be heard but her lamentations. At last (to contemplate
Iphidamantus) she grew silent, and grasping him in her arms, had certainly
then died on him, had she not been taken off: Achomat called her, and presently
her reason surmounting her grief and fury, she knew her fathers voice, and
ran to his bed. Achomat, who decayed, and grew palpably weak, and scarce able
to speak, stretched his hand toward her, and presently letting it fall,
Daughter (said he) give thanks with me to that Goodness which is at last
wearied with our sufferings; if thou desire I should die in some peace,
moderate thy lamentation, and think thou have lost not^g, but what thou were
sure and bound to be deprived of, sooner or later. With that he ^fted his hands
to heaven, and addressing himself to that Power which could only hear him,
he gave up the ghost. When Melicerta, growing more furious then before, tore
her face, plucked off her hair, and attempted often to seize on some sword to
fall on; Almanzaira and Cydaria expressed, that if she continued as she was,
that she was to expect no other then the loss of her soul with her life; that
consideration resetled her, and after a while musing, she cast her self on
Achomat, and presently starting up again, But (said she) this is only the
half of my miseries, with that she ran to the other bed, and drawing the
curtains, stood like a statue, at the pitiful sight of so late an admired and
fair a countenance, and now shaded with the obscurity and horror of death;
she kissed him, and afterward looking on him without any apparent disturbance,
O short (said she) and unfortunate love of humane creatures, glorious and
pitiful remains of the fairest of men! Iphidamantus, dear Iphidamantus, is
it thus that we were to be linked with bonds more strong then time or fortune?
Must I needs leave the tomb wherein I had buried my self alive, to be the
spectatresse of thy precipitated death, and see thee again after so long a
separation, only that I might lose thee more then once? Yes, it must be, for
heaven had so resolved it, let us therefore fully perfect our destiny: Those
were the last words she spoke, afterward she did nothing but sigh, and utter
some inarticulate speech; and then leaving her lover to return to her father,
she embraced him near a quarter of an hour, without giving ear to Zabaim's
entreaties, Almanzaira's exhortations, Cydaria's laments, nor the supplications
of Polexander and Bajazet. When she perceived she could no more, she went from
her father to Iphidamantus, and laying her self down by him, took his hand,
kissed it, and so gave up the ghost. These three so considerable dead bodies,
and so near to one another, made Polexander and Bajazet almost forget what
they owed to themselves; at last their servants drew them from that mournful
place, and even forced them to retire to their vessels. Bajazet suspended his
passion to accord with that of his Mistress, and for two or three days did
nothing but sigh and nourne with her; the fourth he took the hardiness to
speak, and told her that so fair and excellent a soul as hers, should be
above all the malice of fortune: But Cydaria was of too noble a nature to be
overcome by so barbarous a philosophy; she had lost the half of her self in
losing Iphidamantus, and 'twas fit she should have more then ordinary
resentments; well might she yet strive to arm her self against reason, but
time and love, which are as powerful as death, made her yield, and quit her
complaints and sorrow for the respect she bore to Polexander, Zabaim,
Almanzaira, and Bajazet's continual solicitations. Eight or ten days passed
over, during which time the City of Morocco was almost utterly ruined; that
famous palace which Historians have described to us as a masterpiece of the
African Kings magnificence, was subverted; the Temples escaped not the fury of
sacrilegious hands, and those three golden apples which shine on the point of
the principal Mosquy, were hardly preserved by the virtue of such enchantments
as are their eternal defense and guardians. Bajazet would have naught for his
part of the booty but Cydaria's picture, which was found in a private Mosquy of
Hely's lodgings. Presently after, he sent command to the pirates, and the King
his father's soldiers, to come from the Town, and repair to their colors;
they obeyed without compulsion, being so rich, and tired with ill doing, that
they wished for nothing more, then to put their pillage in some place of
safety. Polexander (for his part) pressed as much as he could their depart,
which in his opinion might produce some great change of his fortune; Zabaim and
Almanzaira desired it as much as he; Bajazet presently agreed, and so with as
fair a gale as could be wished, they weighed anchors, and landed happily in
the Island of Fez: there Zabaim visited the tomb of his second son, and
Polexander restored to its ancient sepulcher, the body of unfortunate
Melicerta. Her Father was laid on her right hand, and her Lover on her left,
with Trophies of War and Love; and Inscriptions, which had lasted to this
day, if the pride of Spain had not subverted all the Monuments which might
have preserved to after times, the memory of our Hero's conquests. From
thence they passed to the new Isle of Alcidiana, and among the triumphs and
rejoycings answerable to the time, th^e ^arriage of Bajazet and Cydaria was
concluded; a few days after that glorious Ceremony, Zabaim and Almanzaira
took thence their son and daughter to enter in possession of their estates,
and solemnize among their own subjects, the feasts of so illustrious and
long-wish'd for an alliance. Whilst Senega, Guinea, Melly, and many other great
Provinces washed by the Niger, drained their riches and inventions, to raise
every where eternal remembrances for Bajazet's return and marriage.
Polexander by degrees and insensibly relapsed into his former melancholy, and
held all those for Impostors who assured him he should one day reinjoy the
felicities he had lost; A Canarian (one that had been a great observer of the
stars) came to him a little before he set to sea, and knowing his design, Sir
(said he) those which have not my knowledge in future things, having taken
notice of those misfortunes you are like to fall into, advise you to give over
your voyage; but I, who even now foresee the event, entreat you to hasten on,
and not lose the benefit of certain constellations, which seem to shine only
to contest with the malignity of such others as threaten you; set sail
therefore, and hold it for infallible, that your happiness shall not be far
off, when you see your self reduced to the most unfortunate estate, ever any
great Prince like your self ever met with: Polexander neglected this counsel,
as others, and yet for fear of disobliging the Author, he ^ain'd to be well
pleased with it, and to assure him he was so, gave him a worthy Present. The
Prognosticator being gone, Polexander set sail with Alcippus and Diceus, the
dear and inseparable companions of all his fortunes; he commanded his to
steer right North, and without varying either West or Easterly, to hold on his
course on the same point. All that ever experience and the art of Navigation
have taught the most judicious Pilots, that man observed in the guiding his
ship, and a wind from Africa seeming to be risen, expressly to favor their
enterprise, made Polexander believe he should not always be unfortunate. The
hundred leagues which they held to be from the Canaries to Alcidiana's Island,
were reckoned by so exact a computation, that the Pilot's Mates assured
Polexander, they had not miscounted a mile; for all that no Isle could be
discovered, and the ship still made on with all her sails. Polexander not
knowing whom to accuse but his destiny, imprecated against himself, and if
that principle of piety which never parted from his soul, had not stopped the
agitations of his anger, he had without doubt added one to the examples of
those, who to be delivered ou^ of the hands of fortune, have daringly laid
violent hands on themselves: being then engaged to suffer till Providence had
otherwise appointed, he caused part of his sails to be taken in, and willed
his Pilot to alter his course, and sometimes steering East, and othertimes
sailing West, not to forget any thing on what his art depended. The Pilot
believing his reputation as well as fortune to be annexed to this discovery,
followed it both w^h the eyes of a Lynceus, and the judgment of another
Typhis. Two days and two nights he attempted several courses, and rectifying
himself by the help of his Compass as often as the wind put him off from his
first Rhombe; he had the boldness to tell Polexander, that in spite of the
power of what Demons soever, he would find that enchanted Island. These
promises were too audacious to be licenced, and indeed were punished by a
contemning which was like to cost their Authors life. At the fifth days break,
those that were in the top of the maine Mast began^ cry, Land, and by that word
filled all the ship with a noise that witnessed their universal joy.
Polexander, who durst not believe what he so much desired, went up into a place
from whence he might discover all that was round about: That land he saw, and
his heart beating (so much did that object master his senses) I know (said he)
well enough what punishment Alcidiana's just anger has provided for me; but
how worthy is my mishap to be envied, since the lightning that threatens me, is
to come from the fair eyes of that Princess! Whilst he spoke thus, his
vessel flew on the waves, and seemed to take part in her masters rapture.
As Soon as they were in the road, they knew the discovered land to be an Isle:
Polexander unwilling to trust to any body in a thing so important to him,
commanded the shallop to be lanch'd, and taking none with him but Alcippus and
Diceus, caused himself to be landed with all haste. He came on shore in a
very hidden and private place, and therefore went further up into the Isle to
descry it; he had not gone above five or six hundred paces along the coast,
but he perceived the points of many turrets: with that he went some hundred
paces further without saying any thing; but when he was gotten to the top of a
rock from whence he plainly discerned the pavillions whose tops he had only
seen before; It Is the fatal Palace (said he) which I forsook to pursue
Amintha's ravishers. He spoke it imperfectly, his excess of joy transporting
him, he grew pale, he trembled, and underwent all the agitations that an
extreme Love ever yet troubled the strongest mind with: sometime he thanked
Fortune, then he blessed Love, and ever among mingling Alcidiana; I have no
sense (said he) but wrongs the extremity of happiness I enjoy. I confess (O
ye Divinities equally powerful) that to you I am infinitely obliged; but to
show such vulgar acknowledgements for so extraordinary benefits, is to be
ungrateful. If there be any one which may be accepted, it is the confession I
make, that it is not less impossible for me to express, then to acknowledge
sufficiently your incomparable gratifications: with that he turned to Alcippus
and Diceus, and knowing not what was best to be done; Advise me my friends
(said he) for in the case I am, it is a hard matter for me to counsel my self.
Alcippus replied, he was not so well in Alcidiana's favor, as to present
himself to her without the advice of some one of his ancient friends, by whom
he might understand how the Queen was affected toward him: It Is true (said our
Hero) I should be more guilty then Alcidiana imagines, if I made no scruple
of coming before ^er, incensed as she is, or bore so mean a respect to a
personage worthy so much adoration, as with an impudent boldness, enforce her
to violate her own laws, and justify that rash man whom she has condemned
to a shameful death. Let Us return to our ship, and there we will deliberate
at leisure in what manner it is fit I should prepare my self for the punishment
my disobedience has deserved. Presently he turned himself to sea-ward, but he
had not gone twenty paces e're his mind altered, and so resolved to attempt on
fortune, and to try what should become of him: Alcippus laid before him all
that he thought most persuasive to divert him from so dangerous a resolution;
but all was in vain, and so was of force to follow him. After they had left
the sea coast and traversed a plain, watered with many sweet rivers,
beautified with fair houses, and encompassed with a wood of very high trees,
into part of which they entered, because their way engaged them; they had not
gone far in when they stopped, at the sound of a flute and bagpipe:
Polexander imagining whence the music came, went out of the largr way, and
striking into a path fast by among the trees, came to a cross way, environed
with five or six little cottages; there they saw two shepherds seated at the
foot of a tree, playing on the instruments our Hero had heard, and ten or
twelve young children dancing before them, who made him see by their rural
habits, but fair ones, that their fathers were not reduced to the necessity of
the European Shepherds. Polexander ravished with this adventure, would have
addressed himself to the Pipers, but the poor men affrighted in seeing him,
fled with the children; our Hero followed to the cottage whereto they retired,
and had made such an outcry, that five or six other shepherds well clad, and
armed with staves like our half pikes, from several places came resolutely
toward him: He spoke much to them, but imagining they understood him not, he
took a little diamond (which by chance he had on his finger) and offering it
to them (...) a demeanor full of courtesy, staid their fury. They took the
ring, and after they had well gazed on it, embraced Polexander one after
another, and showing him many civil respects, invited him into their cottage:
thither he went, where he beheld two women, whose naturalnesse that had nothing
of what was silly, and beauty without art, might have made them taken for some
of those famous shepheardesses of the ancient Arcadia; there wanted nothing to
his satisfaction, but to make himself understood, but that being not then
possible, he thought best to talk to them by signs. In less then two hours
he made them conceive what he desired, and intimating he would willingly change
his habit for some of theirs, they went and fetched him one made of fine linen
and shining as silk. The women likewise brought him hats, and buskins, so
neatly made, that Polexander imagined he should be too finely dressed in those
clothes: notwithstanding he took that which was fittest for him, and gave the
other to Diceus. Never was he better pleased then when he had hung a scrip
(made of a Hynde spotted Fawnes skin) in the place of his sword; and taken in
his hand a sheep-booke, whose knots and carvings would yield matter for a long
description to a man that had more leisure then I have. He looked on himself
as on another Paris, going to be Judge of all that was fairest in Heaven or
Earth; presently he sent back Alcippus with a command to attend him eight days
in the road, and keep his enterprise secret: Alcippus obeyed without reply,
and Polexander leaving his rich apparell' with the shepherds who had given him
of theirs, made them understand by his signs that he would go to their
Princess castle. Whether the shepherds conceived what our Hero meant, or
apprehended him not, once they staid him, and by their woeful countenances and
joined hands, seemed to have him know there was an extreme danger in
approaching that castle: he gave not the interpretation he should to the
shepherds signs, but knew it afterward when it was too late. Having then
sent away Alcippus and taken leave of his hosts, he took the way to the
castle, and growing merry with Diceus about their pleasant encounter, had not
walked an hour but he came within a musket shot of that fatal castle: he
descending a little hill, and crossing a meadow bordered on both hands with
willowes and poplars, he came before a great plain environed with very high
railes, and beyond them with a file of black men chained to one another, and
all armed with bows and arrows. As far off as those Archers had descried
Polexander and Diceus, they gave a shout, and presently sent them a flight of
arrows, from which they could not so well shelter themselves but some met with
them; Polexander unwilling to be taken for any other then he seemed, fell on
the ground, and expected when those fettered devils would be somewhat pacified.
Not one of them left his station, but ten or twelve men less black then the
guard, coming out of some tents that stood in one corner of the place, ran to
our two adventurers; one among them taking our Hero and his man for the
shepherds of that Country, asked, why they had dared to violate what their
Queen had forbidden: Polexander hearing Spanish spoken so far from Spain,
answered in the same tongue, that they were two strangers, by a storm driven
on that Island, and bearing it was commanded by a Queen, whose like the world
afforded not, we much desired to do her our obeisance, before we betook our
selves selves to sea again. The Castilian replying with their natural
haughtiness, If (said he) thou be not so happy as to have had thy birth on
this famous Earth which produces none but invincible men, be assured thy
curiosity will cost thee thy life. Polexander smiled at the threats of this
new Rodomant, and answered thus, It is a hard thing for me to tell you the
place of my birth, but I can well assure you I have naught of the Spaniard in
me. Ah wretch! (cried the Castilian) what sin has brought thee to execution?
Yet speak, and without dissembling thy thoughts, tell me if thou have never
loved. I wonder (replied Polexander) how a Spaniard can ask me that question;
answer to it your self, since it is the belief of all Spain, that it is harder
to live without loving, the^ to live without breathing. The Castilian in lieu
of continuing the discourse, turned to those that came with him, and commanded
them to perform their charge; thereupon they straight fell on Polexander, who
would not defend himself, and put on his legs and arms such chains, as
almost took from him the use of either. Diceus was treated accordingly, and
with his Master led to the palace: there they were shut up in a vaulted
chamber, and had leisure enough to reflect on so diversified an accident.
Polexander, after a long meditation breaking his silence; Was not I (said he)
sufficiently accustomed to the malice of that ill Spirit which prosecutes me,
to mistrust his promises, and imagine he would use me with as little favor in
this occasion as in others? assuredly (quoth he, turning to Diceus) my desires
have made me of a too easy belief. I am not in Alcidiana's Isle, and plainly
see, that what I took for a haven is a treacherous roske, on which all my
hopes are suffering their last shipwreck. Whilst he ended thus, the prison
door was opened, and many Soldiers, who by their looks and words, witnessed
their barbarism, confusedly entered, and plucking Polexander with a brutish
fury, commanded him to follow them. He obeyed, with the patience of a man
truly courageous, and after he had crossed many great courts, mounted by a
winding staire, which was a masterpiece in Architecture, into a hall, that
might be said, the most that art could do. It was of an extraordinary breadth
and height, and had light by great overtures which were contrived between many
ranks of Pillars: the vault was of great stones, naturally blue, and speckled
with stars so glittering, that they seemed of perfect gold. Polexander took no
great heed to those rarities, but had his eyes fixed on a troop of Ladies
which stood round about an empty throne; as soon as he was seen there arose a
little murmr amongst them, and a while after, a woman of some forty five
years old ascended the throne: she was so laden with diamonds and pearls,
that 'twas well seen she would borrow from her dressings that Majesty which
nature had denied her. In effect, she might have been taken rather for an
Eunuch clad like a woman then a woman indeed; her hair was red, her color
swart, her height excessive, and her countenance so ill, that had she not been
lamentable meager as she was, yet had she been the very true image of horror.
When she was set, and her Ladies, with that blind and servile obsequiousness,
which thinks of nothing but custom and interest, had wirnessed their fear
and worship, she called for Polexander to come nearer, and asked him what he
was, whence he came, and why he had taken on the habit of one of that Islands
shepherds. To that, Polexander (answering with all the respect, which reason
wills us to observe to all persons which carry the particular signs of the
Divinity:) Madam (said he) I am a Prince far more unfortunate then I
esteemed my self two hours since; I seek after that which is impossible for
me to find; I ^ded in your Isle with a firm belief it was the same wherein I
was to meet my greatest felicity, and in hope of it, changed my habit for
those I now wear, the better to satisfy passion, and not wrong my duty.
Infallibly (said that incomparable phantasme) turning to her Ladies, see here
one of those mad men against whom those laws are established which I cause so
rigorously to be observed. Is it not true (said she to our Hero) that thou art
in love, and call all such who are not so, monsters; whom nature has
produced in the same manner as she has done nights, winters and diseases:
confess thy fault boldly, but I much fear, that cowardice which is
inseparably with these esseminate youths, who lay all their glory in the
conquest of I know not what young minion, will keep thee from making it known:
speak, speak poor witless man, and deserre not till torture draw the truth
from thee. With that Polexander making appear gloriously that imperio^ and
charming countenance, wherewithal he was wont to reign over the freedom of
men, and even give a feeling to insensibilitie it self: Your Majesty (said
he to the Queen) may give me leave (if you please) to leave off my
observance, for the defense of an innocent whom calumny has made despicable;
If you believe (Madam) that love is a monster, you believe withal that youth
is the greatest defect of life, and the Sun should be accounted a prodigy.
The Queen suddenly turning her eyes into two comets as red as her hair,
threatened Polexander with a terrible death, and without any more hearing him,
commanded he should be delivered into the hands of the hangmen. Before
Polexander would be enforced to be withdrawn from that Megera, Madam (said he)
it is not the custom of those who govern discreetly to condemn any that is
accused till the cause be known; Your Majesty believes me guilty in taking on
me the defense of love, and I, on the contrary should think my self so, if I
wayv'd it? Command some Knight of your Court to take arms, that by a just
combat he may either force my life, or make me dishonourably unsay what I
have maintained in your Majesty's presence: such a command will be as equitable
as glorious for him. The Spaniard of whom we have spoken, fell presently at the
Queens feet, and transcending all the vanities which make his nation
ridiculous; Great Queen (said he) be pleased to permit me to be the
exterminator of a monster, as feeble as he whose defense he undertakes: but if
your Majesty will please to command he be strictly guarded till the day of
combat, for I read already in his eyes, that the propositions he made, are
but cunning pretexts to save himself by a shameful flight. Polexander, at
some other time would have laughed at that Gallant's extravagancy, but for
diverse reasons growing choleric, he retained himself only in his first
temper, and told the Spaniard, that if it pleased the Queen, there was day
enough to decide their difference. The Castilian who was very valiant, took
Polexander at his word, and would not rise from before the Queen, till he had
got leave to fight. At the request of the Ladies it was granted him, for they,
having no other malice to love then from the tongue, were very glad to see him
triumph over his greatest enemies. Hereupon Polexander was unbound, and
delivered into the hands of the Spaniard. The Gallant very insolently made use
of his authority, and carried to an excess of pride which made him forget his
own alloy, he spoke of his combat as if our Hero had been already reduced to
beg his life of him: he often told the Prince, that 'twas not his humor to
show them any favor who were so rash as to interchange blows with him; to
which Polexander replied, he would entreat any courtesy from him, but that he
was resolved to make trial of whatsoever the chance of arms had reserved for
him. When he came to the Bragadochio's lodgings, he entreated him the leave
of sending to his ship for armor; No, no, replied the other in scorn, I have
servants here that will furnish you with arms and horse: the Prince thanked
him for his profer, and patiently endured all his insolences. Whilst he was
in this decadence, a young man very well clad, came into his chamber, and after
diverse extraordinary civilities done him in the name of a Lady of the Court, My
Mistress (said he) understanding that you had not here either horse or arms,
has taken care to provide you of both, and commanded me to intimate, that for
Polexander's sake, she sends them to Love's defender: she beseeches you to
make use of them, and imagine, that going to maintain the power of Love, you
go to fight for Alcidiana's beauty. Polexander was no less surprised then
ravished at these words, and did his utmost to get from the young man his
Mistresses name; but the Squire humbly besought him to be ex^s'd, since he was
expressly forbidden. Go then (said Polexander, putting a fair diamond on his
finger) and assure thy Mistress, I will strive to make my self worthy of her
Present and counsel. The Spaniard grew mad at his enemies fair fortune, and
insolently told the Squire, he would advertise the Queen of his Mistresses
flippery: You owe her too much respect (replied the young man) to do her that
wrong, yet you may do as you please, and with that took his leave of
Polexander, not giving any the least reverence to the Spaniard. Our Hero
presently opened the armor was sent him, and found it very fair; the shield
was of an extreme well polished steel, in the midst whereof was painted a
Torrent, which being repulsed and stopped by a Damme, foamed with rage, and
shocking on it impetously, seemed to shake the very foundations: The word was,
[I will overcome.] Then he went to see his horse, and finding him such as was
promised, commanded Dicens to put on his armor. In the mean time the Spaniard
calling for the arms he intended to use, made show of a great deal of
impatiencie till he were all ready; and descending with Polexander into the
court of the castle, went to his stables, where among a great many horse, he
chose one that had no other fault, but his being as proud as his Master.
Polexander, all armed as he was, would have no help to get on his; Diceus had
the honor that day to be his Squire, and carried his Helmet and Lance into the
field, and gave him both as soon as the Spaniard was ready for fight. The place
could not be better, (for 'twas the same railed in with lists where Polexander
was first seized on) nor the season more favorable, since the air was so
extraordinary calm; but the company, though it were composed of a Queen, of
many Princesses, and a great number of Ladies, was not yet such as our Hero
could have desired. As Soon as all that Court were at the windows which looked
into the lists, and the Queen had given the signal, the trumpets advertised
the Combatants of their devoir; the Spaniard gave spurs to his horse, and made
him start and fly on like lightning: Polexander putting on his eagerly, and
inveloping himself (as I may say) in a cloud of dust raised by his horses
hoofs, met the Spaniard in the midst of the careere, and with the extreme
shock he gave him, bore over horse and man, and made him roll two or three
turns on the ground. There was not a Lady (the Queen excepted) but began to
cry out for joy; our Hero the mean while attended till the Don was got up,
who darting fire from his eyes, and blaspheming what was most venerable above,
freed him from his horse, and came on with his sword drawn to avenge him on
his enemy. Polexander, to take no advantage, alighted, and met him with an
intent only to disarme him; but the Spaniard made him know, he was truly
courageous, and knew how to die with honor: for he would never either confess
himself vanquished, nor ask his life, though the blows he received from that
thundering arm, (to which no other is to be compared) made him feel
sufficiently that he must either humble him self or die. Polexander often drew
back to give him time to think of his preservation, but perceiving he scorned
it, thought himself not bound to value his life more then its master did; he
therefore let drive so furious a blow on his head piece, that cleaving his
skull, he laid him dead at his feet. The affrighted Queen seeing the defender
of her extravagances so rigorously chastis'd, shot from her eyes as dreadful
flashes as those of comets, and commanded eight or ten Knights which were under
the window, to avenge her on her enemy. They were not less barbarous then
their Princess, but came all cowardly rushing on Polexander, who so stoutly
received them, that with the three first blows, he laid two of them along and
dead; a third he made safe enough for fighting, and cast such a terror among
the rest, that had he delighted in blood, he might have shed what he had listed
without any hazard. He therefore contented himself with the driving those
wretches before him, and thrusting them to the utmost list of the field: the
Queen at the sight played the mad woman, and asked her Ladies who had brought
that devil into her-dominion; she that was next to her, making a low
reverence, and humbly beseeching to be heard, If your Majesty (said she)
considers nothing but for the present, you may believe this stranger came
hither for no other ends but such as might tend to your disadvantage: but if
you cast your thoughts on what has passed, and may betide, you will confess
that a particular protection from heaven has sent you this redoubted. Knight
to avenge you of the cruel Astramadan's tyranny, and to extinguish for ever
that bloody tribute he exacts from your subjects, for the safety of your own
person. Tisiphone (so was the Queen called) meditated a while on what the Lady
spoke, and confessing to her self that Polexander's preservation was very
behovefull for her; she staid those who were running to the defense of their
companions, and with her loud and terrible voice, commanding them to lay down
their weapons, sent word to Polexander to give over the prosecuting her
servants, and come presently before her. He obeyed without disputing that
Princesses will, and presented himself all armed save his head; she found him
more pleasing in his armor then in the habit of a shepherd, and pardoning him
the death of the Spaniard and her Knights; If (said she) you will obtain the
liberty to love, you must avenge me on a Barbarian, who by his brutishness
has forced me to believe, that Love was a Mon^er, which persuaded us to
nothing but cowardice and villainies. Tisiphone strove to sweeten her eyes as
she spoke thus, and as if she had forgotten what she was, made the Ladies
(which looked o^) believe that she would not die in the detestation of love.
Polexander, that was otherwise too much amazed then to note the Queens
impertinencies, promised her all she desired, and humbly besought her to hasten
as much as possibly she could the occasion in which she would employ him; and
so took leave, and was (by her command) put in posssession of the unfortunate
Castilians goods and lodgings; presently he dispatched Diceus to his ship, to
bring him thence such necessaries as he wanted, to call for Alcippus, and to
give order to his Pilot to disanchor from the rode where he lay, and to ride in
that of the palace. In less then four hours all this was done, and
Polexander clothing himself according to his birth, and the present condition
of his fortune, made appear by a pleasing mixture, state and magnificence
intermingled with sorrow. His earnestness to acquit him of the promise to
Tisiphone, scarce giving him leave to breathe, he went to her presently after
supper; she welcomed him with as smiling a countenance as she could put on, and
looking on him with an attention which seemed very strange to the Ladies, did a
thousand braveries, and engaged her self so far in a business she knew not,
that she strai'd and was lost, without any hope of ever recovering her old way:
she retired much later then she was wont, and had not her women advertised her
of it, she had spent the whole night with Polexander. As Soon as she was in
bed, she strove to sleep, but she perceived that some (I know not what) strange
thoughts, and certain unknown desires, spite of her heart kept her eyes
waking. At first she began to grow angry with her self, and having a spirit as
inconstant as malicious, she altered her mind a hundred times in an hour;
went from praises to reproaches, and in a word witnessed, whether in loving or
hating too quickly, that she was neither capable of love or hatred. When she
perceived her thoughts were resolved to keep her awake, I will (said she)
traitors as you are (which deceive in soothing) hinder you well enough from the
prolonging your malice: I am not so far from the Port, but I can enter again
when I list. Retire then ye too importunate gusts, and hope not my voyage will
be long unless the fair gale continue. Love, who intended to avenge himself
on this extravagant woman, would not terrify her with these beginnings: he
gave her the calm she demanded, and raised not a tempest, till she had lost
all kenning of the haven. She then slept, and the next more awaking with an
extreme desire of re-seeing Polexander, she loaded her self with so many
jewels, that if our Hero had been covetous, he would certainly have found her
very amible. But being not in humor to remarke ought of fair or foul in
Tisiphone, he besought her again to send a defiance to her enemy, or be
pleased himself might carry it. Tisiphone forged excuses to retain Polexander
near her, and whether he would or no, obliged him to stay seven or eight days
for the return of such Heralds as she had sent to challenge her enemy. During
which time Polexander abode alone, as long as he could be permitted; and one
evening being retired into his chamber, Diceus advertised him there was a Lady
at the door who desired audience; Let her enter if she please, (said
Polexander) and straight way rising, went to receive her with his wonted
courtesy. When she was in place where she might speak unheard of his
servants, she took a veil off her face, and approaching the lights, Cast your
eyes (said she) Polexander on a person which has been sometime in your
esteem, to let her know you have not altogether forgotten her. Our Hero
instantly knowing the Lady both by speech and countenance; Do not (said he)
mine eyes deceive me, or do not I flatter my self with a vain belief, if I
take you for Amintha? No, (replied the Lady) you are not deceived, I am
Amintha: but before I can relate by what chance I came into the service of this
Princess so differing from Alcidiana, I must acquit me of the commission she
gave me, and tell you, that after I had been a long time your confident, I at
last became hers. You laugh at so brave an employment, but when I have
recounted my fortune, you will confess I was not to deny Ti^iphone in any
thing. Do me then the favor (said Polexander) to relate what your fortunes
are, and (without losing time) the follies of this old woman. Presuppose I know
them all already, and thereafter frame your self such an answer as you think I
would make to your propositions. Truly (replied Amintha) you shall not escape so
easily; you have made the wound, and you must work a remedy; she spoke those
words smiling, but perceiving Polexander took no pleasure in it; Know (said
she) that Tisiphone is passionately in love with you, and beginning to neglect
her own interest for fear of your loss, she deferres as much as she can the
combat you are to have with Astramadan: but to instruct you who that Tyrant
is, I will relate what has betided me since I was stolen away. To begin my
discourse of it well, it must be by rendering you all acts of gratitude for the
obligation in which I am bound to your valor for avenging me on my greatest
enemy, in killing Tisiphone's protector; I cannot tell you on what humor
that insolent Spaniard cast his eyes on me, the very day that Alcidiana came to
the palace of the sea; but I can say, he found me so pleasing his fancy, that
knowing well he was not like to obtain me by his merit, he resolved to get me
by cunning. To that end, he came to my lodging like a merchant, and having
unfolded all that the luxury of Spain has most voluptuously found out; he
told me that he had a whole magazine of such things in his ship, and if I would
go down to the haven, he would show me such jewels and rarities as the Queen
had not in her closet. I confess freely to you that my curiosity which is
far more natural to me then distrust, made me give credit to that traitor;
and besides, I that never had so good an opinion of my beauty as to believe my
self worthy the stealing away, thought the Spaniard (who called himself a
merchant of Lisbone) had no other design then to sell well his merchandise. I
put off that visit till next day, and promised him to come aboard in the
morning, before Alcidiana was awake, which I performed, accompanied only with
an Esquire and two women. He took me into his shallop, without making show of
any thing that might give me the least suspicion; and in a trice getting me
into his ship, talked of nothing but of Spanish cut-workes, amber'd skins,
Essences, and other the like commodities. But I was no sooner aboard then four
of his servants laid hands on my Squire, and strictly bound him; my self and
my women were brought into the hinder cabin, and reduced to the estate of
reclaiming your succor without hope of obtaining it. Whilst I made these
unprofitable acclamations, and railed on the Spaniard for his impudence and
treachery, he made me be held by four of his servants, and answered me not a
word till his ship was far off at sea. But when he had lost sight of
Alcidiana's Island, and saw he was not pursued by any of her vessels, he
commanded his men to leave me at liberty, and casting himself at my feet,
Madam (said he) I am none of those infamous pirates which scowre the seas for
all men's destruction, and the dishonor of women: An offense of State made me
lose the favor of King Ferdinand and Queen Isabell, but with it not the
quality of a Prince, which cannot be taken from me but with my life, though
they deprived me of all my fortunes due by birthright. I was forced to
abandon Spain, and seek my safety among the dangers of the sea. The
companions of my better fortunes have been sharers in my adverse, and by a
generositie, rare in the Courts of Kings, those true friends have stood
constant in my miseries, and instead of abiding on the safe shore, when they
saw me suffer shipwreck, threw themselves into the danger to witness their
unparalled affection to me. These are they whom you see in my ship disguised
like Soldiers and Mariners. I tell you this Madam, to free you from all fear,
and fit you to believe, that being among men of quality, you are to apprehend
nothing of violence: the greatest enemy you are to contest with, shall be the
headstrong wilfulness of my too amorous inclination, it has sometime made me
aspire to the enjoying of a Princess, which was one day to fill the throne of
my King; and love who takes a pleasure (as well as fortune) in seconding all
daring enterprises, had rendered all my services so acceptable to her that
could reward them, that I was on the point of ravishing from the King of
Portugal all hope of the crown of Castile. I cannot imagine you to be more
rigorous then that Princess, in denying t^ requests of a man who never yet
made any in vain. The Spaniards insolency put me into a rage, and casting
mine eyes on him more severely then my face and spirit promised, blaming him
for his vainenesse so out of all appearance; I said, that at first I took him
but for a pirate and a ravisher, but by his speech I held him for one most
extremely impudent, a^a fool. I ascribe these reproaches to the strangeness
of your taking away, replied ^e Spaniard, and to your little knowledge of my
deservings: when time shall let you understand how rare those treasures are
which my affection has in store for you, I am most assured you will alter your
language, and to preserve me wholly to your self, will not permit my return
to Spain. To these he added many other flourishing bravadoes, but let them be
buried with him; it shall suffice me to relate that after I had been near a
month so sued to and persecuted, and as much cause to complain against
heaven, and ask Justice thence for the violence I was like to suffer; either
it or the sea took compassion of my tears, which animated against my
ridiculous lover, dashed his vessel in pieces on this Island: I saved my self
unawares upon some great fardles of cork, which my fear made me lay hold on.
He was taken up by fishermen which casually met with him among the rocks where
we were shipwrack'd. All the rest were drowned, I was presented to Tisiphone
the same day we were cast away, and the morrow after, the Spaniard was led by
the fishermen (who had saved him) to the worthy husband of that excellent
Princess. When she heard of the danger I had escaped, she seemed to have some
feeling of it; but when she understood I had been stolen away, and would
never give consent to my ravishers desires; What (said she, clean out of her
self) you do not love then? Is it possible (I replied) for any to love a
thief and a traitor? You speak not enough (quoth the Queen) you must go
further, and say, It is not possible to love any man whatsoever. My fathers
tyranny has enforced me to marry the greatest enemy I have in the world; I
speak it aloud, for I would have him know that my hatred increases daily, and
if I meet not at last with some one of my subjects courageous enough to restore
me the liberty I am deprived of, I in my just indignation will find strength
enough to regaine it my self. Imagine whether I were terrified or no at the
horror of this first speech: But not knowing to what intent she had made it; I
replied, that the hatred women might bear to men, could not (without blame)
go so far as to their husbands. It Is to them (said the Queen) it should be
most of all; for besides their being the tyrants over our liberties, they are
to us continual executioners, which, whether they flatter or abuse us, keep us
night and day in torture, and are never taken by them from one, but to make us
suffer a many others. At this second speech I was without an answer, and
thinking my self not bound to contradict her, I intimated by my silence that I
condemned her not. The first day I saw not the happy husband of that good Lady,
but the next I had the pleasure of it; 'twas a Prince who truly was worthy the
love his wife bore him; he was of a very ill look, and a far worse humor;
he came to the Queen with a brutish fullennesse, and presented her my ravisher
with a certain barbarous authority, which (not to lie) was capable enough to
make me partly of Tisiphone's opinion. As Soon as the Spaniard saw me, he gave
an outcry of admiration, and casting himself at the Queens feet, Madam (said
he) if your Majesty will have the honor to surmount that which o'recomes
Kings, you have need of no other thing then to restore to me a treasure which
I thought had been buried in the bottom of the Ocean. Fortune thought I had
lost all that I could, but if you render me that Lady, (pointing to me) I make
known that your Majesty will have enriched me with more then that blind
goddess has deprived me of. Tisiphone presently imagining the Spaniard might
be very useful for her abominable designs, resolved to win him, and to
begin that divelish traffic; This stranger is mine (said she) but if you be
so venturous a merchant to buy her at my price, you shall have the first offer.
The Spaniard answered, that if I were to be purchased by any action of valor,
he would engage himself to employ his arm and sword both against heaven and
earth to redeem me. By that promise their conversation ended; but as if I had
been borne the object of all extravagancies, Thersites (so was Tisiphone's
husband called) fell in love with me, and thinking to witness extremely well
to me the greatness of his love, he spoke of it to every body, and took for
his private confidents such as were accustomed to serve him in his other
passions. Tisiphone knew it as soon as I, and though she was neither capable of
love or jealousy, yet was she of rage and vengeance. That made her precipitate
her execrable intentions, she plotted with the Spaniard, and neither disclosing
to me nor any of her women her secret practices, so managed them, that
Thersites (...) found dead in his bed, and none could discover the instruments
of the fact. Tisiphon^ a few days after sent his corpse to Astramadan his
cruel brother, and withal proclaimed war against him. The Isle whereof he
is Lord is not distant from this above a days sail; thither went the Spaniard
with a fleet, and had so good fortune by his arms, that but for the
incomparable valor of Astramadan, (who came from afar off to the aid of his
territory) he had been absolute master of. But that hardy Tyrant some three
months since forced him from his Island, and I make no doubt but (to avenge
himself) he had been already here, if he could have gotten sufficient ships
of war. News has come to Tisiphone of his sending into Europe for vessels,
and that as soon as they are arrived, he will imbarke his troops to assail
her: she every day expects that enemy, and has therefore set so many guards
about her palace. But leave we Astramadan, and be pleased I go on with the
history of Tisiphone; The death of her husband did but augment her aversion to
all men, she forbad on pain of death as well her subjects as strangers to
come within three leagues of her palace, and to have always before her eyes
such objects as might confirm her in her hatred, and serve as instruments of
her horrible cruelties; she sent into Africa for the most deformed and
barbarous that could be found amongst the Negros: when they came, she commanded
and made them cut the throats of all such as were of any eminent condition in
her Court, and taking out of prison those whom her husband had cast there, gave
them the title of Knights, and the places of greatest command and trust. That
done, the Moors were chained, and ranked about the castle to defend the
accesses to it; the Spaniard was preserved not out of consideration of the
services he had done the Queen, nor that she thought her self bound to keep
her word with him, but because she feared the arrival of Astramadan, or rather
that she reserved him for the riddance of that tyrant in the same manner as
she had freed her self from her husband. Now (since the Spaniard is dead) you
are the man she will employ in so notable an execution, if you will hearken to
her; or rather, if the affection wherewithal you have miraculously stung her,
be not as miraculous to reform the defects of so depraved a nature. After
Amintha had related thus much, she stood a while looking on Polexander, and
seeing he spoke not, thus went on; Since I have so well described the qualities
of your lover, and discovered all that is most excellent in her, I hope I shall
have no hard task to persuade you to love her. Polexander casting forth a sigh
from the bottom of his heart, Amintha (said he) you know my estate is too
wretched to find a diversion in Tifiphone's extravagancies; I seek for
Alcidiana, I sigh after her, and wish for nothing but the felicity of her
sight, though since your absence she has proclaimed me for an offender, and
by an irrevocable sentence, wills that I should be sacrificed on the altars of
the God of Vengeance. What is it you say (quoth Amintha)? I tell you what is
true, replied Polexander. Pallantus whom I met in the pirates Island, related
to me the particulars of my sad fortune. Yet Amintha let us return if it be
possible to Alcidiana, and submit my self to all that so dear and obliging an
enemy can inflict. I wish no less then you (replied Amintha) the happiness
of reviewing the Queen; but what Angel, or what Star shall so direct our
vessel that it may at last cast anchor in some one port of that enchanted
Island? Either Love (said Polexander) will open us the way, or it shall never
be discovered. You have often told me that perseverance never yet met with
invincible difficulties: I will try whether Amintha can tell a lie, and spend
all the remainder of my life in the quest of a happiness that can never be too
dear to me. But I am certain that should the Island which you call enchanted
be so far, so as to change places every day of the year, nay, even to
beguile all the art of Navigation, yet should it not be prevalent to hide it
self from the travels, searches and perseverance of my affection. All that I
want is a Guide that can well govern that passion: Be you so dear Amintha,
persever to oblige a man that owes you all his happiness, and be pleased that
as soon as possible may be, I may withdraw you from a place too infamous, to
have the honor of enjoying you. Amintha replied, that if his desire were to
get from Tisiphone, he must force himself, and without being so cruel, comply
(at least in show) with the passion of that foolish woman. Our Hero besought
her again not to laugh at an unfortunate man, but to believe heaven was too
just to permit Tisiphone to retain that which was destinated for Alcidiana.
Hereupon they parted, Amintha went to Tisiphone, to whom she gave so many
hopes, that the mad woman believed she had pleasure enough in store for her
whole life. Her joy was interrupted by the return of her Heralds, who related
there were already arrived six ships, men of war to Astramadan, and he
expected yet fifteen or twenty more, with which he intended to invade her.
Besides (said one of the Heralds) he has charged us to tell your Majesty,
that he will not deal with you as a lawful enemy, but intends to prosecute
you as the murderer of his brother, and put you to the most dreadful torture
and punishment that can enter into the imagination of his hangmen. As for the
stranger Knights defiance, he laughs at it; and sends word that if within
three days he come not to him, he will not fail to meet him here with ten
thousand men. The Queen was so affrighted with these threatenings that she was
like to forgo all her love: she sent for Amintha, and opening to her how her
affairs stood, said, that to enjoy the company of Polexander longer, she was
engaged to lose it for a few days: But (said she) since I have made a vow
never to trust to any ones promise, I will not suffer Polexander to go hence,
till I have good caution for his return: I will therefore keep you here, his
servants, and his ship, for I am certain he cannot get from me whilst I have
you in custody; he may sail to Astramadan in my gally, and for fear that
tyrant may work some treachery against him, I will send along five hundred of
my guard. But Madam (replied Amintha) you show but little love to the Knight in
hazarding him thus. What shall I do (said Tisiphone) with any appearance of
humanity? I know well I thrust Polexander into danger, in sending him so
weakly accompanied. The only remedy I find for this inconvenience is to
break off his voyage, and should I do so, I draw on me all the forces of
Astramadan. Let him therefore set sail as soon as may be, for I desire to have
my mind at rest whatsoever betide me. Amintha went instantly to let our Hero
know those two resolutions of the Queen, and seeing him displeased at them;
Never trouble your self (said she) for any thing, but how you may vanquish the
cruel Astramadan: all the rest will be facile enough, yet I extremely fear
that tyrants perfidiousnesse; so do I (said Polexander) the malice of
Tisiphone. This discourse ended, they went both to the Queen, when Polexander
instantly told her, he only staid for a command to meet her enemy. Go then
presently, quoth the painted Megera: but remember brave Knight that my life
depends only on your valor, and your voyage must bring forth all that ever I
shall enjoy of bliss or extreme misfortune. Polexander took leave of the
woman with a resolution never to see her again, and so went straight to
imbarke himself with his Moors. He made his passage in fifteen hours, and
at sunset was within ken of the high towers which were built for the defense
of Astramadan's port. Diceus, who alone of all our Hero's servants had the
liberty to accompany him, petitioned his master to give leave that he might
land with five or six Moors, and go to Astramadan to sounder his intentions,
and know in what manner he would entertain him. Polexander who thought far
less on the combat he was about then on that he still waged with his
discontent, yielded to Diceus urgent supplication; and delivering the challenge
he had written before he departed from the palace of Tisiphone, commanded him
to stay as short a time as he could with Astramadan. This trusty servant
landed with six Moors, and came quickly toward the place he was sent. As Soon
as he arrived at the port, he was staid, and when they understood whence he
came, was received very civilly and brought to the Prince. He put one knee to
the ground, when he saw the Majesty of him who had been described for one most
barbarous, and without showing either fear or rashness, I belong (said he) to
a Prince whose fame (may be) has attained your ears; the hazards of the sea
casting him on Tisiphone's Island, and finding her under the terror of your
arms, he thought himself obliged to undertake her defense. But to speak
nothing from my self, See (said he, presenting his master's challenge) the
reasons which have brought Polexander to fight with you in your own
territories; and neglect all considerations which might deter him (if I may
say so) from putting himself alone into the hands of a great many enemies.
Astramadan answered not Diceus a word, but taking Polexander's challenge, he
read it with a look that well witnessed his choler, and after made the
messenger this answer. Return to your master, and tell him I will make him
know that he believes naught of Astramadan but what is true: the cause he gives
me to be his enemy, shall not hinder me from allowing him that entertainment
his virtue deserves. To morrow I will attend him in the place I have prepared
for the giving that satisfaction he desires. The only thing I have to
complain of him, is, the facility wherewithal he has been engaged to
defend such crimes as cannot be expiated but by everlasting punishments. Diceus
returned with that answer, and watched all night to put in order his masters
equipage. At day-breake that Prince awoke after many ^bers interrupted with
dreams and strange visions, and called for such arms as sufficiently witnessed
the sad condition of his fortune. They were of an ashy color, and there seen
in many places sparkles which sparting from under the ashes, seemed to
intimate, that they nourished a fire which had no other aliment. Hic shield was
of tempered steel, which perfectly represented that blackish color which is
seen in an extreme deep water. In the midst was painted a Granado casting out
fire on all parts, and these words graven round about it; [Nothing can quench
it.] His horse's harness was of ash-colored velvet, one half of his plume was
of the same hue, and the other like fire. Thus he came into the haven, and
as soon as his horse was landed, he mounted and rid to the place for combat.
He was but a while there when Astramadan came; That Prince clad in armor as
polished as the best crystal glass, made the sunbeams so extremely
reflect, that those which were about him scarce durst hold open their eyes. At
the sound of the trumpets the two combatants parted from one another; but their
meeting again was far otherwise: for Polexander received only a fleight
touch, but his enemy was incountered with so much vigor, that he was feign to
catch hold on his horses mane, or else he had been born over his horses
crupper. Our Hero wondered to meet with so little address and strength in a
personage which had been esteemed almost invincible, but the sequel of the
combat made him believe that Astramadan had put one of his Knights in his
place. On that thought, he scorned to prosecute his victory, and though the
other came up to him very resolutely, he would not almost take the pains to
fight; yet at last to put himself out of trouble, and to learn whereto tended
so little advantageous a super^rie, bore his sword to the face of that weak
enemy, and of two good eyes making but one not worth a straw, tumbled him dead
between his horses feet. Presently he cast his eyes toward a place filled
full with people, as if they had been there either as witnesses of the death or
cunning of Astramadan; but in the same time a new Knight entered the lists, and
calling to our Hero to take heed to himself, threw away his sword, and came
on him with his battle-axe. Polexander thought then that Astramadan had neither
resolved to keep his word with him, nor by the half to make him sensible of
his perfidiousnesse; yet could he not conceive what his reason was to assail
him but with a single man at a time: but wanting time to ruminate on so giddy
an infidelity, he went to encounter that second enemy, and in less then
nothing made him keep company with him that had begun the combat. After that
second came forth a third, then another, after a fifth, and to him two more,
who incomparably more valiant then their companions, held Polexander play above
two hours, and pressed him so near, that if that Demon of valor had not been
produced to surmount all others; we must surely believe that Astramadan had
carried away the victory without fighting. But when the tyrant saw his seventh
champion laid along, he came into the lists, and commanding new lances to be
brought Polexander, came to him on the gallop; Knight (said he at their
meeting) I always thought that a great Prince should never undertake any thing
unworthy his courage and honor: I have therefore always used to make trial
(by some of my Knights) of those with whom I was to encounter. Both the Princes
of Morocco have passed this law; the Prince of Zanhara surnamed the Invincible,
has voluntarily submitted to it, and many others whom I will not name have
returned hence with dishonor, for not observing so reasonable a custom. Of
all those Princes, two only have been thought worthy to be chastis'd by my
arm; thou art the third, and I confess thy valor makes me jealous: and I
believe that when I have overcome thee, it will not be the least act of my
life. Polexander who found this manner of fighting very handsome, could not
choose but smile at it, but his disquiets quickly put him out of that humor; If
(said he to Astramadan) the Knights of other Countries had the invention to put
their enemies to the like trial whereto thou put thine, there would many a
one have fallen in combating, which might else have gone away victorious. When I
shall travel (replied Astramadan) into strange countries to defy such Princes
as command there, I will make no difficulty to accommodate my self to their
customs. Nor do I (said Polexander) make any scruple in putting thine in
practice, but it is fit I should know them before I be obliged to their
observance: nevertheless let us make an end of that which thy Knights have
begun, and let not the inequality which is now between us be the cause of thy
engaging me to new trialls. With that Polexander turned from him, and went to
choose the strongest he could find amongst a great many lances. Astramadan
took an extraordinary great one, and came against his enemy with an
incredible fury. Polexander recollected all his strength, and carried with a
just desire of vengeance, ran against his enemy with all the swiftness his
horse had left him. The lances flew into shivers, Astramadan's pierced his
adversaries shield; But our Hero ran through both his enemies shield and
cuirats, and gave him a great wound on the left side, from whence the tyrant
lost a great deal of blood, but his rage being far more then his pain, he
drew his sword, and with it charged Polexander with such horrible blows, that
at first all he could do was either to ward or avoid them. At last he revenged
himself, and made his Antagonist feel, he could as vigorously make use of his
sword as of his lance. He made his cuirates fly in a thousand pieces, and with
a back-blow (which is not almost imaginable) he not only parted his helmet but
cleft his head in two. The tyrant's death ended not the combat, for though
Polexander were covered with wounds and had scarce force to uphold himself,
yet he was constrained to renew his forces. A woman (all dischevel'd) entered
the lists with a sword in her hand, and inciting every one to fall on our
Hero; Can you endure (my friends, cried she) that the inhumane Tisiphone's
Protector, shall return to her with your and my Lord's head? But should you
prove so cowardly as not to dare revenge him, and so ungrateful as to forget
the benefits you have received, I alone filled with a just resentment, will on,
and enforce from him the soul of this murderer. Those words were so powerful
that all they about the barriers which had weapons flew on Polexander, and not
caring for death forced him at last to yield to their number. Diceus gave then
a great proof of his wonted fidelity: he fought till he was so wounded, that
he came and fell for dead at his masters feet. The multitude was not contented
with that revenge, but being on a further prosecution, saw themselves assailed
by diverse troops which came from the seaside, which flew with fire and sword
through all the streets of the city. Those that abode in the field were
slain, and the rest which had retired themselves into some advantageous
places, after a little resistance ran the same fortune. The ships in the haven
were burnt, and the town almost wholly on a fire: the flame for the whole
night made a new day, the better to discover the run-awayes to the cruel
prosecution of the vanquisher. This succor a little too late for Polexander,
was conducted by Tisiphone her self: Love causing in that Fury, what cruelty
had done in other times. She put to sea presently after Polexander, and with
such forces as she had ready, followed him, either to make use of his victory
if he overcame, or not to over-live him if he were slain. She landed from her
ship by the light of the burning town, and understanding how great a massacre
her men had made on those of Astramadan; she called before her some Inhabitants
of the Island, which had escaped the Soldiers fury, and questioned what was
become of their Prince and the Knight who fought with him. They answered, that
Polexander after he had slain seven Knights belonging to Astramadan, and their
master to boot, had been assaulted by that Prince's guard, and slain after an
incredible resistance. No sooner did Tisiphone hear this news, but she caused
those poor innocents to be taken, and their throats cut before her: that cruel
execution satisfied not her fury; she hastened to the place of combat, and
commanded her Soldiers to respect neither sex nor age, Palace nor Temple.
Whilst those barbarous people with a great deal of pleasure executed so
horrible a command, Tisiphone sought every where for our Hero, but he was not
there where she thought to have found him. Some little while after Diceus was
fallen (as dead) at his masters feet, he came to himself, and though he were
exceedingly wounded, his affection yet gave him, if not strength enough, at
least courage sufficient to surmount his misfortune, and endeavor to serve the
King his master. He at first sight knew him by his arms, and plucking him out
from many bodies which in dying were fallen on him, did all his art had learned
him, to see if there were any life left in him; for Polexander throwing forth
weak fighes, and now and then groaning, made him conjecture he was yet in case
to be assisted. Presently he took on the very place some of the earth,
mollified by the quantity of blood which had been there shed, and clapped it on
his masters wounds. After he saw he was come to himself, Sir (said he) it is
not enough that you live, but (if possible it may be) we must work so that
your enemies know not of it: try therefore to get hence, whilst the tumult,
the night and distraction, gives you some means to escape. Polexander (who
knew no more then Diceus of Tisiphone's arrival) thought there was no other
fit means for his safety then what Diceus had propounded: To make use of it, he
quitted the remainder of his armor, and covering himself with certain
skins which he found on some of those he had slain, (with a great deal of
pain) followed Diceus. At every foot, he asked who had set Astramadan's city
on fire: Diceus (who thought on nothing but how to save his master) answered he
knew not; and so slincking from the light as much as he could, passed through
diverse companies of men without any the least stay. At last he got out of the
inflamed town, but taking a way clean contrary to that of the haven, he led
Polexander two or three hours through narrow paths that lay between two
little hills. The loss of blood constrained the Prince through weakness to
lay him down, and he had infallibly fallen again into another swoune, if
Diceus had not given him some grains of an exceeding cordial composition.
That faithful servant thinking his master could be in no safety whilst he
was in the power of those traitors that had so unworthily wronged him, went
along the shore to see whether he were far from the haven. He had not gone
above fifty paces but he met with a pretty broad River, which rolling down
headlong from the top of the hill into the sea, stopped his further passage.
This obstacle would have almost made him desperate, but that he instantly spied
(through the dark) a little boat made fast near the bank of the torrent;
into it he went, and finding there five or six oars, thought it not best to
neglect a convenience which was (as it were) miraculously offered him. Back
therefore went he to Polexander, and intimating to him that extreme
misfortunes ask the like remedies: Your good hap (said he) should it bring you
from hence to the Canaries in a simple boat, will have wrought no greater
miracle then it has done in preserving your life, after the receiving so many
wounds, and among so many enemies. Never then deliberate, (I beseech you) and
betide what may, give not to the most perfidious of men, time to perfect their
revenge. Polexander arising with a great deal of pain, Come (said he to
Diceus) let us go since thou will have it so, and bestow on the sea that body
which thou deniest the earth. Without any more words he went on, and having no
other arms then his sword, came to the rivers side, where entering the boat
(by the help of his trusty servant) and cutting the rope that fastened it, the
impetuousnesse of the stream bore him far off into the sea with an extreme
swiftness. At the same time, Tis^phone, equally transported with grief and
choler for the loss of that Prince, and intending to avenge it to the utmost,
came to the place of combat; she was attended by Amintha, Alcippus, and other
of our Hero's servants; and as if the flame of so many houses had not (to her
wish) cast light enough for her searching, she caused a great many torches to
belighted, that she might not mistake, but at last find Polexander either
alive or dead. Being come to the place where the slaughter had been greatest,
she her self turned and removed a great many bodies, and finding not that of,
her Protector, began an incredible lamentation. In the mean while, Alcippus,
who with a torch in his hand searched more narrowly then she, came to the
place from whence Polexander was newly gone, and knowing his armor, cried out,
that he was certainly dead. His light fell out of his hands, and lifting them
aloft, O Heaven! (cried he) jealous of extraordinary virtue, have thou
permitted an infamous rout to extinguish by an obscure death the bravest life
of the world? With that he turned to Tisiphone, and presenting her his tasses,
and one of Polexanders gantlets, See (said he) all that you shall find
remaining of that Prince whom you have delivered into the hands and to the
mercy of these murderers. Tisiph one going out of one fury that had some
bounds, to another which had none at all; took Polexanders gantlet, and
presenting it to the dead, as if they had been in case to hear her, Villains
(cried she) who for these many years have been the authors of my afflictions,
what have you done with Polexander after you had killed him? Shall I not have
the comfort to enjoy him dead, since it was denied me living? Seek (said she,
turning to Amintha and Alcippus) seek, ye faithful servants of that
unfortunate Prince, and if ye cannot find his body, at least find me his
sword. What! you hearken to me, but assist me not, and instead of prosecuting
your search, content your selves with unprofitable tears and lamentations.
With that she cast her self on the ground, and besmearing her hands and
clothes in removing many bodies drowned in their blood; continued till almost
daybreak that horrible exercise. At last she found out Astramadan, and her
hatred (all goary as he was) making her know him, she seemed to be infinitely
joy'd at that encounter: instantly she began extremely to rail on him, and
finding a sword cut off his ears and his nose; and the enraged woman (not to
be satiated at halfes) commanded two of her Moors to strip the wretched
Prince, and as soon as he was naked, she ran the sword into his body, and
rending his breast, and tearing out his heart, Accursed heart (cried she) how
unfortunate am I, that thou art no more capable of suffering. How glad should I
be could thou revive again, and become sensible, that thou might feel
the extremity of my hatred and torments! but as dead as thou art, I must tear
thee in pieces, and taste at least the shadow of that pleasure I had enjoyed in
eating thee alive. To it, Tisiphone, glut thy self with this accursed heart;
avenge thee as much as thou can, since thou can not as much as thou
would: and intermingling love, hatred, despair, revenge and death together,
give succeding times a prodigious example what a woman can do, when she is as
hardy as she is unfortunate. With these words the enraged woman gnawed off and
swallowed a piece of Astramadan's heart; and whether that dismal morsel
choked her, or (as it is most likely) the excess of her fury discomposed all
that order of nature which preserves life, so it was that she fell stark dead
at Amintha's feet, and freed her age of a monster which had made Heaven accused
of Injustice, had she not been punished by an exemplary chastisement. Amintha,
Alcippus, and others of Polexander servants, being delivered from that woman's
tyranny, thought of nothing but on what they had lost: Dead Polexander was the
only object which became master of their thought. They invited one another to
weep and bewail him, and to preserve his memory for ever among them, made a
vow to keep more charily then their lives, the relics that were left of him.
Amintha took the gantlet which Tisiphone let fall in dying, Alcippus his
helmet, and distributed the other pieces of his Princes armor to his most
affectionate servants: which done, he erected a pillar in the midst of that
fatal place, and fastening to it Astramadan's armor, all broken as it was;
took a great shield which he found all whole on the ground, and writ thereon
with blood these words following: Polexander for the eternal memory of his
Victory, and Astramadan's Treachery, in the midst of this by fire consumed
Town, has here fixed his Enemy's Arms which he lost with his life.

This Trophie being erected, Amintha and Alcippus returned to the port, and
imbarking themselves in our Hero's vessel, thought of nothing more then how
to accomplish the vow they had made to eternize the lamentation for his death.
But he (in the mean time) laid along in his boat without any more strength
then what might suffice him to undergo his many wounds, was rowed on by the
weak arms of Diceus, or rather by fortune, who desirous to belie those who
accused her of that Prince's death, employed all her endeavors to preserve his
life. His boat made mighty quick way, whilst it was carried by the violent
swiftness of the torrent; but when that impetuousnesse was lost in the bosom
of the Ocean; Diceus perceived he had not strength enough to handle the oars,
and imagining straight he had lost his master in striving to save him, did so
vively resent it, that the most of his wounds opened again, and he the second
time fell for dead at his masters feet. The Prince believed he was so indeed,
and bestowing on him some tears as the last tokens of his affection: Go
Diceus, (said he) go to thine eternal rest; and if Fidelity as the most
necessary virtue, is the most worthily recompensed, take thy place among the
highest thrones which Eternity reserves for the truly blessed; I shall soon
follow thee, and restore (if I dare hope it from the mercy of Heaven) the
prsence of that master whom thou have always so extremely loved. After he had
spoke thus, he stood some time without losing his sight and yet not seeing any
thing; but by little and little growing weaker, it seemed to him as if a thick
cloud took all light from him. Then indeed 'twas he thought he should die, and
that the judgments of heaven laying before him the vanities of his youth, as
so many causes of his condemnation, and the ill employments in which he had
exercised his life; he fell to his oraizons. After which he left all
knowledge, and lay a long while be twixt dead and alive. In which time his boat
carried by the waves out of sight of the desolate Island, floated almost two
days at the will of the the wind, which having no less care of him then it
would for a nest of Halcions, brought them happily to an Isle, where Polexander
and Diceus recovered again that life which they had more then half lost.
Truly that succor betided them, whence with reason they could not expect any,
and heaven permits it, to teach us, that sooner or later a good action shall
have a due recompense. In the very place where Polexander's boat arrived, there
lay a ship at anchor which had been but ill handled by the late tempests; the
masts were broken, the rudder torn off, and the body. open in many places: at
sight of our Hero's boat, a great many men very fantastically clad came on the
hatches, and some of them getting into a little skiffe, came close to it. They
no sooner saw Polexander, and Diceus stretched out, as dead, but their
commiseration made them resolve, either to relieve them if they were alive, or
if not, to bestow the last dues on their corpse. One lay down close by our
Hero, and lifting up his head, did not only wash his face with the seawater,
but holding his mouth close to the Princes, perceived he had yet a little
breathing. If his joy w^e great, his charity was a great deal more, for
instantly he gave him of a drug whose virtue was so powerful and speedy, that
he no sooner (almost) had it in his mouth, but his weak senses regained part of
their ordinary vigor. Diceus had no need of that remedy, for his own strength
o'recame his long swouning, and as he was talking, and about to ask the King
his master, if he were yet alive, he prevented him; and speaking (without
opening his eyes) Is it thy voice I hear Diceus? (said he weakly) tell me; and
come nearer to thy Polexander, who as well as thee, is now no more then a
shadow, wandering for his offenses in eternal obscurity. Polexander's voice
so astonished the man who so charitably assisisted him, that he gave a great
exclamation, and diverse times repeared the name of Polexander. When he had
done, he arose, and earnestly gazing on our Hero, began to cry out louder then
before, and with gestures which showed the extremity of his admiration, Come
(said he, to his companions) and see, this is certainly Polexander. O what a
happy shipwreck have we made! since it has cast us on a place where we meet
with him whom we had vainly sought for in all the world else. But what said I?
rather O unfortunate encounter, since we find this great Prince in so
different a state from that wherein our master the Ynca imagined we should see
him! Polexander was too weak to reply, and Diceus too languishing to
understand them well; they opened their eyes together, but 'twas rather to take
their leaves of light then to enjoy it; and certainly it had been so without
the extraordinary assistance of those charitable strangers. For five or six
days together they watched the master and his servant, and treated them with
so much affection, that forgetting what they owed themselves, they thought not
of repairing their ship. In that while, Polexander began to be well
strengthened, and knew who had saved his life: But 'twas not without a great
deal of wonder; Is it possible (said he to one of them) that you are Garruca?
The same, (replied that charitable friend) doubt it not; and to bring you news
from your dear Zelmatida I have thrice crossed the Ocean. Polexander embraced
him, and rendering many thanks for the travells he had undergone for his sake;
Zelmatida then (said he) has at last carried away the victory over what he so
long contested? My Lord (replied Garruca) knowing the generousnesse of your
soul, and her contempt of the worlds greatness, I ask not what victory you
mean: but Zelmatida is fully victorious, and though he be not seated in the
throne of the Yncas, and the brutish ambition of Atabaliba threatens him with
lasting war and horrible revolutions; yet I may well say, he is fully a
conqueror, since the incomparable virtue of Izatida has worthily recompensed
the travels of that incomparable Lover. If thou desire I should live (said
Polexander) my dear Garruca, if thou would (in the midst of my afflictions)
make me capable of any contentment, I entreat thee to relate the end of thy
masters miseries. Without much trouble (quoth Garruca) I obey, since to
express a happiness so long sought for so many years, and for which, so long
and so violent miseries have been endured, there needs but two or three words.
You may therefore be fully satisfied when I have said, the Ynca my master is
the Princess Xaira's husband. Manage a little better my joy, said Polexander,
and do not thus precipitate my contentment, but let me receive by little and
little a potion that may free me from the sense of all my afflictions. Call to
mind the Island where Zelmatida and my self parted, and keep him not twenty
or thirty days at sea before he speaks with Izatida: Say they came to
Quasmes with all necessary circumstances, satisfy the desire I have of the
parents and daughters knowing each other. And lest thou mai'st ancipitate my
imagination, bring me ere I be aware to that happy day, wherein, by the loss
of Izatida, I may see the fatal Xaira borne again. I will, (said Garruca)
since it is your pleasure and command, to give you satisfaction, replied
Garruca: but first be pleased I give you my Kings letters, and let you know how
the good Quasmes resents so many favors vvherewithall you have eternally
obliged himself, his son, and his daughter. With that Garruca went to his
cabin (by Polexanders leave) and returned with a little box made very
artificially of four wonderful great Emeralds: he opened and presented it to
Polexander, who took out eight or ten little plates of gold, which being put
one on another, showed them diverse characters, which signified this that
follows.

Quasmes the unworthy Image of that Deity he knows not, to Polexander
enlightened by the everlasting Sun.
IF I durst do it without blasphemy, I would call thee (great Prince) the
tutelary Angel of my estates, my kingdom, and my self. Thou have all alike
preserved us, and my old age should have been more unfortunate then ever, if
thy goodness had not taken pity on my afflictions, and thy charitable hands
wiped off tears, in drying the source which seemed to make them eternal. My
poor Xaira, without thy assistance, had been more lost to her desolate father,
then she was in the very dungeons of Montezuma: I confess I owe thee for her,
and if I chance to live in my posterity, I must withal acknowledge thee to be
the cause of my second being. I am transported with a sacred rapture as often
as my dear Zelmatida unfolds to me the mysteries thou have revealed to him; and
tells me that our souls shall one day be more resplendent stars then those
which make their nightly geers over our heads. What can I render to thee, O
thou dear child of heaven, for such things as inforceth us to respect our
gold, our pearls and emeralds, as the excrements of the unfortunate land we
inhabit? Nothing certainly since in enjoying the knowledge of the true Deity,
thou have the sole treasure which all mortals can wish for: It Is thy part
therefore to continue thy liberalities, and not expect from our acknowledgement
but a just and insatiable desire of daily receiving more. Garruca whom we send
to thee, to make thee partaker of our common joys, is particularly commanded
to receive thy instructions, touching the vvonderfull effects of love, of that
Deity thou have made known to us; ^ch him (if it please thee) those truths so
much importing our happiness, and make him comprehend for what cause that
eternal Monarch would put himself in the place of his enemies, to deliver
them from those punishments to which they were by him justly condemned.

After Polexander had read this letter, he cast forth many pious ejaculations;
and in the mean while Garruca put up the little plates into their box, and
delivering it to the Prince, gave him withal Zelmatida's and Xaira's letters,
very neatly written in vellam. He opened the King's, and read this.

Zelmatida Successor of the Yncas, to Polexander, the greatest of the Croseat
Princes.
IF my happiness had depended on any thing else then the enjoying of Izatida,
I would have staid till time had seated me in the throne of my forefathers, to
have made known to you that I am perfectly fortunate: but since (without
yielding ought to my affection) I am certain, that the great Empire of
^inacapa cannot be to ^e but a great hinderance, I will not say a great
misfortune; should I not be injurious to Izatid^'s virtue, if I were no more,
without assuring you that there wants nothing to make me perfectly happy? I
will say it boldly Polexander, and the rather because I have daily ^ew
assurances, that imagination represent^ to us contentments infinitely below
their realitie: mine have gone beyond my hopes and thoughts, and leave on my
hands neither trouble nor care, but what arises from my inabilitie of
representing them as they are resented. I hope time will give me eloquence
sufficient to express them: in the mean while, I wish you were well skild in
so sweet and pleasing a language, and that the enjoying Alcidiana had taught
you all the graces and ornaments of it.

POlexander sighed often whilst he read the letter, and was pleased to
witness by that sad language that he was as yet ignorant of Zelmatida's. He
put up his letter again into a little box of diamonds which served as for a
coverture; and took that of the Princess Xaira, which spoke thus.

Xaira to her Benefactor POLEXANDER.
AFter the letters of the King my father, and my Lord Zel^ida, I should have
nothing left to write, if your obligations wherein I am (...) did not furnish
me with such thoughts as neither of them could conceive. I (...) therefore tell
you, that as the contentments which each of them ^aste apart, are only re^ted
in me; so the resentment of your favors which is divid^ betwixt them, is
altogether entirely treasured in my soul. One of them contemplates you (...)
d^liverer of his daughter, and the other as the preserver of hi^ wife: but I
consider you as a (...) Angel, by whose assistance, with the sight of my body,
I have recovered the eyes of my soul; and with a most worthy husband, a
father, whose like the world contains not. These truly are extreme
obligations, I yet desire their (...); and to obtain it, I join my humble
requests with the entreaties of the King ^y father, and the Prince my lord, and
beseech you with them, that you will perfect the discovery to us of those
light^ by which you have begun to draw us out of that darkness wherein we
languished with the rest of our world.

POlexander put off the answering those letters to another time, and admiring
no less the piety then the affection of those truly royal minds: it had
been very hard (said he to Garruca) if that persons of so eminent a virtue
should have less solid contentments then those they now enjoy. The Deity whom
they love and seek with so much fervencie, should not be what he ought to be
eternally, if after the trial of their constancies by so many adversities they
had not been crowned with all kind of gifts and consolations. Garruca being
very glad that this discourse led him out of it self to that which was the
most important of his Embassy, told Polexander that his Kings seemed to be
ordained by Heaven to drive all Idolatry out of the new world, and do that by
their piety and good examples, what the Spaniards vainly pretended by their
cruellties and tyranny. I shall with a great deal of joy (said Polexander) give
satisfaction to Quasmes in what he desires from me, and we will not part, till
I have not only given you instructions, but withal Doctors, that shall attend
you into the new world, for the perfection of so pious a work. Thus ended
their converse for that time, and Zelmatida's last adventures were put off to
the next convenience. Two or three days passed, during which, our Hero
variously perplexed with his adverse fortune, was not capable of any diversion?
he besought a hundred times in the day for an end of his miseries; and
addressing himself to Heaven, I acknowledge (said he) I do too stubbornely
persist against the will of the infinite Wisdom; I search after a happiness
is forbidden me, and forsake what I am commanded to follow: Change my intention
if it be absolutely ill; but 'twill be more easy to exterminate the offender
then rout out the crime. After this petition he resigned himself wholly to
that Providence which at once he invoak'd to his succor and destruction, and
promising an indifferency whereof he was incapable, was a few moments as
insensible of that excess of love he bore to Alcidiana.

The end of the second Book of the fourth Part of Polexander.
THE FOURTH PART OF POLEXANDER. The third Book.
IMperious Reason, thou have more boldness then hope, when thou promisest thy
self to govern absolutely over such powerful rebels as the body raises
against thee* I could not refrain from this exclamation, considering the high
resolutions which the superior part of the soul made our Hero take on, and
the secret repentance which that revolted slave, (I would say sense) made him
presently conceive for it. Indeed Polexander had no sooner submitted his love
to be ruled by reason, but he thought he had committed an offense that merited
more torments then he had suffered; and by a sacrilegious vow, disengaged
himself from another which he acknowledged most equitable. Hereupon, he threw
himself again into his grief and impatiencie, and rather wished to perish,
then to fail of that duty which he thought was owing to the incomparable
beauty of Alcidiana. My voyage (said he to himself) is no more in my own
disposition; he which drew me out of the haven, has shut up the entrance
against me for ever. I must yield to my Fate of necessity, and (without fear
of storms or hope of calmes) perfect that voyage which through it I have
undertaken. I know, that this fearfulness which they call Reason, would feign
by its specious considerations rob me of my desire, as well as it has done of
my hope. But her counsel is too weak to be hearkened to; and the pearlesse
Alcidiana should not be what she is, if Reason or Fortune could oppose her
resolutions. Though Polexander began this Soliloquy with the same temper he
showed in his other loose talkings, yet at last he grew into such a passion,
that forgetting his wounds and the place where he was, he spoke so loud, that
Garruca and Diceus heard the five or six last words. They both thought he
slept, and being troubled with some strange dream, deemed it fitting to put
him out of that vexation. They came therefore to his bed, but finding him
awake, and at quiet, they only asked him of his health. It Is too good (replied
Polexander) for such a wretch as I am, and 'twill be long of you (speaking to
Garruea) if it be not far better. For you cannot relate to me the happiness
of the King your Master, but instantly our perfect amity makes me resent it,
and by consequence brings a great deal of ease and comfort to my pain and
sadness. Garruca, unwilling to be solicited for a debt which he should already
have acquitted: Would to heaven (said he to Polexander) that friendship were
able to work the like miracles which are attributed to the imagination! I
should then see you freed from some part of your affliction, and (without
wearing out your days in the discovery of an Island that flies from you) you
should enjoy Alcidiana, out of the very joy you would conceive in seeing my
Lord the Y^ca in possession of his Izatida. But though so great a happiness
cannot be expected from the relation I am to make you, yet I will not desist;
but believe I have done well, if I cannot make you sensible of any pleasure, I
may (at least for some short while) make a diversion, or work in you some
insensibility of your misfortunes. After this preamble, Garruca, a while
meditating on what he had to say, (by the express command of Polexander) sat
down, and thus began the recital of his Master's last adventures. As Soon as
Zelmatida was recollected from that grief your separation had wrought in him,
and from that excessive joy, caused by Izatida's company and her perfect
health; he strove to make his happiness of a long date, and to obtain from
the Princess, that she would confirm in private those promises she had made
him in your presence. But she stopped my Master in the very beginning of his
speech, and forbidding him with a sweet severity to doubt of her word, Do not
imagine (said she) that to comply with any other, or for any bodies sake else I
have yielded to what has past in the Island we came from. I have done it,
Zelmatida, because I saw it was your desire, and thought I was bound to it,
because I have found you exceeding discreet and very reasonable. Let time then
agitate, and without disquiet and unjust longings, ask not the accomplishing
of what was promised you, but when you see those things effected which ought to
precede it. I should (replied Zelmatida) be capable of that transcendent
wisdom, since your example gives me daily new lessons, but whether I have not
sufficient apprehension to conceive them, or too much weakness to put them in
practice, I confess, Izatida, I cannot attain to that perfection, nor
absolutely enough put off man, to see what is most glorious and fair in the
world, and yet not desire it. Take heed you discover not your self (said
Izatida) and speak more of it then you would willingly have me know. If those
desires of which you speak are tokens of our love, they are so but as the
violent fits of a fever are signs of life. Cure your affection, (if you will
take my counsel) purge it of these irregularities, and be certain, that when
we cover any thing with so much fervency, we rather love our own content,
then the person from whom we expect it. Those judicious corrections prevailed
so much with my Lord the Ynca, that he presently suppressed all those secret
enemies which his sense armed against his reason; and so unwound himself from
what was man, and the matter, that his love became altogether intellectual;
and contented with the delights of apprehension, desired not any more those of
enjoying. Izatida thereby knew how true, and extraordinary an Empire she had
acquired over a spirit so high and so humble. She took so great a content in
it as sweetened the most bitterness of her fortune, and said often to her
self, that she had been ungrateful, had she not inclined to the affection of
so respectfull and constant a lover. In these pleasing thoughts they both
continued during the voyage, and though many tempests crossed it, yet, I may
say, they enjoyed a continual calm. Only our mariners felt the incommodities
of the sea, who would have refreshed themselves in the Island of Cuba, and
already had left their Southerly course to attain it, when Zelmatida, to whom
all delay was insupportable, made them stick to their old steerage, and whilst
they had a favorable wind, cross those large extents which divide the
Islands lately discovered by the Spaniards, from the continent of the new
world. The end of this voyage was more irksome and tedious then the beginning,
for we were almost as long again in passing from the Isle of Haity to the
Kingdom of Quasmez, as we had been in sailing from Cape Verd to the Ken of
that Island. After a great deal of trouble we entered the fairest port can be
found again in either the one or the other sea, and gave thanks to heaven for
our happy success in the voyage. As Soon as Zelmatida was landed, he discri'd
a company of Indians, who with bows and arrows in their hands, dragged very
rudely three prisoners, and it seemed they were bringing them to their
execution. He went to meet them, and at first afrighting the troop with the
strangeness of his habit and arms, he resetled them straight by speaking
their language, and declaring his name and parentage. Those poor people,
ravished with so good a news, cast out such a cry, and used such actions as
were as barbarous as themselves; and one among them, thinking to testify his
affection to the Prince with a club, beat out the brains of the youngest of the
three prisoners. Zelmatida reprehended him for his inhumanity; but with that
sweetness which should be used in correcting those that offend through
ignorance; and asked the rest where they had taken those slaves. Cacique, (said
the eldest) look on them well, and thou will know who they are. They have left
Montezuma's Army, who makes war with thy father, and are come hither to
learn the passages of our Mountains, for the utter ruin of thy Estate. My
Lord the Y^a understanding this, was desirous to know more, and to that end
took the Mexicans (with the consent of those that had taken them) and presently
brought them to Izatida. See here (said he) Montezuma's Spies, which have been
taken by your fathers Subjects. Izatida was glad of this encounter, and to
satisfy her curiosity, asked them the state of affairs in Mexico. One of
these Spies casting himself at the Princess feet, If (said he) my memory and
mine eyes deceive me not, you are the fatal Virgin whom Montezuma has lost;
and whose loss (if our Prophets speak true) will be seconded by that of all
Mexico. But why call I in doubt so true a verity? Certainly you are Izatida.
The Princess questioning who he was and where he had seen her, the prisoner
replied, He was a Mexican, of an illustrious family, called Belizco, and had
borne arms in all Montezuma's wars, either against Quasmez, the Kings of
Tlaxcallan, of Panuco, or other neighboring nations. For her self, he had had
the honor to see her often in the Court of Mexico. Izatida, taking him at that
word, entreated to know what Montezuma and Hismelita had done since her
departure, and whether any of them which were employed for her destruction,
were returned to Mexico. I shall not (said Telizco) inform you of all you
would know; but I can say, that the King and Queen believe you are certainly
dead, and that belief has grieved and so much afflicted them, that if their
Priests had not staid their fury, they by some horrid death would have
prevented those miseries wherewithal your loss threatened them. Montezuma who
is far less violent then the Queen his wife, and believes far more in the
providence of his gods, disposed himself by little and little to what their
irrevocable destiny had resolved, should become of him. He feared the thunder
was to fall on his head, but he left not to lift up his eyes, nor to respect
the place from whence it was to come. He spent almost his whole days and
nights in the Temples, and as often as I had the honor to wait on him there,
I noted, how (after his sacrifices) addressing himself to the chiefest of the
Deities, he spoke thus: Thine eyes which penetrate even to the heart, have seen
with what an intention I took out of the arms of my brother Quasmez, the only
fruit of his marriage, and the sweet consolation of his old years. Thy
Prophets have told me many a time, that the safety of my people and mine own
should be secured, when I made the son of a Virgin reign with me, which should
be the delight and hope of Quasmez. I therefore took away his daughter, and did
it to conform my self to thy behest. If I have offended in it, thou art the
Author of my crime. Justify me then my Deity, before all my subjects; testify
that I am not guilty of those tears which Izatida has shed, nor of that
cruel death which Hismelita's wicked Counselors have made her suffer.
Hismelita (said he) had thoughts far differing from these, she believed that
in bearing down the Images of her Gods, she should overthrow their power; and
going further, she persuaded her self that she should divert the miseries she
feared, in proclaiming abroad there were no Gods at all. Whilst she strove to
beguile her subjects by her impieties, she attempted all kind of means to
hinder the effecting of her Prophets predictions: she put to death all such as
by birthright or love of the Mexicans might ascend the throne; she kept four
or five great. Armies on foot, to the end, that by busying the Kings her
neighbors in defense of their own countries, they might neither have will nor
power to fall on Mexico. But for as much as she saw amongst all those Kings
none so much to be feared as the King your father, she has turned her
principal forces against him; and whilst her husband plays the Priest and the
woman, she acts the General of the Army, and leads her own troops. Twice
already has she cometo handy-stroakes with Quasmes, and made a vow at her
entrance into his kingdom, never to lay down her arms till she had conquered
it. This is a part of what you would know; for that which concerns my self,
your subjects have told you the truth. I came with a hundred of my companions
to discover the passages of the mountains, and see if possibly I could slip in
some troops there: last night we were descri'd, and taken in the traps laid
for us by the inhabitants of the mountains. My companions are slain, and so
had my brother and my self, if the generous Zelmatida had not taken us out of
the hands of our enemies. Izatida, unwilling and not able to do them hurt that
had an intention to do it her, entreated Zelmatida to give the two Mexicans
their lives, which obtaining, she sent them to be refreshed and resetled
amongst our servants and mariners. Zelmatida in the mean while accepting the
glorious occasion that Hismalita's war presented to his courage, as a new
gratification from fortune, entreated Izatida to cross the mountains, and
undergo the incommodities of a way which would bring her into the arms of the
King her father, You may imagine whether she took time to resolve on that
journey; certainly if they would have been ruled by her, they had presently
quit the ship; but her safety was too dear to Zelmatida, to be put in hazard
among so many enemies as were ranging in the country: he intended therefore to
march somewhat strong for the avoiding of mishaps, and therefore landed with
the most of his servants. Some twelve or fifteen of them he sent about the
villages at hand to make known his return, and gathered as much force as they
could. Every one with a great deal of joy made ready for the journey; M^ ^care
master promised to himself to do so many valorous actions, as should blot out
the memory of his predecessors; and all we that were with him, wished for
nothing else then to be at blows with our enemies. We had yet left us eight
of those horses you gave my master, and we were all so well armed, that each of
us might without rashness undertake a hundred Mexicans. I caused our horses to
be landed, to refresh and easethem after their ill usage at sea, and make them
able within a few days to do us service. Zelmatida in the mean while
courteously welcomed such as at the first news of his return quitted their
abodes to come to him; and indeed the love which all those poor savages bore
him was so great, that the very women followed their husbands to the wars, and
the most decrepit old men would not be dispensed withal. In less then
fifteen days the Prince had seven or eight thousand men, so resolved to
fight, as if every particular man had taken arms for his own interest. He did
with these new soldiers, what he had in former time done with the Mexicans: he
taught them to keep their ranks to fight, and to relieve one another; and
having made them capable of discipline sufficiently reasonable for them, he
entreated Izatida to begin her journey. Some two hundred of the youngest
amongst his Soldiers he selected, and giving the charge of them to Bereamis,
who was very well armed and mounted, sent them before to accommodate the worst
ways, take notice of the fittest places for lodging, and serve for
Avant-Courieers to the army. At break of day Bereamis set on; my Lord the
Ynca commanded me to march five or six hours after, and himself followed me
far enough off, to accompany the Princess, Mexiqua, which he caused to be
carried in covered chaires. The first days journey was not long; Zelmatida was
contented, he was entered the mountains, and made seen when it came to
bedtime, how ingenious lovers are, when there is question of accommodating
their Mistresses. He had privately made many little cabbins of wood, which with
a great deal of facility being to be set up and taken down might be as
easily carried. That which was appointed for Izatida, was pight in a place as
pleasant as the sharpness of the mountains would permit it: the outside was
weather-proof against the most boisterous temper of that climate, and within so
rich and well furnished, that the chamber wherein Bajazet and Zelmatida first
saw one another, was but a foil to it. We marched near ten days along
fearful precipices, though we had to go not above twelve or fifteen of your
leagues: At last we came out of those frightfull solitudes, and descride at
foot of the mountains two armies, which joining at the very time we were in
sight of them, made us conjecture they had expected us to have some judge or
witness of their combat. Zelmatida after he had caused the Princesses chamber
to be set up, left me (with a thousand men) for her guard; and told me at his
departure, that his good or ill fortune depended not on what he was going
about, but in that treasure which he entrusted to my courage and affection.
Your enemies (I replied) will not be so hardy to set on us in places so
advantageous on our side; but if by chance they undertake it, assure your self
we will perish all, one after another ere they come any thing near the
Princess. Zelmatida, thereupon mounted on that brave courser (Alzan) which you
gave him in the Isle of Teneriffe, and all covered with his guilt armor,
descended with his troops from the top of the mountain into those large
plains which the combatants had chosen where to fight their battle. There was
(at his coming) such a general affright to see him in that equipage, that he
was taken for some strange monster by both the armies; but his servants making
the name of Zelmatida to resound again through all the vale, so inspired with
courage Quasmes troops, and so absolutely quail'd it in Hismelita's that the
one half of them fled, and the other let themselves pass the edge of the
sword, rather then to abandon and leave their Queen to the mercy of her
enemies. Our soldiers at last enclosed her, and more then a thousand arrows
aimed at her, were about to avenge as many innocents which she had oppressed,
and to punish her for no fewer crimes. When Zelmatida staid that cruel
execution, he took off his helmet, and addressing himself to the chief
officers of Quasmes army, My friends (said he) be not carried away by your
first thoughts, nor blemish the glory you have lately acquired by the death of
a woman, and a woman that begs her life of you. This remonstrance wrought
somewhat, but not enough to stop the general fury and hatred; the Ynca (my
master) took notice of it, and presently thought, that to save Hismelita there
was no way, but to make a show of ill-treating her: Hereupon he caused her to
be taken by Bereamis, and command him (aloud) to guard her so well, that she
might not escape that punishment which her wickedness had deserved. In the
mean time, the battle being fully gotten, and of so many thousand Mexicans not
one appearing, who was not either dead or a prisoner; Zelmatida thought on
Quasmes, and asked for him of some Caciques his tributaries; who told him that
having been for six months together in the army, in such incommodities as his
age could not endure he was fallen ficke, and enforced to be carried to a palace
some two leagues from the camp. Presently the Prince sent away the young
Cacique Procoros, to let him know of his victory and return; himself in the
mean while went to Izatida, to be the messenger of his own good fortune: in
few words he made known that days success, and when he related to her the
lamentable condition of Hismelita, he perceived that sweet natured Princess to
shed tears, and could not without grief hear the misery of her enemy.
Zelmatida seeing her resentment, commanded me to take care of the unfortunate
woman, and to treat her according to the greatness of her condition: I
confess that employment had not been very welcome, but that the commands of
my Lord the Ynca were always dear unto me. But I was quickly freed from that
guard, for the next day receiving order to conduct Hismelita to Quasmes castle;
when she was before the King, she perceived Zelmatida and Izatida whom he held
by the hands; at which sight, breaking the silence she had hitherto kept, Base
cheaters, (cried she) traitors, who have abused me with your lying promises;
must I then before the end of my days feel greater miseries then those your
impostures seemed to threaten me withal? You have resolved then that these two
plagues so fatal to Mexico, accomplish that cruel destiny for which you
brought them into the world? Could neither iron nor poison, nor the fury of
man, nor of the elements, deliver me from these subverters of mine Empire? And
is my fortune come to that point it ought, that I must live a slave to those
tyrants which have plucked me from my throne? No, no, fierce and not to be
reconciled enemies, unpitifull gods, you shall triumph no more over Hismelita:
she defies all your unjust power, she contemnes your thunder, and knowing well,
that with the loss of life, we lose the vain terror of your names, she will
not be so cowardly and base to preserve that which maintain your tyranny.
Quasmes affrighted at that monster's blasphemy, lifted his eyes and hands to
heaven, to turn away the thunder that wicked woman had deserved: Zelmatida
approaching, entreated her to disbeguile her mind of all such errors, where
into her false Prophets had plunged her, and to believe that neither Quasmes
nor the Princess had any design on her estates or her life. Izatida added to
those remonstrances her tears and supplications, called Hismelita her Lady and
mother; and embracing her, besought her to be consolated and to live. But that
eternal Justice which abandons all obdurate offenders to fury and despair,
would not have that Queens impiety remain unpunished: in lieu of being moved
with the goodness of our two lovers, her rage increased by it; she thrust
Izatida (with all her force) against Quasmes; and (said she) go thou unluckie
maid, go, and in the arms of thy father enjoy my cares and watchings, with
all the troubles thy infancy brought on me: with that the desperate woman
snatching an arrow from one of the guard, stroke her self to the heart before
any that were by could hinder her. At these words, Polexander interrupting
Garruca, You have been so hasty (said he) to be rid of your prisoner, that you
have forgotten one of the best pieces of your narration; I mean the first
interview of the father and the daughter, and Quasmes joy he took in re-seeing
Zelmatida after so long an absence. I confess (replied Garruca) I should not
deprive you of a contentment which should be infinite, were it equal to that
which the good Quasmes resented, to see his so much desired Xaira, and
Zelmatida whom he no less affected then if he had been his own son. But my
fault is not so great as I imagined, for that adventure is too admirably high
to be well expressed: your imagination only must represent it, if you will not
lose the principal beauties of it. My relation would blurre it, and I can
conceive nothing that might describe to you the joy and astonishment of the
father, the gladness of the daughter, the rapture of Zelmatida, and the
admiration of their subjects: give me leave therefore to speak nothing of it
for fear of being too troublesome, and be pleased I may abridge my dear
Masters adventures. Quasmes, who at the news of Zelmatida's return, was fallen
into many faintings, and seeing him come with his daughter was like to die for
joy, could not taste the excess of his happiness till many days after their
arrival. Hismelita's death troubled him, but his disturbances were accompanied
with an extreme consolation, when he began to consider that she had assured
him of Izatida's being the same Xaira which she had caused to be stolen from
him in her cradle: neither had he left any more of those scruples, fears and
distrusts which the long loss of his Xaira threw on him, but resenting his
happiness all pure as it was, went to the Temples to give their infinite
thanks to the author of it. After a great number of sacrifices and offerings,
he caused to be published amongst his subjects, the accomplishment of those
Prophesies which had troubled him for so many years; and to make his joy the
more absolute, he desired to communicate it to her that was the half of
himself. That pious Princess kept her bed, through a debilitation of all
parts of her body, and had not been able to follow Quasmes; he went therefore
to her (with his children in his capital city) and presenting Izatida to her,
was not much troubled to persuade that she was the true Xaira: her blood, her
bowels, and her transports, assured that verity; and at the very time, the old
Prophet Thisnatidez coming in, Doubt not, O Queen, (said he) the Lady whom you
see before you is the same whose loss I foretold you, and now confirm her
recoverie. Taste in peace those contentments heaven bestows on you, for a
retribution of your good deeds; and recompencing Zelmatida's travels and
virtues with a reward worthy himself, strive to preserve in your posterity
that lawful authority which the supernatural favor crowned you withal. This
speech calming all the virtuous Queens agitations, and confirming Quasmes in
his belief, the business was to perfect all things else. The first resolved
on was to send back Hismelita's body to the King her husband, and in lieu of
demanding reparation for the wrongs his Armies had done, to offer him the
alliance and friendship of Quasmes, and my Lord the Ynca. Whilst this Embassy
was in hand, Zelmatida pressed for the conclusion of the marriage; he entreated
Quasmes and the Queen, that they would not take from him the quality of a
son which they had given him from his cradle; and though he acknowledged
himself unworthy of it, he humbly besought them to ratify the will of heaven,
and yield to an alliance which had been written there already. Thisnatidez
came in the interim of these solicitations, and taking off the sole
difficulty on which they stuck; No, no, fear not (said he) you have not
recovered your daughter to lose her again: she shall never be taken from you;
and though the Prince to whom heaven has destinated her, is to reign in a
country far remote from hence; yet it is decreed, that Xaira shall close
your eyes; and before you leave this life for a better, make you live anew in
two Princes, which shall be the wonders of their age, and the last defenders of
our dying liberty. These promises accomplished that great work; Xaira was
solemnly promised to her loyal Zelmatida, and a little while after, given up
to his impatient longings. The very day of his nuptials, six Courriers of
Guinaca came to Quasmes Court, to inquire for Zelmatida, and make known to
Quasmes the estate of the affairs at Cusco: these messengers meeting with such
happiness as they durst not hope for, assisted at the marriage of their
Prince, and with their usual diligence returned to the King their master.
Zelmatida thought on you in the height of his contentments, and commanded me
once more to cross the Ocean, to bring you news of his happiness. Thus (Sir)
have you all that you would know of me, there remains nothing else for me to
say, but that Time shall never blot out of my Master's memory, either the
favors he has received from you, or the friendship he has promised.
Polexander, after Garruca had ended his relation, sighed often; and then, Thy
master (said he) is at last most happy; but I, dear Garruca, am more
afflicted then ever, and think I should sooner make a way to climb up into
heaven, then find that which leads to Alcidiana's Island: Yet must I persever,
and like our dear Zelmatida, I propose to my self no other end but death or
victory. After this discourse, Polexander had many more with Garruca, whereby
he was fully informed of diverse particulars which that wise favorite had too
lightly touched on; afterward, he instructed him in all such things as the
good Quasmes and his children expected from his love and knowledge. When he saw
his wounds were half well, and that time alone might perfect the rest, he
thought it best to return to the Canaries in Garruca's ship, that he might
there give him one, wherein to return to the new world, and put himself in case
to attempt again the enterprise he had so often failed in. Garruca
understanding his resolution, presently caused to be repaired all that his ship
needed, and so set sail as soon as the wind served. Diceus, who was no ill
Pilot, judging very near what courses they were to steer, guided them so
luckily, and so well amended the Compass by which Garruca had been directed,
that the fifth day of their navigation they were in sight of the Canaries. Our
Hero landed in the new Island of Alcidiana, and finding all things there in
the same case he had left them, resolved to go thence as soon as Garruca had
taken his leave of him. A few days after his arrival there came news which
altered that design, or at least retarded the execution of it. The inhabitants
of Gomera and Teneriffe hearing of his return, gave him notice that Ferdinand
and Isabell prepared a great army in Palos de Moquer, and that St. Lucar de
Barrameda, to reconquer the Canaries, and wrong the liberties of all those
Islands inhabitants. Polexander animated with a just anger against the ambition
of those Princes that would not permit liberty to find any sanctuary either
in the Continent or Islands, made all the Canarians take arms, and having not
ships enough to encounter the Spaniards at sea, put himself into the great
Canarie, as in that, which in his judgment would be first set on. It was so
indeed, and Don Pedro de Vero, Viceadmirall of Castile landed there with above
three thousand natural Spaniards: He had conquered it before it had delivered
it self into the hands of Polexander; but he found now that he had not to do
with a Doramas, a Guavartem, nor such Barbarians as before time possessed it. Our
Hero the second time made the Spaniards know, they were in an error to call
themselves invincible, and the men alone that deserve to be masters of the
world. Their ships were all either sunk or burn^; the Vice Admiral had the
honor to die by the hand of Polexander, and above five hundred Spaniards which
had escaped the fury of the sword, were taken and sold up and down the
Islands. Polexander thus punished them, to teach their pride, how insupportable
slaverie is, and make them feel the heaviness of that yoke which they would
impose on all nations else. After a victory as glorious for our Hero as that
which he won on the famous Fernandez de Sajavedra, he was not esteemed for a
mortal man among the Canarians. They published every where that he was one of
those Gods which they had before time adored, and but for the punishments which
he was constrained to appoint against the authors of such pernicious opinions;
that people to render him divine honor, had confounded the Christianity which
of late years they had professed, with the Idolatry which by force they had
only quitted. Garruca was witness of our Hero's last wonders, and after he
had obtained from him all that Quasmes and Zelmatida had desired; returned
thence replenished with the admiration of his virtues, and enriched with his
presents. Polexander on his side, commanded new sorts to be made on all the
Islands, to take from the Spaniards all desire of returning thither; or at
least, the thought of conquering them; and as soon as they were defencible, he
not only put to sea, but made a vow in going out of that port, never to see
the Canaries again, nor by his will ever set foot on land again but in the
kingdom of Alcidiana. He commanded his mariners to take the same course they
had done before, and they took it as much in vain as they had done before. His
vessel made above three hundred leagues instead of a hundred, and was almost a
month ceaselesly beating up and down the same ruts, (if it be lawful for me
to use a term so unknown to Mariners.) Not a day passed but they made him
new promises to find the Inaccessible Island, and at every little cloud which
arose from the sea, they came with false comfort to him, and assured him they
saw the white clifts of that fatal abiding. After the Prince had been thus
often deceived, he perceived that fortune affected as much as ever all
occasions to laugh at him; and that the vain favors which she obliged him
withal by the lasting calm, were but new proofs of her jealousy: Will thou
(said he to that imaginary Power) be always so ingenious to torment me, and so
dextrous to strike, that not any one of thy blows can prove mortal? Why
covet'st thou not as well my death as my affliction, or why exposest thou me to
so many differing persecutions, if thou would not have me die? Cruel and
fantastical! that can not endure I should be happy, and yet take not away
absolutely my hope of being so; be once at one with thy self; hearken to thy
sole inhumanitie, since thou altogether take pleasure in mischief; awaken
the winds which sleep, raise up the tempests, and rending my vessel against
some one of the rocks in these seas, suffer me no longer to contest with thy
will. As he had spoke thus, one of his brought him word they descri'd a ship in
their course, presently Polexander thought it might be some of Alcidiana's
vessels, and on that belief commanded to make up to her, or at least not to
lose sight of her. When they had received this order, they clapped on all their
sails, and in less then an hour came up and laid her aboard as friends, and
were so welcomed by those that were in her: for instead of taking arms, they
fell to clapping their hands, and intimate by their talk that they had met
with what they had been a long time seeking after. Polexander seeing those
strangers so jocund and merry, kept as near them as he could, and needing not
speak very loud to be heard, asked whence they were, and whither they were
bound. We are Danes (they replied) and are in quest of an Island which flies
from us, and gets out of sight as soon as it is discovered; if you are such as
can surmount that Islands enchantment, employ your skill in our behalf. We
are going to Alcidiana from a personage that is very dear unto her, and carry
her the most pleasing news she can ever receive again. Polexander, even rapt
at so happy an encounter, answered the Danes, that he had the same design, and
was in the like perplexity as they: I have a long time (said he) sought that
enchanted Isle, or some one of those that have the power of dissolving its
enchantments; but hitherto all my search has been in vain, and for these two
years I have wandered as you, and yet cannot discover that fleeting Island. He
had no sooner spoken, when a Dane breaking out into an extraordinary
admiration, O (said he) how well has our voyage thrived, my companions, if I
may believe mine ears and eyes: Free me from the trouble I am in (said he to
our Hero) and conceal not your self from such, who account this meeting
amongst the greatest of their felicities, if you be Polexander. Our Hero was
much surprised at so unhop'd for a question; yet he would not conceal
himself, how great soever his reason was to do it; and telling the Dane that
his name was Polexander, entreated him withal to relate, how Phelismond stood
with the King his master. I cannot give you satisfaction to what you demand
(answered the Dane) till I am in place where I may speak without witnesses and
fear; but if you please that our ships may go in consort-ship, I will come
aboard of yours, and at leisure relating Phelismonds adventures, free you from
an error, which (as generous as you are) certainly throws on you a great
deal of jealousy and disquiet. Polexander no sooner heard the Danes
proposition but he accepted it, and presently commanding his mariners to join
indeed with the Danish ship, he took into his own that messenger of so great
and good novelties. The complements ended, he brought him into his cabin, and
commanding his servants away, was alone with him: I will then (said the Dane)
begin to atquit my self of what I promised in presenting you this letter, and
therevvith he put into our Hero's hand a packet on which was written, To
Polexander King of the Canaries. He opened it, and there found a letter which
said thus:

MY dearest brother (let me call you so, for I find no term like that which
can so well express the greatness of my affection, nor the happiness I wish
you, if you enjoy it not,) be pleased to know that all those whom I have sent
to the Canaries, to renew the assurance of my love and service, have returned
without informing me any thing concerning your self, that could either content
or give me satisfaction: they could only relate to me your absence, and your
subjects sorrow for your loss. I at last persuaded my self that you were
returned to the Inaccessible Island, and that Alcidiana (overcome by your
services as well as by your merit) had given you both her crown and favor, as
the sole reward wherewithal she could remunerate the pains and travels you
have endured for her. If your longings have received so good a satisfaction,
the Ambassadors I now send to that Princess, will impart some of those
secrecies to you, which they go to intimate to her; and will protest on my
behalf, as I do by this letter, that the throne wherein I am seated, has
nothing in it so pleasing as the belief I have of your enjoying Alcidiana.

After Polexander had read this letter, he gazed on the person that gave it
him, as if he would ask, whether truly Phelismond had sent it; the Dane
surely knew the Prince's meaning, and to put him out of trouble, The King my
master (said he) has commanded me to make you a relation of all which has
happened since the day of your separation, and particularly to assure you, that
the love he bore to Alcidiana, is absolutely confined within the bounds of
friendship. I could expect no less (replied our Hero) from Phelismond: he
must yet give me leave to be sorry for his change, and to accuse him for
preferring Ambition before Love, and the Crown of Denmark before the service
of Alcidiana. The Dane smiling at these upbraidings, Your Majesty (said he)
may be pleased to give me leave to contradict your opinion, and condemn your
accusations as unjust: it is true, Phelismond has taken on him the Crown of
Denmark, that he might no more dream of his enjoying Alcidiana; but it is
not so true (I beseech your Majesty to pardon this boldness) that his
ambition has been more prevalent then his love. He loves Alcidiana as much
as he has ever done, but loves her not the same way; and is still her
affectionate servant, though he be no more her lover. The sense of what you
speak (replied Polexander) is too mysterious to be deciphered. It Is very true
(said the Dane) that the verity I announce to you, is able to astonish your
wit and thought, rather then to convince it; and though all its circumstances
have betided, yet has it so little of ordinary events, that it may pass with
you, for one of those witty intrications of the Theater, represented for the
peoples admiration, to suspend the functions of their souls on the doubtful
expectation of a success which they could not foresee. You will therefore I
hope give me leave to exercise a little your patience, and (as if I repeated
one of those stage-peeces) clearly make manifest to you, by little and little,
Phelismond's adventures.

The late King of Denmark in lieu of being displeased with that worthy
favorite, for so many combats he had undergone, and so many disobediences he
had rendered to save your person, conceived so extreme an opinion of that
Prince's generousnesse, that he thought himself not able to give him
sufficient testimony of his affection, if he forgave him not the loss of his
daughter, and (in his life time) placed not the Crown of Denmark on his head.
To that end, he convocated the Estates of his kingdom, and remonstrating that
in the state their affairs stood, there needed a man to command them; besought
them (with tears) to approve of the election he had made of his successor: I
know (said he) that the love you bear my daughter (though (may be) she is not
now among the living) is more dear to you then your own interests, and may
make you obstinately resist all other election which may seem to exclude your
Princess from that dignity she might claim by birthright. But let not that
consideration amuse you, the successor I have chosen is such, that in giving
him my crown, I assure it to my daughter, and in giving him you for your Lord,
I secure you the conquest of Sweden and Poland, and make you the arbitratours
of all the German liberty; I think there is no need for me to name to you that
worthy successor. The thoughts of all you here abouts are cast on Phelismond,
and seem to say to one another that it is he alone from whom these wonders are
to be expected. It Is true my loyal subjects, it is Phelismond; I say
Phelismond, who has entombed those discords which laid waste your families,
who has revenged the authority royal for the Norway revolt, who has knocked
in again the Swedish ambition even into the deserts of Lapland; and finally,
who has made Poland feel, that her Cavalry (as valiant as it is) is not
invincible: I know what his enemies can say for his exclusion, The mournful
accident which betided the imprudent Helismena may be laid to his charge (with
that he put his handkerchiefe on his eyes:) but why should the remembrance of
so lamentable a history cast us into our former sorrows? Let us bury in
oblivion (since it is the will of heaven) that disastrous accident, and strike
it out of the number of whatsoever cases have mis-betided; strike out that
unhappy day of Helismena's loss, from amongst those which compose and fill up
the ages. On so sad a subject let us impose an eternal silence, and so
discreetly conceal our shame, that gliding away by little and little in the
train of years, it may never come to the knowledge of posterity. When the King
had spoke thus, he was going on to the election of Phelismond, but that
generous Favorite preventing the Danes remonstrances, cast himself at the feet
of the King his master; and decyphering himself as the most despicable of men,
besought him not to place in his throne, the man, who had plucked thence the
lawful Inheritrix: Rather (said he) render that Justice, which so many good
men petition for, against the ungrateful Phelismond. Let him die, or at least
make him a vagabond and wretched all the rest of his days, since he has dared
to fail in his obsequiousness and respect to your own blood. Those words
drew tears from the Kings eyes, and so moved all the assembly, that even those
who came thither most averse for Phelismond, were the first that desired the
conclusion of his election. He on the contrary seeing it not likely to be
longer hindered, would at least have delai'd it; and therefore fell again at
his master's feet, and more and more expressing his generousnesse, Sir (said
he) if my good destiny can give me the boldness to force from your Majesty
any thing beyond that which you have pleased to bestow on me; accord to my
humblest petition, and the just instances of so many illustrious personages,
that my election (which you intend) go no further on, but be deferred till the
return of such as shall be chosen to go in quest of the Princess. All the
assembly falling on their knees to obtain from the King that which Phelismond
had proposed; had the satisfaction to get from him what their respect and
loyalty scarce permitted them to demand. The estates being thus dissolved, the
business was for the choosing of such as were to go in quest of Helismena.
Phelismond would be one, and for all the obstacles the King could lay in his
way, he got to sea as soon as the rest, and was near six months in the
voyage. It Is best to speak of things as they are, he had either an inclination
to the Princess of Denmark, or with his hope of enjoying Alcidiana, had lost
all the love he bore her: but acknowledging himself extraordinarily indebted
to (both) the fathers and daughters love; he would give to his resentment and
to Justice, what he could not to love. He returned as he went, and reaped no
other fruits of his labor, but the satisfaction of having done his duty. At
that word, Polexander interupting the Dane, Be pleased (said he) that I renew
my accusation, and noting so great a coldness in the King your master, persist
in my former expostulation. For his sake, I will think that 'twas for the sole
consideration of the honor and duty he bore to Helismena; but how will he
justify his small remembrance of Alcidiana? Certainly, were I little less his
friend then I am, I would go further, and say, there remained not in him the
cold ashes of all that great fire which the fair Idea of that incomparable
Queen had kindled in his heart. You may without offense speak it, (replied
the Dane) for it is true, from that time forward he was cured of his wonderful
love to Alcidiana; yet must you not for all that change, accuse him of
inconstancy. He altered not, but when he saw that reason, his conscience, the
laws of honor, and the success of your combat, absolutely forbad him to
persevere. And if those powerful considerations had been too few to sway him
to that alteration, he had received such advertisements from Thamiris, as after
them he was not permitted to be any more the passionate servant of Alcidiana. I
would feign know (said Polexandervery coldly) of what importance those
advertisements (of which you speak) were before I can justify Phelismond's
alteration. They were these replied the Dane: Some two months after my
master's return into Denmark, Thamiris fell sick, and as if she had received
some secret notice of the end of her days, she assured Phelismond she was to
die of that sickness. That Prince who had always loved her as his mother,
left the Court; and giving no care to his flatterers, abode two months entire
with that Lady. There was no kind of service (which could be expected from
him) wanting; nor ordinary or unusual remedies, but he made use of to preserve
her life. Yet Thamiris receiving them only to make Phelismond believe she
desired not to die, secretly prepared her self for it, with all the love and
fear could be expected from Heaven; and seeing her self near her end, was
desirous to speak with Phelismond apart: presently, all were commanded to
avoid the chamber, and the doors being shut, that good Lady in lieu of
speaking, fell (lovingly) on Phelismond's face; as he lay weeping on her
boulster. After she had leaned there a while, she raised her self, and making
no show by her speech of her weakness; Phelismond (said she) you are like to
lose a mother, who has ever loved you as tenderly, as possibly she could do
who brought you into the world: but first I will tell you who she was, since I
alone can inform you of her. Know Phelismond, you are no Dane, but an
Englishman at least by your mother, and sprung from that ancient family which
at this day reigns in England: you are of the blood of York, born among the
High-landers in Scotland, and brought up in Denmark. This exceeding news is
to be but the least part of your contentment; I am to tell you another far
greater: You are the son of the great Alcidus (King of the Inaccessible
Island) and brother to Alcidiana. Brother to Alcidiana! (said Polexander,
interrupting the Dane.) Yes Sir, (replied he) Phelismond is Alcidiana's
brother; and when Thamiris made known that secret, he was not less surprised
then you seem to be. That I am Alcidiana's brother, (said he to Thamiris) Ah!
Madam, pardon me, if I beseech you to come again to your self, and a little
suppress your malady which seems to hinder your thought of what you have to
relate to me. No, no, my son (replied that good Lady) I talk not idly, I
tell you once again that you are Alcidiana's brother; and if you will give me
leave to end what I have begun, you shall be fully cleared of that which so
much amazeth you. Phelismond grew silent for fear of displeasing Thamiris, and
rested far more attentive then he had been, that he might not lose the
strange particularities of his birth. Thamiris hereupon began again, and
holding Phelismond by the hand, You may know (said she) that amongst other
fundamental Laws of the Inaccessible Island, there is one, by which it is
commanded, whoever reigns there of either sex, to choose every year from among
the Princes and other great Lords of the Kingdom, a man of extraordinary
virtue, and to constitute him chief Priest, and King of the Sacrificatory; to
the end, that in the name of the Monarch and the Subjects, he may go and
render the tribute of love and acknowledgement, which from all times the
Country, is bound to pay to the Temple of a certain God which is adored under
the figure of the Sun. Pimantus, father of Alcidus, desirous his son should
receive that Sovereign Priesthood, before he came to his Regality; chose him
to go into the Isle of the Sun to perform the sacrifice of alliance. The
young Prince overjoyed at such an occasion for his seeing other countries and
other seas then his own, embarked himself in the sacred vessel; and taking
with him the miraculous birds, by whose flight, as by the needle of the
Compass, they used to be guided to the Inaccessible Island; he commanded his
mariners to give over their course for the Isle of the Sun, and stand for the
coast of Africa. The Priests and other Officers fell at his feet to make him
alter so strange a resolution; but he giving no ear to their remonstrances,
would be absolutely obeyed. His Pilots that had neither knowledge of needle nor
art of navigation, left themselves to the wind, and judging by the Sun
whereabout that part of the world should lie which their Prince called Africa,
were cast by the wind amongst some Islands that were some hundred leagues from
their own; where Alcidus found such extreme rude people, that without making
any stay he sailed on, and came to an anchor on the coast of Morocco. Sometime
he staid there, but troubled with the heat of the climate, and the
barbarousnesse of the Inhabitants, he sailed into Europe. When he came in sight
of Spain, he met with atempest, which holding him above a month betwixt life
and death, drove him happily (at last) into England. To that Court he came
unknown, and growing quickly weary, left it, to travel through the principal
Shires. At last he came to a place where the Duchess of York was confined by
a Tyrant King, with her two daughters: but he being slain, the successor
married one of them to a principal instrument of hi^ greatness, and left the
second (fair and young) to her own disposal. Alcidus being by chance in
company, where she made appear to the utmost, both her sweet demeanor, her
wit and beauty, he became infinitely in love with her, and was no less
beloved of chat Princess. Their sickness being reciprocal, made them equally
have recourse to a remedy. Young Alcidus making use of that age'^ liberty
which has no greater an enemy them wisdom, gave the Princess notice of the
wounds she had given him, and besought her not to treat as one of the vulgar,
the Inheritor of one of the fairest Crowns in the world. Phelismonda (so was
your mother called) was not deaf to his petition, she let him know she had
pity on what he suffered; But (said that amorous Princess) I advertise you,
that the remedy which you seek for it, is not so much in my power, but it is
far more in your own. Young Alcidus considering himself already as a
conqueror, forgot nothing which he thought might any way advance his triumph;
he vowed his constancy and says inviolable; he joined oaths with promises,
and presently complained of Phelismonda for her deferring the requiring his
putting them in exec^ion. She then laid before him, that being borne the
daughter of a great King, sister to another, and by right to pretend to the
Crown of England, she desired a husband that might re-establish her in the
throne, and not a lover who might absolutely ruin her. Alcidus found nothing
rigid in this proposition, he protested that his love was pure and innocent;
that he looked on Phelismonda with no other intent, then to honor her with
those Crowns were ass^'d him; and that she might not doubt of it, promised to
espouse her publicly Phelismonda yielded after she had so well ended her
treaty; and fearing left her marriage might be known to the King, entreated
your father to demean himself toward her the most reservedly he could
possibly. But that secret could not be long time concealed; Alcidus's too often
visits working a jealousy in the King of England^ Spies, the business was
discovered, and all that Alcidus and Phelismonds could do, was to ^don
England, and put themselves to the mercy of an extreme turbulent sea. They
were cast on the wild parts of Scotland, and as I had been the sole confident
in your mothers love, so was I the sole shecompanion of the miseries she
refented. A little while after we arrived among those people, she found her
self indisposed: the alteration of her countenance, her waxing leanish, her
squeamishness, her drooping, and continual faintings, made me think that her
indisposition was but an effect of her being with child. I advertised Alcidus
of it, who resolved (for all that we could say) not to hazard his Lady in the
case she was: he went not from her far in five months, and though he were
continually entreated to go thence, he preferred (generously) his love and
faith before any consideration of his estate; and would not put to sea again,
till Phelismonda could endure the incommodities of a voyage, which he would not
undertake without her. In the mean time, the fatal term of your birth came
on; but O sad and mournful day! can I call thee to mind without the loss of
that short remainder of life which is left me? The unfortunate Phelismonda felt
all the throws which women undergo in their labors, yet could not be brought
to bed. The remedies we applied for her succor did but hasten her end; when
she perceived her self to fail, she fell gently on the face of her half dead
husband, and glewing (as it were) her mouth to his; Preserve at least (said
she) the remembrance of our loves, since heaven will have nothing else left
thee! and with those words she died. Alcidus presently tearing his hair, and
acting the part of a man desperate, not only forsook the little cotes wherein
we had lived all the time of your mothers going with child, but instantly
embarked himself, and fet sail. I have always thought that his extreme
grief was so prevalent, as to make him intend his own loss, after that of
Phelismonda; and for that cause would not trouble himself either with me, or
any of his Lady's women. He was not long gone out of the chamber, but I felt
you stir in your mothers womb, whereupon I called for a Surgeon that was
come to assist us, and caused him to open one of Phelismonda's sides, from
whence he took you, and after his well treating, assured me you were likely to
live. The desire I had to preserve all that was left me of my dear
Phelismonda, made me suspend the resentment of her loss. I sent to inform the
wilder people (who were somewhat humaniz'd by our conversation) of our
misfortune: some of them brought us women but lately up from childebirth, and
offered them for your nurses; of which I retained three, and by their help, or
rather (if you will permit me to say so) through a true maternall love, I
overcame the rendernesse and infirmity of your infancy. Near eighteen
months staid I in Scotland, so much incommodated that I resolved to get
thence; but unwilling to return into England, I was much troubled in thinking
of a place where I might put you in safety. Fortune, who at that time destined
you for the Crown of Denmark, brought a ship to the place where I had put you
to be nursed; there I embarked me, and taking you along in spite of all the
English Ambushes, came happily to Copenhagen. Lo, (my dear son) all that
which I have been desirous to have my conscience discharged of before I leave
you: I thought it not fit (to any purpose) to give you sooner notice of it, for
fear lest it might prove a hinderance to your attaining that Throne, to which
your virtue has raised you, in stead of those you have been deprived of by
fortune. I confess that many times since the fatal moment wherein you became
so much inamoured on your sister's portraict, I have been on the point to
declare to you what I have now related; but seeing there was naught (in your
love) to be feared considering the enchanted abode where Alcidiana is enclosed;
and besides, I know not what Spirit suggesting to me new prohibitions; I
imagined that the decree of eternal Providence would have all the ventures of
your birth concealed still from you. Thamiris thus ended her narration, and
afterward unwilling to hear any more of what concerned the world, died so
well, that envy and scandal openly repented themselves of such falsities as
they had invented against her virtue, and contributed as much as they could
toward her beatification. Here the Dane stopped, and left Polexander in such
an admiration, that he was a pretty while without being able to persuade
himself that the truths he had heard, were any other then dreams and
illusions. At last, recollecting himself from his wouder, Must I then (said
he) believe that Phelismond is Alcidiana's brother? You are to credit it,
replied the Dane, and hold for certain truth, that so many strange and
incredible accidents happened by the guidance of a spirit, which (without
blasphemy) cannot be accused of ignorance, neglect, nor injustice. These
prodigies are infallibly the presages of some extraordinary event; but till
time shall make them known, be pleased that I relate what ensued the death of
the virtuous Thamiris. A few days after Phelismond had rendered her her last
dues, he returned to the King his master, who had nothing whole and sound but
his understanding: as soon as he saw the term was expired which Phelismond
desired, he assembled the estates, and causing Phelismond to be crowned with
the consent of all his Peers, imposed on him all the marks and all the cares
of regal authority. The joy he took in being disperplex'd and unloaden of
that glorious and stately slaverie, or rather in satisfying his affection, by
the putting off all sovereign authority, to place himself beneath what he
loved; retarded the hour of his death, and made him live five or six months
more then he had done, in such quiet and contentment as he had never before
been acquainted withal. He imitated those lights which never give so fair a
luster as when they are ready to go out; for he did in so little a time many
actions of courage and justice: he intimated most sensible sorrow for his
weakness and exactions, and calling to him the chief officers of Copenhagen,
entreated them to love their new King, as they had done him; and besought their
pardon for his defects committed through want of judgment and too much
facility. Phelismond was so sensibly grieved for the death of so good a master
(for he then died) that he found nothing but bitterness in the beginning of a
new authority wherein ambitious men find all height of felicity. But time
that takes away the feeling of sorrows as well as joys, restored him to his
former temper, and gave him so many several employments, that he thought of
nothing but how to make himself worthy of a dignity whereof all good Princes
acquit themselves with no little difficulty. As Soon as he had any time to
himself, he bethought him of the Queen his sister, and your Majesty; and
giving me in charge his letters, instructions, and presents, commanded I should
do my utmost to find you; and at last (if it were possible) to land in the
enchanted Island. I took my leave of him, in promising, that I would never
return till I heard news either of your self or Alcidiana; to that end have
I been at the Canaries, and receiving no satisfaction there, but that you were
away, (if that could be any) I thought good to inform my self what was the
best course to be held for the Inaccessible Island: those to whom I made that
proposition, were ready to laugh at me, and said, that only Chance was the
Pilot to that Isle. At last (to free themselves from my importunities) they
told me what they knew of that enchanted piece of earth, and this is the tenth
day that I have wandered up and down these seas to find it, and left my ship
to the sole guidance of Chance, to see whether it be as good a Pilot as your
mariners assured me. After the Dane had thus ended his discourse, Polexander
was put into so deep a musing that he remained a long time scarce knowing where
he was, at last he came again from that amorous Lethargy, and many sighs
over-passed, I am (said he) the only man that cannot tread on my misfortune.
Zelmatida saw all things armed against him, yet the power of Kings, the
elements surie, the distance of one world from another, and in brief, the
blindness of his Mistress, have not been prevalent enough to bar him from
his felicity. Phelismond has had impossible designs, yet one way or other he
has brought them to perfection. Bajazet has overcome all difficulties which
opposed his contentment, and in one day seen himself King of many Realms, and
the enjoyer of whom he affected. Even my poor Iphidamantus has met his rest.
Only against me are eternally shut up all ways which tend to any felicity; O
just heaven! O pitiful providence! how long shall I be so wretched as to have
no reason to hope for a better fortune? The Dane showed well by hi^ judicious
discourse with Polexander, that Phelismond knew well how to choose such as he
employed in his affairs; but all that he could think on to quiet, or give
any content to our Hero's mind, served but to surcharge him the more. In the
mean time, the day left them, and night augmenting their disquiets, they
commanded their mariners to strike sail and lie at hull, left they might lose
the Inaccessible Island in the dark, if by chance it might present it self to
our view. Night had her course as well as day, and retired to give the other
place: Polexander seeing it break, made inward vows to it, and passing even
to Idolatry, which was not criminal, because forced, promised the Sun to hold
him for his visible Deity, if he would be propitious to his intentions: but
his prayers were too wrongly addressed to have any good success. That day they
made a great deal of way, yet advanced his design no more then if he had
stuck still in one place. Night coming on, changed the manner of his
impatiencies, and the three days ensuing, making the Danes as much out of hope
as our Hero; they resolved to return, and lose no more time in so vain a
search. They were even already resolved and fitted to take leave of Polexander,
when those that were in the scuttle of the ships mast, cried out that they saw
land, and cast the Prince again into the same vexations he had at the
discovery of Tisiphone's Island. He ran with Phelismond's Confident to the
highest part of the decks, and perceiving far off in the sea somewhat that
was cloudie, neither the Dane nor Diceus could possibly get him to turn his
eyes from it: at last he certainly perceived it to be an Island, but in the
very time that his affection would have had him believe it to be that of
Alcidiana, his memory and judgment represented the pleasure he took in
suffering himself to be deceived: nevertheless, he could not put off so
pleasing a defect, and belie his conception, till his eyes enforced him to
acknowledge his error. As Soon as he came to an anchor in a road of the Isle,
he caused himself to be landed with the Dane, and finding there no other then
cedars and date-trees, or some more of the like kind, he returned to his ship
more discontented then he was before: yet the same grief which drew him from
the Island made him presently return again. He entreated Phelismond's
Ambassador to pardon his extravagancies, and pity his sad fortune: the Dane
who was not so insensible but that he knew the effects of love followed our
Hero; and to divert him, related the extreme discontent Phelismond was
thrown in, when he saw himself engaged by the ill success of his combat, to
renounce all his love to Alcidiana. Polexander the while walked on a great
pace, and staid not till he came to a brook in the midst of a wood which
stopped his way; by the clear stream he lay down, and began to mark its
course so wistly, that he forgot for it, not only the Dane, but his fortune
and himself: his melancholy which found its element in that moist and obscure
abode, brought on him so sad but so pleasing thoughts, that had he remained
long in that case, he might have vaunted how in the extremity of all his
sufferings and displeasures, he had been entertained with incomparable delights
and consolations. From these musings he was diverted by the Dane, who thinking
to oblige him, entreated his return to the ship, and not to stay longer in a
place which did but increase his afflictions. Polexander hearkened to him, and
as he went back, he spied along by the river a little path, so beaten, that it
was easily guessed to be often trodden: a great desire took him to find
whither that way tended, and without any cause to be given for that curiosity,
so firmly stuck to it, that he entreated the Dane to give him time for it is
satisfaction. Scarce had he gone fifty or threescore paces, but the path was
lost amongst a great many great palme-trees, and as he was going on to find it
again, he heard a kind of hissing like to that of a Snake. The Dane fearing
to meet with one of those prodigious Dragons which he had seen pictured in maps
of Africa, began to entreat our Hero again to return to his ship. But he,
who would have been glad to have met with some monster able to devoute him,
flew in amongst the palme-trees, and casting his eyes on all sides to discover
whence that noise should come, in lien of a serpent he spied at the foot of a
palm, an old woman asleep, who being uneasily laid, made that kind of hissing
through the difficulty of her breathing. When he came within ten paces of her
she awoke, and had no sooner opened her eyes, but being afrighted with the
sight of men so near, she flung up, in shreeking out, and fled in among the
palme-trees; Let Us follow her, said Polexander to the Dane, and make known
that we are no hobgoblins. With that he went on, and when he was got far
among the trees, he saw one of a greater bulk by much then all the rest,
which* (afar off) seemed as it had been open; toward it he went, and coming
near, perceived that (indeed) there was a cleft large enough for a man to
enter into the truncke. Listingly, he put himself partly into the tree, and
heard a harmony like to that of a Lute, admirably well fingered: he called the
Dane, and letting him hear a very sad Almain, Surely said he, the party that
inhabits the body of this tree, is not so savage as the abiding seems to
persuade us. This he spoke aloud, that the person who played on the Lute might
hear him and come forth; and it succeeded as he intended. A Lady of eighteen
or twenty years, fair, as much as a person extremely afflicted could be,
came out of the hollow palm tree, and looking on our Hero and the Dane, spoke
not to them but with her tears and languishing regards. The Dane conceived
presently that he had before time seen that Lady; and to clear it, (in his
own language) offered her all that he could for her consolation. That fair
discontented Lady had not time to hear the end of his speech, but lifting her
eyes and hands to heaven, and asking her self oftentimes whether she had well
understood the proffers of the Dane; O heaven! cried she, he is my
countryman; I am so indeed replied the Dane, and can now glory of making a
voyage far more happy then I could promise my self. Phelismond may have
cause enough to envy my fortune, when he understands that the jewel he has
so long sought after by sea and land, is (as it were) of her own accord come
and rendered her self into my hands. Ah flatterer! said the Lady, (weeping)
strive not by thy pleasants untruths to sweeten the bitterness of my destiny.
Thou know what he is, do not set any false gloss on him, nor augment my
shame and sorrow in making me call to mind the man who yet never thought me so
much as worthy of his friendship. The Dane desirous absolutely to quiet the
mind of that Lady; If Phelismond (said he) have been so far insensible as
to behold so many allurements, and not be moved with them, 'twas Madam because
that part which we call the original of life and sense was not then at his
disposal. Alcidiana had deprived him both of his heart and eyes; but now,
since she has restored them, he resents the power of your beauty, and admires
even your least perfections, if I may be permitted to say, more and less, of
things which are all alike excellent. In a word (Madam) Phelismond laments and
wishes for you; nay all the favors of the King your father will be but so
many torments to him, till he have obtained from you a pardon for his
fore-passed faults, and see you seated in the Throne of your predecessors.
Helismena (for 'twas she) could not give credit to alterations which seemed to
her beyond all hope; but Polexander, after he had done his complements and made
himself known, Madam, said he, having been always (as you know) so much at
odds with Phelismond, I believe you will not accuse me of flattering or giving
him such praises as he deserves not: and this being granted, I hope you will
do me the honor to give credit to what I shall say, and believe, (since it is
truth) that the generous Phelismond has preferred his serving you, before the
gift of a Crown; and having turned the love he bore to Alcidiana into the
friendship of a brother, he now has not only any more passion but for your
beauty, but he cannot give way to be happy, unless he be so with you.
Helismena witnessing to Polexander her joy in seeing him, and to hear his
words; Though (said she) what has already passed, cannot promise me but an
unfortunate success, yet I will suspend my fears, and put off my mistrusts,
for fear of offending that verity which speaks by your mouth. I believe,
since you say it, that Phelismond hates me not so much as he has done, but
withal I think, that being compelled by your valor to leave to you
Alcidiana, he has at last resolved to take such a wife as may establish him in
that authority, which otherwise he might perhaps not be very well assured of.
Polexander, desirous to free Helismena of that imagination, related to her all
Phelismond's adventures, and letting her know that Alcidiana was his sister,
not only cured her of her jealousy, but dispelled all other clouds of sorrow.
In an instant she passed from one extreme to another, and according to the
nature of the Northern women, which are full of violent agitations, but of
short lasting, she thought on nothing but her return into Denmark; and with
all content to behold him again, whose sight had been always so dear, though
so sad unto her. The Dane then began, and having given the Princess an account
of the cause of his voyage; If your Majesty (said he) will make no longer
abide in this Island, I shall be glad to have the honor of conducting you into
your kingdom, and will not believe I have failed my master in ought I owe him,
though I put off to another time what I have now in charge, to hasten the
contentment he will receive by your return. Polexander again addressing him
to the Princess; If (said he) I were not restrained by my adverse fortune, I
would propose to you a means by which your desires and those of Phelismond
should be alike satisfied: I would humbly entreat you to charge me with
Phelismonds instructions, and make me you Ambassador to Alcidiana. Helismena
approved of this advice, and commanding the Dane to deliver all to Polexander;
I desire you withal (said she) to reconcile me to Alcidiana, and after you
have made known to her the just cause of my wishing her ill, represent the
reason I have to love her during my life. Madam, replied Polexander, I will
acquit my self as I ought, (alas! what can I promise) of the charge
wherewithal you entrust me. But that I may not fail for want of instruction,
be pleased ere I go, fully to inform me of such things whereof I am ignorant;
I conceive well said Helismena what you would say, without any further
intimation. You would know my follies, and I like them so well that I take
pleasure to relate them: you shall hear all Sir, but before I begin, I must
needs see what is become of my nurse, that while I intertaine you, she may take
leave of these palms and waters which have preserved our lives. Whilst she
spoke, she perceived her nurse among the trees much afrighted; she called her,
and being settled, told her in few words the change of her fortune, and
commanded she would make ready for their departure. Whilst the nurse put that
injunction in execution, Helismena sat down with Polexander at the foot of
the palm tree which had served her long time for a palace, and began thus; I
need not tell you that Phelismond is a most courteous and gentile man, and by
consequence very amiable; you have too long conversed with him to be ignorant
of his qualities: judge then whether it were not very hard for me to be almost
continually in the company of so winning a personage, and not be moved by him:
I was indeed, as soon as I became capable of knowing his merit. For besides his
sweet aspect, his brave courage, and his pleasant wit, which were as so many
enemies who resolved the ruin of my liberty; the King my father's example
made me resolute to receive the law of so sweet a conqueror. I knew I loved
Phelismond by the contentment I took in his intertaining me; nowithstanding, I
know not what modesty restraining me from declaring my love to him, and
besides his own purity hindering him from noting it, I lived above a year
much in love and yet silent: my languishing looks, my intermitted sighs, and
^e eyes wearied with my watchings, and tears spoke to him of it sufficiently.
But he (who apprehended naught but what spoke of Alcidiana) as often as those
true interpreters of my heart made known my love, seemed to understand nothing
of all that they intended. At last I resolved to speak my self, and finding
an occasion in the time of a violent sickness, caused by the excess of my
affection; Phelismond (said I to him, one day when he came to visit me) you
grieve for my loss, and yet would you have understood mine eyes and sighs,
you might long since have known that you are not only the cause of my
sickness, but the sickness it self whereof I die. I have not been less
sensible then the King my father, and though my fear has not permitted me to
make it known as he has done, yet assure your self, that I have far more
then he resented the imperious charms by which virtue reigns absolutely over
all hearts. I confess Phelismond I love you, and so much, that for fear of
being troublesome to you, I am resolved to die. I would have gone on, but my
father coming in, I was forced to defer it to any time, and endure the
perfecutions of a troop of ignorant Physicians. Many new diseases they
invented, because they would not be silent before the King, and blind as they
were, discerned not that I was sick of a disease as old as the world.
Phelismond, that was retired from me, with a wonderful astonished countenance,
had a great desire (at least if my conjecture be right) to free the King his
master from the trouble wherein he saw him. But conceiving he could not draw
the King out, without plunging himself into the same vexation, he was pleased
to say that my malady was a pure effect of a melancholy humor, and that if he
would preserve me, he should try by all kind of diversions to bring me to my
former mirthsomnesse. My father who was not able to question whatsoever
Phelismond spoke to him, dismissed all the Physicians, and thought that dances,
maskes, plays, and other sportive pastimes, were the best remedies which my
new physician prescribed for my recoverie. But that new Leech soon repented
him of his counsel, for the King imagining that Phelismond would be as able to
suppress my malady, as he had judgment to discover it; commanded him to be
with me as often as he could, and entreating I would cast off that melancholy
which might be my ruin, assured me that if I did but contribute somewhat to
part of my health, Phelismond's conversation would be able to perfect all the
rest: thus he parted, after he had (unwittingly) given me so true counsel.
Phelismond (who has ever kept that respect to his Master, as not to abuse his
favor) staid at my beds-head to show his obedience; and being excellent at the
relation of stories, was willing to begin one that might divert me, and withal
relate his fortune; but presently I perceived how violently he forced himself
to it, and therefore touched with his constraint, I stopped him at the very
first, to let him know the excess of my love by that of my compassion: Do not
(said I) Phelismond force your self any more; your concent is too dear to me
to sacrifice it to my peace; I had rather die then to redeem my self from the
grave with the loss of your happiness; leave then when you please the
miserable Helismena, and sear not that either to be revenged or to be cured,
she will ever complain of your cruelty; death is most dear to her, since she
is permitted to tell you, that for you she dies. Phelismond unable to resist
his sweet nature, nor the pity I wrought in him, shed a torrent of tears
before me, called himself a hundred times ufortunate; lastly, cast himself on
his knees, and speaking to me with a freedom which gave me some satisfaction:
Madam (said he) if I may expect from your Highness a favor which I deserve
not, be pleased I may discover my thoughts to you, and that without coloring,
either with fear or respect, or any other specious falsities, the refusal I
am bound to make of your love; I may say to you, that being absolutely
another, I cannot be yours; that Queen whose picture has ravished all the
Court, possesses what you desire of me, and I should be a traitor, if I
promised you an affection which is not in my power to give you. I confess my
engagements to the King your father, and your incomparable virtues, should
pluck out of my soul this stranger passion, and forcing my inclination, make
me find my pleasure in my duty and what concerns me: but Madam, what opinion
would you have of a man that should be capable of so great an infidelity? and
what can your Highness expect from a heart so remiss and weak as to
accommodate his love with his fortune; or faithless enough to conceive as many
desires, as there are objects worthy to be coveted? Give me leave then, Madam,
to repeat what I lately said, and make a protestation which shall be just,
though it may seem insolent, and it is, that Alcidiana shall be the sole object
of my love; and that I will sooner die as many times (if it be possible) as
your lawful indignation can make you wish it, rather then I will infranchise
my self from the glorious servitude wherein my inclination and Alcidiana's
virtues have so sweetly inthrall'd me. When Phelismond had done, I was so
ravished at his constancy and generousnesse, that it was not in my power
either to condemn his resolution, or to complain of the contempt he made of
my affection: on the contrary, I approved of them both, and seeing that Prince
at my feet which seemed to confess himself guilty, and asked me pardon for
his offense; Love Alcidiana (said I) since heaven will have it so; and because
it is there decreed too, permit Helismena to love you. Phelismond arose from
before my bedside so pusled, and divided between his love and mine, that I
doubt not but in himself he thought him very unhappie that he could not
absolutely become at my disposal and solely mine. This inabilitie was the
cause of my recoverie, for I took comfort in my misfortune, by knowing that
the author of it was no less afflicted for it then my self; and I thought
that in his intimation of his impossibility of loving me, he made known to me
a new kind of love, whereof till then I was altogether ignorant. As Soon as I
had recovered my strength, and was permitted to leave my chamber, I appeared in
Court with that same cheerfulness which had before time got me the name of the
delight of Denmark: for all that, I was secretly fed on by my passion, but I
concealed it very warily, for fear lest Phelismond should be thereby anew
discontented; and though there scarce passed a day wherein I spent not at least
two hours in bewailing with tears (apart) the misfortunes of my life, yet in
public I appeared so pleasant, that Phelismond himself was deceived a^ it,
and believed, time had absolutely cured me. To that extremity was I brought
when you came to fight with Phelismond: his defeature mightily afflicted me,
and but for his consideration which retained me, I had wrought my father's
choler to higher violence then it ran then. It may be you are yet ignorant of
the person who won him to violate the faith he had given you, and made him so
wilfully bent to your ruin: I would have you know (Polexander) that my desire
to revenge the affront you had done my love, mademe employ all my credit and
power for your destruction. The King who has always been a great observer of
his word, was a very long time before he would hearken to the reasons I
alleged against you; but I so pli'd him on all sides, and gave him so many
several assaults, that he was forced to yield: hereupon your death was
resolved on, but when I understood that Phelismond grew enraged at your ill
treatment, and had therefore plucked off all that which had been applied to his
wounds, of purpose to undo himself; my desire to preserve him kept me from
perfecting your ruin. I dexterously therefore put a new face on all business,
and had less trouble to obtain your pardon from the King my father, then I
had in getting him to sign a warrant for your death. When I was informed that
Phelismond affected you, I slack'd my hatred, and turned all my choler on
Alcidiana; No (said I to my self) I will never endure that any poor petty
Princess, who for all her Territories has but a little shelfe or rock,
known only by the shipwreck of some unfortunate mariners, should be so
overweening as to esteem of the most excellent of men, no otherwise then as of
one incivilis'd, and unworthy either to breathe or to serve her. Presumptuous
Alcidiana (said I, as if she had been present) thy insolence will ruin thee;
and if Phelismond be so far bewitched by thy charms as to persevere in his
dishonor and Idolatry, I shall have heart enough to carry me even to thy
enchanted Island, to scratch off that vain beauty which makes thee
insupportable to all the world. Many other injuries did I to your Mistress,
and meditated many extraordinary avengements; but ere they were to be put in
execution, I desired to see how Phelismond stood, after so many trialls of
Alcidiana's aversion. The next day after your departure I went to visit him,
and finding he was (though in his bed) less distempered by his wounds then by
the disdaines of ungrateful Alcidiana; Shall it (said I, after some words of
civilitie) be published to the world, that you are insensible of all affronts,
outrages, hatred, and all contempt? Shall that great courage which sees under
it all whatsoever is most elevated among the fortune of Kings, belie it self
in so eminent an occasion, and stick senseless on so urgent affronts, whereof
cowardice it self would have much a do to be insensible? As long as I thought
your affection was just, though averse to me, I wished rather to be unhappie
then to condemn it; but now, since it is not only a scandal to your self
but to all those that love you, I cannot (for your reputation sake, and
satisfaction of your friends) but find fault with your unreasonable
perseverance. Phelismond turning his eyes on me swollen with tears, If (said
he) this unfortunate man has truly any part in your favor, and if that
miraculous affection which you have showed him be not as yet extinguished,
resume (if you please) those generous thoughts which it inspired you withal:
bewail my destiny, and indammage not that person who merits it least of all
men living. It Is true Madam, that Alcidiana does but contemn, nay hate me, and
to free her self from my presumptuous desires, she has set my head at a
value, and designed my death as the highest mark of love and fidelity which
she can expect from her admirers. But since it is the will of my sad Fate to
make me of that number, should I not look on Phelismond as on a monster whom
the Sun should no more shine on; and to testify fully the obeisance which I
render to all Alcidiana's commands, to account him mine enemy, whom she deemes
unworthie of her favor? This extreme constancy of Phelismond (said
Helismena) confirmed mine own, and made me avow, that he who knew how to love
so truly, could not be too much beloved. Yet was I above three months
continually urging him to retort Alcidiana's neglect with as great a slighting,
and at last to give over the imploring of a Power, who was so far off from
assisting him, as she gloried in rejecting his invocations. I confess yet,
that sometimes when I thought on Phelismond's wonderful love, I chid my self
for so obstinately tempting a mind so persevering, and reproved that malice
wherewithal I strove to corrupt the virtue of him I loved. No, (said I) at
last, I will not add to Phelismond's miseries; but since I truly love him,
scorn to imitate the example of her that hates him: My solicitings are but as
weapons which I lend to that proud cruel one; I follow (ere I am aware) her
merciless humor, and as if I had undertaken to please her, would compel
Phelismond to do what she desires. Rather (Helismena) give ear to thy
ingenious and just anger; make Phelismond to continue in his doting on
Alcidiana, since she enrageth to know that she is beloved; and (to be avenged
in a way which may be was never imagined) suffer him whom she despises to sue
to her eternally. But silly creature that I am! I perceive not, that in
meditating this revenge, I do my self far more wrong then I could do with
it; and that if Phelismond continue his love to Alcidiana, I make my self
truly miserable for no other end, but that she might only seem to be so.
Avenge thy self more really, Helismena, and hazard not that small portion of
life which is left thee, but in doing an act worthy thy just anger; let thy
choler furrow up and make a way to that Island whereto none can arrive, and
forcing from the world that insolent Rival who indeed triumphs more over thee
then Phelismond, subvert those obstacles which fortune makes use of to cross
thy contentment. Do not think, Polexander, that these resolutions were of the
number of those which are ordinarily in our sex; I mean, such as last no
longer time then there was to conceive them: my indignation turned not into
wind with my words, but I stuck constant to the execution of what I had
deliberated, and to trample on all difficulties in the undertaking it. To that
end, my nurse and my self stole from my fathers Court, by the help of a
Captain of a ship, who thought himself wonderful happy to be ruined in my
service; and with a company of gleesome young people, and resolute, we left
Copen-hagen; and at two months end, landed on the first of the Azores. From
thence we sailed as if we had stood for the Canaries, because our Pilot assured
us that the Inaccessible Island lay between the Terceras and the great
Canarie. I besought the Pilot to do some wonder of his art in the finding out
that cursed abode, but the Devils into whose protection the sorcerers have
committed that piece of earth, were offended with his too exceeding skill; and
that they might not receive such an affront as to see their power mastered by
that of a man, they called together all the Northern winds with the Southern
thunder, and brake my vessel to shiv^s against the rocks of this Island. All
those which strove to save themselves were lost; my nurse and my self, who
alone had neither will nor ability, were thrown on shore by the same waves
which had drowned our conductors. I will not tell you how long. I have been in
this place, for if I would believe mine own account, I should say I had been
whole ages here. This, Polexander, is the instruction you would have from me,
to make you my Ambassador to Alcidiana. I persuade my self you like this
employment the rather, because the business will be of reconciling us, and
causing all jealousy and hatred to give place to love and alliance. After she
had thus ended, she gave way for Polexander to use his Rhetoric. He gave her
thanks for the honored Embassy whereof she thought him worthy, and entreated
her not only to blot out of her memory, all wrong imaginations which
jealousy had there figured, but to permit truth to represent to her, Alcidiana
with all her charms and perfections. Your desires are already accomplished
(replied Helismena,) I see Alcidiana as fair and alluring as she is; but you
can scarce believe it, for lovers cannot persuade themselves that any others
are so cleere-sighted to take notice of all the graces in their Mistresses. As
she had said thus, the Dane came to them, and told her she might depart when
she pleased: the Princess loath to defer a moment, saluted Polexander; and
for a last farewell, Brother (said she) I wish your happiness may betide you
in the same instant with mine; and that the name I give you may be a certain
presage of it. Polexander replied, that he was borne too unfortunate to have so
much as the thought of so great a felicity, and so brought her to her ship.
There he ended his last complements, and delivering to the Dane the letters he
had written to his Master, went not from him till he had made him know the
greatness of his liberality. As Soon as he was come back to his own ship, he
began to reflect anew on his misfortune, and confirming himself in the opinion
he had of his destiny; Assuredly (said he) heaven is drawn dry of all good
chance that it kept in store for mankind; there is nothing left but miseries
and languishments, and to see how plentifully they are showered on me, with good
reason I may believe they were all reserved for me. From that he fell into a
deep musing, and when he was got out of it, he had quite lost sight of
Helismena's ship. Presently he commanded to weigh anchor, and putting to sea
again, ignorant of what course he should steer, spent near fifteen days
more bootlesly in searching for that Island, which truly too rightfully
merited the title of Inaccessible and Enchanted. The calm which had been so
far obsequious to our Lover's passion, now seemed to be angry at its
inutilitie, and gave way to a furious tempest: eight days together the
Prince's vessel was driven up and down the immense vasts of the Ocean, and
sometimes from hell carried up to heaven, and straight from heaven to hell
again; the masts were all shattered, the saile-yards broken, the sails all
torn, the rudder stricken off, and they might say, that the storm like an
insolent conqueror would triumph over that miserable ship in all parts of her.
The Pilot deprived of what he was to guide withal, began to deplore the
wretch'd estate of those of his condition; and the mariners being clean tired
with blaspheming, betook them to their beads, and began to cast their eyes to
heaven, against which they had but newly vomited so many injuries. Those which
were not yet weary of living, made vows to all their Countrey's Saints; and
others which were resolved to die, fell with a true contrition at their
Confessor's feet, and in hope of a second life, comforted themselves for the
loss of the first. Some holding up their hands to that succor which they saw
not, giddied themselves with their extreme noise and crying; and others having
not courage enough to look death in the face, hid them in the hold of the
ship. In the mean time the tempest enraged to be so long time contesting with
a few broken plankes, and the waves perfecting what they had to do, tore the
ship open at the poope; presently the sea all white with foame, and as proud of
the victory, rushed in at the breach, got the deckes one after another, and so
filled her, that on the sudden they perceived her sinking. In that extremity
every one caught hold of what he could, and at one instant did two differing
things, despaired of their safety, and yet sought all means to secure
themselves. Polexander, by chance meeting with a broken mast of the ship which
floated by him, got on it, and with an incredible constancy expected, when the
storm should deprive him of that last refuge. After he had sat a while on it,
turning his head, he perceived Diceus at the end, which so overjoyed him, that
he conceived not he was in any danger at all. Be not astonished (said the
Prince to him) but wait for the resolution of Heaven in its disposal of us
without despair. The noise of the waves was too high to suffer Diceus to
understand his Masters words; besides the terror had so much deprived him of
the use of the best of part of his senses, that he scarce knew whether he were
alive or dead. As the Sun was ready to go down, Polexander descri'd
somewhat before him that seemed white among the greenness of the waves: Take
heart, (cried he to his servant) be of courage Diceus, I either see a rock or
a vessel; the wind drives us to it, and if fear kills thee not, my life for
thine. He had no sooner spoken, but he found himself very near to what he had
discovered, and found it to be a great shelve of rocks environed with the sea:
many a time had it been the terror and loss of many a mariner, but was then
the hope and safety of Polexander. The Prince being driven near to it, thought
that if he quitted not his, mast before the surges threw him against the
rocks, he or Diceus (without doubt) ran a hazard to be crushed in pieces among
a great many other small ones which appeared close by the water: he called
therefore to his servant to follow him, and presently betook himself to
swimming. Diceus recollecting his wits and strength, obeyed his Master, and
after some hundred or more stretches or fathomes, overtooke him: 'twas most
happy for him to be able to do so much, for in the very instant when he came
up near to Polexander, his strength and heart failed him. Our Hero seeing him
sinking, swome to him, and showing how dearly he esteemed the life of that
trusty servant, hazarded his own to save him. He took him by one arm, and
swimming with a great deal of trouble and pain, got behind the rock. As Soon
as he got footing, he drew him on the sand, and made him resume his spirits;
when Diceus with scattered looking on his Master, would have asked him where he
was, but Polexander preventing him, Friend (said he) we are safe, if to be so,
we need nothing but to be freed from the fury of (...) sea: we must endure
yet, and let us suffer with a good heart, since heaven has not permitted us to
find a grave where so many has met with theirs. Thou may tell me Diceus
that 'twas our own faults; but we had then violated the most inviolable laws
of nature, and that providence which reserves us to some other end, would have
punished us as selfe-murderers, if we had neglected the means of our safety,
which its all powerful hand miraculously offered us. Here he stopped, and going
along the side of a little creek which was hidden in the bosom of the rock,
he found a staire cut like a screw into the maine stone, by which one might
ascend the top: up he trod it all musing, and when he was at the highest, he
found a little cave. Presently he called for Diceus, and entering the grot, he
saw two beds of moss so neatly made, that he could not imagine them to be the
simple work of nature: on the foremost he sat down, and Diceus on the other;
night as well as their former pains inviting them to rest, they unclad
themselves to dry their garments, and finding the temper of the climate
excessive hot, they slept without fear of any cold taking. Polexander's sleep
was not long, the night which grew very cold, and his disquiets, awakened him;
he clad himself without making any noise, that his servant might take the
better rest, and walking out, began to meditate on the woeful estate of his
fortune. After he had ended this sad meditation, he cast his eyes on the Moon,
and besought her (if she could) to number up all his miseries, and to relate
them to Alcidiana. At last it grew day, and the winds ceasing with the night, a
general calm ensued in both Elements, which were the subject of their
violence. Our Hero then left the place where he stood so long musing, and
getting to the highest part of the rock descri'd some land, but it seemed so
far off, that he despaired of his getting thither by swimming, and by
consequence believed, that hunger would effect what the tempest had denied him.
He (after his resolve to undergo that miserable end) descended to the cave:
at the entrance he cast his eyes on the portall and perceived some Letters
graven in the stone, his curiosity won him to read what it was, and with an
extreme astonishment found that which follows: 'Twas against this Rock
(after the to be lamented end of the great Polexander) that Amintha and
Alcippus (who would live no longer) were cast by a tempest. O ye! who
hereafter by the chance of the Sea may hap to be thrown on these shelves; know,
That the invincible Monarch of the Canaries, is no more: and that the Traitor
Astramadan, (who unable to vanquish him in an equal Combat) caused him to be
murdered by a base whole Nation that were enemies to his and all eminent
virtues.

After Polexander had read this Inscription so loud that Diceus might hear
him, it made him wonder no less then himself; they therefore verily thought
that Alcippus was dead on that rock, and Amintha swallowed up by the sea. With
which imagination, Polexander was so inly touched, that the tears came into
his eyes, and witnessing the grief he rooke for the loss of two so worthy to
be beloved; Eternal Providence (cried he) what horrible crimes have I
committed, that for their expiation I should run through all the torments that
can make a life miserable? Will thou not have me perish till such time as I
have lost all that I love; and die in the person of all my friends, before I
die in my self ^et Heaven, I murmr not, do as thou list: I am prepared to
endure all, and will ever respect that just and dreadful Power from whence the
thunder must come which will turn me to ashes. These pious thoughts gave way
to those of love; near all the day he spent in meditating on Alcidiana; and
talking to her as he had been in her presence, neither remembered his late
shipwreck, nor the fearful death which in all likelihood was inevitable to
him. But Diceus in the mean time, who thought on the preservation of his
Master, was gone down to the seaside to try if he could get thence any thing
that might keep them from starving. Amongst a great deal of caskes, pipes, and
fardels which floated about the rock, by good hap, a vessel of pure water,
and a barrel of bisquet were fortunately driven so near to Diceus, that he
took hold and drow them to him. As Soon as he had rolled them on the sand, he
went and made it known to his Master, and (against his will) won him to go
down to the beach, to make use of that which was sent by the particular care
of the Power that would preserve him. After he was descended, our Hero
(unwilling to thwart himself in the relief that was presented) steeped some of
the bisquet in the water, and gave himself some nurriture, being almost
quelled with his former toil, and a fast of near forty hours. A little after,
the night came on, and he ascended again with Diceus into his cave; and
rather to intertaine his disquiets then to take any rest, threw himself on his
bed of moss: some four or five hours after he had lain down, he thought he
hard some body talk near him; and therefore called Diceus, and asked whether
he dreamt or wanted any thing. He replied, that he neither talked in his sleep
nor needed ought, but that he was much deceived if he heard not some body
speak about the entry into the cave: he had no sooner said so, but an
apparition all black from head to feet came in, with a branch of a tree which
burnt as a torch of wax. Polexander raised his head, and asked what it fought,
but the phantasme in lieu of replying gave a fearful shreike, and went out of
the cave: Diceus seeing it go away so quickly, thought certainly it was a
Devil; and with that belief was almost dead for fear, when he saw it enter
again with five or six more as frightfull and horrid. Polexander could not
choose but laugh at his servants fear; but he was not too well settled himself
when he saw those phantasmes, come near to his bed, and that some of them
extending their arms toward him, and others taking him by the hands, seemed
to wi^ him to follow them, After he had indor'd a long time with patience those
Demons caresses, he grew weary of them, and asked them again and again what
they would have of him. They replied, hut 'twas in such a manner, that our
Hero could understand nothing by their howlings, (for we must say s^, and not
by their discourse.) They themselves thought too that they were not understood,
and would therefore exprosse themselves by signs; but their signs were more
difficult to be comprehended then their former language. Hereupon, Polexander
arose, and commanded Diccu^ not to forsake him, Come (said he) let us see
whither these Devils will lead us; presently he went out of the grot, and the
phantasms dancing about him, and whistling aloud in putting one finger in their
mouths, brought him straight down to a barque which rid at the foot of the
rock. Diceus, who could not imagine any other thing but that he was arri^'d at
that dreadful place, where his nurse had related to him the Devils turned
ferrie-men, and was^ed souls over into hell; thought that his Master and
himself were now to be carried thither both body and soul together. But
Polexander, who had no such ridiculous imaginations, perceived his mistake, and
thought that those whom he had taken for spi^its, were of those black people
which inhabit under the Torrid Zone. It was true indeed, for after six or
seven hours sailing, those Negroes landed in a country where the air was so
hot, and the sands so burning, that Polexander and his servant almost, thought
they walked on kindled char-coales, and were forced to. suffer themselves to be
guided with their eyes shut. At last they came into a place as delight some as
the others which they had passed were insupportable: 'twas a wood of
palme-trees, cedar^, and wild olives, so high and thick, that they kept a
great extent osiland from the Sunne's ardor: they were watered with many little
tills issuing from ^e source; within it was there a house of stone built in the
midst of many others, and a Temple at one end, whose stately and sumptuous
structure made it appear, that the inhabitants of that place had surmounted
their misery and barbarism, that they might not lodge in a poor hovell of
straw and dirt, a Deity whom they believed to be the absolute Lord of heaven
and earth. As Soon as ever Polexander's Convoy appeared with him, a great
company of men, women and children, as black as the former environed them;
and every one striving to touch the Prince, they crowned him with chaplets of
palm, and in that manner brought him into the house which exalted it self
above all the rest. When he came in, he found it not so rich as on the
outside; there was neither marble, not gilded seelings, nor rich tapestries:
all the ornament of the halls consisted in mats of palm, in some seats of wood,
and certain hangings made of discolored rushes; where there hung bows,
quivers full of arrowe^, half-pikes without iron heads, and steel bucklers,
with pretty handsome swords. After he had gone through three halls, one after
another, he came into a chamber, and in one of the corners, saw lying on a
very low bed, a man which seemed to be blind; by the Negros demeanure, our
Hero conceived he was their Prince, for one of them kneeling down, spoke to
him a while, and whilst he did so, held his eyes still on the earth. No sooner
had he ended his discourse, but the blind Prince lifting toward heaven, his
eyes incapable of light, called Polexander to him, and embracing him, bedewed
his cheeks with his tears. After this sad reception, he spoke to him much,
but our Hero understanding naught of his language, knew not to whom he should
address himself to learn who had spoken to that Prince of any thing which
concerned him, or what he expected from his own person. Whilst he stood thus
perplexed, there was a piece of mat lifted up, and instantly appeared some
fifteen or twenty women black as the men, and amongst them some that were of
admirable feature, who all with stretched out arms to our Hero, and tears,
besought him to take pity on their miseries. But he, unweeting how to answer
their petitions, or not knowing what to do in lessening their afflictions,
thought of pointing them up to heaven, and striking himself on the breast
afterward; as if he would say, that by its assistance, he would quit them of
all their troubles. In seeing these signs, all of both sexes, and all at once,
gave an acclamation, and hurrying together to the blind man's bed, seemed to
assure him of something of great importance. When this was ended, they
conducted our Hero to the Temple, and causing him to be an assistant to as
fantastical and odd sacrifices, as were the spirits of the Priests; he was
left with the chief of them, who was not so black as the rest. That man,
affecting the impertinent gravitie of those of his profession, and intimating
by his scattered and afrighting looks that he had some strange chimera's in
his brain, strove to speak Arabicke to make himself be understood. But if
Polexander had not divined the greatest part of his speech, he had been no
better instructed by the Pastor then he had been by his sheep: all that he
could gather from that strange gibbrish, was, that he was arrived in a Province
of the kingdom of Galatia, and that the blind man whom he had seen was Prince
of it; but being unjustly set on by the ambitious King of Thombut, he had lost
his estate, his sons, and the chief of his subjects, and been constrained to
fly to the deserts, to avoid the fury of his enemy, and preserve the
chastity of his daughters. That ever since his exile, his eyes had not been
without tears, and with too much weeping he had lost his sight: that every day
some of his subjects gave him intelligence that the tyrant of Thombut was
levying a puissant Army to perfect his destruction, and that within a short
time he would come and pluck both his wife and daughters out of his arms.
Polexander, after he decyphered thus much, was desirous to learn more, and
entreated the Priest to tell him, by what means they knew on what place the
tempest had cast him, and what they pretended of his assistance. The Priest
replied, that the Sun, father of the blind Prince, and the Deity of all
Galatia, had appeared in his dream to his sorrowful son, and (after his
assuring him that he should yet see his beams again, and be avenged of the
tyrant of Thombut) enjoined him to send every month to the Hermit's rock, till
such time as they found in the holy Cave, two men of a strange color and
language. After the chief Priest had related the blind Prince's dream, he
brought Polexander into the most private place of the Temple, and drew from
under the Altar a table of brass, on which in Arabic characters was written a
Prophefie, which Polexander read and found it thus. WHen the Scepter of
Galatiashall be forced out of the hands of Abrim Esseron's true Successor, and
that the misfortunes of the State shall be lincked with those which are
particular to the Royal Families; the Sun our father shall be compelled
whether he will or no, to deny his light to the dearest of his children. But
the tears and piety of that good King shall at last touch that
incomprehensible Power, which hides it self in the rays of that great light.
From thence, shall be sent into the world a Prince, that shall be succourer and
Protector general of all such as are afflicted, and he shall be made to
wander in diverse parts of the world, to the end, that many afflicted souls may
by his assistance, be delivered from their miseries. The unfortunate King of
Galatia shall have his share in that universal happiness, if he be so prudent
as not to neglect it. The Rock which shall become famous by the miracles of a
holy Hermit, is to be the place where the blind Prince shall find (with the
fight which he has lost) that invincible arm which shall subdue his enemies.

Though Polexander could not contradict the verities contained in the Prophecy
without denying those things which himself had either done or suffered; yet he
could not imagine, that he was either the Prince whose birth was so certainly
foretold, or that his actions merited the honor they received by such
extraordinary ways: yet considering that heaven makes use of the meanest
creatures whereby to operate the greatest wonders, he humbled himself; and by
the doubt of his ability, made him more worthy then he was of those
employments which were reserved for his courage. Scarce had he ended his
acknowledgement, when diverse clamours arose in all parts of the wood, and a
little after, a great number of women and children hurrying on the neck of one
another into the Temple, made the Archpriest believe, that either the blind
Prince was dead, or his enemies were come to assail him. Presently our Hero
made out of the Temple, and with the Priest ran to the Kings lodgings: there he
understood how the troops of the tyrant of Thombut were got into the wood, and
that they had either slain or put to flight all those that opposed their
entry. He heartned the blind Prince and his timorous Court, and putting
himself in the front of three or four hundred archers, made signs to them
that they should go on courageously and repulse their enemies. The Princesses
who had now no other sanctuary then his valor, brought him part of such arms
as he needed; one of them presented him with a sword and target, another caused
a very brave horse to be brought him, and all falling at his feet, besought him
to have compassion on their misfortunes, and not abandon their honors to the
infamous prosecution of the tyrant of Thombut. Polexander, overjoyed that he
had gotten wherewithal to resist the enemy, and so piously exercise his
courage, went to meet the Thombutians, and surprising them as they were
scattered, either to pillage the Galatians, or to murder them, charged them so
furiously that they were all routed, and after, so followed through the
deserts, that not one was left to carry news of their defeat to the King of
Thombut. Polexander returned from the fight, or to say better, from the chase,
without the loss of any one that followed him, and entering the Kings
lodgings, found him at his devotions with the Chief Priest, and the Princesses
his daughters. He made known to him by the Priest, that his enemies were
retired, and that they seemed by their little resistance, they had no great
mind to drive him from the place where he was. His modesty would not permit
him to say more; but his soldiers being dispersed through the palace, so
highly extolled his valor which had overthrown their enemies, that they made
him be esteemed for the Deity whom they adored. The women and children seeing
their husbands and fathers safely returned, cast themselves on the earth, to
render thanks to our Hero, and invocating him in their private necessities,
besought the continuation of his miracles among them. The good King of Galatia
let himself slip into that opinion, and as there is no error which so easily
infecteth all humane minds then that which leads us to the adoration of such
as have redeemed us from our miseries; he thought he could not without
impiety, deny divine honor to such a one as did the actions of a Deity.
This thought so raised his abated courage, that in the very instant he left his
bed, and lea^ing on two of his daughters, was led to the Temple to give thanks
to heaven for Polexander's victory. Our Hero admiring the zeal which that
afflicted Prince made show of to a Power, of which he had scarce any knowledge,
resolved to instruct him ere he went thence; and in the mean time told him by
his Priest, that he should go on in his piety, and promise to himself from
that Deity which he invoak'd with so much fervor not only all the
greatnesses and goods he had lost, but all that his imagination could represent
unto him. After these promises, he desired instantly to prosecute the execution
of such as depended on him, and to perform them effectually, intended to
sallie out of the deserts with five or six thousand Galatiaus, and charge in
all parts of the country on the troops of the tyrant of Thombut. The blind
Prince who certainly believed that Polexander was sent from heaven to establish
him in his throne, approved of his resolution, and all those whom love and
duty had obliged to follow the fortune of their King, prepared them to that
war with all the courage and cheerfulness which loyal and affectionate
subjects could testify in defense of their Prince. Our Hero drew them forth
from their abodes, made them traverse the deserts, entered into Galutia, and in
eight days gave two little battles, perfected three sieges, out the throats of
most part of the garrisons, and drove the rest far into the territories of
Thombut. Those that know not the Provinces I write of, will believe I mean to
make Polexander pass for an A^adis, or some other enchanted Knight, in making
him conquer a Kingdom in eight days; but when he shall understand that all the
Kingdom of Galatia consists but in three great Bourghs, and some twenty or
thirty Hamlets, they will alter their cause of upbraiding me, and accuse me
for so ill husbanding our Hero's time, in making him lose so much in an
enterprise of so little importance. Yet let their second accusation^ be
silenced as well as the former, since it is true, that the King of Thombut's
soldiers having notice of our Hero's coming, not only came to meet him with
a true warlike resolution, but entrenched themselves in the villages, after
they had been beaten in the field, and disputed with the Galatians for the
least of their Hamlets. There fell above four thousand in the fights and
sieges, and the rest (as I said) being forced to save themselves in the ancient
territory of the King of Thombut, struck the inhabitants with such a terror,
that if Polexander had intended to assail them, without doubt he had conquered
them all. But he thought it not to belong to the King of Galatia, nor for the
good of his affairs, and therefore contented himself with the regaining of
that which had been unjustly usurped. He therefore returned, and brought him
out of his sanctuary, and conducting him to the great town that bears the
name of the kingdom, re-established him very solemnly in the ancient throne of
his fathers. Some few days after came to him the King of Thombut's
Ambassadors, and after their congratulating his return, told him, that the
King their Master had specially sent them, to entreat an abolition of things
passed, and impute all which seemed contrary to his promises and their ancient
alliance, to the iniquity of the times. To this they added, that if the blind
Prince intended to preserve the peace, and make his peoples tranquillity
lasting, he should hearken to some alliance, whereby the Crowns of Galatia and
Thombut being united, their interests might be common, and their affections
reciprocal. The King of Galatia deceived by these fair propositions, yielded
to all that the tyrant of Thombut desired from him; and told his Ambassadors,
that he not only left to their Master the choice of four daughters he had,
but also from thence forward, would live with him as with his son or brother;
provided that he restored to him the two Princes his sons, whom he had detained
prisoners since the beginning of the war. The Ambassadors dispatched letters
to their Master, ^and had quickly their answer: in them he granted to the King
of Galatia more then he desired, and demanded his second daughter, who was as
courageous as the lions among whom she had been bred. The marriage concluded
on, the Ambassadors returned to Thombut, and within a while after, others came
with a great equipage, who solemnly espoused the Princess of Galatia. Her
father, who was a good man, but as weak and blind in spirit as in body,
entreated Polexander to be the new Queens conductor to Thombut, and to procure
from the prison of the King her husband, the two Princes of Galatia.
Polexander, who sought for nothing more then an occasion to abandon Afric,
that he might get him another ship, wherein he might put forth again for the
discovery of that enchanted Island, which he could not attain to, easily
condescended to the Kings request: but having seriously pondered on the
proceedings of the King of Thombut, he wished the good blind Prince that before
he let his daughter depart from him, to press the re-deliverie of the Princes
of Galatia; and secure the life of the one by the liberty of the others. Ah
Sir! replied the poor King, (by his Priest) my children will be dead if I
intimate the least suspicion of that Kings faith; he is of a spirit haughty
and cruel, who would have all men come under his lee, and to satisfy his
ambition spares not the very lives of his own children. It may be (replied
Polexander) his pride may be a little abated, and the fear of falling into your
hands, may hinder him from attempting any thing against the lives of your
sons. The chief Priest was of our Hero's opinion, but speaking (only) as
his Masters Interpreter, he besought Polexander, by mildness to work into
that barbarous Prince, and do a new miracle in the deliverie of the captive
Princes. Polexander knowing the weakness of that poor King, would not
disquiet him any more; he therefore with tears took leave of him, and after
twelve days journey, came to the great Court of Thombut with the Princess of
Galatia. The tyrant gave him such intertainment as was able to assure a mind
the most mistrustfull, and after he had often told him that he would have
bought his company with the loss of many kingdoms, besought him (in embraces)
to love Thombut as much as he had done Galatia. Polexander replied to these
false-hearted pratlings, after his wonted freedom; but he was in a place where
'twas a heinous offense to speak freely, and he was besides so suspected, that
had he been so poor spirited as to have soothed with tyranny, yet had he felt
its cruelty. The King of Thombut among his other qualities, having perfectly
the art of dissimulation, concealed all his vices, to make the better use of
them when there was occasion: he counterfeited the courteous, the humble, and
the pitiful man; and speaking of the blind King's afflictions, was so
treacherous as to let fall some tears at their relation. If he had so much
command over himself to deceive Polexander, he had no less to beguile the
Princess of Galatia. Some few days after her arrival, she was solemnly
conducted to the great Temple of Thombut, and from thence to the hall appointed
and prepared for her nuptial solemnities Polexander was engaged to be at that
assembly, and as if his good aspect and presence had a design to avenge that
Innocence which the tyrant had too much oppressed, it touched to the heart, and
corrupted (if I may dare say so) the innocence of his two daughters. They were
twins, and might have passed for very amiable personages, if that eternal
which dwelt on their faces had not hidden their chiefest beauties, besides they
were the sole creatures whom the tyrant durst trust, for he having filled with
blood all the best houses of his kingdom, imagined that he had as many enemies
as subjects. He slept not but under their guard and their watchings; and (as
it is related of an old tyrant of Sicily) he would not have any assistance in
all his necessities but from from those miserable Princesses. They had not
seen Polexander before their father's marriage day, since they were still
confined, and never had the liberty to converse either with subject or
stranger: they had no sooner cast their eyes on the Prince (who since his
brother's death might well vaunt himself to be the fairest of ^ll men) but
they lost their simplicity, or to say better, the insensibility, in which their
father had nourished them. They had no sooner that first touch, but they fell
in love, and no sooner fell in love, but they began to be witty: they studied
their gestures and their countenances, and I know not what secret motion
speaking inwardly, assured them that 'twas as much as their life was worth if
their father came to the knowledge of their affection. This within
advertisement made them turn away their eyes from that dear object, which
they could not sufficiently gaze on, imposed them silence at their first
intertaining one another; smothered their sighs in the place of their
conception, and even made them begin to feel how insupportable was their
father's tyranny. He in the mean time, that had far differing thoughts from
those of his daughters, rejoiced in himself that he was got to the day of his
revenge, and grown able in one same time to exercise his fury on many of his
enemies: he swom already in the blood of the Princess of Galatia, and that of
Polexander, and lamented that a night which was to be so joysome unto him,
seemed by its slow coming to envy the contentments it reserved for him. That
night, destinated to so many massacres, no sooner came, but the tyrant prepared
to make good use of it; he broke up the company assembled for the nuptial
solemnities, and caused the Bride to be conducted to a chamber which in all
appearance was made ready for her, wherein she might receive the innocent
pleasures of marriage; but that place as treacherous as its master, under those
deceitful ornaments, hid the deadly scaffold which was prepared for the
execution of that unfortunate P^incesse. The Ladies who had brought her
thither, innocently left her to the rage of his hangmen, and retired with their
husbands to rejoice at home for that marriage, which in their judgments was to
produce the peace, security, and plenty of former times. Whilst all the town
was in feasting and jollity, and a great number of rascals (hired by the
tyrants accomplices) ran from street to street, and by their clamours and
disorder hindered the non-performances of that tragedy which was to be acted in
the palace; Polexander was taken and chained in his bed, even by those that
were wont to wait on him, and led with the woeful Diceus into a prison that
was under the King of Thombut's chamber. The tyrant had straight ways notice
of it, and instantly hastening thither, at first sight infinitely out-raged and
reviled the Prince, and at last threatened to make him undergo such tortures
and punishment, as were proportionable to his own resentment. After these
insolences he departed, and fastening the door with many chains and locks,
thought that the keys could be no where so sure as in the custody of one of
his daughters. She who had them was called Philesia, who was not only more
lovely then her sister, but withal more affected Polexander. The tyrant
commanded her to keep those keys more carefully then her eyes, and thinking to
overjoy her, in few words declared the design he had to avenge himself with
his own hands, on that stranger who had made him lose all Galatia. At those
words, Philesia was like to have let the keys fall out of her hands, and
indeed was near discovering what she had till that time concealed, if the same
love which had caused that dangerous emotion, had not kept it from being
perceived. Before the enamored Princess was well recollected, twenty of the
most deformed Negro's which Africa puts in the number of her monsters, came
into the chamber where the tyrant was, and dragging after them the two Princes
of Galatia, outrageously bastonaded them to make them walk. As Soon as the
tyrant had placed them near their sister, he turned to her, and making his true
hatred which he had always borne them to break out to the utmost; Thou have
then dared to believe (said he) in famous brood of a heards-man that I would
make thee, daughter of my greatest enemy, and a vagabonds concubine, the
partner of my bed? Surely thy hopes have too much injured me, and I will
therefore have them severely chastis'd. With that he looked on the Princes of
Galatia, and commanded them to strangle their sister. Never shall be spectacle
(how bloody soever it can be imagined) any way comparable to this that I
describe. At the tyrants command Philesia cast her eyes on her brothers, and
seeing them insensible at that excessive outrage, she threw her looks on them,
not languishing and pitiful, but looks that were furious, and such as
upbraided them for their ignominy and cowardice. Miserable men (said she) are
you not yet accustomed after so long and dishonorable a slavery to a blind
obedience? Do what your master commands you, and since you have not the
courage to live and die like Princes, g^ve at least a testimony to the world
that you are good and obedient slaves. The tyrant clapped his hand on her
mouth, that she might not go on, and growing enraged to see all his fury
contemned by the constancy of a young maiden: Ah Tygresse! (said he) I always
believed that thou were not resolved to receive me into thine arms, for any
other end then to strangle me; but I have prevented thy treachery, and
therefore thou desire nothing more then to die. It Is true tyrant, replied the
Princess, I was resolved to kill thee this night with the weapon I conceal
from thee; with that she put her hand under a large veil of tiffany, which
served her for an upper garment, and made show as if she would draw somewhat
from under it. The tyrant (who was extremely timorous, as usually those are who
are as exceedingly cruel) was afrighted at the Princesse's action, and flew on
her, either to seize her arm, or to act himself, what he had resolved should
have been done by the Princes of Galatia. Philesia, seeing this prodigious
example of her father's cruelty, was so stricken with it, that on an instant
her intellect lost all its simpliciny, or to say better, its error; she then
perceived things as they were, and disdeceiving her self of her former
opinions, was forced to confess that children are not always of an ill
nature, though they disapprove the actions of their parents. The love she bore
to Polexander serving her for an excellent Master, had in a moment inspired her
with these high notions; in the very instant that she heard speak of his
courtesy and valor, she condemned her fathers actions, and misliking them her
self, looked on him as an object of hatred, as soon as she thought on our
Hero; but when she understood from that merciless father that he had
resolved to murder that Prince, she trembled through her natural sensibility,
trod under foot the names of father and daughter, and said within her self,
that it was more just to ruin the oppressor, then to suffer the oppressed to
perish. This being so, imagine what her thoughts were, and what her joy, when
her father delivered the keys of Polexander's prison into her hands; she gave
heaven thanks for it, which she thought was the author of that wonder, and
prayed often to have an occasion given her, whereby she might make a happy use
of her charge of jailer: she believed her prayers were heard when she saw the
tyrant busied in disarming the Lady. Presently she ran out of the chamber, and
running to Polexander's prison, so nimbly handled the locks and keys, and so
speedily opened the doors, that such a miracle could not but be attributed to
the blind God of love. Her affection advised her to defer her love's
deliverance, that she might the more satisfy the desire she had of seeing him;
but the same passion letting her know, that she loves not truly who regards
her own contentment as the principal object of her love; she loosned
Polexander's chains, and told him in Arabicke, that 'twas all she could do
for his preservation. When she had spoke thus she fled, and for fear let fall
at the entry of the prison a torch which she had brought. Polexander, that
would not go forth without Diceus, lighted the torch again that was not well
extinguished, and making use of it for his servants liberty, presently after
put it out to save themselves the better in the dark. Chance (which has
oftentimes better success then judicious guidance) led Polexander right to the
chamber where he had been taken; he knew it by the light of a lamp that hung
over the staire, and calling to mind the good sword which the Princess of
Galatia had given him, went in to see whether any had carried it away. He found
it where he had laid it, and vowing not to leave so good a weapon but with his
life, descended into one of the courts of the palace; the place was enclosed
only with a palisadoe, but the height and greatness of the piles or stakes
made it as safe as if it had been environed with a wall. Polexander ran to the
gate with an intent to fight with the guard, if they stopped his going out; but
he saw them all dead on the ground, and presently heard a clamor on all sides:
he imagined it to be a remainder of the public rejoicing, and that the people
(ignorant of what was done in the palace) celebrated with all kind of pleasing
licenciousnesse a feast which they hoped should give a period to their
calamities. With this opinion he went out of that court, but when he came into
a large place which served for the avant-court to the palace, he descride at
very day break a Negro dragging a Lady by the hairs of her head: that
barbarous act made him forget his intention to save himself, and with his
sword drawn, made toward that hangman, and with one blow on the head slew
him, and made him fall at her feet whom he had so unworthily treated. As Soon as
the unfortunate Lady saw her self at liberty, Pity me she would have said to
Polexander, but knowing him as she had the first word on her tongue: Ah! thou
powerful origin of my race (cried she) author of light, what see I? Pardon,
pardon me my first thoughts, I am guilty of doubting of thy providence: thou
savest me when I accused thee of my ruin, and thou left'st me not in the power
of the perfidious Atalas, but of purpose to deliver me into the hands of this
dear and worthy stranger. Polexander knew not presently who 'twas that spoke
thus, but looking on her at leisure, he thought she was one of the Princesses
of Thombut, and the very same who had set him at liberty. The first imagination
after this, was, that the tyrant had been informed of his escape, and
suspecting his daughter to be the author of it, had condemned her to be so
dragged by the hair, that the cruelty of the punishment might answer the
enormitie of the offense. This thought bred in him so extreme an horror of
that barbarous Prince, that being suddenly seized on with an heroic fury; O
thou! (said he) that instructest mine arms to fight, and have rendered me this
sword, (with that he lifted it a lost) to make thine anger felt by such as
contemn thy clemency, give me now an extraordinary strength, and be pleased,
that to avenge the Majesty which invirons thee, I may exterminate the tyrant
that dares wrong it in thy Images. As he ended this ejaculation, he saw come
out of the great gate of the palace, a man all bloody, who being forced back
by near twenty others, witnessed by his resistance that he only gave way to
their number. Polexander being moved with the Negro's valor, left Diceus with
Philesia, and ran whither his great courage carried him. Instantly he flew in
among the murderers, and felling two or three of them so afrighted the rest,
that he took from them all desire of perfecting their assassinate. He who had
been so fortunately assisted, cast himself at Polexander's feet, and kissing
them, Generous stranger (said he) though Galatia should erect Altars to thee,
should it be acquitted of that which it owes to thy valor? No truly, and I
confess for it, that having for ever delivered her from the tyrant of
Thombut's persecutions, she is bound to invent new honors, to let posterity
know that she has not blended thee amongst her other gods. Ah Prince of
Galatia! (said Polexander) go not on with these blasphemies, unless you have
a mind to ruin your self; speak with more respect of things divine, and know
it is thence, and not from me, that you are freed from the hands of your
enemies. But tell me who has reduced you to the state I find you in; where is
the Princess your sister? What does the King of Thombut? That tyrant is now no
more, replied the Prince of Galatia, another as cruel as himself has struck
him out of the world; but alas! he has had the comfort before he died to
satiate his fury by the death of those you inquire after. How! (said
Polexander) is the tyrant of Thombut dead? He is so, replied the Prince, and
with him his two daughters, who truly for their beauties as well as for their
virtues, merited a better fortune. But the new tyrant murdered not the father
to spare the daughters, and questionless you will fall into his traps if you
hasten not to escape his fury. Polexander would have been instructed of all
these tragical events, but he had not time, for a great company of Negroes
rushing out of the palace, came (with a great shouting) to fall on him; he
resolved rather to die then give ground, and therefore slighted the danger, and
plunged his sword up to the very hilts in the belly of the ringleader to that
enraged troop. Fortune at that very instant had mind of our incomparable
Hero, and repenting her putting his virtue to so cruel trials, engaged her
self to be thereafter more favorable unto him; and that she might not defer
the execution of her promise to another time, she made the most part of the
inhabitants of Thombut to run to the succor of our Hero. Rumor, though
confusedly, gave them intelligence of all that which had passed in the palace,
and upon that news they had armed themselves for the preservation of their
liberty, if they had recovered it, and if not, to get it themselves by the
sword. As Soon as they appeared in the place where the Princess Philesia was
left, they would have ranged themselves in order both for offense and defense;
but the Princess fearing lest their too much preparation might make them lose
the occasion of assisting Polexander, went to meet them all disheveled as she
was, and without loss of time in relating what had passed: Run (said she) and
make haste my friends to the aid of that man who gave the first blow for the
subversion of the tyranny which inthralled you: he is in fight with the cruel
Nigeran, who by the murdering my father thinks to become master of your
liberties, your goods and lives. The Thombutians presently nock'd their
arrows, and entering all headlong into the palace court, so well behaved
themselves for the preservation of their Liberatour, as well as for their
liberty, that he who would have oppressed them, (with all his accomplices) was
sacrificed to the memory of the dead, and the safety of the living.
Polexander, being so miracoulously with-drawne from the danger whereinto his
valor had engaged him, turned to the Thombutians, and speaking to them in
Arabic; My friends (said he) you are too much redevable to heaven, to defer
to another time the thanks you are bound to render: Get you to your Temple,
and offer up the spoils of the tyranny you have undergone, as an eternal
remembrance, that you acknowledge your deliverance to have only come from
thence. Those who understood the Arabicke, interpreted to their companions what
Polexander had said; and all of them approving his counsel, resolved to follow
it. He put him self in the from, and taking the Prince of Galatia with the one
hand and the Princess of Thombut with the other, would march so, that the
people might have compassion on them both, and be won more easily to what he
intended to make them execute. When he was come to the Temple, the Priests
began their acts of thankesgiving, and as soon as they were ended, he entreated
the Assembly not to depart till they knew how strange the accidents were, which
heaven had permitted for the punishment of miscreants, and the comfort of
honest men. Philesia hearing this preface, stepped forward, and told the
multitude that she being a spectatrix of all the miseries which had befaine her
house, she could better relate them then any else. The Thombutians entreated
her to fear nothing, and to make known to them all things as they had passed,
they pressed up thick together, that they might lose naught of what she spoke,
and got her to stand on a seat which by chance was by her, that she might be
heard the farther off; and a general silence being imposed, thus she began: If
I did not enforce my resentments, and sacrificed not my tears and lamentations
to the public felicity, I ^eare lest you would think me unworthie the
compassion my misfortune winnes from you. What shall I do O ye Thombutians?
Shall not a daughter be permitted to bewail the death of her father? But shall
a person who is obliged to you for her life be permitted to lament the death of
your tyrant? No, Philesia will not confound things so differing; she if you
please, will yield what she owes to nature, and yet not deny the debt is
expected from her to her Country. She will rejoice with you for the
extirpation of your enemies, and bewail to her self the miserable death of
her father, and the desolation of her family. But why should I (with these
thoughts) defer the recital of those disasters which have finished yours?
Hearken ye inhabitants of Thombut, and judge if that man be not devoid of
reason that wishes for a Crown. Ambition, which has always handled the mind
of the King my father, far more cruelly then he has done you, advised him to
adjoyne to his own territories those of the most part of his neighbors. He
began with that of Galatia, and the facility of the conquest, gave him a desire
to undertake some that were far more considerable; to that end he raised a
mighty army, and was ready to proclaim war against the King of Gheneoa,
when this visible Deity (with that she pointed to Polexander) came to succor
the King of Galatia; and by the recovery of his Realm, confounded all my
fathers pretentions. His ambition seeing it self curbed in the beginning of
it is course, put into his thought such fearful ways of avenging himself,
that the only relating them would be able to make that monster seem more
horrible to you then I can describe it. My father therefore knowing the
weakness of the King of Galatia, was willing to make use of it; he proposed a
peace to him on such conditions, which he thought surely the other would not
refuse: it was accepted, and the Princes of Galatia delivered not for a
hostage, but for the victime of that accommodation. When my father had that
unfortunate Princess in his power, and with her this invincible stranger,
(showing Polexander) cruelty, which always accompanies ambition, counseled
him to join the pleasure of his revenge to the firm establishment of his
authority. Though that Devil be merciless, yet is it far more ingenious in
the execution of its fury; it persuaded my father that he should not be
sufficiently avenged, if he satisfied himself only with murdering them; and
that temptation prevailed. Thereupon he resolved that the Princess of Galatia
should die, but he would have her suffer such a death that might fully glut his
fury. That Princess was no sooner in the chamber where she was to receive the
Crown of Thombut, but she saw her brothers enter, not sumptuous and brave as
she had seen them a little before, but as two miserable slaves dragged to
their execution. Your enemy commanded them to strangle their sister, which
bloody charge disturbed all sense and reason in them, and their sister
upbraided them for their senselessness, showing the stoutnesse of her heart;
laughed at her husbands threatenings, and made him believe that she came to
Thombut with no other intent then to murder him. The credulous King flew on
her, with an intent to take away the weapon which she made show to pluck from
under her robe; but finding none, he grew the more enraged, and with his own
hands cast a bow-string about the neck of that to be deplored Princess. Long
might she (if she had listed) have defended her life, but she conceived that to
give it freely, was the last sign of a true courage. The executioners of your
enemies cruelties, bound the two ends of the string to the arms of the two
Princes, and compelled them with blows to be themselves their sisters
stranglers. Imagine (if it be possible) what their griefs, what their
sorrows, and what their torments were during that of their sister; truly they
endured so much of all, that the eldest expired in seeing his sister die; and
he whom you see here, had not been alive, if in the height of his anxietie, a
long swound had not made him void of all sensibilitie. These dismal beginnings
had a sequel worthy of them; the cruel Nigeran whom you banished from Thombut
for the enormitie of his offenses, forsook the ordinary place of his retreat,
and under favor of the night, slipped into the palace, to execute that which he
had often attempted. At his first entrance, he cut the throats of the guard, as
they lay buried in sleep and wine; and followed with above a hundred more
banished fellows, flung into the chamber where your enemy feasted with
pleasure on the bloody fruits of his impious and abhorred vengeance. To him he
threw an impoyson'd dart, which too well guided (for me most miserable and
disinherited orphelin) entered under my father's left breast, and with that blow
felled him half dead on the body of his unfortunate wife. My sister seeing him
wounded, ran in, that she might not forsake him in that extremity, but
presently being shot with three arrows, she had the happiness of neither
surviving her father nor her fortune. All the soldiers in the chamber were put
to the sword, and justly rewarded for their too wicked obedience. For my self,
I fled, and strove to save me by the most unfrequented places of the palace;
but my flight was bootlesse, for I was found out by Atalas, the most execrable
of all Nigeran's companions: many strange injuries he did me, and hurled me on
the earth, either certainly to have torn out my heart, or to murder me by
some most cruel and inhumane way. But by chance finding under my hand an arrow
which that monster had let fall, I gave him with it a deep wound in the thigh:
as soon as he felt himself wounded, he arose, and tearing off part of my
hair, dragged me by the rest, cross the court of the palace. I cannot tell
you what he would have done with me, but I can well say that my invincible
Protector staid him, and with one blow deprived him of the power of doing any
more mischief. These my friends are the last night's events; they are so
strange and so many, that they would be incredible were they a little remote
from us. I desire you not to look on me now as on her that was lately your
Princess; the dead have made that condition too odious to the living to
preserve it. I renounce it most willingly, and entreat from you nothing, but
that burying in one same tomb the body of my father and the hatred you have
borne him; you will be pleased that I may abandon the troublesome titles of
Sovereign and Mistress, and partake with you the pleasures which accompany
private fortunes. Philesia had no sooner ended this oration, which had drawn
tears from the eyes of most of the hearers, but there arose a humming noise,
such as often happens in a great Assembly, wherein is deliberated the peace and
safety of the Weale-publike. At last as those voices broke out, and besought
Philesia to choose a husband worthy of her, to fill the throne of her ancestors,
and by the honorable actions of her government, gain so much on the hearts of
all, that (without injustice) none might absolutely condemn the memory of her
father. Alas! (cried the Princess) hurl me not again into that tempest from
whence I am miraculously escaped; suffer me to enjoy (with your selves) the
sweets of liberty; let them desire and sue for thee that list, most miserable
and glorious condition, which have nothing but bitterness and vexation for
those that make good use of thee; and art naught but fear and torture to such
as misapply it. The mournful example of the King my father is too recent in my
memory, to suffer my self to be blinded with thy deceitful allurements; and
ye my friends, who to heap on me imaginary felicities, would make me lose such
as are real, have sufficiently tried that an injunction is no less dangerous
to those that undergo it, then to such as put it in execution. Root out
therefore that monster that can but work mischief, and do so, that there may
not be amongst you any condition incompatible with innocence. If the people
were astonished to hear the Princess speak so judiciously, Polexander was far
more ravished at it; he then entreated the Assembly to give him audi^nce, and
addressing himself to such as understood the Arabicke; Thombutians, (said he)
you cannot doubt but she will reign well that so perfectly knows the miseries
of a tyrannical government. Engage her then whether she will or no, to t^ke on
her the care of your fortunes, and that she may have some one to lend a hand to
so high and weighty a charge, give her the Prince of Galatia for a husband He
is descended from so good a father, that it is impossible for him to be ill;
besides the long bondage which he has constantly endured, may well assure you
that he will sustain his regality with the same courage. This counsel
savouring well to all of the best rank, the multitude would needs know what
'twas, and as soon as they understood it, they not only gave their
approbation, but in the very instant, proclaimed the Prince of Galatia King of
Thombut, and husband to their Queen. Philesia did her utmost that she might not
yield to the peoples requests, but as soon as Polexander added his to theirs,
she could no longer deny them, but descending from her seat, and extending
her hand to the Prince of Galatia, I am yours (said she) since my deliverer
commands it. The Prince seeing himself in an instant brought from a slave to a
throne, did what he could to meditate on so great and so happy a revolution;
but (as one should say) taking his happiness with too much greediness, he
gave not himself leisure to taste it. The people did not so, for these sudden
and unexpected changes, gave them cause of pleasure and extraordinary
rejoicing: they showed well, that their nature being of it self insensible,
cannot be roused up but by very urgent spurs, and if it do not instantly pass
from one extremity to another, they are not capable of resenting the
alterations which betide them. Polexander, finding all things so well disposed,
was desirous (before he parted thence) to see them well perfected; in the very
instant the officers of Thombut resolved with him of what they had to do, and
to that end, went to the palace to take thence the dead, and having left
nothing there that might retain the memory of what passed, so altered the face
of the place, that a man might say, they had built their Queen a new palace.
She was conducted thither with much ceremony, but of all her fortune, nothing
so much pleased her mind, as the freedom she had to see and intertaine
Polexander. As Soon as she was in a place fit to speak in private, she made
known her affection to him, and besought him never to forsake her. Polexander
taking notice of a great deal of innocence in that Princesses love, was
willing to remedy it with as much sweetness; he therefore told her, she could
not blamelesly love him since she was engaged to another, and that the promise
she had made newly to the Prince of Galatia, was a continual bar for her
affecting any other. If it be so (replied the Princess, with a great deal of
simplicity) I recall the promise I made him, for I can love none but your
self; and with that she fell a weeping. Polexander, very loath that the
Princesses folly should be known abroad, entreated her to strive with her
self in an important affair on which depended so much of her reputation; and
intimating a great resentment of her affection, protested that of all those
which had the honor to enjoy her presence, there should be none able to
surpass him in the intention he had to serve her. These words a little
pacified or rather sweetened the Princess discontents; but her sickness being
not of that kind which is cured by such slight remedies, the more our new
physician applied them, the worse grew his patient. When he perceived that his
being there ruined all that his advice would have perfected, he resolved to be
gone. The very night (therefore) of the Princesses nuptials, he stole away
from the palace, and put himself on the Niger in a boat belonging to a
merchant of Gheneoa which Diceus had privately retained. Let us leave Philesia
in quiet, since she is not to be so long, and follow the course of the Niger,
and the precious charge which floates on it. Though that river runs along a
most plain and eaven champion, yet runs it as swiftly as those floods which
have a far greater declining. The lesser vessels in which the Negro's
traffic, go thirty five or forty miles a day, and those which use their
sails make as much way more. That wherein Polexander embarked was of the
latter sort, for within five days sail he came to the frontiers of the
kingdom of Gheneoa. It Is a great province, and extends it self along the
Niger above a hundred miles from East to West; it has Galatia on the North,
Melly on the South, Thombut on the East, and the Ocean on the West. The Niger
which over-flowes like to Nilus, covers the lands of that Province in the
months of July, August, and September, and makes them so fertile, that the
inhabitants want nothing useful for life. Polexander took great pleasure in
seeing the abundance of those places which the ancient Geographers set down for
uninhabitable wildernesses; and intertain'd himself with his mariner about the
customs of that kingdom of Gheneoa, and the fashions or manners and exercises
of the Prince. He was informed of many rarities, and by so pleasant a
diversion, a little beguiled the continual discontents, which his little hope
of ever finding the Inaccessible Island threw on him: at last he saw the tops
of those high Pyramids, which are at the entry of a famous Temple consecrated
by the inhabitants of Gheneoa to the Sun; by little and little the other
structures appeared, and when he came nearer, he distinctly noted the fair
situation of that great village, which sometimes is in the continent, and at
others, in the midst of the waters. When he came within a mile of it, he
descri'd in the open fields a great many men, both horse and foot, which ran
against one another as they had been in fight; thereupon he commanded his
boat might be stayed to see the event of the skirmish, but not well perceiving
that which passed by reason of the dust which arose under the men and horses
feet, he cau^'d them to land him; no sooner was he got on the top of the bank,
but he saw two men which in full speed strove to get to the river; at first he
thought it was for a wager, but a little after he saw a huge lion, who
violently throwing himself on the hindermost of the Knights, plucked him off
his horse, and almost as quickly tore him in pieces. He who had escaped the
danger, in lien of flying away whilst the lion was busied, stayed when he heard
his companion cry out: his affection had no sooner made him commit that fault,
but his reason caused him to repent it; he would saine save himself, since he
could no more serve him whom the lion had slain; but he had not time, for the
beast in ten or twelve leap^ got to him, and had handled him as ill as his
companion, if he had not suddenly cast himself from his saddle, and (on foot)
opposed his horse against his fierce enemie's fury. He had torn out the
horses intrailes before the Knight could get twenty paces off; and then flew on
him, proud of his victories, and presenting him his bloody paws, seemed to
call him to the combat. Fear had pusled the man's judgment (even till then
when he saw himself at the point of losing his life) so far, that he put
himself in no posture of defending himself. Polexander was moved at it, and
presently with his sword in his hand, redeeming (as I may say) the life of that
miserable man out of the paws of the lion, would see whether it were more
difficult to vanquish men then beasts; he wound about his left arm a kind of
a short cloak, which Diceus had bought for him at Thombut, and using it as a
buckler, stopped the fury of his enemy. Those who have related that those
beasts bear a respect to the Majesty of Kings, never saw them in an equal
estate of hurting one another: the lion with whom Polexander contested, flung
on him with a fearful roaring; but our Hero making him twice feel the edge
of his sword, beli'd the fable that says, the rage of that beast is never so
great as when he sees his own blood gushing out. When he saw Polexander
shield himself so well that he could not fasten on him, he drew back, and
flinging presently into the air with a wonderful impetuousnesse, would have
thrown himself over Polexander, and seized on his head in passing; but our
Hero avoiding that attainct, thrust his sword into his belly, and so
fortunately met (it glyding upwards) with his heart, that the beast was no
sooner pierced, but he fell dead on the sand. During the decision of this
combat, the man for whom it was undertaken, was upon his knees, with his hands
extended to heaven for his defender's victory; as soon as he saw his prayers
were exauc'd, he came to him, and looking on him, was not less ravished at his
brave appearance, then he had been already at his own preservation. If thou
be not (said he) the Deity whom I adore, thou art at least one of those fair
Spirits which incompasse his throne, and (as Ministers of his power) never
appear but for our safeguard. What would that Negro have said if he had seen
Polexander before his voyages, his disquiets, and insupportable heat of the
South, had not only decai'd the first luster of his youth, but so sunburned
him, that he was not to be known by such as had not of a long time seen him;
yet was he an Angel near that Devil; and indeed he took him for one, and
falling at his feet, besought him not to forsake him so soon, but retire to
his palace, to repose and unweary himself of the pains wherein he was
engaged for the safety of the others life. Polexander who began to understand
the Negro's language, and principally that which was spoken by persons of
quality (who among them are called the Surnigay) knew by his speech that he was
King of Gheneoa; whereupon he intertain'd him as a Prince, and replied (after
his accustomed civility) that it it was too great an honor for him to have
contributed any thing to the preservation of a life which was so necessary for
the weal of so many people; and though Fortune made him wander miserably from
Country to Country, yet he confessed he was indebted to her, since she had
presented him an occasion to serve so great a Prince. That King which might be
between fifty and threescore, fainting by the feebleness of his age, as well
as through the resentment of the good he had received, let himself fall on our
Hero's neck. Dear stranger, said he, since thou art a man as others, subject
to sorrows and afflictions, take part of mine, and stay with me, that by thy
company I may receive some comfort after my late loss. That fierce and cruel
beast which thou have laid stretched at my feet, has devoured the only hope
of my people, and sole delight of my old age; that son whom I loved so
dearly, is now no more but the woeful remains of a monsters fury. I have lost
him in the flower of his youth; Alas! who shall hereafter oppose the
enterprises of mine enemies. Rejoice ambitious King of Thombut; thy prayers are
heard, the rampires of Gheneoa are demolished, and the buckler of the miserable
Apheristidez is torn in pieces. In a word, he whom thou feared'st is now no
more. Polexander taking hold of so fair an occasion to divert that Prince's
sorrow, told him that he came from Thombut, and as he passed through it,
understood that the King thereof had been murdered by one called Nigeran. But
(said he) in as much as the story of his death is very strange and long, I
think 'twill be fit to remit the relation to another time. You tell me
wonderful news (replied Apheristidez, (so was that King called) and it is fit
to follow your advice, and stay till we come to the palace for the hearing a
matter of so much importance. In the mean while, (if it be possible) let us
get hither some of my servants, to have the body of my son carried to Gheneoa
to be interred in the sepulcher of his ancestors. Presently Polexander
commanded Diceus to go into the champion and call in some of the Kings
attendants, and he himself hastening abroad too, took such pains that he
stayed a Cavalier who was getting to the town as fast as he could ride; to him
he related the accidents which had betided Apheristidez and his son, and
engaged him to follow. Back he came to the King, who dissolved into tears,
and spent these lame^ts on the torn body of his son: Have I (said he)
offered so many victimes for thy birth, and made so many prayers for thy life,
that thou should be the prey of an enraged beast? Were thou by thy glorious
actions thus to deserve the favor of that Queen with whom my false Prophets
have so long time flattered my hopes? Who will acquit me of the Promise I made
to thee, fair Alcidiana? and what other my self able to serve thee, shall go
and take on those beloved chains which fortune and mine age hinder me from
wearing? Here he stopped, because in turning he perceived Polexander behind
him. But our Hero who had heard the name of Alcidiana, was not a little
troubled; he grew pale, he trembled, could not speak, and stood as he had
been out of himself: at last he overcame his first motions, and loath that
Apheristidez should perceive his agitation, entreated him to go into his boat,
and take that convenience of returning to Gheneoa. Apheristidez accepted his
offer, and walking to the strand where the boat lay, entered, and commanded the
Skipper to steer him straight into the channels of his palace. Our Hero who
had his afflictions as well as that Prince, seated him down by him, and musing
on the name of Alcidiana which he had heard uttered by the King, was so long
ere he spoke, as his boat was almost descending near a little Temple but half
a mile from Gheneoa. That object suddenly dashing on his eyes, awakened his
spirit that seemed asleep, though he was in a most violent agitation. He
remembered Apheristidez, and to excuse his so long forgetting him, said, that
the miseries of his life were so great a burden, that when he thought never so
little on them, he was (as it were) clean overwhelmed with their excess.
Hardly, (said he) can I make you conceive the greatness of my misfortune, if
the affliction you lately received, had not taught you how sad and doleful the
loss is of what we love: this being granted, you will be pleased not to think
it strange, that I have submitted to so powerful an enemy, and being engaged
in so rude a combat, I have failed in such things as reason and duty commanded
me. Apheristidez could not hear these excuses without tears, and embracing
our Hero with a great deal of tenderness, How unhappy am I (said he) since
I see that from the place whence I expected all my consolation, issues the
redoubling of my miseries; and that he who has pluckedme out of the mouth of
the lion, cannot deliver me from the tyranny of sorrow? Ah dear stranger!
perfect that for which you were sent; wipe off my tears, since it is
particularly the office of the Ministers of my Deity; and by the continuation
of your assistance, confirm me in the opinion I have always had, that there
are corporal Angels on earth, as well as there are incorporeall in heaven.
Polexander, admiring his wisdom, and fairness of spirit, spoke many things
to comfort him; and falling on the affairs of Thombut, related all the
accidents which had preceded and followed the death of that tyrant.
Apheristidez, in lieu of answering Polexander, lifted his eyes toward the
Sun, And thou have (said he) revealed to me often times that an ill life
could have no happy end. After that exclamation, he stuck meditating a while
on the prodigies he had heard, and as he was about to continue his discourse,
he saw 'twas time to land, for his boat stopped at the entry into the palace.
It was not enriched with marble, nor imbellished with that work which the
Grecians skill invented in former ages for the magnificence of their buildings.
All that it had of fair, was it is being environed with a channel, through
which ran a little arm of the river Niger. The form of it was square, and
resembled a cloister; it was built of chalk and covered with thatch.
Polexander entered with Apheristidez, and thought not to find it better
furnished, then that of the Galatian King. But he was astonished when he had
traversed a great court full of Negro's, who were handsomely clad in streaked
cotton; and when he came into a hall which was for Apheristidez guard, it was
hung with carnatian and green goats skins, on which there were small and
curious flourishings of gold. But this was nothing in respect of what he saw
in the next hall to it; there was a tapestrie of cloth of gold, and many large
turkey carpets, which the merchants of Morocco, of Sally, of Argiers, and
Tripoly came to traffic withal in those parts for other merchandises which
were more necessary for them. Thence he entered into a chamber, which might
justly be called the golden chamber; all the floare was covered with broad
lingots of gold, on which were no figures but rays; the walls were adorned
with the same metal and gravings, excepting in the principal face of the
room there stood a statue of massy gold, seated in a throne which represented
the Sun under the countenance of a woman. As Soon as Apheristidez entered
here, he began again his sighs and lamentations, and casting himself at the
feet of the Idol, Almazetide is dead, (cried he) and when I shall have
followed him, thou shall not have (O divine Alcidiana) any more of those
disinteressed Adorers, who consecrate themselves to thy service for the sole
glory of thy name. The words renewed and increased our Hero's unrests and
impatiencies; yet durst he not show them, for fear left his curiosity might
cause to vanish away that little hope which the name of Alcidiana had raised
again in his mind. That day and many others he let pass without daring to
ask Apheristidez who that Alcidiana was, whom he put among the number of the
Gods. In the mean time, his winning conversation, his fair personage, and the
wonders of his valor, acquired so absolute a command in the Kings thoughts,
that he forgot (at least in appearance) the loss of his son. Now, one day
being close alone with him in the golden chamber, some while he kept his eyes
fixed on the statue of the feminine Sun, at last turning them away, spoke
thus to Polexander; The tokens you have received of my affection, are as
unworthie it self, as of that which I owe to the greatness of your courage,
and the beauty of your mind; yet believe not that I can be ungrateful, or so
ill an esteemer of occurrences, as not to understand how to give them their
just value; my griefs are in part the cause that I have not hitherto performed
what I ought, and partly the little need I saw of precipita^ing a business
which would receive no impairement by a short deferring. But now when I know by
diverse presages that the true Sun my father calls me to the fruition of that
place, which he has designed for me above the stars, I will acknowledge by
two presents alike valuable the love you have showed me. The first is my
crown, and the second a servitude and chains, which in truth are of more
estimation then my Crown. I will not speak to you of the first, since you
might well know since your being here, whether my estate be of worth sufficient
to satisfy the hopes of a man of your extraordinary virtue and deserving; it
shall be of the other that I will discourse to you. Know therefore that far
off from the mouth of this river which runs through this town, there is an
Island no less wonderful for its perpetual spring, then for the propriety
it has by enchantment or nature, to make it self invisible to all such as
seek after it. There reigns a Princess, the miracle of our age, the shame of
times past, and the envy of those to come. Her portraicts make it well appear
that she is the lively image of the Sun her father, or to say better, she is
truly a Sun her self. I have endeavored (as you may see) to represent by
the fairest of all metalls, the luster of that Sun; but the unskilful hands
which have wrought it, in stead of making the image of it, have only made
known how unworthie the hand of man is to employ their pains on so fair a
subject. In a word, it is the Queen Alcidiana, whom to satisfy the most
religious passion that shall ever inflame an innocent soul, I have been
willing to adore in private, under the figure of that star to whom we owe our
being and preservation. I may say that my love was borne with that Princess,
and that she knew not the power of her charms many years after I felt them.
Hear how that wonder betided; it was not above a year after the suffrages and
general votes of all this kingdom, had seated me on the same throne whence
they had expelled my cruel predecessor, when I resolved to make a voyage to
the chief of the Temples dedicated to the Sun, to give thanks to the Deity
he represents, for the blessings his liberal hand had so largely showred on
me. This Temple is in an Island, which stretching toward the Meridionat part
of the sea, is seated some fifty leagues from the mouth of the river Niger.
The voyage I made, visited the holy Island, admired the riches and magnificence
of the Temple, and by my offerings and sacrifices, strove to make appear to
the Power I worshipped, some little acknowledgement of those benefits for which
I was redevable. On the very point of my departure, and imbarking thence for my
return, the Ambassadors of Alcidus King of the enchanted Isle landed in that
holy Island. To the Temple he came laden with so great and so rich presents,
that the Priests (who were accustomed to receive diverse of great value)
confessed that Alcidus had outgone the magnificence of all other Kings. Among
these offerings, one was a statue of gold, representing a maiden of some nine
or ten years: O fatal sight to my liberty! I had the curiosity to inquire
who that young Lady was, and Alcidus Ambassadors told me she was the divine
Alcidiana their Prince's daughter. The relation they made me of the wonderful
beauty and incomparable wit of that visible Angel so inly touched me, that I
returned hither with a wound which is not yet closed up. My love grew to such a
height, that it made me forsake my kingdom under a pretext of returning to the
Island of the Sun, but indeed it was to sail to that of Alcidiana. A whole
year was I at sea, and yet could not discover it; then I came back to that of
the Sun, and saw in the Temple a portraict of that Princess drawn to the
life, which her States had sent thither since the death of her father. Many
days abode I fixed on that picture, but when I understood that that Princess
was so strictly guarded, that she did not so much as communicate her presence
to her most affectionate and considerable subjects; and that her guard
consisted of a great number of strangers whom Chance had thrown on the coasts
of her Island, I made a vow to be one of their band, and all my life time to
wear the chains of so glorious a servitude. Yet for all my industry, have I
not been able to accomplish my protestation, but imagining by the invincible
difficulties I found, that Heaven esteemed me not worthy the service of so
admired a Princess, I betook me to a course for this kingdom, with an intent
to perfect by some other, that which I could not perform in mine own person.
I had a son of Alcidiana's age, (with that he listed his hands to his eyes)
and the same whom you saw so cruelly murdered; him I consecrated to Alcidiana,
and (with mine own hand) having put a chain of gold about his neck in token
of his servitude sent to Morocco and Fez, to find out able masters to instruct
him in all that which might equalize him with the great King of the Canaries,
the Princes Abdelmelec and Nephizus, or the invincible Bajazet. I dare say his
actions answered what I expected from him, and but for that not to be exceeded
misfortune, which has robbed me of him in the flower of his youth, I had been
now in case to have acquitted (in mine own thoughts) that which I had promised
to Alcidiana: yet do I not despair of performing it, if so be my ill Fate
hinder you not from believing your own generositie. But why do I endeavor by
my solicitation to force you to a business which can gain no repute, unless
the undertaking be extremely voluntary? Polexander, who had more desire to
accept the condition proposed to him, then Apheristidez had a will he should
accept of it, would have interrupted that Prince to let him understand his
intentions; but Apheristidez entreating his leave to finish his discourse, I
will never give way (said he) that you suddenly put on any resolution for an
affair of so great importance. I give you eight days liberty to consider on
it; and that term expired, you shall make known to me (without complaysancy)
whether you had rather be King of Gheneoa, then Alcidiana's slave. Polexander
replied, there needed not so long a time to answer to it; there is not more
then enough, said Apheristidez, and there withal arising, led Polexander to
his most usual exercises, which were riding and hunting. All the eight days
after this converse, that Prince gave our Hero all the most choice contentment
could betide the condition of a King of Gheneoa; and laying open to him (as I
may say) all his treasure, made known the strength of his estate, the riches
of his people, the facility of governing them, and the advantage he had over
all his neighboring Kings. He did more, he assembled in his palaces all the
officers of his Crown, with the chiefest inhabitants of Gheneoa, and
representing to them the valor and eminent virtues of Polexander, won them
to respect him as his successor. He had besides that wisdom, as in all the
time he never spoke to our Hero of Alcidiana; but as soon as the ninth day
came, My son (said he) the time is now come wherein you are to let me know
your resolution. Time has not altered it, replied Polexander; it is still the
same it was eight days since; I give you thanks for the Crown you have
offered me, and accept as a thing more precious, the chains which tie me to
the service of Alcidiana. Is it possible (said Apheristidez) you will make that
choice? Yes (my Lord) replied the Prince, I elect it as the most honorable
fortune can betide me in the world. O said the King! how judicious is your
choice, and what infinite happiness does it promise you! defer not my son,
defer not any longer that voyage, go on to the servitude you have chosen as
to the conquest of all the Universe. But to the end your expedition may have
better success then mine, receive a secret which I owe to my painful and
troublesome experience; do not think to find the Inaccessible Island by your
Pilots art, nor your long searching. Go straight to the Isle of the Sun, and
consecrate your self to the Deity. If you follow the instruction which (at
leisure) I will give you, without doubt you shall be received into the number
of her illustrious slaves: and if Chance which shall be common to you as with
them, permit you to see the Ambassadors which Alcidiana sends to that holy
Isle, to render the tribute of love which she owes to the Author of her race;
you shall go to them in my name, and say, that forcing necessity, to which
all must obey, hindering me from wearing my self the fetters of their Queen,
I have chosen you to serve her in my place. Without doubt they will receive
you, and taking you aboard with them, will conduct you to the blessed abode of
that incomparable Princess. Whilst Apheristidez spoke thus, Polexander in his
heart gave infinite thanks to Love and Fortune, and though his religion forbad
him, promised them Temples, if they gave good success to Apheristidez
counsel. The King had no sooner ended, but our Hero casting himself at his
feet, called him a hundred times his father and benefactor, and besought him
(to make his favors perfect) to accelerate all that was necessary for his
voyage. Apheristidez promised him that within six days he should put to sea,
and indeed caused all his workmen so to speed them, that within that time all
his presents were ready. The holy vessels being lanch'd out of the Arcenall,
where they were carefully kept, were brought into the channel of the palace.
At their arrival, Apheristidez, who could no longer retard Polexander's
departure, long time wept over him; and embracing him as he had been his own
son, Go, (said he) most happy victime, go and perfume the Altars of a
Divinity, to whom for my offenses, I am not permitted to sacrifice my self.
And thou visible Deity, miraculous in thy race, (with that he looked on the
Sun) reject not the offerings of the least of thine; I know they are
unworthie thine Altars, but thou regardest less the richness, then the zeal
of the Adorers. Receive them then, and by thy good guidance, let this stranger
quickly and happily see the issue of his desires and mine. This ejaculation
ended, the King was nee^e two hours with our Hero, talking to him of nothing
else but the services he was bound to render the first year of his entrance
into his profession, and to number to him the different employments, whereto
the slaves (according to their several merits and reception) were appointed by
the Chief Priest of the Sun. After he had thus instructed him, he embraced
him again, and in taking his last leave, entreated he might not be forgotten
in the solemnity of the sacrifices. Polexander promised to preserve eternally
the memory of his favors, and so (with Diceus) went to imbarke himself. There
were four great boats on the river, which were appointed for the voyage, and
into the fairest of them he entered with the King of Gheneoa's Ambassadors,
the Priests which were to present the offerings in his name, and many other men
of quality, who had taken on them the habit of pilgrims, to go visit the
Temple of that Deity whom they thought to be the Author of their being. The
three other boats were laden with victuals, and three or four hundred
pilgrims of the ^aner people. As Soon as (according to the ancient Ceremony)
they had cut the ropes, and by a general shout taken leave of the city of
Gheneoa, the boat-men ^ois'd their sails, (made from the palm) and so fell
down with the stream. They had so favorable a wind, that they made much way
in a little time; and for Polexander, the days went insensibly from him,
having in his mind continually, the Idea of ^s future happiness; and drove
away by his revived hopes, the melancholy and displeasures wherewithal
despair is always accompanied. These sweet and dear ^ations had lasted all
his voyage, if the Priests and others who were aboard, had not sometimes
engaged him to abandon his musing, to take part in their intertainment. Now,
one day when those Priests and he seriously disputed of Religion, I would
saine have you tell me, said he, why you conceal from the people the light
you enjoy; and in stead of spiritualizing their belief, and make them
comprehend the Deity to be a Spirit; why tie you them to a Religion altogether
corporeal, to a Religion of stocks and stones, I mean to the adoration of
Idols? The Priests taking themselves to be much wronged by these upbraidings,
though they knew them to be ^rue: The manner (replied they) of all such as
would excirpate the worship of the Divinity, is to publish, that it is neither
enough pure, nor sufficiently separated from corporeal things. That great
Impostor which rules yet in the minds of half the world, and whose Sectaries
daily strive to corrupt the purity of our belief; introduced the errors of
his Alcoran, by breaking the many Images of the Divinity, and plucking down
the Altars that were consecrated to them. If the Deity would that we should
adore it in spirit, and that Religion should have nothing material and
sensible, it would never have created man, but for witnesses and chanters of
its glory, (pu^ as you desire) had been contented with the creation of Angels.
Do not therefore imagine it to be Idolatry, to represent the Divinity by
palpable figures; and if I dare-say so, to incorporate that eternal Spirit, to
the end to communicate it more easily to men. It Is true we adore the Sun,
though he be but a creature: but do you believe we worship him because of
himself? No such matter. We adore him only as the Lieutenant-Generall of
that all-powerfull Monarch, who by him would exercise his authority over all
the Universe, give life to all creatures, dispell the darkness from their
eyes, to cause the seed of all things to grow and sprout forth from the
entralls of the earth; and in brief, to make men happy or unhappy, rich or
poor, according as that visible Image of the Divinity approaches or declineth
from them. From all times this belief has been div^ged through all those
Coun^es which are washed by the river Niger, and I be^ve it to be good, since
heaven has vouchsafed, that neither the f^xe of time for so many ages, nor the
many several Nations which have flowed in on Africa, have bee^ able to corrupt
this ancient Religion. Polexander, unwilling to be an ob^te disputer in a
matter wherein the wisest men are wont to lose their moderation, and temper,
answered the Priest, that in the manner which he explained their veneration,
he saw not (if he thought rightly) wherein he was much to be condemned. But
yet (said he) it is defective in one thing, and that is, your embracing the
shadow for the substance; and in attributing to the dei^e a body which is
impassible and inanimate, all light as it is, rather then to acknowledge it
under that living body which it vouchsafed to take on for the good of all men.
After this preparation Polexander preached aloud his Re^gion to them, and
accommodating the mysteries of his own, with the ceremonies which those
Priests used in theirs, so adapted their minds for the embracing of his
belief, that doubtlesly it had made a great progress among the Negro's, if
those Princes who seem to be excited to convert the Nations, had sought their
conversion with the same zeal they explored for gold and precious stones. In
the mean time the vessels sailed on, and at last arrived where the Niger
discharges it self into the Ocean. The great Burgh of Jofian which commands
the mouth of the River, was the term of our pilgrims first navigation: there
they unloaded their boats, and with as much diligence as they could, carried
their stuff and provision into a great ship, which was called the ship of the
Sun. In it Polexander embarked with the rest, after they had paid the due
customs to the King of the Country, and entered the Ocean with an East wind,
which seemed (so favorable it was) to be sent by the Sun himself for the
waftage and guidance of his adorers. When they had lost sight of land, they a
little altered their course, and leaving the Isles of Cape Verd on the South,
steered full North: eight days together they had a calm so fit for their
voyage, that they made as much way as if the wind had blown a fresher gale
then it did. The twelfth day, those which were above in the masts descri'd the
Isle of the Sun, and cried out thrice, The holy Land. At that word, (as
pleasing to the Negro's ears, as an excellent consort to a melancholy man) the
Priests caused diverse perfuming pots of gold to be brought, and throwing into
them perfumes of all sorts, sent to the Sun a fume which represented the heat
of their zeal, and the purity of their intentions. After that sacrifice, they
offered another of praise, and began a Hymn which lasted till the ship was
entered the port of the Island of the Sun. They arrived at the very hour of
that stars setting, and seeing him more glorious then at his high Noone-sted,
they thought he rejoiced at their coming, and went to adorn himself in the
night with all the treasures he inricheth the Orient, to be with the more
extraordinary luster and glory at the solemnity of their Sacrifices.

The end of the third Book of the fourth Part of Polexander.
THE LAST PART OF POLEXANDER.
The first Book.
AS soon as the sacred vessel was in the port, the mariners crowned the poope
and the masts with branches of palme-trees, and placed among those crowns, an
image of the Sun made of gold, and covered it with precious stones as radiant
as carbuncles. The Priests in the mean time ended their Hymn, and deputed one
from amongst them, to go and advertise the Archpriest and Clergy of the
Sun, of their arrival, and get leave from them that they might land. The
Chief Priest having assembled the officers of the Temple, to understand from
them their ancient customs, and hearing on what conditions the Ambassadors of
Kings, and Pilgrims were wont to be received into the Isle; sent to those of
Gheneoa, that the next morning at day break they might come on shore, and
prepare themselves for the Ceremonies of the Sacrifice. This answer made all
the Africans to spend the whole night in prayer, and in preparations worthy the
sanctity of the place they were going to visit. Polexander who in himself
hoped for a great deal of happiness by that voyage, would not contradict his
conductors in any thing they would exact from him; he intimated that he was
truly a victime, who having no other will then theirs who brought him to the
sacrifice, offered himself, not to the Sun adored in that Island, but to him
whose heat he felt though he saw not the light of it. Those who had the charge
of purifying and adorning him, brought him into a cabin of the ship appointed
for that Ceremony; where the Priests presently encompassed him with diverse
little silver pans, in which they burnt several perfumes, and sprinkled on his
head and arm some of the seawater. After that they put him into a bathe of
fresh water, perfumed and anointed him again with excellent Pomata's, and then
putting on him a shirt of very fine linen, took him out: two of the chiefest
Priests, put on his legs buskins made of a serpents skin, covered with little
golden skales; after that, they put on him a long vestment all streaked with
threads of the same metal, which being gathered up on the right shoulder, and
fastened with buttonings of diamonds, hid his left arm, and the other was at
liberty. His head-tire was very handsome and comely, being a bonnet or cap
composed of a gold tinsell, and covered with many Ostrich feathers, amongst
which shined out a golden Sun which served for the band. For the last
ornament, they put a collar of gold about his neck, and two others about his
legs, with chains of the same metal, in sign that he was consecrated to
the Sun. As Soon as that visible Divinity dispersed his first rays on the
rocks which inviron his Island; all the Pilgrims were commanded to go on
shore, and stay there every one with his offering till they had order to march
forward. Fifty of the King of Gheneoa's slaves followed the Pilgrims, some
carrying vessels of palm and cedar, others censers of gold and silver, and in
all of them, male incense, and other perfumes which Africa borrowes of Arabia.
After these slaves went the Kings Ambassadors, then followed the Priests,
excepting the two principal which came after Polexander; his robe was so long,
that Diceus was appointed to bear up the train with the ends of the chains.
Those who saw Polexander so full of Majesty, and making himself the chief
pomp of his triumph, could not refrain their sighs and tears; and knowing
the hazard he ran, prayed for his preservation, and besought their God, that
the ball whereon his name was to be engraven might not fall into the hand of
the Archpriest. The good people receiving command to march on, put themselves
four in rank, and so went to the Temple which was but two miles from the sea.
The Hymn which the Priests begun at their parting from the shore, ended not
but in the midst of a long passage of cedars, which had been expressly planted
to defend the Pilgrims from the excessive heat of the Sun, and to serve them
for a place of retreat at such hours as the Temple was kept shut. Those of
Gheneoa, obeying the Master of the Ceremonies, stayed in that fair walk, and
put themselves in file on each side to leave the passage free. Their Clergy
meeting with those of the Sun at the gates of the Temple, made all the places
around resound again with new songs and new anthems. Apheristidez Ambassadors
cast themselves at the feet of the Archpriest, and receiving his benediction
by the imposition of his hands, told him they were sent by the King their
Master to offer to the Sun his father in Sacrifice both his heart and his
Crown; and to consecrate to him a victime the most accomplished, that ever his
life-giving light had ever produced on the face of the earth, With that they
turned them to Polexander, and beckned him to come near: the African Priests
advanced too, and causing him to kneel, took the ends of the chains which
Diceus carried, and presented them to the sovereign Prelate of the Sun.
After that venerable old man had slightly touched Polexander with a golden rod
which he held in his hand, he recoyl'd two or three paces to look on him; but
he had scarce fixed his eyes on his person, when a sudden trembling seized the
Priest from head to foot, and testified by his agitations, that his Deity did
not communicate himself to him with less violence then the Grecian Apollo
conversed with ^s Prophetesses. The God (said he to all the Assembly) whom you
come to adore, has a very private contentment in your arrival; his splendour
which is seen by our souls, in a greater luster then it appears to our eyes,
makes me feel and know by extraordinary agitations, that your devotions and
offerings were never so pleasing unto him. Come then my affected children, and
well worthy your father, and pray incessantly for us who are his servants, but
servants that deserve his anger and reprobation rather then the honor of
presenting him with your offerings. After he had spoke thus, he betook
himself again with his Clergy to the way which led to the Temple; and those
of Africa following him through the files of Pilgrims, entered that stately and
proud structure. The figure of it was round, though it were enclosed with four
marble walls, which made a perfect quadrangle; without, were three ranks of
columns, of Porphire, of Jasper, and Serpentine, which were placed rather for
ornament then necessity; though in sight they bore up some arches which on all
sides sustained the bulk of the maine edifice. Just in the middle of the
Temple was a great Dome, born up by two rows of white marble columns, which
served but for the basis to a second rank of pillars all of massy gold: the
columns were enriched with so many diamonds, that when the Sun shone on
them, all those within the Temple were dazeled with the great luster that
reflected from them. The embowed roof of that Dome as well as of all the
Temple, was composed of an infinite number of stones set together with so much
art, that imagination could figure to it self nothing which the eye met not
withal in the intermixture of those stones, and the variety of their colors.
The floor was enriched with an inlaid work of Agats, Cornalines, and other
curious stones: in the center of that pavement which was just under that of the
Dome, was an Altar, which seemed to be made of one sole diamond, cut. For the
workman, for a masterpiece of his art, had covered the sides of the Altar with
steel extremely polished, and in it had enchaced the diamonds with so much
cunning, that to look on them a little way off, they blended one within
another, that it seemed they made but one stone, This Altar was never besmeared
with any bloody victimes, nor was it made for that purpose. For though the
Basis were square, yet it was sphericall on the top, and nothing could be
placed there but a violl of gold, which intimated by its stopped mouth, that
the Deity whom they came to adore in that place was to be worshipped in
silence. About that Altar, there were twelve others by which (as 'twas held)
were represented the twelve signs of the Zodiac, or the twelve months of the
year. On these, the Pilgrims laid their offering, and the Priests perform
their Sacrifices, but not bloody-ones, because they thought it a sacrilege,
rather then an act of adoration, to deprive those creatures of life, to make
themselves acceptable to the Divinity which gave it them. On the same Altars
likewise the King of Gheneoa's Ambassadors laid (as delivered into the hands of
their god himself) the Presents that were consecrated unto him. The other
Pilgrims (every one) acquitted themselves of their duty by gifts answerable to
their zeal and ability. The Priests belonging to the Temple, began presently
the oraizons which precede the solemn sacrifice which was afterward
celebrated, being only of Praise, Thanksgiving, and Invocations for the
general good of the whole world. These being ended, the Archpriest threw the
incense on the holy hearths, and whilst the smoke mounted with the private
prayers of all toward that eternal Temple, which the invisible Sun has built
with his own hands, the sovereign Prelate ascended a throne of gold, which
was raised aside the Altars, and lifting up his eyes and hands to heaven, made
a long prayer. After which the people ratified it with a great shout or
ejaculation, and staying a few minutes longer in meditation, went out of the
Temple, and retired to such places as were appointed to lodge the Pilgrims. The
King of Gheneoa's Ambassadors, the Priests, and such of quality as came with
them, were lodged in the Appartment of the Arch-Prelate, and entertained with a
magnificence worthy the purity of the place. For Polexander, he was brought
into the Quarter of the noble Slaves; and though it was not the custom to
allow any of that condition Servants from abroad, yet the Chiefe-Priest gave
way for Diceus to wait on Polexander. The Quarter where he was lodged was
severed by a high wall from that of the vulgar slaves, and made well appear by
the beauty of the lodgings, and richness of the furniture, how great and
powerful the Master was whose Slaves were so stately and so sumptuously
lodged. Our Hero was no sooner in his chamber, but he put off as well all his
saddish Ornaments, as his his triumphant; and being laid on a little bed
covered with branches of Palm Tree, at last (said he) Diceus, I am arrived at
a place where I have for a long time wished me. Your Majesty (replied Diceus)
may please to pardon me, if I take the boldness to say that your greatest
enemies could not wish you worse. Hitherto you have run such hazzards, wherein
in all likelihood you might have perished. I have beheld you in those places
where your liberty was so extremely engaged, that I should have been void of
Judgment, had I ever thought it in possibility to be recovered; yet have you
never been so captivated, nor in so great danger of your life as you are among
these Idolaters. You may imagine, that by some miracle of good fortune, (which
shall betide no man knows when) you may deliver your self out of a prison,
which is the more to be feared by being held sacred, and meet with a ship which
miraculously too shall wast you to Alcidiana's Island: But put the case it be
so, who can assure you that you have yet two days more to live, since but to
morrow (if it be true what a Priest of this Island lately told me) you shall be
put among the number of the victimes appointed for the bloody sacrifice, and
next day too, the Archpriest may in drawing the lot, light on the ball whereon
your Name shall be engraven? Friend, (replied Polexander) thy thoughts leave
not their old object, but fasten themselves perpetually on such things as are
no more. But if thou will as earnestly take into consideration what is to come,
as that which is passed, and be as clear-sighted as I am, thou shall behold
such felicities as will make thee forget all our former miseries. Know, Diceus,
know, that my fortune is altered, and my long wanderings have found their
periods in this Island; and after my long and vain search after the
Inaccessible Island, at last Love, Time, and Fortune, and what is more
admirable, Alcidiana her self leads me (as it were by the hand) to the place
where resides all my quiet and felicity. Understand, that this place is
questionless the very same, whither the Kings of the Inaccessible Island have
sent yearly to present to the Sun the sacrifice of their Alliance. Diceus
interrupting the King his Master, and falling at his feet; Alas! Sir, (said he)
let your Majesty be pleased that I may know how you came to any certain
intelligence of these happy intimations. Love (replied Polexander) tells me
this truth, and I feel so great an alteration in my self, that it is
impossible to proceed from any thing but that important Verity. How mightily
do I suspect those Authors, Sir, (repii'd Diceus coldly) and how much do I
fear lest Love deceive you with that Imagination as well as he has done in all
others? Rest thy self satisfied (answered the Prince) in this, that I am not
wont to flatter my self with vain hopes. But that we may contest no longer,
do thou learn among those that are shut up with us, what Princes usually send
their Ambassadors and offerings hither, and above all, forget not to know (if
thou can) how long the Archpriest has been in his Office, and by what
means he came to it. For I have a suspicion, which contributes much to the joy
which flashes more in my heart then is to be seen in my countenance. I have
such a suspicion too, as well as your Majesty, (said Diceus) but I see so little
likelihood, that I rather hold it for a dream which I have, as waking as I am,
rather then for a rational imagination. Go, I tell thee, (replied Polexander)
and after thine ordinary address has got thee some familiarity among my
companions, fail not in those two businesses I commanded thee. Polexander had
no sooner ended, but two slaves chained with gold as himself entered his
chamber, and intimating the desire they had to know so worthy a companion of
their fortune, spoke to him all that which civility puts into the minds of men
in whom is seen an admirable breeding joined to a birth of most Eminence.
Polexander, after his wonted seemlinesse and grace, welcomed the two famous
slaves, and rendering them their complements with interest, astonished them with
his Eloquence; far more then he had done with the sweetness and Majesty
which flew from his face, spite of all the scorching heat of the torrid Zone.
The civilities passed, they sat down all three on one bed, and whilst Diceus
was enquiring after that which his Master had given him in charge, they
entertained themselves with the cruel condition annexed to their servitude.
The eldest, which was not above eight and twenty or thirty years old, and who
by his olive complexion, made him known to be an African, with a great sigh
began thus: I confess (said he to Polexander) that Death, which I have so
often wished for, does not only begin to be fearful to me, but the further I
absent my self from the cause that makes me desire it, the more does the
horror of its approaching make me repent my too inconsiderate engaging my self
to the wearing of the chains I have on me. Is it possible (replied Polexander)
that Death should be able to terrify a man, who never feared to defy it in
those places where it has always been victorious? In that (replied the Slave)
I confess my weakness, and would (were it permitted me to break off my
chains) run into the midst of a battle, to receive from the hand of some
valiant man, that death which I may meet with here dishonourably, from some
wretched Sacrificer. Ah Benzaida! (said he, lifting up his eyes) how mortal
has thy beauty been to me? or to speak more truly, how fatal have the furious
fits of my jealousy been to us both? Polexander looking earnestly on the
Slave, Your words (said he) make me call to mind the tragical end of a Lady
which bare the same name you but now called on. She was indeed a personage for
beauty and generousnesse to be admired, and well worthy the blood of the Kings
of Granado. Unfortunate man that I am! (cried the Slave) it is the same
Princess whom I now vainly call upon. Her beauty made me her servant, before
the ambition of Spain had laid waste my dear Country. But what remembrest
thou, perfidious and abominable Menocenarez? Impose thy sorrows an eternal
silence, and involve (if it be possible) in that darkness which shall never
have end, those horrible treasons by which thy unbridled passion delivered thy
King and Country into the hands of the Usurpers. With that, the Slave was
silent, and not able to suppress his tears, covered his face with his hand,
that he might weep at more liberty. Polexander, desirous to take him out of
that agony, I (said he) have known your name in the city of Fez. I have heard
Benzaida utter against you all that the anger of a wronged Lady could make her
invent, yet rather pity then hate her. For if her love have brought you into
this servitude, that which she bare to the ungrateful Prince of Morocco, made
her turn on her self the point of that poniard which she had provided to
avenge her self on that Infidel. 'Twas that traitor (said the Slave) who
after he had struck the steel into the heart of Benzaida, (for he was the
cause) continually whetted that knife which is prepared to cut my throat. But
since you know the general misfortunes of my Country, I will relate the
principal causes, and tell you that Ferdinand and Isabella are beholding to my
treason more then to their own power for the conquest of the kingdom of
Granado. The unfortunate King (under whose government that brave Province was
lost) was one of those timorous Princes, who are so far from any intention of
extending the limits of their kingdoms by forcible incroaching on their
neighbors Territories, that they scarce have courage to oppose the enterprises
of their own enemies. Two years before the truce was broken betwixt the
Spaniards and the Moors, my ill fate made me cast mine eyes upon Benzaida. I
saw her fair, for she was then in the prime of her age, and may well say, that
in the very instant I began to die of a death which is not yet ended. When I
lost my liberty I lost my reason, and not considering that I was but only on
ordinary knight, my ambitious thoughts made me believe that my Nation owed not
the Empire and States it possessed, to men of a royal extraction, but to
great, invincible, and persevering courages, such as were Masters of the
fortunes of Monarchs themselves. I therefore sought out the most fit means to
get me the favor of Benzaida, and knowing her to be of an exceeding high
spirit, and (particularly) esteemed men of valor, I betook me to the Wars. I
dare say, and so will my greatest enemies too, that for eighteen months
together, I was placed as an inexpugnable Fort on the Frontiers of Granado,
against the invasions of Ferdinand. My name was spread throughout all Spain.
The Court of Granado was filled with it, and the King my Master seeing himself
secure under mine arm, omitted nothing that might oblige me to the continuance
of a service that was so advantageous unto him. The affairs of Castile
recalling Ferdinand and Isabella into their own Territories, our frontiers
were left in peace. I then returned to Granado, and the honors I received
there, rather beseem'd a King that triumphs, then a Subject whose services had
made him useful. I was not only admitted to the Princes particular pleasures,
but to his Counsels; and I dare say, that if my my love to Benzaida had not
troubled my senses and taken away courage, I had put the Granadians in an
estate of regaining on the Spaniards all those Kingdoms which they have lost
within six hundred years. But that furious passion possessing all the
functions of my soul, I was not able to reflect on any thing. My thoughrs, my
designs, and my wishes, had only the enjoying of Benzaida for their object. I
betrayed the public affairs to adjust and fit them to my private
contentment, and subverted the Counsels of the Sages, by the authority which
my pass'd-actions had gained me. In the mean while, I burnt in secret, and
durst not make known to Benzaida that she had kindled the fire. But at last the
violence of my disease forcing me to forget all consideration, I imagined that
I should not be more unhappy then so many others, who had ventured on the like
boldness. One day therefore, as Benzaida walked in the Palace Garden, only
accompanied with her maids of honor, I met her, as it were by chance, and
feigning to be much surprised at the encounter, made a low reverence and
retired She smiled at my astonishment, and calling me, What (said she) if I
were a Castillian, you cannot witness a greater mislike of me? I replied (even
trembling) Madam, you may please to pardon me, if I say your Highness does
your self a great deal of wrong by so unjust a comparison. I have indeed an
extreme aversion to the enemies of your state, but their presence shall never
amaze me. For you, Madam, whom I am not to look upon but with respect; I
confess, that as often as I have the honor to see you, my soul is full of
dread and astonishment; but of such a religious astonishment and devoute fear,
as our Alphaquies command us to feel when we approach things divine and holy.
Your words (replied Benzaida) more surprise me, then my encounter did you. I
never thought that a man trained up in war, and who all his life time
breathed naught but blood and battles, was capable of so much and so high a
jeering. I answered, that brutishness whereof your Highness accuses me under
such words as may seem obliging, is not that which has hitherto made me
delight in the acts of war A fairer cause compelled me to so noble effects;
and did I not fear to violate the laws prescribed me by my subjection, I
would bring your Highness to confess, that till now I have not been happy
enough to be well known of her. I will never (said Benzaida) take you for my
Interpreter, since you come no clearer off in your explications. I would have
only said that I thought it very strange, how a man accustomed to the serious
discourse of war, could be so skilled in those effeminate terms,
wherewithal both delicacy and idleness have compassed the Courtiers language.
Your Highness then (said I) must hate that which is most to be beloved amongst
us, if you condemn a language which Love himself has invented, to render all
things fair and eminent, the testimony they deserve from all men's
acknowledgements. This language (replied Benzaida) is as ridiculous as its
Author, and though Spain had nothing strong enough to make you give up your
arms, yet I will undertake to have the better, when you dare defend so bad a
cause. You have already carried away one part of the victory, (I replied) but
since I am sure of the other, be pleased, Madam, that I leave your Highness,
lest I may be engaged either to ore'come you, or to waive all verity and my
self. With that I made her a low Reverence, and went away, that she might have
the more time to meditate at pleasure, and may be to comprehend the meaning of
what I had spoken. All things happened as I had forethought: For the first time
that I saw Benzaida again, she darted such looks on me as were answerable to
lightning; and when I came near her, Go, (said she very softly) go, bold and
rash Man, and if you value your life, beware lest your extravagancy be known to
any whosoever. Before I could open my mouth to reply, she retired; and to
express to you well at this instant what I then felt, I must needs say, that
from the height of heaven she threw me into the depth of hell. For a month
together I assai'd all means that were to be imagined, for the bringing her to
understand the integrity and innocence of my affection; but that perseverance
was in her thought a new fault, and the more I endeavored to come near her,
the more I augmented her desire of flying me. After all my patience was quite
exhausted, and that I knew I was hated for no other cause then the not being a
Prince: I resolved on the most bold and rash design that ever entered the
thought of a Lover. I intended to make my self King of Granado. But well fare
thinking, that such an Enterprise could have no success but by great
revolutions, I thought it was best to begin them by drawing the war into the
Kingdom. Presently I sent (unde^hand) to solicit the King of Spaines
Officers, and represented to them the facility of making themselves Masters of
Granado, if so be they would make me of their party. To this advice of mine
they gave care, and I was promised no less then a Crown, if I brought it to
pass. To witness therefore to the Spaniards, that I promised nothing but what
I would make good, I went and surprised one of their Towns, and by that breath
engaged Ferdinand to besiege Malago. Whilst I thus laid the foundation of my
imaginary Kingdom, the Granadians accelerating their own ruin, took arms
against one another, and during their intestine broils, gave way for the
common enemy to fortify himself. So well had I provided all things, that I
had been King of Granado and the possessour of Benzaida, if the Moors had
persevered in the revolt I had engaged them. But Boabdilez after he had subdued
his enemies, and made himself strongest in Granado, compelled me to follow his
fortune, that I might not give over my design. Some little time before the
young Prince of Fez was come to Granado, and obtained by his quality that which
I could not get by my many and important services, and actions of such fame as
might have obscured the birth of that barbarous Prince. As Soon as I came to
Court, I understood that Benzaida was passionately in love with him; but the
insolent Prince, as a proud Conqueror, who mispriseth a victory easily gotten,
thought he should humble himself too much in contributing but a cold
complacency to that Princesse's affection. As Soon as I heard that unwelcome
news, my love became a furious jealousy; and I presently resolved with my
self the death of my Rival; but before I could be in a fit place where I
might freely be permitted to challenge him, I was commanded by the King to
oppose the progress of the Spanish Army, and retain in obedience those
Towns, which since the taking of Baza would have yielded to the conquering
party. I was in all places of importance, and reducing all to their devoyr,
returned to Granado to satisfy my Jealousy; but the Prince of Fez was gone.
He had repassed the sea without taking any leave of Boabdilez. Benzaida seemed
to me so sad and disconsolate, that I doubted no more of her passion. For mine
own part, I strove to suppress my grief, and smother my first motions, to
let her know her fault, or at least to entreat some pity for that offense which
her beauty had been the first cause of. She seemed extrremly enraged when I
durst come near her, and upbraiding me more then ever for my impudence and
rashness, told me boldly, that my malipertnes should have been chastised long
agone. The grief and vexation to see my self so ill treated by the Princess,
made me resolve to combine with Spain, for the ruin of my Country, that I
might have the comfort to see a great many Companions in my misery. Besides, I
thought that when Benzaida had lost her Crown, she would give over her pride,
and stand not so obstinatly in desiring none but Kings for her Lovers. I
straight sent my Agen^s to Valedolid, and my information putting all Spain in
arms, Ferdinand and Isabella came and besieged the city of Granado. But I was
not so fortunate as to have the sad contentment to see that Town in the flame,
I had lighted to avenge me of its Princess. For at the beginning of the Siege
Benzaida stole out of the city in a man's habit, with a Moorish Prince called
Tyndarache, and sailed into Africa, to follow (shamefully) the perfidious
Prince of Fez. Her loss made me take new counsel. I renounced all my
abominable pretentions, and abandoning my Country, went to Morocco, to stab
(if I could) in his very throne the Traitor which triumphed over all my hopes
and travells. But I neither found Benzaida nor her Lover there; and after I had
inquired of all such as were likely to tell me news of him, I understood that
he was put to sea to follow a fair young Canarian, called Ennoramita, with
whom he was passionately fallen in love. I imbarck'd me again in the same
vessel that brought me out of Europe into Africa, and was about six months
searching on all sides for that infamous Ravisher of my happiness. But all my
diligent inquisition being bootlesse, and a tempest shipwracking me on this
Isle, I was (whether I would or no) plucked out of the sea by two flaves which
fished by the sea side. To this house they brought me, and then was I presented
to the Chief priest. At the very first, I made known to him my intent of
mischieving my self, but he instructing one how pernicious my resolution would
be to my soul, put me clean off from committing homicide on my self. Yet was I
above three months in overcoming my despair. Continually I grieved for
Benzaida, as ungrateful as she was to me, and when I called to mind her love
to an Infidel, I grew so enraged, that to hinder off the effects of my fury,
they were forced to put me into the custody of two Priests. They told me that
if I had so eager and violent a desire to die, there was no speedier nor more
innocent means, then to make my self the slave of that God whom they adored,
and attend the lot which should give a period to my life and miseries. I was
surprised with their proposition. But a little while after, seeing with what
bravenesse and jollity one of this Temples slaves came to his death, I made a
vow to wear the chains of the Sun, and to die for his service in that very
place where that generous victime had been immolated. When the slave had thus
ended the relation of his crime and love, he was (as it were) transported with
fury. He arose from between Polexander and his Companion, and speaking to one
that heard him not; Thou have then (cried he) O ungrateful Princess,
preferred a violent death before the fidelity of a Lover that was not
altogether unworthy thy respect? Thou have, unfortunate Benzaida, and unhappy
as well as I, in thine inclinations, loved the Traitor which contemned thee; and
treading on the sweetness and timidity of thy sex, washed thy hands in thine
own blood? O! what a sad but powerful example art thou to me, to avenge my
self in my turn, and at last triumph over that cruel one, to whom my
perpetual flames were despicable. Yes, Benzaida, I will imitate thee, and if
the lot do not quickly put me into the hands of the Executioners, I will act
mine own destiny, and get from the power of my reason, what I could not obtain
from the giddiness and uncertainty of Chance. With that he stood mute. A too
piercing grief, and extreme violent contention of thought, stopping his
spirits in their source, hindered their communicating themselves to the parts
they animated; and the body being abandoned of so necessary an assistance, fell
(as dead) at Polexanders feet. His fall was not so heavy as it might have been,
if the Prince, seeing him staggering, had not caught hold on him; and being not
strong enough to stop the fall, yet he hindered the violence of it. With the
aid of the other slave he raised him up, and laid him on the bed they had sat
on whilst they discoursed together. The unfortunate man quickly recovered from
his fainting, and calling upon death with as much fervency as he had made show
to fear it at the beginning of his discourse, made plainly appear, how
changing and unweigh'd the desires are of such who without any reservation give
themselves over to the mercy of their own passions. Polexander, who had learned
by his own infirmities not to be too rigorous in censuring another man's,
comforted the Moore with all that his brave spirit could furnish him, either to
extenuate the enormity of his treachery by the old excuse which men borrow from
the power Love, or to justify it by the example of many other Lovers. This
discourse got somewhat on the slave, but not enough to bring him wholly to
himself. He took leave of our Hero with his Companion, and retired into his
lodging; passing there the most dreadful night that despair and anguish could
bring on a man that would not live and yet feared to die. Diceus, in the mean
while who had been abroad till night, came back to his Master, with a
countenance that well witnessed the content of his mind. Yet durst he not make
known what he had learnt, because some Officers belonging to the Temple came
in with him, to advertise Polexander of that whereto his condition bound him.
To put him in possession of his charge, he was brought to the Temple, and told
him, the last slave that was admitted, ought to watch on the Dome of the Temple
all that night long, which succeeded the Eve of the great sacrifices, and there
from hour to ^oure to awaken by a Cry all such as were shut up within the
close of the Temple, that they might betake themselves to prayers and prepare
for the next mornings Solemnization. Polexander thought that nights work a
little too troublesome, yet conceiving 'twas not to be dispensed withal, he
resolved to watch out the night on the top of the Dome. They brought him up to
it by a winding staire very artificially contrived within the thickness of the
wall; and when he was mounted, he came into a little chamber wherein he might
as well stand upright as sit. According to the ancient custom, he lighted
about an hundred or sixscore lamps, which were about the Dome; amongst which
there were twelve, whose matches were so equally measured, that at every hour
one of them was to go out, whereby Polexander might precisely know when he was
bound to make his Outcry. In this exercise he spent the night, and was not
taken from that station till he had cried out thrice that the God of that
Island began to guild the Dome of his Temple. He acquitted himself so well of
his charge to the content of the Priests that he was applauded by all, and
conducted to a place where he might take amends for his watching and fasting.
Yet he eat but little, but was presently brought to his lodging, and laid
with as much care and delicacy as if he had been in his own Palace. Five or
six hours he slept, and was called up by the same persons who brought him to
bed. Diceus was of the number, who getting leave to make ready his Master, was
so straightened by those about him, that he had scarce liberty to tell his Prince,
he should hope still, and that a great many of his conjectures were true.
As Soon as our Hero had on all his ornaments which he wore the day before, he
was brought into the Hall, where all the other slaves were assembled. When
every one had taken the rank according to his admittance, the Ambassadors and
Pilgrims of quality were placed on scaffolds. After that, the Chiefe-Prelate
presently entered clad in his Pontificiall vestments, and ascending a throne
like to that in the Temple, (by the waving of his hand) imposed silence on all
the Company; and when he perceived that all were attentive, he turned himself
to the slaves, surnamed the Noble, and spoke thus to them:

One of you this day must by the loss of a miserable life purchase the honor
to die for a God, and the felicity of a condition which is to continue as long
as the Power that promises it. I would not at the very first have laid before
your eyes that dreadful Image, which might even amaze men void of all fear,
if I knew not that your courage being as great as your zeal, and the oblation
you make of your self to our Deity being a voluntary offering, I should lessen
somewhat of your virtue, if I went about to dispose you for death by long
persuasions. And indeed, I should most vainly undertake it, since I see in your
countenances so great a desire to shed your blood for the honor of him to whom
you owe it, that I doubt not but there would be a most ardent contestation
amongst you who should offer himself first, if the precise will of our God had
not prescribed the order by which he brings you to him. What a brave emulation
is this, generous Sacrifices? and how should your magnanimity confirm, in the
resolution to die, those who being well persuaded of the future estate of
souls, look on their bodies as on cruel tyrants which keep them bound in
loathsome and obscure prisons. It Is true, you live already an heavenly life,
since you go to your death with a firm belief that the same steel which
deprives you of life, puts you in possession of a better. Presently, even
presently, one of you shall receive that worthy guerdon of his faith, and with
the same eyes wherewithal he sees the lively image of that Deity which he
confesses by the voice of his blood, he is most assured to see him himself in
the midst of his glory. The Chiefe-Prelate having thus finished his
Exhortation, four Priests came out of a Chapel carrying on their shoulders a
table covered with plates of gold, and on it a large vessel of Crystal of the
rock, in which were the names of all the noble Slaves. The expectation of all
the Spectators was doubled at sight of that fatal Vessel; and though among
the Slaves there were some that could not choose but look pale on it, yet they
all made show as if they were alike prepared for death. Polexander had not so
much as the slightest apprehension, whether because he thought, that Death
respecting him in the most dangers and shipwracks, would not be so daring as to
set upon him in the haven; or whether he believed his life not to be in the
disposal of Chance, but depended absolutely on that eternal Providence, which
assigns a beginning and end to all things. His passion adding many other
considerations to these, persuaded him, that in exposing himself to death so
voluntary for Alcidiana, he gave her such proofs of constancy and fidelity as
far excelled all those he had ever rendered her. But when Reason got the upper
hand and came to be heard, she showed him all things on the right side they
were to be looked on, and made him see how most vainly he precipitated himself
to an infallible death, since Alcidiana being not a God to know his intentions,
he might believe that when she came to hear of his death, (which may be might
never happen) she could call it no other then a mischance, or a blow of
Despair. This thought made him not repent of what he had done; but bringing
him to bewail his Fate, I must (said he to himself) fair Princess, confess
my death is less welcome to me then it should be, if it were known to you.
Long, long ago, I was resolved to die, since your just anger thought it not
fit that I should live, and that Fortune denied me the happiness of your
sight. But I could wish to die in some place where your fair eyes might be the
witnesses of my death, that so nothing might hinder you from believing that I
died for you only. When by some exceeding good hap, it may so betide that the
news of my last hour shall come to your knowledge; what can I promise my self
by it, if you be ignorant of the cause? The remembrance of me will be no less
odious to you then was my life, and may be you will account the death I have
suffered as a punishment for my disobedience in swerving from what she had
commanded me. I dare speak it, Alcidiana, and it is most true, I have had
sufficient tokens of the care heaven has had to persuade me that my ill Face
proceeds only from your indignation; and that I could well have o'repass'd my
miseries, if the sentence you have pronounced against me had not made them
eternal. Here he stopped, and thinking on what he had said, condemned it, as
subverting that extreme generousnesse which had been always annexed to his
passion. He even grew angry with his own wisdom, and beginning again with
much sorrow, How cowardly and perfidious am I (said he) to have more
consideration of my self then of that incomparable beauty for whom I suffer? In
lieu of giving thanks for the miseries she would have me undergo, and run to
my death, since I can give her no other testimony of my humblest servitude; I
would articulate with her, find ways of moderating her sentence, not perform
her commands but conditionally choose mine own punishment, and in short not
present my self to the Martyrdom, till I were assured of the Crown. Far,
far from me be this self-love. I here (fair Alcidiana) quit it for ever. I
desire death, since you command it. I neither look for comfort nor recompense,
but go instantly to present me to the steel that must end me, with as much
content as if it were in your own hands. Polexander, transported with these
imaginations, went out of his station, and had he not been withheld by Diceus,
(as the day before) he had given the whole Assembly cause to think strangely of
that unexpected passion. In the mean time, the Chief Priest commanded those
that carried the Lot vessel to approach, and holding his hand over it, Thou
light (said he) which the Sun cannot obscure, Intelligence which govern'st all
others, guide my hand and give thy self that victime which is most pleasing to
thee. By our last sacrifice we have confessed thee to be the Author of our
lives, by this which we are now making ready for thee, we intend to acknowledge
thee to be the Author of death; and as by the one we confess thee All-good, by
the other we avow thee All-powerfull. With that he put his hand into the
Vessel, and drew thence a ball of Ebony. Presently he read the name of him
that was to die, and all the Priests together instantly began to cry out
thrice, Be favorable to thy sacrifice, O mild Deity, which take not away
the lives of thy Creatures, but to render it more perfect and happy. That done,
four other Priests presented themselves at the foot of the throne, carried a
Vessel of gold made like one of the ancient Urnes. The Chief-Prelate threw the
ball into it which he held, and presently the Master of the Ceremonies caused
all the Assistants to march. The slaves by two and two went before the Priests;
and the Sovereign Prelate (seated in a chair which was borne on the shoulders
of eight Slaves) held still his hand on the mouth of the Vessel wherein was
the ball of death. They went all into the Temple, without making there any
offering or prayers, and came out of it by a gate opened to the West. That gate
led to the long walk of Cedars of which I have spoken, and beyond that to a
rock which advanced it self far into the sea. There was discovered a dismal
Preparation. On the left hand was seen an Altar built of marble as red as
blood, and on the right, a funeral pile, at whose sour corners, eight little
children held diverse silver fire-pans full of burning coals. The Pilgrims
encompassed the place. The Clergy and the Ambassadors of Gheneoa were ranked
before them. The Priests joined with them, and made a second circle. The Noble
Slaves made a third, and the Chief-Prelate, staying in the midst of all, with
those which carried the Vessel of Death, at last took it with his Assistants
and put it on the Red Altar. These Ceremonies were performed with a very deep
silence, and as in an act of sorrow, every one witnessed his astonishment and
fear. At last the Sovereign Priest drew out the ball that was to clear the
doubts of so many terrified minds; and presently they cried thrice, that the
Officers of death should come forth of their dark dungeons. Instantly four
doors which were in the four sides of the bloody Altar opened, and four men
came out having their eyes banded with black Cypres, to show that with a blind
obedience we are to go where we are called by the voice of Religion. The
Archpriest delivered into their hands the ball which he had taken out of the
Urne, and presently he and all his Clergy fell with their faces flat on the
earth. The four Executioners of Justice which those Slaves called divine, read
the Name that was written on the ball; and going behind the Slaves (who by a
particular prohibition were enjoined not to turn their heads) they seized on
that miserable Granadian, who the preceding evening, as if he had foreseen his
death, had (before Polexander) unburthen'd himself of all the sins wherewith
he was tormented by the remorse of Conscience. The Executioners presently blind
folded him, and making use of no other thing to bind him but the chains he
was wont to wear, led him to the Altar. Strait they cried out, that all were
to fall flat with their faces to the earth; and that done, there arose from
among the Priests a lamentable voice, which filling their minds with horror,
Remember (it said) O powerful Deity, that thou have not made man to destroy
him. That being spoken, they heard it no more, till the pile being kindled
another voice, but less mournful then the first, cried out thrice thus: Let,
O merciful Divinity, by thy All-powerfulnesse be enlightened again this life
which is newly extinguished for thy glory. When this prayer was ended, the
High Priest arose, and all the Assistants doing the like, without any prayer
they went about the pile, and with no more Ceremony returned toward the
Temple. The gates were found shut, conformable to the ancient Ceremonies, and
then the Chief-Prelate, turning toward all the Assembly, Let every one (said
he) retire, and obtain by his private oraizons what is not to be gotten by the
blood of Sacrifices. After he had pronounced those words thrice, he entered the
Temple by a little door which was then presently opened. The Priests departed
to their Quarters, the slaves to theirs, the Ambassadors to the Highpriests
palace, and the Pilgrims to their particular lodgings. The Noble Slaves that
day eat together in common, and after their repast went to walk together in a
garden which was appointed for that purpose. Polexander took him by the hand
who came to visit him with Menscenarez, and separating themselves from the
rest, led him into a long and close alley, and witnessed there his grief for
the death of their common friend. The Slave stopping to answer Polexander, I
bewail not (said he) Menscenarez, but I lament my self for the loss I have
had. For him, he has met with what he wished for, the end of his torments; and
the Deity which they worship in this Island, making to appear at need the
succor which he promised to such as are in misery, has taken home to himself
our friend from a place where his affliction had infallibly made an end of him
by a more dismal blow, then that which he lately received. The news you told
him yesterday, threw him back into his former design of dying, and the last
night calling on Benzaida, and bewailing her death; I will follow thee,
ungrateful, but amiable Princess (said he) from time to time, and will let
thee know by my death that I knew how to love, and by consequence how to die
as well as thee. Acknowledge then his death is a particular gratification of the
Deity which he has so faithfully served; and that we are more to be lamented
then he, since we are bound to attend yet may be five or six years till the
lot free us from our chains and the remembrance of our misfortunes. Polexander
admired at the slaves understanding, and looking on him more curs^usly then he
had done, saw in his face something of I know not what, which made him desirous
to know who, and from whence he was. He therefore asked how long, and by what
accident he came into that Island of the Sun. My too much daring (said he)
hurried me hither; and that which is to me the most insupportable of all the
torments I endure, in my conscience I know I have deserved them. I would have
gone beyond that which was permitted me. My good fortune made me proud, and
that pride made me forget my self. Wretched bird of darkness that I am, I
feared not to flutter out of my obscurity, but exposed my weak eyes to the
beams of a more radiant Sun then is worshipped in this Island. In a word, I
would have committed a Saeriledge, and from an adoration permitted, gone on to
a love that was forbidden me. It is now almost three years since my impiety
was discovered, and almost as long time have I undergone the punishment
enjoined me for it. I was at last brought into this Isle, and without the
hearing my justifications they consecrated me to the service of the Sun.
Polexander, being not to his wish well satisfied, entreated the Slave, to make
known the place of his birth, and if he might ask him with modesty, to let him
understand more clearly then he had done, the cause of his Exile and Captivity.
It would be very hard for me though I indevour'd it (replied the Slave) to
refuse any thing you shall request of me. Your desires have a certain charm
which compels all minds, and they get with a great deal of violence, what
they entreat with far more sweetness. Let us therefore, I beseech you,
retire to some place where none may interrupt us; and I will there amaze you
with the recital of a passion which may serve for an example to all young
Spirits, which through a ridiculous presumption persuade themselves that all
things they affect, should be permitted them. Polexander putting himself to be
guided by the Slave, traversed a great many Alleies, and at last came to a
place where the murmr of many fountains, and the shade of diverse Palm trees
and Cedars made a retreat fit for the converse of melancholy lovers. They sat
down both far enough from the fountains that they might not be troubled with
their noise; and Polexander entreating his companion not to defer the
Contentment he had promised him, won him to begin his discourse in these
terms. Certainly they knew well what a passion that is which we call Love,
when they represented it by an Infant that had his Eyes banded. They would,
surely, thereby intimate, that 'twas a twofold blindness; since it is true,
that Infancy is as it were a blindfolding which hinders the Souls operation
with knowledge, and permits it not either to consider the end of what it
proposes, nor the means she is to take in acquiring it. I have not this
Philosophy from the learning of any Tutors, but from my long and cruel
experience. Yet before I acquaint you with it, I think it fit to make known
who I am and where I was borne. In this Sea, which incompasseth the Isle
wherein we are, and not far from hence, where the ancient Idolaters had
placed their Elizian fields, is an Island; which is no otherwise known to other
Nations, but by its not being known to them at all. Some have given it the
name of Inaccessible, others of the Enchanted Island, but all agree that it
hides it self from all that go about to discover it, and sometimes shows it
self to those that never look after it. Polexander, at that word stopping the
slave, and intimating an impatiency truly amorous; How (said he) were you born
Alcidiana's subject? Yes, (replied the slave sighing) and could have boasted to
have been of the number of her most happy subjects, if my temerity had not made
me lose all those advantages which the goodness of that Princess afforded
me. Who e're you be then that know the famous name of Alcidiana, be pleased to
understand that till I was ten or twelve years of age, I was so happy as to be
called by her by no other name then that of brother. The reason was this. There
is in that Inaccessible Island, a Family, which by a privilege almost as
ancient as the State, seemed to be destined for the furnishing of Nurses to all
the Kings children; and indeed it is recorded, that for two thousand years, the
most of our Princes and Princesses have been nursed by the Ladies of that
house. Out of that family came I; and that you may know it is not mean, let me
tell you, that this important employment has made it so illustrious that it
gives place to none but the Princes of the blood, and it has so far gotten
the love of the people, that they certainly believe, if they have able, valiant
and virtuous Kings, they owe it to our excellent nurturing as much at least as
to their birth. When Alcidiana was borne, she was delivered into the hands of
my mother, which was not long before brought to bed of me. She was her Nurse,
with all the care and tenderness that could answer the general expectation
which all the Kingdom had in the life of that Princess. It Is true, there was
this difference betwixt her breeding and that of other Princes, that none were
permitted to see her: because all that could prognosticate things to come, had
foretold that under the reign of that Princess, the Crown would be
transferred into the power of strangers, and that the Princess her self, to
save her Country, should be compelled to marry a slave, that was come from among
the Negroes. At those words Polexander had much ado to suppress the
extraordinary motions he felt within him. But imagining he was obliged, for
the accomplishment of that prophecy, to conceal himself more then ever, he
forced his transports, and redoubled his attention, that he might not lose any
thing of the slaves discourse, which the young man thus prosecuted: Alcidiana
was therefore shut up in the palace of Calliroe, with her Nurse and Officers.
My mother, who was young, and had no other child but my self, would never give
way to let me be from her, so that I was confined with Alcidiana, and by little
and little made me so necessary for the pastimes of her childhood, that they
were forced to keep me still with her. At the age of four years, that
Princess (as my mother has often related) had so great lights of
understanding, and was so admirable in all her actions and discourse, that it
seemed heaven had exempted her from all the infirmities of childhood; and in
her birth been endowed with all such treasures as others acquire with much
pain and a great many years. In this extreme infancy, I felt my self with a
great deal of pleasure won to the adoration of this rising Sun; and though my
mind was not yet capable of any of its operations, yet it turned it self
toward the beauties of Alcidiana, just as the Adamant, though inanimated, by a
hidden quality turns it self to the star which it loves and which draws
it. I was the beloved brother of that Princess, if we were to play, if we were
to dance, I must always necessarily make one. Alcidiana could not well pass
the time without m^, and I dare say, she loved me so dearly that there never
was man more happy then I, without knowing it. But that felicity lasted not
long, for after I attained the age of nine years, they began to make me know
who I was, and what was Alcidiana. Her Governesses too, instructed her in the
difference that heaven had set betwixt our degrees, and withal taught her to
converse with me far otherwise then she had lived thitherto. All freedom
which I formerly enjoied was debarred me. I saw my self reduced to serve on the
knee, her whom I before treated with as much familiarity as she had been my
Sister. It was not so much permitted me as to touch that fair hand which before
time I could kiss as often as she took any thing from mine. Alcidiana was a
great while ere she could practice these rigorous instructions; but by little
and little she grew so learned in the Art of Imperial commanding, and
disdainfully regarding the unfortunate Pisander as well as all other men, that
as young as I was, I took notice of the alteration, and almost died for sorrow.
My mother who took no delight but in what I did, seeing me suddenly fall into
a dangerous sickness, used all kind of remedies for my recovery. But
perceiving that I waxed every day worse and worse, and that I complained of
nothing else but Alcidiana's change, she was so imprudent out of her affection
as to entreat the Princess to lessen a little her severity, and bear with my
innocence. The love which Alcidiana bore to that second mother, was so
powerful as to win her to suppress her thoughts, and to visit me as I lay
in my bed. The sight of her gave me my health as it had taken it from me; and
the hope of living with that Princess as I had done, made me soon leave my
chamber. For a whole year after my recovery, there passed not a day wherein I
saw not Alcidiana. Every morning I brought her flowers, either to make her
nosegaycs or guirlands. At the time of Devotion I waited on her to the Temple,
and I remember how approaching the nearest to her that I could when she prayed,
I innocently besought the Divinity which she had adored, not to grant her
petition, unless by a particular vow she bound her self not to treat me ever
as a man indifferent to her. The afternoones if she went forth to walk, or if
she passed the time at any sport, I strove to fit her with new services, or at
least to make show of my diligence. At night when she was making unready, not
only her Governesses, but the King her father himself, had not the power to
make me forsake her mirror. I looked on her with an earnestness that beseem'd
not mine age; and oftentimes the power of mine inclination making me speak
such things as I understood not my self, I amazed with the violence of my
passion, those that troubled themselves with heeding that sport or rather
prodigy of nature. At the first Alcidus took pleasure in it, but fearing, lest
my affection might increase with my years; and that what was then called a
childish extravagancy, might at last grow to be a manly resolution; he
commanded that by little and little I should be put away from the Princess,
that with the absenting from her company I might lose the memory of her person.
My mother therefore, had command to put me out of the palace of Calliroe; and
she strove to do it so dexterously that I should take no notice of it. But 'twas
impossible for her; I foresaw the evil was intended me, and a little before I
was forced from that sweet abode, I went to Alcidiana's chamber, and casting my
self at her feet; (after I had a long time wept there) Fair Princess (said
I) I must leave you, and (to obey mine enemies) lose all occasions to serve
you. Be a little touched with the pains I endure, and by some word witness to
me, at least that you have no hand in my banishment. But alas! I shall see you
no more Alcidiana, for how short soever my mothers voyage be, I am sure to dye
in it. Whether the Princess did it out of innocence, or whether it were to
jeere at me, once she said, she would not have me dye. I will not (said I
innocently) if you command me to live, but the hope of revisiting you, shall
preserve my life till my return. In this manner I parted as much an Infant as
a Lover, but my journey was a journey of five or six years; for I was sent to
the University of Sophilama and stirred not thence till I had perfected all my
studies. In the mean while, neither book nor time could blot the Image of
Alcidiana out of my memory. I came from the Academy not only with some
qualities which were not absolutely ill, but full (withal) of that fire which
the age of seventeen or eighteen kindles in our veins. Then did Alcidiana
appear to my imagination, as charming and beautiful, as she was in her
Inaccessible Palace. I returned to the Court, but not so as I went thence. Time
and books had taught me, that there needed a great deal of dissimulation and
much suffering to an affection of the quality that mine was. I thought, that if
it came to be discovered, it might either make me an offender, or at least
esteemed for one giddy headed and by consequence, for fear of shame, or
punishment, I should do my utmost endeavor to conceal it. About that time
Alcidus dyed, and left his Kingdom to the disposal of a Princess but sixteen
years old. But at that age, her admirable wit and judgment, had made her
capable of the highest sciences, and the philosopher Rhadiotez had made her
understand all the secrets of Policy, as well as all the mysteries of
philosophy. And indeed she was no sooner in the Throne but she astonished her
Subject with her admirable government; but for her own misfortune, and to the
grief of all that might adore that Princess, she invented a business which
her predecessors had never put in practice, dividing her Court in two: She made
a public and a private one. The public was composed of the greatest part of
her Kingdoms Grandy's, of the Officers of her Crown and Counselors of
State. The other which was particularly her own, consisted of young Ladies and
women, and some ordinary men appointed to serve the Princess. Before that
reformation, the children of the best houses in the Kingdom were bred up near
the person of the Sovereign, as well to wait on him in his chamber, as to
guard him with that affection and fidelity which is seldo^e found in mean and
mercenary minds. During Alcidus reign that custom was a little changed,
because that Prince, who was the first there that had traveled into strange
Countries, for the memory of it, would have his Guard part strangers and part
of his Subjects. And a little before his death, he chose a hundred strangers to
be near to Alcidiana; and to add more glory to that novelty, appointed them
all to wear great chains of gold, and to be called the Princesses Slaves.
That band continued as long as the King lived. But as soon as Alcidiana came to
the Crown, she casheer'd that magnificent Guard, and shutting her self up in
her palace with her Ladies, caused to be proclaimed every where, that a King
could never be better guarded then by the affection of his Subjects.
Nevertheless there betided an accident which made her change that opinion, and
call back again to her, those whom her too scrupulous virtue had discharged.
One of the greatest Lords in the Island (called Siziphus) desperately
ambitious, and passionately in love with the Princess, imagined with himself
that there was none surely who durst against him contest for the enjoying her.
After he had a year or two revolved this thought in his mind, he conceived
the time was come to declare himself. To that end, he became extremely
expensive. He increased his retinue by a great many gentlemen. He got to him by
presents and pensions, part of the Gentry; and by notable prosusions, I mean
richnes, and pomp of shows, and spectacles, and by public seastings, he
corrupted the Loyalty, and made himself master of the peoples Love. To that, he
added turneies, and sports, in honor of Alcidiana. In a word, he made his
intention sopalpable to the world, that there was none but knew it save the
Queen. Hereupon the Assembly of the Estates ensuing, he won the most part of
the Deputies, and got them to represent to the Queen that they had need of a
King. This proposition was made with all the respect that happy and loving
Subjects owe their Prince. Notwithstanding, it offended Alcidiana; and when she
saw herself extraordinarily pressed to it: Well (said she to the Deputies)
since you are weary of being under the government of a woman, name me who it is,
whom you desire should be your King. Many humble excuses were by them opposed
to that command; and the chief replied, that none but her own high and
discerning Spirit could make a choice of so great importance. No, no, (said the
Queen) if the question were of my contentment, I would reserve to my self that
Election, but since it lies in yours, you your selves must make the choice. A
young Magistrate, (thereupon) one that had been corrupted by Siziphus with the
hope of a great fortune and some liberality, came forward, and putting one knee
to the ground, Madam (said he) all your Subjects most humbly (by me) beseech
your Majesty, to perfect their happiness by promoting the Prince Siziphus to
be their King. At that proposition Alcidiana blushed, and yet constraining
herself, lest she might make known her choler: If Siziphus be the general
Vote of my Subjects (said she with a voice which sufficiently expres'd her
scorn) I perceive they would very easily be contented to wayve the government
of Alcidiana. This Answer taught the Deputies the fault of their companion. But
to reaccommodate it, they all fell at the Queens feet, and having besought her
pardon for their exceeding boldness, assured her that the late made
proposition was rather intended to make her think on marriage, then to oblige
her to take a husband; and that Siziphus had not been nominated to her, but
that they thought he might be acceptable, as well in regard of his eminent
virtues, as for the authority he had acquired in the State. If he have so,
(replied presently Alcidiana) he has stoine it from me. I never meant he
should have any other command in my Kingdom, save that which his Birthright
gives him over his Vassals. But I see well how matters go. My overmuch
mildness is abused. I will (since I am forced to it) become more severe, and
know how to keep you all in your duties. This Parliament having so ill
success, and Siziphus seeing himself so absolutely refused, thought, he must
not fit down with that affront, but practice to obtain by violence, what was
not by fair means to be purchased. He bargains therefore, he bribes, he
promises, he gives, and by his immense Presents corrupting even the women
which very seldom came out of the Queens chamber, guided his plot so
cunningly, that he doubted not of the success. When all this was in hand I
returned to the Court, and became so extravagant in love with the Queen, that I
spent whole days and nights in gazing on the walls within whose cincture that
miracle was enclosed. I had not been there long ere I understood of Siziphus
design; and love making me look on him as a dangerous Rival, I resolved to
hinder his Suit, and with the first occasion to bring him to defend himself in
a Duel. Now one night as I walked in the great garden of the Palace which is
under the Queens chamber windows, I had a glimpse of one that marched a great
pace. I drew sortly near, and heard these words: MAKE HAVE, AND LET EVERY MAN
OBSERVE WHAT IS AGREED UPON. These words making me suspect somewhat, I slid
along by a back way which was contrived by the Alley, and followed those
disguised persons. They were seven or eight, and seemed by their talk, to be
going to some place where they were not to meet with any great resistance. When
they were come into the Castle ditch, I saw (can you believe it?) somebody let
fall a private Bridge* by which the Queen was wont to go out of her lodgings
into the Garden. Then I knew that the Princess was betrayed by her own
domestical Servants; And my Love making me instantly take on a resolution
worthy its cause; I stepped from behind the Pallissado, (where I had staid)
with my sword drawn, and laying one of the Rascals at my feet, in two leaps I
got on the Bridge, with an intent to be cut in pieces ere I would suffer any
whatsoever he were to enter the Palace. Siziphus (for 'twas he,) seeing
himself (so unlooked for) crossed, flew in upon me, and with that strength
which made him almost invincible, bore a thrust at me which in all likelihood
was to pierce me through and through. But I put it by, in sliding my foot; and
seeing the Traitor engaged on the Bridge, I pressed on to him, and got within
the point of his weapon. The address which I owe to Nature and Exercise, made
me so hardy as to graple with that Giant. I seized on him, and ere he could
take fast hold of me, put him to his leap, and turned him headlong into the
ditch. Presently I cried out, there were thieves, attempting the Queens
lodgings. At which alarm, all the Palace awoke, and the most part of the
Queens Officers came armed into the Garden. In the mean time I followed
Siziphus Accomplices, and though the many Alleyes, the Meanders, and little
thickets in the Garden, afforded them fair means to escape, yet I met with
one of them, and having taken him, left Alcidiana's Officers the pains of
seeking out the rest. Till all that great disorder could be appeased, it grew
to be broad day. The Queen being well informed of this attempt, assembled all
those of whom her public Court was chiefly composed, and commanded Siziphus to
be produced, who had been taken out of the Castle ditch. At the same time I
came into the council, and presented to the Queen the man I had taken. The
Princess commanding me to speak what I knew: The obligations (said I) which
bind me to your Majesty, being written by the very hand of heaven (whereof you
are the lively image) have made me believe that it was impossible to infringe
them, without the perpetrating a crime beyond all Example. This Consideration
(blinding my thoughts from all others, and dreading not the acquiring of any
enemies, how powerful or redoubtable soever, when your Majesty's service is in
agitation) makes me speak boldly what Siziphus himself dares not deny, if he
be not as cowardly as guilty. From that very hour wherein his impudency (or
rather treachery) was so justly and publicly chastis'd, he complotted to force
away your Majesty; and to that end, trying all means, he saw so great an
ingression to what he intended, that there remained nothing for the execution,
but to make a free entry into your Palace. Many ways he tried, to overcom that
obstacle, and wrought so powerfully that he thought he had suppres'd it. These
wonderful prodigalities, as sufficient poisons to corrupt the best
inclinations, and allurements violent enough to disturb reason, seduced (even
within the walls of your sacred Palace) such personages, who for virtue and
fidelity were till then impregnable. I cannot tell your Madam who are the
Accomplices in so great a treason. I will only say, after I had discovered
Siziphus intention, and knew the time when 'twas to be put in execution, I came
the last night into your Majesty's gardens, to the end that suprising him in
his crime, I might not be obliged to proofs which are many times difficult,
and are almost never convincing. All things happened as I had forethought. I
saw Siziphus come to his appointed place, and saw that at a certain Signal he
made; the little bridge of your lodging was let down. But Siziphus could not
make use of that fair but detestable occasion, because, I throwing my self
first on the bridge, disputed the passage with him. We came to blows, and his
wicked Action, depriving him of his wonted strength, or rather the horror of
his Treason robbing him of his judgment, I tumbled him from the bridge into
the Moa^e, then gave the alarm, and seeing the danger passed, ran after
Siziphus Confederates. This here (Madam) is one of them which I took, who has
already confessed to me that his Masters intent was to carry you hence, and
after he had married (either by consent or force) to place your Crown on his
head. When I had thus spoke I held my peace; and the high Chancelour of the
Kingdom commanding Siziphus to answer to those accusations: that ambitious Man
was so base as to deny an Act whereof he was convicted by his being taken in
it, and by the confession of his Accomplices. The Queen commanding that Justice
should be done, arose, and told in withdrawing, that my Service should not be
unrewarded. Within four or five days Siziphus Process was drawn, because
his Crime being so openly proved, there needed no observation of ordinary
length and form. To give satisfaction to the Law for his Attempt, he was
condemned to dye by the hand of the Hangman. After this Judgment was
pronounced, he was brought to the place of Execution; but Alcidiana desirous to
let her people know how far her Clemency could extend, gave Siziphus his
pardon; and to perfect it fully, in lieu of confining him to perpetual
imprisonment, she gave him his liberty, and with it, all his means that were
confiscated. Yet this extraordinary mercy could not alter or make any change in
Siziphus ill nature, but he converted into a private hatred the love he bore
Alcidiana; and that hatred being cherished by his ambition, he recommenc'd his
former practices. But they had such ill success, that in their prosecution, he
most dishonourably lost his ^ise; for I understood by those whom Alcidiana sent
the last Spring into this Island, that a stranger Prince called Polexander,
accusing Siziphus for intending to attempt again on Alcidiana's liberty, had
enforced his Justification by Arms. The Combat was long and doubtful; but at
last Siziphus seeing himself sore wounded, and at the feet of his Enemy,
confessed the second Conspiracy as basely as he had denied the first; but his
Confession could not save his life, for he died in the place. Now let us
return to that which concerns my self. As Soon as Siziphus was set at
liberty all the Citizens came thronging to the Queens Palace, and
remonstrating, that the audaciousness of any that was ambitious might make her
fall into the like accidents, besought her Majesty to take a Guard, and to take
more care then she had done, of a life on which depended the welfare and lives
of all her Subjects. At last she yielded to their just petition, and restored
again the brave Band of her Slaves. By that means, my good fortune fell to be
beyond my hopes. The Queen did me the honor to nominate me Captain of her
Guard, and in that quality, I and my companions were lodged in the first
enclosure of her Palace. My command gave me admittance every where and engaged
me to see the Queen almost every day, to render her an account of what was done
abroad. Imagine, if you can possibly, to what a height this opportunity wrought
my passion. When the Princess had made a match with her Ladies to spend the
day in the Gardens, I saw her clad like a Nymph: When her mind to hunt made
her leave her beloved Solitude, I followed her to the woods, and seeing her in
the habit of Diana, I thought her more fair then that Goddess is described.
At those words Polexander sighed aloud, because he remembered that Alcidiana was
so clad the first time he had the honor to see her. The Slave taking no notice
of it, continued his story thus: Sometimes, when public affairs obliged the
Queen to give audience, or to sit in her throne of Justice, I admired the
majesty she showed in her royal robes. Another time when she was dressed for
a Revells, I compared the whiteness of her pearls with that of her neck, and
the luster of her Diamonds with that of her eyes. And ravished at the
difference I saw between them, You (said I) that are called Nature's
Masterpieces, and her utmost endeavors, humble your pride, and acknowledge
(ye pearl) that your whiteness is sallow'd by that of her neck. And ye little
stars, which shine but in darkness, be no more so bold to appear in presence
of your Sun. My dear companion in my fetters, how much eloquence do I want, to
describe to you the parts which composed that incomparable Lady? Why have I not
colors lively enough, and pencils sufficiently neat to delineate to you that
Princess as fair as I see her even in her absence? Think on all that is
admirable, both in proportion and colors; add sweetness to majesty, beauty
to favor, and in brief, the charms of the spirit to the allurements of the
body, and of all those wonders make a judicious composition, and you shall
infallibly meet with the resemblance of Alcidiana. But rash man that I am, for
daring to fly too high, and exposing my self too near the heat of that great
Star, my hopes less solid then wings set together with wax, have precipitated
me into this abode of banishment and death. I was not above two or three
months in that happiness I related, but I found my self too weak to support
it. You daily see men, who by their vigor or courage contest long time with a
disease before they are laid down by it; and though they feel extreme pangs,
yet go abroad in company, and act the same things as others which have no
touch of sickness: but on the sudden their strength fails them, their fever
redoubleth, and of a disease which might have easily been cured, if it had not
been too long neglected, there grows one so violent and obstinate against all
remedies, that it can have no end but by death: Such was the lamentable estate
whereto I saw my self brought by the excess of my good fortune. After I had
long dissembled my love, after I had promised my self to hide it so well, that
Alcidiana should not discover it; nay, even after I dared to call to the
combat all that Princesses attractions, and had vaunted that my discretion
should be stronger then they: at last I was enforced (spite of my heart) to
give way to the violence of my affection. I must sigh, and sigh, and in such
places where it must be taken notice of. From sighing, I must pass on to
languishing looks, and from looks to complaints. In the night time I made the
voices of Musicians (to the sound of their Lutes) speak that which I was
forbidden. But all this was nothing to the evil Angel that had resolved to
ruin me. He so tormented me, that as often as Alcidiana (unlooked for) came
within my sight, I could not possibly keep my self from swounding. This
mischief betided me once when I was in the Queens privie-chamber. I felt my
fit coming on, but not being able to withdraw quick enough, I fell as dead at
her feet. Imagine how she was affrighted. She commanded to carry me forth, and
by virtue of some remedies they brought me again. But I was so sensibly
touched with it, that with sorrow and anguish I fell into a sickness, wherein
my recoverie was so much despaired of, that Alcidiana, to comfort my mother,
who was a sick as I, was so noble and good, that she took the pains to visit
me, and to let me know, that my death would not be an indifferent thing to
her. I think verily, that the power of her sweet eyes triumphed over the
violence of my disease: For the fever presently left me, but there rested such
a feebleness, that I usually swounded, sometimes thrice, sometimes four times
in the day. In the mean time I prayed continually that I might not recover of
that weakness, because my amorous swoundings being taken for the relics of
my sickness, I had the content of seeing the Queen, and could swoune before
her, and yet she not suspect the cause. One evening as I meditated in the great
garden on the estate (I cannot tell whether I may say happy or unhappy) of my
life, on a sudden Alcidiana came into the arbor where I was, and being
surpised with mine encounter, witnessed no less anger then if she had heard
all that my reaving had put into my mind. What does this melancholy man here
(said she?) and presently calling for a Lady named Amintha, which always
attended her, See (said she) Pisander, would you not say by his disfigured
countenance, and his melancholy humor, that he is no more already then his
shadow? Amintha, who truly merits to be called the example of all courtefie and
goodness, replied, according to her admirable wit; But Madam (said she) since
the wise should make benefit of all things, I humbly beseech your Majesty to
draw from the loss of Pisander a means of preserving your self. The love of
study, and the pleasure he tastes in these meditations, has made him fall
into this deep melancholy. Beware (if you please) lest you run the same
fortune: Your books, and your R^aiotez, which without intermission take up your
thoughts, will infallibly throw you into some profound melancholy, and at last
make you abandon the throne, to bury you alive in some one of those Grottes,
where your Philosopher tells us so often that his Predecessors found out all
their Sciences. Alcidiana laughing at Amintha's pleas^nt conceit, I am (said
she) no such wise Philosopher to come thither. I make profession of a less
austere doctrine; and thou shall know it, my dear Amintha, that though I love
Philosophy well, yet I love Alcidiana better. I advise Pisander to do so too.
You would be caught (replied the good Amintha with a great laughter) if
Pisander followed your counsel. You are not so wise as you were wont to be
(said the Queen, who was the best Mistress that ever was borne.) The counsel
I give to Pisander i^, that his Philosophy should be as mirthsome as mine.
Alas! how vainly did that Princess advise the unfortunate Pisander? He was
not in case to hearken to her, for from the beginning of her discourse he was
fallen into his usual fainting. Amintha perceived it, and ran to help me.
Presently I recovered, and being a while without ability of discerning who was
about ^ce, at last I knew that Lady, to whom I gave thanks for her assistance:
and after I had ask't her pardon for the pains she had taken with me, Shall
I (said I) be ever so unfortunate as to bring nothing but disturbance to such
persons whom I have most affection to serve? Pisander (answered Amintha) you
should take a little more care for your health then you do, and not suffer
your self to be thus over-growne with melancholy, which will bring you to your
grave, if you do not quickly ston the course of it. My malady (said I) is now
incurable. I have done my utmost to overcome it, and from ordinary remedies, I
have betaken me to extraordinary, but both have been alike to me unprofitable.
Nor indeed do I expect any else then death; and the worst that can be^ide me
is to live. I am very sorry (replied the Lady) that I cannot apprehend the
cause of that sorrow I note in your discourse; but the Queen is gone, and I
must follow her. With that she went out of the arbor, and left me in as much
grief as my sad destiny could make me sensible of. What will become of thee
Pisander, said I then to my self? Know thou not well enough the peril thou
ru^'st into, to resolve to free thy self? See thou not that all discretion
condemns thy design, that thy flames are criminal, that thou will be held
for a fool, if they be discovered, and that thy daring is such, as far off for
being any way glorious to thee, it will make thy death and thy memory alike
ridiculous? Thou art at one extremity, and Alcidiana at the other; and these
extremes are so far distant, that he who shall undertake to join heaven and
earth together, would not be thought so very a fool then the miserable
Pisander, if he persuade himself that he shall be raised to Alcidiana, or
that she will descend to him. Let judgment then effect what love cannot. Be a
victor by flying. since thou can not be so by contesting. Desire no more,
since it is impossible for thee to obtain what thou desire; and spend not thy
whole life in reavings and dreams, which make thee run after phantasmes which
thou shall never attain to. After I had thus discoursed with my self, and
brought me to be a little capable of reason, me thought I saw Love, who full
of indignation and fury, reproved me for my disloyalty and infamous
resolutions. What (said he) do thou so ill acknowledge the favors which
thou owe to my bounty? and dare thou so cowardly betray him, who plucking
thee out of the center of the earth, has on his own wings carried thee as
high as heaven? To what greater glory aspirest thou? or to what height would
thou have me lift thee, if thou be not content to be in heaven? But I hear
thy murmures, and I know thy thoughts. Thou tell me, thou love in vain,
that thou shall never win Alcidiana to the least thought of pity: That thou
shall languish all thy whole life, and yet she shall not so much as know it is
for her; and when thou dyest, thy death, as the death of one of the meanest of
her subjects, shall not make her bestow a tear on thee. Answer me, disloyal
Pisander: When thou began'st to love this Princess, did thy common sense fail
thee so much as to promise thee thou should be beloved again? No, no, repent
thy self of thy repentance, perfect thy ruin for Alcidiana: and remember,
that the glorious thought which gave thee the boldness to adore Alcidiana, is
of more esteem then the possession of all that is fairest in the whole world.
These last counsels made all the former to vanish, and my passion (flattered
by these pleasing imaginations) taking new root, not only strengthened me in
strengthening it self, but served for a special remedy to all my
languishments. The Court, seeing me suddenly got from death to life, knew not
to what to attribute either the cause of my sickness, or that of my health.
Even Amintha was deceived in it, and admiring so sudden a recovery, persuaded
her self, that my malady was no other then the melancholy vapors of the
spleen. A little while after my full amendment, Arziland King of the Isle of
Madera, being by a tempest cast on our coast, came to the Court; and having
seen the Queen, began to be so foolishly amorous, that he threatened to put all
her Island to fire and sword, if she declared not her acceptance of his love. I
thought then that I could not better employ my life, then in freeing the Queen
from that Monster; and that the service I might render her in that occasion,
would be of a greater importance then the former I had done her in the attempt
of Siziphus. I sent therefore to defy the Giant; but thinking for certain
that I should be flaine in the combat, I resolved to provide my self a fair
funeral, and to make known at least in dying the love I had concealed all my
life time. I put on a gilded armor, which by the rays upon it, did not ill
represent the Sun. My Helmet cast forth beams too, and I had for my crest the
Phoenix which Alcidiana took for the body of her Emblem. Upon my buckler,
which was as shining as mine armor, I had caused an Eagle to be painted in the
region where the thunder is engendered. Yet in spite of all lightning and
thunder claps, he flew through it, and fixedly gazed on the Sun. For the word
to this Device there was this, (which spoke my thoughts plain enough:) I HOPE
TOO MUCH TO FEAR. Covered with these arms, I went and met with Arziland, and
was so fortunate, that after a combat of eight or ten hours, I cut off the
Giants right hand. When he saw himself without arms, and unable for defense,
he confessed he was overcome, and loathing to survive his shame, would have
killed himself. But Alcidiana, who preserved him to serve for a redoubtable
example to all such rash ones as he, caused him to be put in strong hold; and
commanded that special care should be had of his life. In the mean time, I,
who had received diverse great wounds, fell as I had been dead in the place of
combat; and if the Queen had not showed that my life was so extremely dear
unto her, without doubt, the day of my victory had been the day of my death.
My wounds were so great, that I kept my bed almost six months, and was four
or five more ere I went out of my chamber. Alcidiana the third time took the
pains to come and visit me, and gave me such signs of favor, that my love in
its greatest extravagancies could never promise to it self. Arziland the while
being gotten into case sufficient to be able to suffer the punishment whereto
the Queens justice had condemned him, was taken out of prison, and lead to the
place where he was to lose his life. Though in the Inaccessible Island we
adore but one God, yet there are Temples in several places, which from all
antiquity are dedicated to particular Deities. In one there is worshipped a
God, which they term the God of Revenge. The Annalls of our Kingdom tell us,
that that Temple was built by a Queen, who having been long time earnestly sued
to by a man unworthy her bed, and after the receiving a great many wrongs and
outrages from him, at last took him in a day of battle. When the barbarous man
saw himself in the power of a personage whom he had so ill treated, he never
craved her pardon, but besought her that she would not delay too long the time
of his punishment. That Princess, hearing from her Priests, that their God had
reserved vengeance to himself, built to him a Temple during the imprisonment
of her enemy, under the name of the God of Revenge, and causing the prisoner to
be brought thither, commanded he should be sacrificed on the altar of that
Deity, as a victime which was reserved for him. Arziland, who had committed
the same fault, received the same punishment. For Alcidiana thought she could
not do better then to imitate the example of her Ancestor. And to give the
more terror to such Princes as loved her, she sent to proclaim in a thousand
places a Declaration, by which she held for irreconcilable enemies all those
that had the boldness to take on them the name of her lovers. After Arziland
had received his punishment, and a Herald of the Queens sent into Europe, she
betook her self to her former manner of living; and shutting her self up in
her palace, there relished again her wonted innocent contentments. I, the
while, who knew very well the offense I had commi^ted in discovering my love,
was tortured with a perpetual remorse, and not possibly imagining that after
so visible signs of my passion, Alcidiana should be still ignorant of it, I
drew out my malady to a longer date, and could not put on any resolution to
suffer my self to be cured. But the tokens of goodness which I almost daily
received from that Princess, the titles of honor which she added to those I
had already, and the excessive presents she sent not only to my mother, but to
all those of my blood, made me believe at first, that she understood naught of
my design; but since that, my vanity and good fortune so dazzled me, that I
persuaded my self Alcidiana knew of my love, and that she was glad to see the
continuance of it. On this opinion. which has been the cause of all my
miseries, I hastened my cure, and repaired again to the Palace with all
diligence. The Queen her self welcomed me with such extraordinary
demonstrations of favor, that I grew confirmed in that foolish belief which
my vanity had wrought in me. So my last errors waxing worse then my first,
and particularly that of not being hated by the Queen, working in me such
thoughts as you may imagine, I grew so insolent, that there scarce passed an
hour in the day wherein I did not violate some one of the laws of the private
Court, and gloried in the neglect of that respect which I owed to the most
generous Mistress in the world. I came into her privy chamber before she was
clad. There I was when they dressed her head, and oftentimes taking out of her
women's hands such things as she used for that attire, I was so indiscreet, as
to offer to do their office. The Queen winked at all these impertinencies, and
when I told some tales which truly were faulty enough to have made me been
banished for ever from her presence, she drowned all in the greatness of my
service; and that she might not be engaged to reprove me, feigned she heard
nothing. Sometime her Lady of Honor, and the Lady which dressed her, being
offended at it, entreated her to do them justice for my freedom; but she
still counterfeited the ignorant, and as if she had been somewhere else, not
only ask't them what I had spoken, but blaming the niceness of their ears,
told them, that she was too well assured of my discretion to think their
complaints were just. This indulgencie which I should have considered as the
utmost Alcidiana could do to constrain her self, being expounded to mine
advantage, absolutely deprived me of that little judgment which the excess of
my happiness had left me. Alcidiana (said I to my self) is too cleer-sighted
not to take notice of a thing which is remarkable to the least witted of her
women. Infallibly she knows mine intention, but she feignes her self
ignorant, that she may not be engaged to make me such a prohibition as (may
be) would not have pleased her. Her condition is subject to most rigorous
necessities. She must sacrifice her will and contentment to the will and liking
of others; and to preserve to her self a strange authority, put off that
command which nature had given her over her self. O the quality of Kings so
generally envied, and (truly) so little deserving it! how well do the Godd
avenge them on thy self, for the slavery wherein thou plungest thy subjects!
Thou first feel the miseries thou make them suffer, and imposest not so
heavy and cruel a yoke on others as that thou wearest thy self. But what,
said I? Ye ridiculous considerations get from me, and ye troublesome relics of
my melancholy hide your selves in some extreme obscurity, and there dwell with
fools and miserable wretches. But for you, ye dear and pleasant thoughts of
mirth, riches, and command, lay open to me all the charms which are linked
with the fruition of Alcidiana. Tell me, that as her beauty is without
parallel, so the bliss of enjoying her is beyond all comparison. Make me see
that such a happiness is accompanied with many more. That in acquiring the
fairest wife in the world, I wi hall gain the richest crown of the Universe;
and from the quality of a private man, which is always troublesome, how
elevated soever it be, I ascend to that of a Sovereign, which is all of
flowers, how thorny soever some fools imagine it. After I had entertained my
self with these Chymera's, and even emptied my thoughts, to be no more
powerfully deceived, I went to Alcidiana. The discourse I had with her
proceeding from such thoughts as I have related, made her blush out of shame
and anger; and (in spite of all her goodness) to look on me as on another
Siziphus. Two or three months before my disgrace, the virtuous Amintha, (who
only witnessed she was truly my friend) advised me to take heed to my self,
and not settle on a foundation which was to be shaken. Alcidiana (said she)
begins to distasse your words and actions. I am afraid (has she lately said)
lest Pisander lose himself, and hearkens after such, who may be will make
benefit of his ruin. I know well he offends through ignorance, and not having
so well studied the malice of Courtiers as he ought, he perceives not the traps
they have laid under those flowers wherewithal they have covertly o're-spread
his walkings. Tell him therefore, that a man may be shipwrack'd in favor as
well as in the sea. That his loyalty and discretion have raised him to the
height he is, and they only must keep him there. Imagine, whether this advice
coming from so good an hand, was not able to make me wiser? But 'twould not
do; on the contrary, being even drunk with a good conceit of my self, I
imagined Alcidiana ^ad not given in charge these advertisements to Amintha, but
the more cunningly to let me know, that she was not ignorant of my love. On
this foundation I began to build, and raised up more and more an edifice, which
at last fell on mine own he^. One day, when the Queen was adorned for a
solemn action, I could not but tell her, that she never was more lovely; and
(I went on) not to lie Madam, what e're he be that has the courage to aspire
higher then is permitted him, he should not fix on any then -- How! (said the
Queen, interrupting me) it is too much Pisander. Think who I am, and do not
force me to come out of my voluntary ignorance. Hereupon I thought, that the
Queen satisfied with her own words, would no more remember mine. But I grew
much amazed when (two days after) taking no notice of any diminution of her
favor, I saw my self utterly and suddenly cast down by a grace, which any
one less cleer-sighted then I, would have taken for an augmentation of his
good fortune. The Queen, assembling her Council, and calling together the
chief Officers of her Crown, made to them a long enumeration of all the
services I had done her, amplified (with an admirable eloquence) the attempts
of Siziphus and Arziland, and called me oftentimes her Deliverer and
Protector. The conclusion of her speech was, that she was ashamed she had not
yet acquitted her self of so notable debts; and that she ingenuously confessed
her self guilty of negligence, not to say of ingratitude. But (said she)
time, which had more care to free me then my self, affords me wherewithal to
acknowledge the services of Pisander. The command he has near my person, is
far beneath his merit; and his valor seems to complain, that I have so
long time retained it in obscurity, and (as it were) fettered amongst my
Slaves. I therefore give him the command of General of my Army, which place is
void by the death of Diomedes. After she had ended this crafty speech, she took
from the hands of her Chancellor the provisions for that charge; and calling
me to the foot of her throne, Go now (said she) and make appear the
knowledge you have in war, by preserving that peace which my subjects have so
many years enjoyed. With that she took a sword, which her high Chamberlain
presented, and commanding me to take it: See (said she) the Signal of the
absolute power I have over my subjects. Do not use it, but in case of
extremity; and to oblige you to keep it in its sheath, know, I had rather see
it overrun with rust, then bloody. I desire the love of my people, and fear
their fear. Do so then that they may live under me as children, not like
slaves. I was about to refuse the charge, imagining '^was but in stead of an
honorable banishment. Yet I accepted it, for fear I should make my design
too palpable. Thus was I put from Alcidiana's Palace: and as soon as I was in
that which was assigned to my place, and freed from all such troublesome
visitants as came to me either out of ignorance or malice, to congratulate
with me for so unwelcome and dismal a dignity: I was often tempted to have
transpiere'd my self with the sword the Princess had given me, and to send
it her back again (all besmeared with my blood) with this message, that I had
made use of it according to her intention. But I withheld, because a little
remainder of hope advised me to live, and not to abandon the pursuit of a
thing which was rather strai'd then lost. This idle motion I gave ear to, that
I might languish as you see me in a slaverie that can have no end, but by the
hand of the Hangman. Now the charge of the General is such, that it gives not
time to him that enjoyes it, to have a day of rest; and therefore engaged me to
leave the Court, and travel from town to town, from province to province to
do justice, hear complaints, pacify quarrels, hinder all partialities, and
free the feeble from the oppression of the mighty. After I had spent a whole
year in affairs which were beneficial to all but my self, I returned to the
Court; and at my day assigned, rendered (in the presence of the Queen) an exact
account of my government, and the state of the Kingdom. The Queen made show of
a very good satisfaction from me; and her Chancellor did me the honor to
say, That of all those who had preceded me in the charge, there was no one who
had more worthily acquitted himself. After I had received these approbations
and applauses, I fell on my knees before the Queen, and besought her, that in
recompense of my services which so much pleased her, she would dispense with
my continuing in them. That favor she denied me, with such strong reasons and
terms so obliging, that the knowledge I had of her secret indignation could
not hinder me from believing, that one day I might recover the favor she had
taken from me. But time disbeguil'd me, and the band which was over mine eyes
being taken away by a hand that was an enemy to all error, I knew the
vainness of my hopes, and the just cause Alcidiana had to punish my boldness.
I thereupon recollected me from the extremity whither ambition and youth had
carried me, and by little and little retired to that which I had forsaken. But
the fault I had committed was irreparable. The letters I writ, the powerful
means I used, nor the validity of my services, could never open again that
gate which I my self had shut upon me. Alcidiana even forbad her dear Amintha
to speak to her of my return; and to take from her subjects the knowledge of
my disfavour, she put all her Slaves out of her Palace, lodged them in the
town, and by a public Proclamation, forbad the entrance of her private
retirement to all save her women, and underofficers. Yet did not these
prohibitions serve for any thing against my passion. The difficulties increased
my desire; and when I perceived I had no more to hope for, my love took new
vigor, and my former malady falling on me suddenly, begot such accidents as
those I have related. Loneliness, reaving, melancholy and despair, were as so
many furies, who breaking out of hell for my punishment, and the general
misery of all Alcidiana's subjects, with my reason, deprived me of all
humanity. In lieu of rendering justice to the oppressed, I used them as I was
handled; and punished them for those violences which other had done them. In
vain had the poor recourse to my power. I added to their miseries, to have
the more companions; and when any one complained of mine injustice, See (said I
to my self) if I suffer it not more, ere I make thee undergo it. When I was
told, that the Towns had sent their Deputies to the Queen to complain of my
outrages, She shall then (said I) be at last compelled to be sensible of mine
affliction, by the recital of that of her subjects. But now the Princess,
unable any longer to dissemble her resentment, or shut her ears against the
complaints of her people: and besides, knowing I served her ill, only out of
an intent to lose my command, she let me see that she knew very well how to
govern, in writing to me a letter, which must eternally remain graven in my
memory; and 'twas thus:

ALCIDIANA, by the favor of Heaven, queen of the happy Island, to Pisander her
Lievtenant-Generall, and her subject.
I Understand (to my grief) that the second year of thy government is far
differing from the first. Not long since I received the benedictions of great
and small; and all the Towns, in emulation of one another, sent to render me
their thankfulness, for giving them so just and so favorable a Protector.
But now their Deputies come all together to demand justice for thy oppressions.
What e're the cause be of thy alteration, know Pisander, I will have thee
continue in that charge whereof I thought thee worthy; and on the next
complaint is made of thee, I will abandon thee to such laws as are made
against those that are guilty of high treason.

After the reading of this Letter, I saw that my plot would not take; yet I
persuaded my self, I might get by one way what I could not by the other: and
to make trial of it, I resolved to let the Queen know, that I no other way
disobeyed her commands, but in my not being able to execute them. Under this
pretext, I took the boldness to answer her letter thus:

Pisander to the queen his sovereign Lady.
IF Kings, as the Gods, could in conferring charges bestow withal such
faculties as are necessary for their due execution, I doubt not, Madam, but
your Majesty in honoring me with the prime command in your estate, would
have provided me with the utmost of sufficiency. But since such a gift is not
to be expected but from Heaven, I humbly beseech your Majesty, not to exact
from me that which is neither in your power nor mine. I confess, that the
complaints have not been heretofore so many and great as they are now. But
impute it not Madam to mine integrity, to my care, or my capacity. You know
well, that the vulgar naturally love novelties, that changes to them are in
lieu of remedies; and that they believe they go from good to bad, when they
pass from an ill which they know, to another which they know not. Let your
Majesty be pleased to join this consideration with that of the to be bewailed
estate wherein I am. That you would vouchsafe to look on me as on a man, who in
lieu of being able to govern others, has need to be governed himself. That
you would know, if I offend, it is out of the disorder of my mind, not of my
manners. In a word, that Pisander is not wicked, but he is sick; and his
malady being a stroke from Heaven, he must necessarily finish his miserable
days by that anger which the complaints and accusations of your subjects have
raised against him.

This Letter was sent, but it was not received. Alcidiana fearing, lest after
the loss of my respect in mine actions and discourse, I might as well neglect
it in my Letters, threw it into the fire, and told him who presented it to her,
that she demanded obedience, and not replies. When I heard how cruelly I had
been treated, Ah! pitilesse Queen (said I) thou have then raised me to this
height only, that I might receive a fall which should be infallibly mortal. I
am content to perish, since thou will have it so; but if thou be not altogether
without judgment, thou will at least confess, that I received my death from
her hand whose life I preserved. My grief stayed not on the vanity of
lamentations, but proceeded to actions; and blotting out of my mind all other
thought then that of dying, won me to send back to the Queen all her
ceremonious marks of dignity. Presently I gave over all mine Office, and
shutting my self up in an Hermits lodge, there abode twelve or fifteen days,
not suffering any of my friends to come near me, nor enduring the presence of
any of my housholdservants. I wept, I complained, I asked vengeance from Heaven
for Alcidiana's ingratitude, whereas (indeed) I should have begged her pardon
for my disobedience; and when I thought that my messengers were got to the
Princess, I took post, and came to Court. I truly doubted, that if the Queen
had notice of my coming, I should not only be barred from her presence, but
ran a hazard to lose the hope of ever seeing her more. To avoid that diaster,
I abode concealed till day in the place where she was wont to give audience to
people of all sorts. As soon as I was certain of her being in the throne of
Justice, and that she dreamed not at all of my coming, I slid closely into the
Hall of audience. O dear companion in my bonds! what Miracle? what Sun? what
Divinity saw I in seeing Alcidiana? When she was seated in her Throne, and
her Ushers had imposed silence, I struck through the throng of those that came
to implore justice, and throwing my self at her feet, presently discovered who
I was: yet feigning to take no notice of the peoples astonishment, (occasioned
by their seeing me there) and principally the Princesses; I come (said I)
Madam, to put me into the hands of your justice as a malefactor, (who being
able to save himself, and yet not of proof to endure the cruel stings of
conscience) comes out of deserts and retreats of security, to deliver himself
into the hands of his Judges. It Is true, Madam, it is to be punished, and not to
request a pardon, that I throw my self at your Majesty's feet. I do not
entreat you to remember my services, nor to cast your eyes on a wretch, who is
more rigorously punished then his faults seem to deserve: I confess, I have
disobeyed your commands, abused those honors you bestowed on me, and to
speak them all in full and to the height, I have oppressed the innocent whom I
was bound to protect and make happy. Avenge then your neglected authority,
degrade me from those honors I am unworthy of, and hearken to the voice of
your people which cries for vengeance on my tyranny. The greatest of my
sorrows, next to the loss of your favors is, that I have but one poor
miserable life to expiate so many offenses, and give satisfaction to the number
I have oppressed. Here I stayed, and with mine eyes cast to the earth, attended
what Alcidiana would pronounce against me. But in lieu of answering me, she
turned to her high Chamberlain, and making no show of being any way moved, I
deliver (said she) this mad man into your custody; take him hence, and see him
forth coming on your life. The Chamberlain, who was my friend, took me to his
own house, and though he made show of a great deal of sorrow for my
dis-favour, yet he failed not to have such on eye over me, that was impossible
for me to have escaped, if I had had any such intention. The third night after
my confinement, I was privately brought to the Queens Palace by the
Chamberlain. At the door Amintha received me, and entreating my conductor to
stay, brought me into a chamber where Alcidiana was. As Soon as I saw her, I
fell at her feet, and perceiving I was ready to swoune, Madam (said I) let me
dye quickly, and suffer me not to languish any longer. With that I fell down,
not knowing any body for near a quarter of an hour. When Amintha recovering
me, I rose again on my knees before the Queen, and letting her know, that
what I requested came from mine heart: I beseech you Madam (said I, then
weeping) to be no more cruel to me, then you are to the rest of your subjects,
and suffer your self to be moved at mine indurements. These words forcing from
her soul all the indignation my extravagancies had be got there, she for a
while held her eyes fixed on me, and after a long thoughtfulness, Wretch (said
she) with what torture should not I punish thy disobedience? But I must not do
so. I understand by thy speeches thou offendest not willingly, but that before
thou were resolved to cast off the respect thou owedst me, thou had lost thy
judgment. Speak, unfortunate man, what is become of that discretion, which
went for a Proverb amongst the people, and made the most judicious to say, that
at last wisdom and youth were met together? Do thou not see to what
precipices thou daily run'st of thine own contriving? Art thou not afraid,
lest my patience grow weary, and that my pity being exhausted, I should to
that justice which I owe to my self, as well as to my subjects? But this is
what is wished (thou say) and truly, I perceive well by thy actions, that
thou art fallen into such a frenzy, as makes thee delight in what is most
dreadful. The love I owe to her that gave thee birth, and the services thou
have done me, preserve a sufficient will to dispose me to the forgetting thy
crimes, and to take pity on thy folly. Yes, Pisander, I will be so merciful;
and would have thee know, that I would willingly give a part of my Kingdom, if
by that loss I could settle thee again in the estate I wish thee. Whilst the
Queen spoke, mine eyes were not dry. I strove to stay my tears, but 'twas in
vain. There was no remedy but they must flow forth, and in spite of my
desire to answer the Queen, I must abide a while silent. When my sighs and
suffocatings, as well as my tears, gave me leave to answer the Queen, Madam
(said I) mine indiscretion is so great, that hitherto it has not given in any
intervall. But your Majesty's wisdom has suspended that tyrannical power,
and gives me the use of reason. Be pleased, Madam, that I employ well these
good motions, and in expression of my gratitude, that I confess I am amazed at
the new proofs of your clemency. Truly, Madam, when I consider the height of
my guilt, I cannot give credit to mine ears, nor be persuaded there can be
found on the face of the whole earth a goodness so near approaching to the
Divinity, who in stead of punishing offenses, proposes a reward to the
guilty, on condition they will be converted. You will have care of my life,
Madam, and yet it is an unhappy source from whence have flowed all the
discontents your Majesty has met with since you came into the world. The Gods
love you. Nature has out-gone her self to make you the chiefest of her
miracles. Strangers admire you, which never had the felicity of seeing you.
Your people find no other difference betwixt the Deity which they adore and
you, save that the first is invisible, and you are seen among them. Even things
inanimate seem to take a soul when the business is of pleasing you. In short,
there is nothing which conspires not to make you as happy as fair. The
detestable Pisander only opposes that general Law; and by an attempt, worthy
of thunder, has dared to contest with heaven and earth, with Gods and men,
fortune and virtue. Take, Madam, take Pisander out of the world, and you shall
find nothing after to molest you. The Queen, not enduring the continuation of
this speech: But (said she) at least let me know what thou pretendest. Madam
(said I) I pretend to die, since it is forbidden me to have any other
intentions. The desire of death (replied Alcidiana) is a pleasing error, which
is hardly forced from a soul that gives no ear to reason; yet must thou
strive to overcome this frenzy. Labor at it, Pisander, if thou will be
advised by Alcidiana, and take her word for it, thou will get the upper hand. I
had a great mind to contradict this counsel, but Alcidiana arose, and gave me
no time to answer. Amintha (who without doubt knew the Queens intention) no
sooner saw her retired, but she took me by the hand, and causing me to sit
down by her: You see, Pisander (said she) there is no more time to flatter or
feed your self with idle hopes, which vanity usually puffes up young men
withal. The Queen loves you; and you cannot doubt of it, after so many proofs
given you. But she loves you so, as a good Mistress should love an excellent
servant, and a Queen extremely just, a most useful and loyal subject. Beyond
that you are to expect nothing. And I make known to you now, as a person who
much values you, and takes part in all your interests, that if you had a
thousand lives, and that they were all absolutely needful for the Queens
preservation, she would see them all lost rather then to give any longer way
to the continuance of your follies. And believe me, Pisander, it should even
make you dye for shame, or at least, if you have not been wise enough to hinder
the beginning, yet to be so in stopping the progression. Do not seem to be
wise to no purpose, nor strive to conceal from me what you have in your heart.
Is it not true, that you are in love with the Queen? It Is an offense which you
esteem too glorious, that there should need the torture to draw the confession
of it from you. You are not the first fool of your kind. Others far beneath
you have had the like extravagancies. But do not you think with your self,
that as those Darers have made themselves the laughter of all the Court, and
the scorn of judicious people, that in the end you will make your self
ridiculous, and be taken for a man fit for a babble, or to be shut up in the
Hospital of the Incurabili? In your own conscience can you be so vain, or
rather mad to believe, that the Queen can fall in love with you? or to make
amends for that which she has shown you, you would oblige her to take her
Nurses son for her husband? When Amintha had no more to say, I thus replied: My
birth (as you know, Amintha) is so eminent, that I see none (the person of the
Queen excepted) who is above me; and I dare say without boasting, that she
shall either never marry, or be constrained to link with such a man, whose
extraction shall not be able to parallel with mine: Not that I will place a
thing (to me) of so small esteem in rank with those that may merit the favor
of Alcidiana. There are requisite to it qualities of courage and wit, as rare
as are her virtues and beauty. There must be a long perseverance, a faith
inviolable; there must be respects and extraordinary submissions: in brief,
there must (by long services) be a testimonial. that the enjoying of so
inestimable a jewel is the only end of all thoughts and actions. Amintha at
those words interrupting me: You (said she) imagine these things to be of
great value, but I assure you they are worth nothing, if they be not approved
of by such for whose sake they are done. Now the Queen not only gave no
approbation to your errors, but from time to time let you understand by her
wonted discretion, that you thereby irreparably offended her. From this verity
draw a necessary conclusion, and you shall find, that even that on which you
build your merits and pretensions, destroys both the one and the other. If it
behove me to consider my actions (I replied) as you look on them, I confess, I
never did Alcidiana any service, nor am to expect any thing from her. But I
have a way of reasoning which confutes yours; and to tell you sincerely, what
you but now demanded of me, it is, that I will rather forgo my life then that
passion which Alcidiana condemns, and in spite of her rigor, disdain, and
threatenings, will never give over the prosecution of that which I esteem as my
chiefest happiness. Thou art lost, Pisander, cried that judicious Lady. Would
Heaven might please to divert my presaging, and restore to thee that reason
which thine ill Angel has deprived thee of. After these words Amintha arose,
and remitting me into the hands of the Chamberlain, commanded him very
severely to observe strictly what the Queen had given him in charge. I quickly
understood what that new command was. As soon as I was returned to my prison, I
was shut into a chamber whose windows were all grated with iron; none of my
friends or servants were permitted to see me: and thus was I kept near three
months, speaking and thinking such things as you may well imagine. At the end
of that time, the great Chamberlain came and brought me news of my liberty,
and told me, that the Queen had chosen me to go to render in her name the
tribute to the Sun her father, and to celebrate in this Isle the sacrifice of
their Alliance. I accepted of that honor, as of an evident assurance that the
Queen had resolved to ruin me. My despair too broke out more then ever; and
if eight or ten men, who flew in upon me, had not taken away all power of
offending, I had well let them know, that any man may die when he list. The
Queen, hearing of my fury, sent some (devoutly consecrated) to visit me, whose
eloquence and sanctity of life did daily miracles. They came, and neglected
nothing that might free me of my frenzy; and performed it, after many long
resistances. Then I betook me to my former calm, and confirming to them in
cold blood what I had spoken in my fits: Yes, fathers (said I) I will die, but
let not this resolution make you believe, that I have any remainder at all of
despair left within me. I swear to you by that Eternal name which we are
not suffered to abuse, that I will not precipitate the end of my days; and
that, whether it be in war or otherwise, I will strive to meet it in such a way
as may be said, I ran not headlong to it. A few days after this declaration,
all things were ready for my voyage. I had notice of it; and Amintha coming to
mitigate my afflictions, I entreated her to be a means to the Queen that I
might take my leave of her. She made me answer, that could not be done. At
least then (said I) deliver her a letter from me. I cannot do that neither
(replied she) for I am ^o expressly forbidden it. Well, Amintha then (cried I)
I must then die, and die without pity. Let Alcidiana have her will. As soon as
Amintha had left me, I went to ship, and with the first good wind setting
sail, in eighteen days arrived in this Island. The high Priest, predecessor
to this here now, received me with the same ceremonies you saw practiced at
your arrival. The pomp of our sacrifices deserves well my describing it to
you, but my mind is not able to busy it self with such unprofitable
intertainments. Give me leave therefore (without meddling that way) to end the
story of my misfortunes, and leave the afflicting your thoughts with the
representation of so many sad and deplorable accidents. You may please to know
then, that after the unbloudy sacrifice had been performed, and they were to
celebrate one like that you saw performed this day, I went to the chief
Prelate, and besought him to put me in the place of him whom the lot should
that day condemn to die. The Priest at first knew not how to take a speech
that seemed so out of all reason; but perceiving that I constantly persisted in
my petition: My son (said he) you are not the first to whom the hatred of
living has given the like desire. It Is not long since a Prince (whom I will
not name) came expressly into this Isle to find that death, which his fear to
offend heaven permitted him not to bestow on himself. To free him from that
ungodly fantasy, I used all my best and the same reasons wherewithal I am
bound now to contest with yours. Know therefore, that homicide is not committed
only by our hands, it is committed too by our wills; and he is no less a
murderer of himself that seeks the occasion of his own death, then if he had
indeed struck the poniard into his own breast: inasmuch as sin consists not but
in a determinate will to do the ill, or to procure it. This being so, my
son, struggle generously with that temptation which would hurry you to your
ruin; and be assured, that it is all one thing to cover what you desire, and to
turn your own weapons on your self. But if you have just cause to hate life,
and that the miseries which are linked to humane condition, in stead of
exercising your patience, have absolutely overcome it, have recourse to that
innocent and harmless remedy which Religion offers to free you from the
tyranny of fortune and your passions. Consecrate your self to the Eternal
Providence which we adore in this Island under the figure of the Sun, and
expect without murmuring or disquiet what it has ordained, shall become of
your life, that so you may find your peace in your obedience, and merit in
making your self happy. Father (I replied) how much impatience soever I meet
withal in searching out a better condition then mine own, and however
dreadful the tortures may be, which the continuation of my life prepares for
me, yet will I follow your advice, and to assure you that I will never wave
it, even now I make a vow to put my self among the number of the Slaves of the
Sun. The chief Prelate, after he had accepted my vow, told me, it must be
published in consecrating my self before all men to that great Sun, whereof
the Sun was but an imperfect image. Those ceremonies were put off to the next
day, and then I took on these fetters which I wear so joyfully, that if my
judgment fail me not, I do not believe the happiness of enjoying Alcidiana
would have been more pleasing to me. As soon as Lynceus (so is the Pilots name
which serves in the sacred Vessel), saw me in my new slaverie, he took leave
of the Priest, and returned toward the Inaccessible Island. Polexander being
no longer able to contain himself, asked (straight) Pisander at what time
Alcidiana's Vessel did use to arrive at the Isle of the Sun. If you live but
two months longer (replied Pisander) you shall see that glorious Vessel here,
laden with offerings wonderful for their raritie, and with victimes almost as
spotless as is the Princess which sends them to the God of purity. It Is to
be confessed (said Polexander) that you have been wonderful generous, in being
able to preserve a respect to such a personage, which seems to have gone out of
her self, of purpose, to forget what she truly owed you. Whatsoever Alcidiana
does (replied Pisander) she cannot be accused for doing ill. Her virtues are
so extreme, that she can make good what is not so in it self; and ingratitude
would become a virtue, if of necessity Alcidiana should become ungrateful.
With this height of praise ended the conversation of the two Slaves; the one of
Alcidiana, the other of the Sun. Polexander would gladly have continued the
discourse, but fearing he should not be master enough of his emotions, he
preferred a solid contentment before that which could not be but imaginary, and
praising in himself Pisander, returned to his lodging. The desire he had to
disburthen himself to Diceus of these important secrets he laetly learned,
caused him (as soon as he was retired) to take leave of Pisander, and shut
himself in private with his trusty servant. Friend (said he) my conjectures
are become real truths. We are in the fatal Island, from which there is a
certain passage to the Inaccessible Isle. 'Twas from hence Lynceus returned,
when I descri'd him near to the Canaries; and to this place he or some other
is to come within two months to celebrate the famous sacrifice of Alliance,
whereof we have so often heard spoken. I know it from so good a hand, that
'twere mere folly to doubt of it; and that thou may be as confident as I
am, hearken from whom it comes to me. Thereupon he epitomized to him the story
of Pisander; and though he were his Rival, yet he forgot nothing of what was
due to so perfect a lover. Diceus, after a many exclamations and excessive
expressions of his exceeding joy, embraced the King his Master: Your Majesty
(said he) may be assured, that our joys, as well as griefs, never come
alone. For as before your arrival in this Island, there was no day passed
which brought you not some new misfortune, you may now likewise believe, that
from henceforward you shall meet with as many felicities as you see the Sun's
rising. This very day presents you many together. For besides that which you
have enjoyed in Pisanders relation, I bring you another, which is not to be
accounted amongst those of small importance. You have heretofore thought, that
the chief Priest did much resemble Alcippus, and I tell you for truth, it is
even he himself. I learned it from one of his servants, and should have
known it from his own mouth, if I had not feared to discover you in
disclosing my self to Alcippus. O Diceus (said Polexander) how increasest thou
my happiness! and how perfect is it, since with the hope of seeing Alcidiana,
I re-gaine the best part of my self. But Diceus, if thou truly love me, do
not defer the contentment thou may give me. Find out some means to get
into the Arch-priests lodgings, invent some occasion to speak with him, and
work it so, that he may know I am here. Diceus, who was wont to serve the King
his Master, with as much promptness as fidelity, left him as soon as he had
waited on him into the Hall where the noble Slaves were wont to eat together;
and under pretext of carrying some Letters to the Ambassadors of the King of
Gheneoa, who were upon going thence, slid into the Arch-priests lodgings. He
found him at supper, and when he saw the place void of strangers which had
supped with him, entreated the Prelate for a private audience. The Archpriest
looking wistly on him, bid him speak what he desired; but Diceus, falling at
his feet, feigning a discontented man, My Lord (said he) that which has given
me the boldness to present my self before you is not only long to be
dilated, but of such importance, that I cannot (without being author of an
extreme misfortune) impart it to any save your self. Your charity, which is
indifferently extended to all persons afflicted, will not (I hope) deny me one
moment of your leisure to give ear to my miseries. The Arch-Prelate; thinking
he should know Diceus voice, and desirous to clear himself of such troubles
as he had felt at the first sight of Polexander, commanded Diceus to arise; and
taking him (by the hand) into his withdrawing-chamber (whence he commanded two
or three of his Slaves, who usually attended there) shut the door himself,
and then sitting down on a Couch, Speak boldly (said he to Diceus) here is
none but my self can hear you. Diceus, knowing Alcippus as well by his voice
as countenance, My Lord (said he) my name is Diceus, and I serve King
Polexander. At which words the chief Priest, as transported, arose, and taking
a light, stood long gazing on Diceus, At last, he clapped the taper again on
the table, and casting his arms about Diceus neck, By what miracle (said he)
art thou risen from the dead? or rather (dear Diceus) by what prodigy can
thou live, and see thy dear Master wrapped up in dust? The King lives, replied
Diceus; and though time, travel, and the torrid Zone have so changed him, that
he is scarce to be known, yet I thought your affection would never let him
slip out of your memory. It Is that same Illustrious Slave whom the King of
Gheneoa desires to consecrate to that Sun he adores in heaven, and to the other
he honors on earth. I do not wonder now (replied Alcippus) at those emotions
I felt at the first sight of that Slave. My soul, more clear* fighted then
mine eyes, knew him, all disguised as he was, and by extraordinary agitations,
made me resent the happiness which (unknown) was betided me. And does then
(my dear Diceus) the King our Master live? and has that good Angel, which
has rescued him out of so many dangers, been of power to raise him again?
There needed no such great miracle (replied Diceus.) It must be so (said
Alcippus) or else all that happened in the Isle of Astramadan was merely
enchantment and illusion. I saw Diceus, I saw the place where the King fell
down dead among that great company of murderers which the traitor Astramadan
had armed for his revenge. I saw his body wounded in an hundred places, and
his face disfigured with many a fearful gash. I saw his armor strewn about
him all bloody, and backed to pieces. In a word, I saw all that could assure me
he was dead. Nor did I see him alone. The cruel Tysiphone was a beholder, and
after she had satiated her fury on others, turned it on her self, that she
might not survive him, whom of all men had made her capable of love. Amintha
saw him too, and the grief she took for his death would have lasted to this
day, if the waves had not swallowed it up together with her body. But Diceus,
I lose too much time to let thee know my errors. Tell me therefore by what
miracle our good Master lives, or rather let me see him, let me speak with him,
and be permitted once more to embrace his knees. Diceus took him at his word,
and would have led him to Polexander's lodging. But Alcippus staying him, We
must (said he) carry our selves in this business with a great deal of
discretion; and for mine own part, I will leave them no place from
dis-beguiling themselves, who having taken me for another, have put into my
hands the sovereign authority of this Island. After he said thus much, he
opened a little door, which was directly opposite to that by which they
entered, and giving Diceus a little key, told him withal what use he should
make of it. Diceus presently left him, and after he had gone through a long
gallerie, came into a chamber adorned and shining with gold and azure. From
thence he went out through a door which he opened with the key the
Archpriest had given him, and then coming into a Cloister, he knew where he
was. Presently he hastened to his Masters lodging, and finding him accompanied
with those that were wont to wait on him, entreated him, since he had been
much troubled all day, that he would watch no longer. Polexander ghessing well
at Diceus intention went to bed. And as soon as he was laid, his attendants
withdrew, and Diceus (who usually lay at his Masters beds feet) shutting first
the doors, made him a full repetition of his discourse with Alcippus. But
(said he) to the end you may advise together of the means you are to use to
get out of this Isle, and attain to that of Alcidiana, it is fit you keep your
self still disguised, and that you and Alcippus meet not together but in
private. Some two hours hence I will conduct you by passages not much
frequented, to a chamber, the key whereof he has given me, and where he will
be as soon as the last prayers are ended. In the mean time sleep. For my part,
I will watch, for fear you fail in your assignation. Ah! friend (replied
Polexander) I should have but little curiosity, or to say better, but a small
portion of reason, if being on the point of making my happiness certain, I
were able to close mine eyes. No, no, Diceus, I will not sleep. Tell me
therefore once again all that Alcippus said to thee, and omitting the death of
the extravagant Tysiphone, recount particularly what thou have heard concerning
Amintha. Diceus obeyed the command, but 'twas not so well done, but that he
left the King his Master doubtful what was become of that Lady. When he had
ended this relation, I have (said he to Polexander) some advice to give you,
on which depends all the success of your labors and inquiries. It Is, that you
expressly command Alcippus to compresse his affection, and keep more then ever
that gravitie which he put on with the Priesthood. By this means he shall
secure your life, for he may secretly take out the ball whereon your name is
written, since he keeps the vessel whereinto all the fatal balls are thrown:
and besides, when Alcidiana's Ambassadors arrive, under the quality of
Arch-Prelate, and Interpreter of the Deitie's will, he may invent some specious
pretext, that may oblige the Ambassadors to waft you to the Inaccessible
Island. But when will that fatal moment betide (cried Polexander, transported
with the power of his imagination) wherein I may see again that blessed abode,
which has concealed and kept it self so long away from mine inquisition? O
fairest Alcidiana! be pleased to let me taste the happiness which my hope
gives me of re-visiting you; and that losing with my despair the memory of
my afflictions, I may inure my self by little and little to those raptures,
and almost incomprehensible blessedness, which are inseparably annexed to the
condition of such as serve you. Polexander would have stuck as ravished with
these sweet meditations, if Diceus had not interrupted them, and told him,
'twas time to go meet Alcippus. Polexander thereupon in all haste clad
himself, followed his guide, went through the Cloister, and unseen of any
body came to the chamber where he was to meet Alcippus. He failed not; and
presently that worthy Favorite, casting himself at the feet of the King his
Master, Let Heaven (said he) do now what it will with me, I ask it no more,
since I have the happiness of seeing my good Master again. O error! which
have made me shed so many tears, I thank thee for so happily deceiving me.
Polexander taking up Alcippus, Remember (said he) who you are, and in what
place; go not on in these superfluous testimonies both for your self and to
me, but without losing in needless demonstrations of love, this time which may
be better spent, give me an account of all you have done since your departure
from the Island of Astramadan, and chiefly let me know what is become of
Amintha. But I fear much, that you can relate to me nothing of her that can
be welcome news; for if I call to mind well what you writ in a Cave which is
at the point of a rock which they call the Hermits rock, you were separated
from her by the wrack of your ship. What says your Majesty (replied Alcippus)
and what Demon could bring you to that rock? I was brought thither (said the
King) by an adventure the most strange and happy in the world: for my ship
being sunk, I had perished but for that rock, which to me was a very
favorable haven. There I spent two days and two nights, and read my Epitaph
which you had engraven. But put me out of trouble, and tell me, how you were
forced to forsake Amintha. Alcippus beginning his relation at Tysiphone's
taking a resolution to follow Polexander to the Isle of Astramadan, and having
continued it with all that which had passed in that Isle: As soon (said he) as
we saw that desperate woman dead, Amintha and my self returned to your
Vessel, and being not able to speak, so much had your loss quelled us, that
we spent the rest of the day not knowing what to resolve on. At last Amintha
starting up, and speaking suddenly, No (said she) I will not leave the body
of Polexander to the mercy of his murderers. With that she went forth, and
never telling me what she intended to do, commanded some of your Mariners to
carry her back on shore. I went into the Shallop with her, but we had not rowed
scarce half a mile, when we saw all the beach covered with armed men. Our
Mariners thereat fell hard to their oars, and having told us, that there was
no reason for us to put our selves into the hands of those barbarous people,
got back again to your ship. Presently there came out of the haven two Vessels
of the enemy, and had had we not with all speed gotten into open sea,
infallibly we had run the hazard of losing life or liberty. The wind (which
favored us much) meeting a ship so good of sail as was yours, had quickly
made our pursuers lose sight of us. Two days and two nights we sailed we knew
not whither. The third day we discovered an Island, and there our Mariners cast
anchor, to take some refreshment, and from thence to steer right for the
Canaries. Amintha in all the voyage had no other thought then of your death,
and from time to time speaking loud enough to be heard, Ah! too superstitious
Queen, (said she) how lately will thou repent thy self, for preferring false
beseemlinesse before loyal affection? Well, thou art now rid of this cause of
thy disquiet; but I fear for thy peace, lest those disturbances be redoubled
when thou come to understand in what manner thou art delivered from them.
Thus was she talking, when I advertised her that we were arrived at an unknown
Island. You may do what you please, said she. For mine own part, I am
resolved to think on nothing but how I may grieve enough for the loss we have
sustained. Seeing her so constant to her affliction, I imagined, that if there
remained in you any knowledge or feeling after death, you would accuse me for
the most ungrateful amongst men, if I had not a particular care of a person to
whom your memory was so infinitely dear. I resolved therefore to bring her to
the Canaries, and put her in possession of all the treasure you had left there,
that so she might end her life in the same splendor she was borne, and have
no cause to repent her of the affection she had borne you. As soon as our
Mariners had provided themselves of all that was necessary, they set sail
again, and leaving the South behind them, bore up full North. From the very
first day were we beaten by a furious tempest, and thrown so far out of our
course, that our Pilot confessed that he knew none of those places where the
wind drove us. This storm lasted four days, and the fifth day, some Sailers
advertising me that the ship would not be long above water, I caused a Shallop
to be launched to save Amintha, and straight went into her cabin, where finding
her at her ordinary exercise of weeping and lamenting for you, I besought her
even by your self that she think on her safety. If Polexander (said she)
were alive, or rather if he could make you know his thoughts, you would soon
see and confess, that he disapproves of that petition which you make me. He
loved me too well, to suffer me linger too long in misery; and that which
you desire from me has no other end, but the continuation of my afflictions.
The King my Master (I replied) commanded me to serve you as himself; and if he
were in that extremity you are now, my duty and affection would oblige me to
do for his preservation that which I now do for yours. Therefore (Madam)
contest no more against what is just, and be not guilty of your own death. At
last, she yielded to mine entreaties, and coming to the ships side, I know not
how (said she) without astonishment, you should imagine me to be more safe in a
little shallop, then in this great ship. I told her the reason, but whilst she
disputed with me, a gust of wind blew me over-boord, and by an incredible
good fortune, in falling over, I met with the rope wherewithal the shallop was
fastened to the ship. In that extremity I lost not my judgment, but cast my
self into the shallop. Surely the rope was not good, for it presently broke,
and the wind in a moment had carried me so far from the ship, that I lost sight
of her, whether it were (as I believe) that she was sunk, or, as it is not
impossible, that the tempest had driven her a contrary course to mine. All the
rest of the day was I sometimes in heaven, and sometimes in hell; and when it
came near to Sunsetting, my shallop rent it self in pieces against the
Hermits rock. When having no other hope then in mine arms, I strove to get to
one of the points; and I swome so happily, that without hurting my self (among
so great a number of rocks which lay even with the water) I got to a little
tongue of land, or rather of sand, which thrust it self a pretty way into the
sea. There I met with the Hermit which surely gave name to that rock, and found
him busied in digging a pit in the sand. He was no way at all surpised at
mine arrival. But on the contrary, leaving his work, and coming to me with
open arms, Thou art welcome (said he) my son, and cast from thy memory all
things which thou can imagine may afflict thee; for either mine art
absolutely is false, or thou do not only go on in a progression of
happiness, but in a way of saving the life of that person whom thou holdst most
dear of all those in the world. With that he embraced me; and beginning again,
For your sake (said he) I must leave off my work till another time. Father
(said I) if it be a work that is of necessity to be done, give me your spade,
and I will ease you of the pain of perfecting this grave. So you shall (said
he, smiling) but there is no haste. He that is to take up his last habitation
in this grave, will be coming yet some few days. This talk, so unconformable
to ordinary discourse, made me think the Hermit had lost his judgment with
his years, or that I had not understanding enough to conceive the sense of his
mysterious talking. The good man then took me by the hand, and told me, I
needed to rest my self. Ascending therefore (himself first) by a little way
cut out of the rock, we came to the entry of the same grotto, where you found
the letters engraven by mine hand. The good Hermit made me unclothe my self,
and having given me some cotton clothes to wipe me, threw a robe about my
shoulders like his own. And as soon as I was clad, Son (said he) our bodies
are not as some imagine them, enemies, to be used with all kind of rigor. They
are vessels worthy the treasure they enclose, and you must believe they are
very dear to the Power which created them, since he has left there as in gage
the greatest of all his miracles. This being so, we are to have a particular
care of them, and to confer what they require, since it most certain, that
they desire nothing but what is necessary. To verify this document, he
presented me a corken cup, full of clear water, and dried dates in an earthen
platter. I eat and drank more to obey him then for any need I had, and after we
had watched very late, I took possession of one of the two beds of moss which
you saw in the Cave. At daybreak the old man awaked me, and bringing me to the
top of the grot, and turning my face to the Sun, which appeared not yet, but by
the several colors where withal he painted the clouds: My son (said he) let
us render thanks to that Deity which inhabits in that light, which we may
call another Deity, since by his perpetual course and wonderful revolutions,
he preserves our being, and draws us out of darkness. After he had spoke
thus, he fell to his prayers, and I to mine, without observing a superstition,
which in mine opinion, favored somewhat of Idolatry. When we had ended our
Oraisons, we went down to the sea, which was much calmed during the night,
and there the good Hermit having thrown some shovell-fulls of sand out of the
grave which he had begun; I resemble (said he) that immortal Bird, which
delights in building her own tomb, because she knows, that the last moment
of her life is the first of her resurrection. It may be you heeded it not, my
son, therefore I am the more willing to tell you, that 'twas for my self I
dug this grave. It Is long agone since Heaven promised me your arrival, and
assured me, that a man of extraordinary virtue, driven by a tempest, should
come and close the eyes of my feeble age, and succeed in a place which I have
preferred before the government of men, and the rule of one of the greatest
Empires of Asia. The knowledge I had of men's ingratitude, and of the injustice
where withal they are wont to requite the pains, watchings and cares of those
great Genius's, on whom most Kings disburthen themselves of the government of
their Estates, made me forsake a glorious slaverie, a torture that had the face
and magnificence of a tyrant, and in a word, a misfortune envied by all
ignorant fools. I rather chose to spend my days in a secure solitude, and in
speculations, which from the top of this rock, carrying me up to heaven, have
made me decypher those great golden characters, whereby we understand all that
passes on earth. I have read in the book what is to come, such things as other
men are ignorant of. I know the revolution of Empires. I have seen Kings, who
after their conquests have been constrained to crouch under the weight of
irons, and wear out their miserable days in a shameful slaverie. I have seen
such slaves, as have been condemned to the most base and infamous drudgeries,
to break their chains, and force to submit to their Empire those who had been
accustomed to bring others in subjection. But to what purpose should I
entertain you with these general notions? Let it suffice me to let you know,
that the end of my days is at hand, and that you are a while to possess that
place which I have near these threescore years enjoyed. By that means you
shall attain to the greatest dignity this day on earth; and shall see the
accomplishment of those things which you have most desired. Assure your self
on my word, and press me not to unfold my self more plainly. After the wise
Hermit had spoke thus to me, he washed his face and hands with seawater, and
ascending again into his grot, made a small repast of four or five dry dates,
and a cup of water. I took as much as he, and being desirous to hear him
discourse: Father (said I) if those ambitious souls, who disturb the peace of
all Nations, to glut their insatiable appetites, could once comprehend, that a
man might be happy with a few dates and water, would not be even desperate to
see how miserably wretched they are in the possessing of such treasures as they
run to tear out of the very entrails of unknown worlds? Oh! how truly do I
know it now to be true which has been so often told me, that he only is rich,
not who possesses much, but that can be contented with little! My son (replied
the Hermit) that Eternal providence, which could compose a harmony out of
things seeming the most discordant, would, that from the variety of parts in
the Universe, should be produced the beauty of all. The ambitious have their
share in the imbellishment. If they throw down on one side, they build on the
other; if they ruin their Competitors, they enrich their Confederates: and
their designs, which have never an end, are as so many engines, whereof that
Providence makes use to move the massy body of the world, and hinder, by
frequent shoggings and agitations, that it fall not into a mortal lethargy.
Peace and immutabilitie is placed in heaven; action and change are the lots of
the earth. So see we that the souls which inhabit heaven live in a perpetual
tranquillity, and find themselves so full satisfied with their condition, that
they know not so much as the use of desiring. We on the contrary, who lead an
unquiet and tumultuous life, continually run after novelties. Our friendship
and hatred follow, and destroy one another. Every hour works us to several
and differing wishes; and our minds, which seek for a beatitude which they will
never meet withal, and yet eternally hope for, are persuaded, that there is no
other way left them to attain to it, but by incessantly passing from one
condition to another. If heaven had treated us as it has done the Demons, and
placed us presently in the abode of true felicity, (...) would have given us
quiet minds, and understanding capable of obedience. But thinking it fit only
to propose to us that happiness, as a goal, whereto it was impossible to
attain without much straining, and a haven not to be anchored in, but through
many tempests: it has made us stirring, lively, impatient, and ambitious, to
the end, that these several thoughts might be as so many spurs to egg us on
to that race; and as so many mufflers, which blinding our eyes from all
dangers, might make us incapable of weighing them, and by consequence, void of
all fear. What does not that insolent, dangerous, and rash fever of the soul,
which we call Valor, produce? To what extremities does not that other engage
us (with delight) which we call Love? Have not all ages seen, (and does not
ours yet behold) men, who to satisfy their own passion, and if I dare call it
so, heavenly madness, expose themselves to hazzards, and condemn their bodies
to such punishments, as the greatest and cruellest tyrants of the world would
not without horror have made them undergo? yet they endure it with a great
deal of alacr^ie, they suffer it with a benediction; and because their thought
finds there its element, they deem to find there, and no where else their
felicity. It seems, the Understanding loses something of its own in its
errors; and that Reason, which should be a light for the guidance of man, is
altogether extinguished, or shines not, but as those wandering fires which lead
passengers out of their way, and in stead of being the means to avoid all
precipices, have no other light but such as may dazzle their eyes, for fear
they should eschew them. But (my son) you ought to know, that the good which
proceeds from this folly, recompenceth with usurie the ill it procures. If you
ask me, Who incited the first of men to defend the weak, and to become the
extirpers of Monsters and Tyrants? I will answer you, 'twas Love. Love inflames
the soul far more then blood, fills it with the desire of honor; and
purging it of all it had contracted of base and terrestrial by the contagion
of the body, purifies and lifts it to that supreme perfection whereto it is
destinated. Was it not Love who drew out of the Island (where may be he had
languish'd all his life) that Prince who fills all the world with the renown of
his actions? Is it not he, that has led him through all parts of the world to
avenge the oppressed, to punish the oppressors, to bring virtue into respect
that had been long neglected, and to banish thence vice, which had gotten
temples and sectaries? How many Kings has he reestablished in their thrones?
How many usurpers has he expelled? Consider well his life, and you will
acknowledge, that if it had not been accompanied with troubles, with desires,
and (to say all in a word) with Love, it had been no more profitable, nor much
more illustrious, then that of the most cowardly and obscurest man breathing.
All that you relate to me, father (said I) is most true, (knowing well he
meant your Majesty) but what availes it now that great personage to have run
so many dangers, and to have so often exposed his life for the safety of
others? He is dead, as one of the vulgar, and of so lamentable a death, that it
is hardly spoken of. You will say that his fame, which lives in the memories of
most men, is an entire and perfect recompense for all the travells he
under-went. Oh! father, did he now live, he would truly let you know the
vanity of that reward; and make you confess, that Love and Honor are
certainly two of those Inchanters which promise pearls and diamonds, but give
us only a few oaken leaves and acornes. My son, replied the Hermit,
Ignorance is always unjust, but it is not always criminal, and is not so
principally, when it is accompanied with a deal of affection. Yours is of that
nature, and therefore I condemn it not. But know, that the man whom you
bewail, is not in case to deserve it. Neither Love nor Death shall ever rob
him of the felicities are due to him. I dare say, he enjoyes them already; and
though his troubles have been great, his recompense shall be far more. But
let us break off this discourse, since I have not so long time to live that I
should bestow any part of it on any other save my self. In this sort having
ended our conversation, the holy man entreated me to go and finish the grave
he had begun, and leave him a while alone, to prepare himself seriously for
the great voyage he was to make. I obay'd him, and was above an hour in
digging. That done, I ascended again up to the Cave, and found the good Hermit
laid on his bed of moss. I came near, to give him an account of my labor,
but he was not in case to receive it. He lifted his eyes and hands toward
heaven, and seemed to be so transported thither already, that he remembered no
more any thing that was earthly. I took him by the hand, all amazed to see him
in that estate; and demanded what he ailed, and what I might do to comfort
him. But he answered not. I then thought him to be extremely sick, and to get
him out of his swoune, began to stir him. By little and little his judgment
returned, and presently knowing me, Oh! my son (said he) out of what a trouble
have you brought me? I saw the habitation of the Blessed all open. My soul
ravished to quit this clog of earth which hinders her flying thither, did her
utmost endeavor to be absolutely disburthened of it. But as she complained for
seeing all her industry bootlesse, a voice called me by my name: Beware (said
it) that thou break not those ligaments which hold thy body bound to thy
soul. Thou want one thing, without which it is forbidden thee to enter into
this place of all delights. The voice flying into air, I called a long time to
entreat it to instruct me what it was I wanted for my felicity. But I
re-claim'd in vain. It would not deliver me out of the torment whereinto it
had thrown me; and I was in such anguish of mind as is not to be imagined,
when your calling brought me out of so strange a dream, or rather so
wonderful a transportation of the spirit. No sooner had the holy man recounted
to me his vision, but I imagined that heaven desirous to bestow on him that
reward it has promised to all good men, had wrought a miracle in the moment of
his departure, that so by the knowledge of that verity which had never been
spoken to him, he might attain the beatitude proposed for the salary of its
belief. Hereupon I told him, it was revealed me from heaven what was wanting
for his gaining that true happiness, and afterward, as fully as I could in so
short a time, made known the mysteries and fundamentalls of what we believe.
After which that learned man, who all his life time had made profession of the
most solid and rational parts of Philosophy, witnessed so great a submission,
and gave so great a credence to such mysteries, as being infinitely elevated
above all reason, must needs justle with his, and clean overcoming it, he
demanded to be perfected by lavation, which I performed; and had no sooner
done, but he (with an hearty ejaculation and instant prayer) sunk down by me,
and testified, that the death of a good man is a true peace, and a pleasing
sleep. I confess, I wept at so great a loss, and you were not the only man
whom I was bound to bewail. I watched him till next day, and as soon as the
Sun arose, carried him to the place chosen by himself for his interment. His
funerals ended, I resolved to take possession of his Hermitage for the
remainder of my life. But knowing not where to draw the water, or get the dates
whereon he lived, I determined to dye with that absolute resignation and
religious constancy which the holy man had taught me. Yet was I not reduced to
that extremity, for eight days after the Hermits death, I saw a little Barque
arrive at my rock guided by two Negro's. They descri'd me on the top of the
rock, and the distance hindering them from any certain knowledge, they surely
took me for my predecessor. By their shouts they made show of their joy, and
brought on shore eight or ten barrells of fresh water, and some six little
chests of dates. As soon as those things were unshipp'd, the Black-Moores cried
out again, as 'twere to take their leaves, and so returned, without any
curiosity of visiting me. After I had long meditated on somewhat that was not
very likely, I imagined, that the late Hermit being not desirous to be seen by
any man, had given order to such as were to furnish him with his ordinary
pittance, to land what they brought at the foot of the rock, and so to return
without troubling him in his solitude. How ere it was, I remained there three
months, living according to the encouragement which the life and death of the
holy Hermit gave me and received such things as were necessary for me from the
hands of the same Negro's. And I grew then so well accustomed to that manner of
life, that the most pleasing things of the world passed not through my memory,
but as objects of commiseration and contempt, and I thought on nothing but how
to dye well, when a great ship, whose sails were of purple and gold, showed
her self one morning some miles off my rock. I confess to you, that object
did not almost a jot move me, and I wished often, that they who were in that
proud Vessel, fearing to fall on my rock, would turn their sails another
way. But I had not my desire satisfied. On the contrary, the tall ship came
with full sails within a mile of my rock, and casting anchor there, for fear
of the shelves and the crags, I perceived five or six men which descended into
a great boat, and then with an extreme swiftness came right to the rock. There
they landed, and presently came up to my Cave. My hair was so exceedingly
grown since my living there, that I had not much less then I have now: and
besides, being grown gray, as you know it did begin to be so from mine age of
five and twenty, I seemed to be above threescore and ten, though I was not five
and forty. Those men, certainly taking me for my Predecessor, cast themselves
at my feet, embraced my knees, ask me pardon for troubling my retired quiet
by their coming, and having protested, that they had not done it but by an
express command from heaven, besought me to accept the dignity of its
Archpriest, which it self came (if they might say so) to offer him by their
mouths. I answered them, that men had their understanding too dull to conceive
that which came from above; for it happened often, that the Oracles and the
advertisements from thence were ill expounded, and by such a mistake, men did
clean contrary to what was expected from their obedience. Assure your selves
therefore, that you are fallen into that mischance, and you have not well
understood the words of your Deity. Have recourse to him again, and beseech
him, that he will vouchsafe to be the Interpreter of his own Oracles, and
leave me to finish on this rock the penance which I owe for the sins of my
youth. The most remarkable of the company, speaking then for all: You strive in
vain (said he) to resist the voice of Heaven which calls you. Those
inconveniences which you propose to make us alter our intention, are so many
reasons to confirm us in it. Humility is the true sign of the souls
sanctity; and yours, which strives to lessen you even to nothing, in lieu of
making us quit the opinion we have of your life, reaches us, that it is more
miraculous then we have heard it related. To this answer I replied with a
little earnestness, to show my heart spoke by my tongue. But remembering at
last, that the holy man had often charged me, not to resist such occasions as
Heaven should proffer for my retirement from my solitude, I yielded to the
requests of those strangers. Yet before I went so far, I am (said I) ready to
obey, since the command, which is brought by you, deprives me of mine own
free will, and forbids my thinking on any other thing then the service of
heaven. Tell me therefore to what employment I am destined. He who spoke last,
beginning again, after all his companions were risen up, You must be pleased,
said he, (to give you a full light into all you desire to know) that I begin my
discourse from the establishment of those ceremonies whereof Heaven has
appointed you the chief Orderer and Dispenser. Know, that some seventy leagues
from this rock there lies an Island, which is not frequented but by such as
adore the Creator of all, under the image of the fairest of his creatures, I
would say under the figure of the Sun. Six of the greatest Kings that rule on
the Niger, that of the Kingdom of Manicongo, the mighty Monarch of the
Abissines, and the Prince (favored by Heaven) which reigns in the
Inaccessible Island, are the principal which have continued in the adoration
of that Deity. Every year they send to the famous Temple, which their
Predecessors built, offerings truly worthy their royal piety; and
acknowledging, though they be Kings, that they are nothing but a little dust in
the sight of the supreme Majesty, present to that Excellence part of their
treasures, as so many several tributes, which subjects owe to their
Sovereign. Within this seven or eight hundred years that those Princes have
continually enriched our Temple, it is so replenished with gold and jewels,
that if it were not preserved by a particular miracle, it had long ere this
time been the prey of Pirates, or of such Kings which search and rifle land and
sea to satiate their prodigious avarice. Nor are we only to fear such
strange Pilferers, but we are to doubt of those who by our suffrages are called
to the sovereign Priesthood, and by consequence, to the ordering of those
dangerous riches. Those who lived before us have been so happy in the election
of their chief Prelates, that if we except one, who would have turned his
Priesthood into tyranny, and worn a Crown in stead of a Mitre, there has
not been known any, who with a great deal of innocence dispensed not the
treasures of our Deity. It is now five months since the great Uranias, who
had fitten on the Sacerdotall throne near thirty years, left us with the grief
of his loss, the sorrow for not being able to find him a successor. Many of
our Clergy were proposed; but the ignorance of some, and the sicentiousnesse of
others excluded them: and we did not believe, that the dignity of Archpriest
had the virtue of conferring learning and honesty on such as had none before.
In the mean time, for want of a head, the members began to languish, and we
saw plainly, that if disorders were not stopped by a speedy election, the
Temple would be profaned, and the treasure abandoned to the covetousnes of an
Usurper. Hereupon we entered the second time into the place appointed for so
important a choice, and came out again without agreeing on it. In this
necessity we had recourse to extraordinary helps. We made public processions,
we redoubled our oraisons, we added ashes and sackcloth to our prayers, our
fastings and sacrifices, and begged from heaven to choose it self an agreeable
Sacrificator. After we had spent a full month (day and night) in these actions
of piety, Benycirac, the eldest of the Priests, forcing himself from the
incommodities which detained him in his bed, came one day to us in the Temple,
and I swear (said he) by the sanctity of this place, and what we worship here,
that I will speak nothing but what has been revealed to me from above. The
last night, whilst I prayed, and with tears besought for an end of our
contestations, in the nominating us an Head, I heard a voice which said, Leave
afflicting thy self, I have heard thy petition, and those of thy companions.
Your requests are heard, and if you persevere, you shall quickly have a
Sovereign, the most pious man that ever ascended the throne of the chief
Priesthood. Right against this Realm, which is round ingirt, either by the
sea, or the river Niger, arises in the midst of the waves a high rock, which
for this many years has been the abode of the most religious man which my
rays inlightens. It Is he that must succeed Uranias. But hasten, lest you lose
the occasion. As soon as Benycirac had told us his revelation, we began the
unbloudy sacrifice, to beg for some visible sign, whereby we might be
confirmed in what the Priest had proposed to us. What we desired we obtained,
and presently concluding that we were to come hither, we cased the sacred
Vessel to be made ready. My self and my companions were chosen to make all
known to you. We have had a very happy voyage, and should be ungrateful, if
we do not render continual thanks for our good success, and publicly
confess, that it is an assured presage of our felicity in your Priesthood.
Therefore we come to beseech you by your own zeal, and the honor of him
that sent us, to accept of the charge whereof you are thought worthy, and to
restore to our Temple and Altars the respect which Ambition and Impiety would
have robbed them of. Let us on then (said I) my brethren and friends, and
forgetting (all of us) our own interests, labor for the glory of our great
Master. That very day I took leave of mine Hermitage, and the blessed Ghost of
the holy Hermit, and imbarquing my self in the Vessel of the Sun, happily
arrived in this Island. Here was I received by all the Clergy as some great
Saint, and installed with a great deal of ceremony in the dignity of
Sovereign Sacrificator. Since I exercised this charge, I have seen the
catalogue of all the Princes and Nations which have used to visit the Temple of
the Sun, and noting that the Princes of the Inaccessible Island came hither to
celebrate the sacrifice of Alliance, whereof we have spoken; I not only more
lamented then ever your loss, but I let my self fall into mutterings and
speeches injurious to that Providence. But it has (out of pity and infinite
wisdom) subverted them, and rendering me that bliss which I thought utterly
lost, engaged me to convert my griefs and lamentations into thanksgivings.
Alter Alcippus had thus ended his discourse, he humbly besought his Master to
let him know how he fell into the hands of the King of Gheneoa. Diceus (said
Polexander) will at leisure inform you of all that. The business is now, to
take order how I must hereafter demean my self in this Island. Alcippus
having confirmed him in all that Pisander had related touching the arrival of
Alcidiana's ship, and made known the facility of sending to that Princess for
his being enrolled in the number of her Slaves, entreated he would not discover
himself to any, but expect with patience the hour of his good fortune.
Polexander approving Alcippus advice, retired to his chamber as privately as he
came thence. When he was laid, instead of sleeping, he began to muse on the
contentment he was to receive at his up-rising. But, as if his memory had been
jealous of his satisfaction, though it was but imaginary, it represented to him
Alcidiana's anger, far greater and more mortal then it was; and bringing him
to meditate on that bloody Declaration she had published against his life, made
him conceive, that he could not without disobeying her dare to set foot on the
Inaccessible Island. With that thought, crying out, as if he had indeed
committed some execrable crime. Let me perish (said he) since Alcidiana
commands it; nor let me by any subterfuge dispense with the necessity of
dying, since the Laws of this Temple engage me to it. Throw in again,
Alcippus, throw in again the ball to the vessel of death, and do not betray
thy conscience for the sparing of a life which I cannot lose too soon, since
Alcidiana will not have it last any longer. But may be thou will say, You but
little know that Princesses intention. Those things which she has made
public, are different from those she retains in private. Her thoughts are not
altogether answerable to her words. You must interpret Alcidiana; by Alcidiana;
and believe, that she has not pronounced the sentence of death against you for
any other end, then that she might have cause to make you sensible of her
pity. Amintha and Pallante have said, that you cannot doubt of Alcidiana's
goodness, without obliging her to doubt of your fidelity. It Is true, Alcippus,
I have infallible testimonies of that Princesses favor. If her Edicts affright
me, her thoughts re-assure me; if I see my death in the one, I meet my life in
the other. Let us therefore cast off all kind of settled will, and resting in a
general indifferency (as to our selves) go, and hear from the mouth of our
Judge, whether we must live or die. With this resolution Polexander fell
asleep, and it caused it so soundly, that the Sun was got far above the
Hemisphere before he awaked. Diceus, who durst not make any noise, was as long
in bed too. But as soon as he heard his Master stir he arose, and came and
drew his curtain. Friend (said the Prince) we do ill observe the diligence
prescribed us. If our superiors come to know what we are doing, and find us
yet in bed, I doubt we shall receive sharp reprehensions from them. Your
Majesty may give them leave to talk, replied Diceus, and laugh at the severity
of a government, under which you are so little while to live. Thou say true,
said Polexander smiling. Therefore help me up, and expose me not to a
displeasure which I may avoid. He was no sooner clad, but the usual cry
obliged him to go to the common Hall. There he found the King of Gheneoa's
Ambassadors, which came to take their leave, and to ask him in the name of
their Master, whether he were fully resolved to persevere in the service of
the Sun and Alcidiana. After Polexander had embraced them all one after
another, Relate (said he) to the King your Master, that I am more obliged to
him then he can imagine, and ere it be long, I will send to give him thanks
proportionable to the favors I have received. The Ambassadors took their
leaves with tears in their eyes, and went presently to imbark themselves with
all the Pilgrims. As Soon as the guards of the Isle saw they were out of sight,
the chief Priest with his Clergy and all the Slaves went to the Temple, to
make their accustomed prayers for the good success of the Pilgrims voyage.
That day Alcippus had a long discourse with Polexander, and engaged Diceus to
related to him in particular the adventures which had betided their Master
since he was left for dead in the Island of Astramadan. Diceus forgot nothing
in his relation, but gave Alcippus so many new causes of astonishment, that he
could not choose but cry out, O great Prince! by whose valor we see renewed
again the true age of the ancient Hero's; what thanks and Altars do thou
owe to the Power that has raised thee so high above all other Princes? For a
whole month entire, Polexander, Alcippus, and Diceus, did nothing every night
but entertain themselves with their adventures, and prepare for the happy day
whereon Alcidiana's ship was to be descri'd on the coasts of the Island of the
Sun. The very day they expected her, there was a great Vessel by them
discovered, which came steering the course from Alcidiana's Island. The guards
gave notice of it to the chief Priest, and after the wonted ceremonies done,
they caused the ship to enter the Port. Those who were within her, confusedly
got to shore, and thereby made the guard suspect somewhat. Yet their habit of
Pilgrims re-assuring them, they brought them to the entry to the Temple. But by
chance one of the Priests being there (and judging by their wild and cursed
looks, that they hid some wicked design under their devout habit) had the
curiosity to come nearer, and view them better. But his prying cost him his
life, for those disguised thieves perceiving they were discovered, inhumanely
murdered the Priest, and presently casting off their robes, showed their
armor. They were at least two hundred desperate fellows, that resolved to
dye, or to rob the Temple of its treasure. They fell furiously on the guard
that would have stopped them, and left not one alive. The lesser Slaves of the
Temple running to their succor, fought a long while; but seeing themselves
forced to give back, retired under the Portico of the Temple, with a resolution
to dye ere they would forsake it. The fight was bloody and furious. About an
hundred of the thieves were slain in that skirmish, but above three hundred
Slaves bore them company; and the rest dis-heartened, abandoned the protection
of the holy places and sacred treasure to the ravaging and pillage of those
bloody minded villains. Presently then, the Archpriest caused the illustriou^
Slaves of the Sun to arm themselves, and desirous to make known Polexander's
valor, commanded him aloud to go and expose his life for the defense of their
Altars. Our Hero seeing himself remitted to his former true profession, went
out of the Temple, and falling in among the thieves, made them feel the power
of his arm. As many blows as he struck, so many men laid he dead at his feet.
The most obstinate to fight recoiled before him; and finding themselves brought
to stand on their defense, lost all the great hopes they had long conceived.
The Prince seeing them stagger, pierced in among the troop, and so drove them
furiously to the Sea side. Some were drowned, others flying into their ship,
were there burnt by the wilde-fire was thrown into her. This tumult being
ended, the High Priest and his Clergy searched among the dead bodies to know
whom they had lost. They found about five hundred, and amongst them, twenty of
the noble Slaves, who following Polexander, had a great share in the glory of
that day. The generous Pisander, who fought still at our Hero's side, was
slain by the Captain of the thieves, and by so glorious a death, sacrificed
his life to his Goddess as well as to his Deity, I would say to the Queen
Alcidiana, as well as to the Sun. Polexander much bewailed the loss of so
brave a man, and publicly testified, that the Island was deprived of her
principal defender. But all those who had either fought by our Hero, or been
lookers on, cried out, that to him alone belonged that title; and that his
invincible courage had (solely) preserved the Temple, the Priests, and the
treasure of the Sun. Alcippus himself went and plucked a branch of Palm Tree,
and making a crown of it, placed it on Polexanders head. He called him the
second Tutelar God of the Island, the Victorious, the Invincible, the Protector
of their Altars; and bringing him into the Temple, as it were in triumph,
there, with all his Clergy, rendered thanks to the Sun, and hung over the
Altar high our Hero's bloody sword.

The end of the fourth Book of the last part of Polexander.
THE LAST PART OF POLEXANDER. The last Book.
ALcippus, who was not less sensible and generous then he was obliged to be
to the King his Master, had no greater desire then to be able to contribute any
thing to the honor of his Prince. Seeing therefore so fair an occasion
offered him by his incomparable valor, he made an Oration to his Clergy, and
so elevated what Polexander had done for the common good, that they were like
to have taken him for that God himself whose Slave he was. He afterward told
them, that the Eternal Providence had lead them to the brink of the precipice,
to advertise them, that they were not to sleep in their sound security, nor
trust so much to supernatural aid, as to neglect humane protection. It Is for
us, my brothers (said he) to make good use of the advertisement has been given
us; and to serve our selves of that succor which heaven has afforded us in
the very instant that our danger betided. The sacred Temple had bin profaned,
the Altars had lost their veneration, the treasure had become the prey of
sacrilegious thieves, our holy Character had been violated; in a word, the
abode of a Deity, was like to be turned into a retraict for thieves, if the
invincible Araxez (Polexander had taken that name in Gheneoa) whom the favor
of heaven has miraculously sent us, had not employed his victorious arm for
the preservation of our Altars, our Treasure and Character. Let us bind him to
our defense by some title that may be honorable unto him; and by a kind
necessity force him to continue to us, that, which he has begun out of his own
generous inclination. Thus ended Alcippus his proposition; and all his Clergy
finding it not only equitable but advantageous, entreated him to instruct them
by what means they might bring what he proposed to a good issue. The
Chief-Priest after he had excused himself withal necessary modesty to make him
the more considerable, and perceiving that his excuses did but increase the
desires of the Assembly: My opinion is (said he) that we should free from the
Chains and the Lot, the victorious Araxez, and infranchising him in the name
of our Deity from the Servitude wherein he was engaged, to declare him
Protector of the Island, and Prince of the Clergy. Atthis proposition all the
Priests clapped their hands in token of their consent and gladness, and
unwilling the business should be deferred to another time, they arose to fetch
Polexander. As Soon as they had brought him into the Hall of Assemblies, they
caused him to sit down in a chair which was a little below the throne of the
Arch-Prelate; and Alcippus began again and renewed their thanks, and then told
him in his usual eloquence, that his brethren, and himself, were not those
alone that were bound to him for their safety. This Temple (said he) seems to
shake on its foundation to testify the resentment of what you have done for
its preservation; our Altars share in that obligation, and if your piety could
permit it, I would say that even the Deity we adore, thinks he owes to your
valor the Sovereignty of this Island, and the possession of his treasure. In
recompense of an action where the interests of heaven are commixt with those of
earth, this Assembly which cannot err, frees you from the chains you wore,
and for an eternal remembrance, orders them to be hung by the sword wherewith
you delivered us from the fetters of a profane Slavery. With that he took the
chains from Polexander, and two of the ordinary Slaves of the Temple, by
command ca^ried them to be hung by the sword. This Ceremony ended, Alcippus
taking Polexander by the hand, told him he was free, and that his virtue had
made him Prince of that sacred and sovereign company. Polexander refusing so
glorious a title, There would not only (said he) be a great deal of pride, but
even very impiety, should I accept of a title which brings along with it the
power of disposing of things sacred and to rule over the Presbytery. This were
to erect Idols in the place consecrated, and with a polluted hand to snatch the
Censor out of the hands of those appointed for that Office. I accept of my
liberty since it is in your power to give it me, but I do it conditionally that
it may be submitted to your lawful authority, and especially destined to the
service of a company which with Justice may be termed, the Society of visible
Angels. All the Priests, who questionless were very glad to preserve to
themselves an authority which made them so considerable, were ravished at
Araxes moderation. They unanimously told him he was the more worthy to govern,
since he had so generously refused it. The Assembly thus dissolved; Polexander
was brought to a lodging, which was not less magnificent then that of the
Arch-Prelate, and if not acknowledged for Prince, at least for one who had
refused to be so. Many Slaves were given to serve him. The Guard of the Temple
and the Island, were bound to acknowledge him for their Chief, and to do
nothing but by his appointment. They took out of the treasury diverse pieces of
gold and silver which came from Aethiopia, to clothe him. But Polexander,
whether it were out of fear of not acomplishing the Prophesies, or that he
would intimate to the Priests he intended not to neglect their favor, took
new signs of Servitude, and always wore about his neck a Collar on which
these words were engraven. THE SLAVE OF THE SUN, AND HIS PRIESTS SERVANT.

The first occasion wherein the feigned Araxes made show of his principality
was at the arrival of the Ambassadors of the Kings of Senega. He sent all the
illustrious Slaves of the Sun to meet them, and went himself with the Arch
Priest and his Clergy to the end of the Entry into the Palme-Walke, to
receive them with the more ceremony. He was afraid at first that he might be
known by some of the Ambassadors; but his dexterity in disguising his
countenance, and speech, succeeded so well, that Almaid himself (who was the
chief of that Embassy) never took him for Polexander. All complements of
welcoming being ended, Araxes, and the Arch-Prelate, took Almaid betwixt them,
and so lead him to the Gate of the Temple. As they were about to enter, Almaid
stopped, and told them that the ordinary revolutions of great Kingdoms, had in
theirs profaned, that which in former times had been amongst them held for
sacred, and made that holy, which foregoing ages esteemed profane. The chief
Prelate fearing, lest the continuation of this discourse might either
scandalize or raise some doubts in the weaker understndings, and by consequence
lessen his Societies authority, entreated the Ambassador to speak with respect
in matters of Relgion. Almaid accepting this advice, with as much discretion as
it had been given: I come not here (said he to the High Priest) to propose my
thoughts, nor make a declaration of my belief. They are the Kings my Masters
which speak by my mouth, and who seeing themselves enlightened with a
supernatural light, think they are bound to renounce all such Ceremonies
which are contrary to those which Heaven has revealed to them. Know therefere
that almost as soon as Zabaim and Almanzaira had placed in their throne, the
King their Son, and the Princess his wife, they cast all their thoughts on
heaven. Almanzaira's incomparable piety, feconded by that of the young Queen,
altered the face of the whole Court; and Zabaim who by a hearty and private
penitence strove to obtain pardon for his long errors, merited at last to be
called to the knowledge of the true Deity. Those Idols which he had placed in
the rank of Gods, lost their Temples, and their Altars. The Sun whom you adore
here, had no place but amongst the creatures the least accomplished. Almanzaira
and Cydaria having well established this new religion, could not endure that
Zabaim and Almanzor should be longer held in their strange Ceremonies. They
therefore besought them to break of all commerce they had with the adorers of
Idols; and those Princes not able to deny their just requests, chose my
companions and my self, to make a voyage hither, to disavow in their name
their ancient belief, and make profession of the new. After the Ambassador had
thus ended his speech, the most part of the Auditors stood either vexed, or
amazed: Only Polexander and Alcippus were overjoyed to see so great an
introduction to what they had resolved to execute before their separation.
Nevertheless the chief prelate thinking it not fit to precipitate a business
of so great importance, dissembled his joy, and feigning all the anger which a
just zeal might stir up in him on such an occasion: If (said he to the
Ambassadors) the honor of that Deity which we adore depended on the servile
acknowledgments it receives from the Creature, it might possibly lose somewhat
now, by our Kings fearful Apostasy. But he is himself his own glory and
reward. He made man for their own happiness, not for his benefit; and his
beatitude is so perfect, that nothing can be added or taken from him, by the
increase or diminution of his adorers. After he had spoke thus, he commanded
that the book of the Kings profession should be brought, and having publikly
torn out that of Zabaim, gave it to Almaid, and then retired with his Clergy
without any complement to the Ambassadors. Almaid took leave of the feigned
Araxes, and all the assistants, and entreating them to believe as he did
presently went toward the Sea; and Polexander accompanying him thither to hear
something of Cydaria, understood, that she absolutely governed the King her
husband. That she was the comfort of Zabaim, and Almanzaira, the hope of all
her subjects, and for the height of all happiness they thought her with child
of a son, whom the people blinded in their affections named already, their
chief delight and safety. Polexander had that day on his finger a very fair
diamond which Cydaria had given him at parting. He entreated Almaid to present
it the Princess from him, and assure her, that her zeal was not disproved of
by the principal of the Isle of the Sun. Almaid took it without further
inquiry, and imbarquing with a favorable wind, steered on to fill the Court
of Senega with several consolations. Leave we him in his happy voyage, and
let us now receive into the port of the Suns Island, that fatal ship after
which we have been so long wandering. One day, when all the Clergy were
assembled about some important solemnity, the new guard (who by the death of
their predecessors grew jealous of all) came to the Palace of the feigned
Araxes, as they had done at Almaids arrival, and told him they had descried
off at Sea a Ship whose bulk shone like gold, and the sails glittered through
the sun beams as if they had been on fire. Our Hero presently thought she
belonged to Alcidiana, and to begin his happiness by the sight of so dear an
object, ran with Diceus to the top of a rock whence he might easily ken her:
straight he perceived the purple and gold imbryodered sails, which truly
appeared as waving flames betwixt the azure of the sky and the water. Withal
he marked Alcidiana's golden Pavillion which was fixed to the maine mast, and
saw shine in a thousand several places that Queen of birds, which was not only
the device but the symbol of Alcidiana. The Ship with her artillery saluted the
Port, and that on shore answering, a great company ran to the sea side to see
the arrival of that rich and stately Ship. Polexander covertly retired to his
palace, and there expected when the Clergies officers came to advertise what he
was to do. In the mean time the strength of his imagination, or to say better,
the violence of his love so troubled him, that he felt himself suddenly
stricken with some strange fit, and fell on his bed as pale and cold as he had
been giving up the ghost. Diceus seeing him in that case, How! (said he) what
will become of you when you shall present your self before Alcidiana, since
you are not able to endure the presence of her Ambassadors? Friend, (replied
Polexander) I thought thou would not have engaged me to become Master of my
former thoughts. Yet I must (nevertheless) in good time prevent such disorders
as they may cause, and by long preparations accustom my mind to take in most
extreme contentments and yet not seem sensible of them. This discourse having
as it were blunted the edge of our Heroes imagination, his senses returned to
their usual functions; and then he thought himself able enough to constrain
his deportment before Alcidiana's Ambassadors. As Soon as they landed they were
entertained by such as had that charge; and Polexander being called to the
Temple by the dignity he exercised there, put on his ceremonial habit to meet
those famous Ambassadors. He acquitted himself better then he thought he
should have done, of a charge so thorny and nice for him; and by the
extraordinary and obliging civility, wherewithal he used to win all hearts,
instantly acquired the love of all those strangers. The next day every one rose
very early to be at the ceremonies of the sacrifice of Alliance. At daybreak
the priests came to the Temple, and sunrising the high priest appeared with
his clergy, in the most eminent place of the great Portico, there to receive
the Ambassadors. That done, the same things were performed to them as had been
to the Ambassadors of the King of Gheneoa in bringing them into the Temple. The
chief priest then taking his place, the feigned Araxes his, and the priests
theirs; the Ambassadors bare headed and kneeling at the foot of the high Altar
did that homage to the Sun, to which the Kings of the Inaccessible Island had
obliged themselves. After that, those who bore the offerings, came in one
after another. The six first carried so many great vessels of crystal of the
rock full of perfumes. Eight following, bore on their shoulders a table of
gold, on which was imboss'd the shape of the Inaccessible Island. The ninth had
in his hands a table of brass, whereon was engraven the terms wherewithal the
person who represented the King of the Inaccessible Island renewed and
confirmed his alliance between the hands of the chiefprelate. The tenth carried
a heart of silver, on which were seen drops of blood naturally figured. After
these offerings, marched forty or fifty slaves (chained with chains of gold)
which placed on the twelve lesser Altars somewhat of the most rarest things in
their kind, which nature produced or art gave to the inhabitants of the
Inaccessible Island. Those oblations ended, they celebrated the unbloudy
sacrifice: It began with thanksgivings, was continued by burning of several
perfumes, and ended in supplications and prayers. The chief priest presented
them to the living Deity after the wonted manner, and after a benediction on
all the assistants, every one retired to his quarter. All the remainder of the
day the Temple stood open, that the inferior Pilgrims might perform their
devotions and offer their offerings. At night the archprelate sent for
Alcidiana's Ambassadors, to entertain them according to the ancient custom.
Polexander supped with them; and the recital of what he had done for the
safety of the Island, was (to his discontent) the whole discourse of their
feast. The Ambassadors looked on him as if they could not have their fill, and
the more they regarded him, the more increased their admiration. The hour of
retirement arriving, all the company severed. As the chief prelate was going to
bed, the famous pilot Lynceus came into his chamber, and besought him for a
private audience: presently the archpriest commanded away his servants; Speak
(then said he) and fear nothing. Before I make known (replied Lynceus) the
cause that obliges me to hinder your repose; you must (if you please) engage
your faith, that for no cause nor necessity whatsoever you shall reveal the
secret which the Queen my Mistress has commanded me to entrust you withal.
Impose (if you please) this tie on your self, and without retaining any
reservation that may dispense with you for your oath, swear by the Deity in
whom you believe, that you will rather suffer death then betray the innocence
of a Princess, who for the discharge of her conscience will entrust you with a
matter that does not permit her to enjoy any rest. Alcippus who had a great
desire to know this important secret; and who by I know not what inspiration
was persuaded it concerned Polexander: The Queen (said he to Lynceus) is most
judicious, in being desirous in matters of great consequence to observe all
that wisdom can advise her. But she would not require these oaths or security
from me, if she knew that one of the principal injunctions in my charge is to
keep as a pledge deposited by heaven such secrets of conscience as are made
known to me. No, no, Lynceus, let not Alcidiana fear it. Neither hope, nor
fear, nor love, nor hatred, nor death, nor life, shall ever be able to make me
violate a law on which depends the eternity of my bliss or wretchedness. I
swear by the sacred power of the chief priesthood, and by the faith I owe to
heaven, that no person whatsoever shall ever know from me that which you have
commanded to discover. Lynceus, made confident by so inviolable an oath: My
Lord (said he) the Queen though she never did act contrary to the rules of
verue, nor could not so much as inure an ill thought without stifling of it in
the birth, yet has her conscience troubled, and feels I know not what remorse
which both accuses and torments her. But to the end you may give her Majesty
such remedies as are fitting for her disease, it is necessary that I make known
to you the original of it. Some three years since, the famous King of the
Canaries was by a tempest cast on our coasts. That Prince, whom without
flattery we may call the wonder of this age, had not been long in our Court,
but by his admirable indowments he grew so extremely recommendable that he
became the love and admiration of all. Alcidiana confesses to you, that that
Heroes virtue, joined to the service he had done her against her rebellious
subjects, insensibly won her to wish him well. She did that at the beginning
by way of acknowledgment, which she did afterward for her own satisfaction.
In a word she loved him; but perceiving her love began to go beyond the limits
she had prescribed it, and what she indevour'd to conceal would in spite of
her divulge it self; sometimes by her disturbances, otherwhiles by her deep
musing, then again by complaysancies which she deemed unworthy her virtue, and
in brief by the alteration of her complexion, she resolved to endure it no
longer. To make it sure, she thought the best way was to get Polexander away.
While she was contriving it, an occasion was offered in the stealing away of
Amintha by a Spanish Pirate. So soon as the news came to Polexander, he got to
sea, and made after Amintha's ravisher: Many days he pursued him and as many
nights, but in vain, for a tempest drove him one way, and the pirate another.
In the mean while the love that Prince bore to the Queen my Mistress, scarce
permitting him to live out of her fight, he left poor Amintha to the mercy of
the ravisher; and preferring slavery before all the Empire which his virtue had
given, he thought on nothing but of entering into Alcidiana's chains. A
thousand times he strove to get to the Inaccessible Island, and as often the
quality of that Isle beguild his hopes, and made him run almost through all the
Ocean, and yet found it not again. After he had spent near two years in such
bootless voyages, and undergone all the incommodities which accompany long
navigations, he arrived at the Isle of two Tyrants. There he slew Amintha's
ravisher, and set that Lady again at liberty; but his generousnesse engaging
him to avenge the Queen Tysiphone, for the outrages she had received from the
giant Astramadan, he was murdered by that tyrants subjects; and Amintha after
she had long time bewailed the death of that famous Prince, was forced to get
to sea to avoid the violence of those of that Isle. Almost as soon as she was
under sail a tempest arose, and by a strange accident being separated from the
faithful and generous Alcippus Polexanders favorite, she was at last
fortunatly cast on the coasts of the Inaccessible Island; where being known of
all, she was brought to the Court, and welcomed by Alcidiana with so much joy,
as if after the lamenting her for dead, she had been newly raised to life
again. But the Queens contentment was disturbed by that which Amintha related
touching the death of Polexander. And since that time our Princess has not
given over the afflicting her self with continual plaints and lamentations.
Her conscience or rather her affection continually upbraides her for the death
of the Canaryes King, and makes her believe that she is truly guilty of it.
Every night his Ghost all goary either appears or seems to appear to her, and
displaying his wounds; See (says he to her) to what a case the desire of
seeing and serving you has brought me. But how dear is my misfortune to me
since you pity it; with what pleasure do I spend my blood, since it draws
tears from you, and how beneficial is my death to me, since it has acquired
me a place in your memory? I should never have done if I would relate what
Polexanders ghost spoke mightily to Alcidiana. However my Lord, these visions
wrought an alteration in her health, troubled her repose, and brought her to
such extremities, that if they leave her not, I shall soon see my Country full
of afflictio, and such calamities as must follow the death of Alcidiana. Lo
here (my Lord) all that which my Mistress commanded me to communicate unto you;
and since she can expect from n^e other then heaven the tranquillity she has
lost, she beseeches you to offer sacrifice for the expiation of her offense,
if she be guilty of Polexanders death. Yet what e're betide she beseeches you
to remember him in your devotions, and to beg from heaven for a cessation of
these visions which persecute her; and since she showed not her self
insensible of Polexanders love, but that she might not be so in the respect of
her honor; that it would not permit her innocence to be looked on as a crime.
After Lynceus had spoke, Alcippus replied thus: The Deity whom we adore is too
cleer-sighted to find any blots in so pure a life as that of Alcidiana. Assure
her from him that she is not guilty of Polexanders death, and that her
disquiets proceed from some other sourse then that pricking remorse wherwithall
the Eternal Justice begins to inflict vengeance in this life on offenders.
It Is her love (Lynceus) that brings on these dreams, and is the cause of all
the agitations which molest her: I advise her to quiet her mind: Yet I forbid
her not to love the memory of Polexander, since it is all she can love of him
now. But I would have her love to be peaceful and quiet; and if it be true,
that my mind is sometime enlightened by the beams which come from above; I
assure her, that heaven in retribution of her virtues, preserves for her such
contentments as it communicates not to many Princes. Lynceus fully satisfied
with this answer, took leave of the Archpriest, and so well imprinted in his
memory all that was said to him, that he truly related it to the Queen his
Mistress. Alcippus, on the other side, perceiving it lay in his power to render
our Hero perfectly happy, was almost ready to disclose to him what he had
newly discovered; but being retained by the sanctity of his oath, and the
Majesty he had called to witness; He thought in becoming perjured, he should
in lieu of advancing Polexanders happiness, infallibly ruin it by his
execrable untruth. He therefore protested again to discover to him nothing of
Alcidiana's secret, and went to bed so well pleased with his vow, that from
that very night he tasted such contentments as ever since made him tread under
foot all those that are earthly. The next morning he went to the Temple, and
consecrating himself wholly to heaven, promised solemnly to have it adored
with all the purity had ever been taught to man. That very day the bloody
sacrifice was to be offered, and Polexander as Prince of the Clergy, was bound
to supply the place of the Arch-prelate at that dismal Ceremony. He then be
thought him it was time to put in execution what he had resolved with Alcippus;
and to employ all his eloquence and credit for the abolishing of that horrible
custom of humane sacrifices. As Soon therefore as they advertised him that the
Priests of the Sun and Alcidiana's Ambassadors were assembled in the Temple, he
went thither with all the Slaves, and beseeching the company to give him
audience, thus bespoke them: If I were yet bound to the observation of those
criminal Laws which make Religion to become a Sacrilege, and blend piety and
homicide together, I would impose silence on my just sorrow, and patiently
endure the injustice of your Ceremonies since I could not condemn them, but by
making you call in doubt either my zeal, my obedience, or courage. But being
infranchis'd from so cruel a slavery, and disburthen'd of those chains which
submitted my life to the blind necessity of Chance; I will tell you boldly,
that your Predecessors have made an execrable mixture of Religion and Impiety,
of heaven and hell, of divine worship and that of the devils. You adore you
say a Deity, which is nothing but Spirit, Light, and Purity; and yet as if he
were a tyrant which took pleasure in bathing himself in humane blood, or some
furious beast that feeds only on the flesh of men, you cut the throats of your
brethren at the feet of his Altars, and if it were in your power, you would
make him drink their blood all hot and reaking. I know at other times he has
commanded the immolation of beasts on his Altars; but I know it was ordered to
affright a brutish people, and to tell them, by so many massacres, that if they
were not exact observers of his Laws, he would leave them as a victime to the
vengefull sword of their enemies. I have not time enough nor sufficient
learning to unfold to you another mystery of that blood. Let it suffice that I
tell you 'twas a figure of an immolation which was to be but once performed.
And as for the sacrificing of men, I protest and assure you it is an invention
of hell, and the relick of that Idolatry which had almost infected the whole
world. Advise with the monuments of your fathers, have recourse to the
establishment of Religion in this place; reflect on these sad and fearful
Ceremonies, which you never put in practice but with horror and condemning
them, and you shall find that you have offended in thinking to do well: cut
off then from the number of your mysteries, these abominable superstitions, and
from hence-forward, adore a Power which is all Innocence and purity, with
Ceremonies as innocent and pure. As Soon as Polexander had ended his
remonstrance, all the Assembly cast their eyes on the Archpriest, and
expected what he would say, either in condemning or approving the fained Araxes
Speech: and he full of that zeal which had consecrated him to the Altars,
took heaven to witness, that he had not entered into that holy place, but with
a firm resolution to die, or to make them renounce the abomination of their
bloody Sacrifices. Yes, my companions, (said he) I am of Araxes opinion, and to
confirm it, I tell you, Heaven has expected but one the like Sacrifice for the
satisfaction of it is Justice: the Devil, who takes pleasure to imitate the
works of the Divinity, or rather by his execrable malice, endeavored to
annihilate all religious mysteries, has won us to slaughter one another;
that he might confound in these detestable Sacrifices, the maine one which
concerns and deprives us (at once) of all our knowledge, and hope which
depends on it. My dear companions therefore, (and this Assembly) if it be not
by a blind and brutish custom, but a true devotion, which makes you apply your
selves to Heaven, entreat from thence an inlightning of your blindness, and in
bestowing on you that knowledge which you want, it would please to let you
understand in what manner you should yield your adoration. All the Assembly
without further deliberation cried out against the bloody Sacrifices, and the
whole Clergy presently being shut up to consult advisedly upon a matter of so
much importance, set down among their constitutions, that it was neither fit
to sacrifice men nor beasts. To this resolution, Alcidiana's Ambassadors gave
their consent; and did it the more willingly, since in the Inaccessible Island
the bloody Sacrifices were so seldom practiced, that in a whole age there were
but two or three seen. Every one rejoiced at this alteration, but the
illustrious Slaves (as the most interessed) made their joy to be taken most
notice of; for though there was but one of them to die that day, yet they
thought themselves all to be redeemed from death, since there was none among
them who from the Lot was exempted: yet were they not absolutely disingaged
from the vows of their servitude, but in stead of being bound to expose
themselves to a voluntary death, they were only to pass the rest of their
lives in the service of the Altars. The next day, Alcidiana's Ambassadors
having ended their Ceremonies, the Archpriest made them their farewell feast;
and after he had assured them, that he would take pains to his utmost, for the
reformation of abuses, and establishment of a right worship, he entreated them
to make known his intention to their Queen, and win her for the discharge of
her conscience, to make the like reformation within her Territories. After
that, he brought them into his withdrawing chamber, and suddenly composing out
of diverse true accidents a mysterious Fable, thus bespoke them; My Lords (said
he) I must discharge my trust, and satisfy the passionate desires of a Prince,
which holds your Princess for a visible Divnitie; I believe, there is none of
you all but knows him, as well by the magnificence of his Offerings,
wherewithal he has enriched the Temple of the Sun, as by Princely presents
he has often sent to the Queen your Mistress. Before he passed from his
condition to a better, and ere time had covered him in that darkness where he
lies interred, he sent, for the last time his Ambassadors to this Island, and
after he had satisfied his zeal, he would likewise content his passion; he
therefore be sought me by his letters and Ambassadors, that as soon as you
arrived here, I should deliver into your hands the last presents he had
appointed for Alcidiana; I am entrusted with these treasures, and to acquit me
of my word given to that Prince, I intend presently to put them into your
charge. That which is most to be valued amongst them, is our Prince Araxes,
who, as the wonder of his age, and the glory of men, has been consecrated to
heaven, and destined for Alcidiana. You may say, that having received his
liberty, for the great service done to this Island, it were Injustice in your
Queen, to put him again in the company of Slaves; but let not that thought
hinder it, Araxes so passionately loves that Prince, who deemed him worthy the
service of Alcidiana, that he preferres the will of that King before his
liberty and life: the Queen may do as she please, either give him her
chains, or infranchise him. The Ambassadors overjoyed, that they had so great
a Present for their Que^e, urged the Archpriest to dispatch them, that they
might set sail while the weather was fair. The Prelate, who had plotted with
Polexander about all that he had spoken to the Ambassadors, sent for him, with
all the other Presents; and he came, not in the habit of a vulgar Slave, but
like a triumphing King: four Black-moore Slaves carried the ends of his
chains, and did not ill imitate the grave and majestic gate of their Master.
Alcippus seeing he was about to lose him once more, could not suppress the
emotions of his good nature, but (weeping) embraced him, and intimating to the
Ambassadors, that his tears were out of compassion; Go, said he to Polexander,
whither thy Fate calls thee; let not the Servitude which thou have preferred
before a Crown, make thee lose ought of that great Spirit which is able to
conquer the whole world; and whether Fortune use thee better then she has
done, or continues her averseness to thee, remember, that Araxes was borne to
trample on her. Alcippus embraced him again, to bid him the last farewell; and
though he was absolutely off from his ancient affection, yet could he never
quit himself of that which he bore to the King his Master; he accompanied him
to the Port, under color of honoring Alcidiana's Ambassadors, and seeing him
embarked with Diceus, was constrained to return, for fear of further tempting
his weakness and humanity. As Soon as a little gale from the shore, had put
the sacred Vessel out of the Haven, Diceus, (who had Lynx his eyes) and in all
places where ere he came, discovered what was most hidden, perceived in the
Pilots cabin, two birds as white as swans, and marking (unnoted) how they fed
them, imagined that 'twas by that slight Alcidiana's Pilots were used to
return to the Inaccessible Island. As Soon therefore, as the ship was out at
sea, the birds flew out of Linceus his cabin at a window, and presently
appearing over the ship, were saluted with many shouts of joy by the Mariners
and Pilgrims: those birds flying in a middle height, were always a bow-shoot
before the ship, and serving Linceus in stead of Star or Compass, showed him
what way he was to steer. Whilst they did so well their duty, and the wind
(as if who should do best) was extremely favorable, Alcidiana's Ambassadors
entertained themselves with the fained Araxes, and desirous to know his
adventures, cunningly besought him to relate, how the Prince, who so dearly
loved him, could resolve to sacrifice him to the Sun, or make him to consume
his days in Alcidiana's fetters? Because that judicious King (said Polexander)
could no way better testify his affection to me, then in dividing his fortune
with me, and bequeathing me to those Divinities, on whom he had bestowed
himself. But (replied the Ambassadors) he deprived himself of the contentment
of seeing you: He was (answered our Hero) sequestered from a greater bliss,
since he had not the happiness of being enlightened by the fair eyes of
Alcidiana. He should then have hazarded somewhat (said the Ambassadors) for so
great a felicity; He has adventured all (replied the King) to attain it; but
whilst the violent and sweet tyranny of Alcidiana's charms drew him one way,
the invincible power of a necessity, as irrevocable, as cruel, thrust him
another; and I may say without exaggeration, that never poor malefactor
endured more violent tortures, that has been torn in sunder with wild
horses; and he is dead of them, and now his unfortunate ghost which has found
no rest, no not in his grave, wanders the world. All the day long it hides it
self in the obscurity of deep caves, and gloomie forests, and in the night,
with long groans and uncessant laments, accuses Heaven, complains on Love,
accuses Fortune, and it self; but it complains most on the strange and
uncouth destiny of the Inaccessible Island, and sometimes wishing what it
always feared: O happy cause (said it) of my misfortunes! why art thou not
absolutely subjected to the necessity of thy condition? And wherefore does the
Demon which presides in tempests, change the order of things, and dare violate
what nature has forbidden? Be at last what it is resolved thou must be: become
altogether Inaccessible, and concealing thy self for ever from our eyes, cease
to feed us with longings, since thou depriv'st us of all hopes. I should be too
long (said our voluntary Slave) if I related to you all that the amorous
Phantasme invented, either to demonstrate Fortune's Injustice, or to publish
the Justice of his Love. Let it suffice, that you know, the Prince of whom I
speak desired only to live and die for Alcidiana; and dead as he is,
overcomes by the virtue of his affection, fate, time, death and oblivion.
Alcidiana's Ambassadors, who were in a manner as tied by the ears to Araxes
tongue, no sooner perceived themselves freed from so sweet a captivity, but
they found fault with that troublesome favor, and entreated Polexander not to
continue it to them: You (said they) have given us both admiration and delight,
in speaking to us of the King your Master; finish (if you please) what you have
begun, and to perfect our contentment (if you like it) speak of your self. I
see nothing (said the feigned Araxes) that you can imagine may please you in
the relation of my adventures, I was borne unfortunate, brought up among a many
miseries. I have lived sometimes in exile, sometimes in prison, always in
affliction; this in few words is the whole history of my life. If the
remembrance of so many miseries (replied the Ambassadors) is not more
insupportable to you then the sufferings themselves, make us a just narration
of so mysterious an abridgement, and condemn not a curiosity which only
proceeds from the esteem which our charmed minds as well as our senses enforce
us, (but mildly) to have of a personage which is scarce known to n^. I will
obey you (said Polexander) and presently addressing himself, related to them,
(without making himself known) the most of the adventures we have recited; by
that discourse, which seemed short to the Ambassadors, though it lasted almost
five hours, he satisfied them, and were it permitted me to debunch the
modesty of Prose, and carry it to the liberty of Poe^sie, I would say, that
the souls of the Ambassadors lay a long time drowned in that delicious
bev'rage, wherein Polexander's Eloquence had thrown them. All this while,
Alcidiana's ship, steering the course which her winged guides directed, got
far from the Island of the Sun, and by a very fresh gale, sensibly had
trial of that Deitie's assistance to whom it was consecrated. Diceus, being
extraordinary curious, and a great enemy to all Superstition, could not
endure that they should call the birds which guided the ship, Angels sent from
Heaven, and particular favorites of the God of Light; he talked, sometimes with
the Priests, sometimes with the Mariners, otherwhile with Linceus, to be
cleared of his doubts, and to overthrow the miracle which was presupposed in
the flight of the two birds: his inquisit i^enesse had all the success he
could expect by it; the first evening he perceived the cunning; for he marked
how the birds obeying to Linceus voice, suddenly stopped their flight, and
incontinently after, soaring very high, they made an impetuous stoop on the
ship. He imagined by their return, that the art of man, and not the power of a
God, had made them capable of a subjection which went for a miracle; and had
some of the generousnesse of those famous birds which forget their nature and
liberty for the pleasure of men; or from the docilitie of those which are the
ordinary posts from Alexandria or Cairo, and from Aleppo to Tripoly in Syria.
Being confirmed in this opinion, by the going off and returning of those birds,
he admired the cunning and wit of the Inhabitants of the Inaccessible Island,
and no more doubted of what he had so often heard spoken, that Commonwealth's
being composed of a small number of able, and an infinite multitude of
impertinent men; the wiser sort as less powerful, had been constrained to
have recourse to miracles, and to employ strengths more redoubtable then their
own, to keep in obedience, such as being naturally the stronger, were in all
likelihood to become their masters. These meditations took up for four days
Dicens thoughts; the fifth at sunset, he came to the King his master, and told
him; that he heard from Linceus, they were the next day to discover the
Inaccessible Island, and if the wind did not fail then at even, they should
land about two or three hours within night. Our Hero, receiving this news
with as much fear as hope, Courage (said he to his servant) we are now on the
point of deciding the great difference that is betwixt us and Fortune; we can
no more recoile, but must either now have the victory yielded us, or she
absolutely take it to her self. He began not this speech to make an end of it
straight, but as he was about to continue it, he that stood as sentinel in the
top of the mast, put all the ship in confusion by his fearful outcries; he
called to the Mariners to take care of the ship, and to eschew two great fires,
which being in their course, seemed to bear up right upon them. At this news
every one awoke, and Polexander amongst the rest coming out of his cabin, went
up on the poup, and was one of the first which descried that wonderful
blazing; presently, he thought it could not proceed from any other cause, then
the setting some ships on fire, and believed it so much the more certainly,
because a little while after, he saw the fire divide it self in two, and
as soon join again: His generous soul f^ll of compassion, made him think on
the safety of those wretches which were like to be burnt in the midst of the
waters; and to effectuate that charitable thought, he besought Alcidiana's
Ambassadors not to be pitilesse and cruel spectators in an occasion, where
they might make known their goodness and courage. Linceus was called to give
his opinion, he would gladly have afforded that which he ought to those of his
own condition, but knowing whereto his charge obliged him; Humane consideration
(said he) demands one thing, and Alcidiana's service requires another. If I
were Master of this ship, I would hazard her, rather then see poor miserable
wretches perish before me, whose cries even coming to our ears, seem to
implore our assistance: but I have command to bring back again this ship into
the Port of Eliza, and have none to go succor these which are in this
disaster. It Is true (said Polexander, approving what Linceus had said) it is not
fit to hazard so many persons of quality as are in this vessel, to satisfy a
zeal which as just as it is, yet may (possibly) not be reasonable; let us do
better, some eight or ten of us may get into the shallop, and rowing near the
burning ships, may at least testify, that we are not insensible of other men's
calamities. This proposition was presently approved of, and almost as soon put
in execution; Polexander was not satisfied with the good counsel he gave, but
he would have his share in the danger which accompanied it; and though
Alcidiana's Ambassadors did their utmost to divert him, they could get nothing,
but the satisfaction of following him: they therefore put themselves all into
one barque, and commanding their sailers to get the wind, they drew near the
burning vessels, and saw two, which like furnaces half quenched, threw out no
fire but what was wrapped up in a thick smoke. On all sides they might hear
fearful groans and clamours, and when Polexander had commanded the Mariners
to betake them to their oars, he thought he heard others, which struck the
sea very near him; he made them row toward the noise, and presently descried
a little shallops in which there were only two women; the one laid all along,
seemed rather dead then alive, and the other strove with oars to get off from
the burning vessels: but through too much fear, and too little experience, she
did clean contrary to her intention, and when Polexander staid her shallop,
she was falling again into those flames from which she had escaped. When she
saw her boat stopped, she cried out, taking our Hero for another; at first he
spoke not to her, to the end he might know by what she would say, to whom he
was to address himself: instantly he heard the woman make use of a language
particular to the Kingdom of Thombut and Galatia, and the understanding it,
gave some (I know not what) emotion which amazed him. But he was far more,
when she, who lay as dead, opened her mouth, and after many long and frequent
sighs, in these terms made known her lamentable fortune: Thou have, O too
amiable, and cruel stranger, plucked me out of the executioners hands! Thou
have led me from slaverie to a throne; and when I had lost all hope of
Government, placed more then one Crown on my head: but to what end were all
these obligations and benefits, except to make me more miserable, in denying
the chiefest, which was thy company and affection; that height of greatness
whereto thou had raised me, only made me more capable of a greater
downfall; if thy intention was so, thou should rest satisfied, since my
obedience has been made apparent to thee by mine own ruin, and precipitating
my self into such downe-falls as thou had dug for me, have witnessed to
the world, that when there was question of giving thee contentment, there was
nothing too hard for me; for this, the unfortunate Philesia is pleased to die,
and the more contented, since she consecrates to thee, with her life, that
first purity, which neither the Prince of Galatia's solicitations, nor the
violence of pirates, have been of force to deprive her of. Those last words
struck Polexander almost to the heart, for he felt in himself that he was the
cause of those just lamentations. He called to mind the love which the
Princess of Thombut had made known to him, the same day he gave her in
marriage to the Prince of Galatia; and conjecturing from th^e, all that her
folly could make her undertake, he placed the blinded passion of that Que^
among the number of those misfortunes which had persecuted him: nevert^elesse*
he was desirous to attempt the means of succouring that unfortunate Lady, and
without discovering himself, by his persuasions bring her again into that
right way from whence love had maliciously turned her. But death prevented his
good offices, and either out of envy or pity, permitted not the unhappie (...)
to see that amiable countenance which had wrought her so much (...), and from
whence she expected so many consolations. Polexander finding her dead, could
not overcome his good nature, but was enforced to bestow some tears on that
Princess, who without doubt had been miraculously driven into those unknown
seas, to the end, that her death which was inevitable, should not be absolutely
unprofitable ^to her. Our Hero commanded two of his mariners to enter the
shallop of that too-constant loving Lady, and gave them order to bring it to
their ship, that he might render to her corpse its due honors, and preserve the
companion of her misfortunes. No sooner had he given this direction, but he was
blown by a gust of wind very near to the greater burning ship, and
perceiving (by the flashing of flames, which by times flew o^t) a man on the
top of the stern: surely he was got thither to free himself from the fire,
but whether he were wearied by his labor, or saw himself set on by that
unmercifull enemy, he cried out in vain, O fairest Alcidiana! I have done my
utmost to preserve a life that was consecrated unto thee; my death is at hand,
and I must now perish in one or other of the most unmercifull Elements; but it
shall (...) be upbraided me, that I have cowardly expected the stroke of death,
I will prev^ my Fate, and thus far satisfy my self, that though I have long
dis^ed with my last hour, yet it has not been for fear of death. With that,
he threw ^selfe into the sea, and so happily, that Polexander had the means to
take hold of him as soon as he arose above water. And the name of Alcidiana,
which he uttered before he cast himself overboard, made the Prince take him
so much into his consideration, that he neglected no means for his recoverie;
but being not in fit place to perform it, he commanded to haste to his ship,
and as soon as he was aboard, entreated the Ambassadors to look well on the
man, and see whether they could know him: they were not long about it, for they
no sooner called for a light, but they knew him to be the famous slave of
Alcidiana, named Pallantus, who formerly met with Polexander in the Pirates
Island, and published to him his sentence of death. Presently our Hero fell on
him, though he was without motion and knowledge, and embracing him, O dear
companion of my chains (said he softly) it is not without a mystery, that
Heaven who had separated us without hope of ever reseeing one another, has
brought us together by so wonderful an adventure. After that, he commanded him
to be carried into a chamber near to his own, there he was undressed, and
Dice^s perceiving his shirt bloody, thought he was wounded; he therefore
searched him, and found he had three great wounds, two in his body, and the
other in hi^ right arm. Polexander at the sight of them showed a great deal
of sorrow; and the Ambassadors which knew well how dear Pallantus was to their
Queen, were as much moved with his hurts, and we^ing well they should do that
Princess good service in saving that slave, equally strove to preserve him.
After Diceus had first dressed his wounds, he entreated every one to depart,
that Pallantus might have the more air, and so be the more easily gotten (...)
of his sounding* Polexander had not been withdrawn past a quarter of an hour,
but he returned to learn how it fared with the wounded man. Diceus told him he
was recovered from his fainting; but having forgotten most things that had
betided him, ^e continually called for the Slaves, and asked where they had
laid him, and by what chance he had escaped the burning vessel. Polexander
hearing it, and besides fearing lest Pallantus might know him, not only forbore
to see him, but expressly forbad Diceus to speak in his hearing any thing which
might raise the least suspicion; and that good servant intimating he had no
need of that warning, returned to his patient. Polexander too, leaving Dice^
went back to the Ambassadors, assuring them of Pallantus amendment, and seeing
day break, brought them to the most eminent place of the Ship, to be the first
that should descry the Inaccessible Island. They were no sooner on the poop but
Lynceus let fly his winged Guides. Their direction was that day to no purpose,
for a furious tempest mixed with thunder and horrible darkness, having as it
were mixed the Sea and Heaven together, and taken from Lynceus not only the
fight of the birds, but the means of governing his ship, he was hurried away
by the impetuousnesse of the storm. Polexander accused not the winds for that
unexpected tempest, but his own fate; He confes'd himself to be the Author of
that disorder, and had he not been detained by some consideration, he would
(as some one before) have told the Mariners, that the only way to regain a
calm was to sacrifice him to the indignation of the billows. Above eight
hours had this storm lasted, and the horizon no way clear but by the flashes
of lightning, when some cried out they were all lost, for the wind drove them
on inevitable rocks. The fear was greater then the danger, for good fortune
drove the distressed vessel into the mouth of a river which ran out among the
rocks. But she was no sooner out of one tempest then she was set on by another.
Two great Ships of war which lay in the River, some two or three miles above
the mouth, no sooner discovered ours but they weighed anchor, and having
observed the Sea Ceremonies, let them know by many Canon shot, they were not to
pass any further. Polexander noting the vessels, and knowing them by their
flags to be Spaniards, imagined, the storm had cast them on some Island that
belonged to the Crown of Castile. Losing then all hope of arriving at that of
Alcidiana; Let Us then dye at last (said he to himself) but not so neither
without avenging us on fortune by executing it on a Nation that is so dear
unto her. With that, he besought t^ ^mbassadors to command the Soldiers to
fear nothing, and himself prescribing t^ Gunners what the were to do, placed
himself on the stern with a resolution that encouraged the ^ost timorous. His
ship according to the order Lynceus had received, pas'd betwix^ ^e two
Spaniards, and in the instant, the Canoneers performing their charge threw
death and terror among their Enemies. Polexander who was resolved to dye in
this occasion, grapled presently with the greatest ship, and spite of sword
and fire, made those tyrants of the sea to feel that valor they had already so
often tried. It Is hard for my pen to express the impetuousnesse with which the
assailants and assailed hurried themselves to their common ruin. Here falls a
Spaniard shot through and through with a musker. There lays drowned in his
own blood an Islander, his head cleft by a Spanyard. The iron neither flew nor
fell in vain. One stood Victor a moment, which was straight vanquished for
ever, and another escaped a thousand bullets to fall (but honorably for him)
under the victorious sword of Polexander. At last that new Alcides forcing
through all obstacles, leapt into the Spanish ship, with some twenty or
thirty of Alcidiana's valiantest subjects, and slew or made to fly all that
were in case to resist them. The Spaniards preferring a glorious end before a
shameful slavery were sacrificed to the honor of Alcidiana; and others that
could not detest life, how infamous and unfortunate soever, had recours to the
mercy of the Victor, and abandoned their honor with their arms. Polexander
made them be taken by such as had followed him, and promising to treat them as
prisoners of war, made himself Master of their ship. In her he left to
command the youngest of the Ambassadors; and hastened to the succor of the
Sacred Vessel which was full of Spaniards and exposed to their fury. If what
he had already done might pass for miraculous, that which he did to avenge
Alcidiana, who was wronged in her ship, might be esteemed as true miracles. To
throw himself into that vessel, fight with those that had won it, and make
them lose it again with their lives, were things betwixt which there was
almost no distance. The regaining the ship did not satisfy him, he would
perfect his victory, and laid not down his arms till he had ended all was to
be done. So noble and important an action putting again Alcidiana's
Ambassadors into their former admiration, they took our Hero for somewhat
more then a man, and whisperingly asked each other, if he were nor the very
Power whose slave he named himself. In the mean time, the violence of the
vvindes, as well as of their arms ceasing, Polexander and his followers had
found themselves in an admirable calm, had they not been ignorant of the coast
whereon the tempest had hurled them. In particular, our Hero, that could
promise to himself nothing but disastrous, upbraided fortune for his victory,
and accused her of a deadly malice for saving him from the mortal blows of
his enemies: but whilst he was on his unjust revilings, Linceus came and told
him, that since he came to himself, and had re-call'd to his memory what the
storm and fearful lightning had as it were blotted thence; he descried that
the tempest had happily advanced the end of their voyage. Be pleased to know,
said he, that the River werein we are, is one of the greatest in all the
Inaccessible Island; it is called Arzilea, and gives name to a very fair city
some thirty miles hence. Imagine, if you can, what Polexander's joy, or rather
ecstasy was, at the recital of this good fortune; he was a while as out of
himself, and when he had recollected his spirits, dissipated by his excessive
rapture, he would have cast himself on his knees to ask pardon of Heaven for
his murmuring, and yield thanks for the favors he had received thence: but
that humane wisdom which tyrannizeth over our thoughts, and will not so much
as permit all that is just, staid our Hero's zeal; he was therefore compelled
to let his heart speak for his mouth, and by private thankesgivings, and
unheard vows, to satisfy for that which was passed, and engage himself for
what was to come. Alcidiana's Ambassadors came presently in to rejoice with
him, not only for their arrival in the Inaccessible Island, but that they
were got thither by the wonders of his valor. Polexander answered them with
his usual civilitie, and entreating them not to give the honor of an action
to him, wherein they had a greater share then he, told them, 'twere fit to
learn from some one of their prisoners, what design they had on the
territories of Alcidiana, or at least by what accident they got thither.
Presently he sent for the Captain of the greater ship, and when he came,
entreated him to suppress the sorrow which appeared in his countenance, and
not expect from his vanquishers any treatment unworthy of him. The Spaniard
putting on again that gravity which nature has bestowed on all the Nation; My
defeat (said to Polexander) nor my captivity shall never be able to make fail
in what I owe my self; I grieve not for my self; the thought of my Kings
service, and the hindrances which the enemy of our Belief daily raises to
retard the holy intention of our arms, are the powerful and only cause of my
sorrow: the dishonor thrown on us by your valor, is (to me) a certain
presage of our enterprises ill success; and though you are mine enemy, I am
forced to confess that if the Queen of this Island whom we have besieged in
her capital city, have many defenders like you, she may a long time yet keep
her Crown from paying that tribute which Spain may rightfully exact from all
the Kings of the earth. What say you, replied Polexander, interrupting the
Spaniard? Have you then an Army in this Island? Is the Queen besieged, and
have you dared to think to make her one of your tributaries? What I have said
is true, answered the Spaniard. The Prince of Medina Sidonia, putting out of
the ports of Spain with a powerful Armado to regaine the Canaries, in lieu of
getting thither, was by a tempest thrown (a month since) on the coasts of this
Island; at first, he thought it desert and not inhabited, because it was
unknown to our mariners; but since, perceiving the fertility, richness, and
beauty of it, and understanding by some prisoners we took how well it was
peopled, he neglected the conquest of the Canaries, and thought he should gain
his King a new world if he could conquer this Island. Casting therefore aside
all other designs, he thrust his Fleet into a great river which invirons the
capital city, and laying waste diverse neighboring villages to give the more
terror to others, and be an advertisment to them not to be obstinate in a
defense that would prove so dismal and deadly: these happy beginnings were so
seconded, as they seemed to assure us of a most fortunate success; for a few
days before our arrival, a Prince of this Island (called Tantalus) had took
arms against the Queen, and to avenge himself (as he told us) of the contempt
he received in his wooing her, and the instant supplications of all her
Subjects, was resolved to get that by force which he could not obtain either
by the greatness of his birth, or his many services. The Prince of Sidonia
after diverse conferences with him, made a League betwixt them, by which they
equally engaged themselves for the conquest of this Island, under conditions
very pleasing to Tautalus, and not disadvantageo^s to our Kings. They shall be
(replied Polexander) as little pleasing to the one as advantageous to the
other: it is easy to make those audacious deliberations, but they are not with
that facility executed. By this answer the Prince confirming the opinion the
Spaniard had of him, sent him away with the other prisoners, and presently
calling together all that were in the holy ship, as well Priests and Officers,
as Soldiers, he thus bespoake them: If you had time to deliberate, it would be
most fitting that you should weigh with all the best of your wisdom, such
things as my zeal would make you undertake; but in the extremity whereto
matters are reduced, to hearken to that circumspect and timorous providence,
which will leave nothing to fortune, were to betray your Queen and country.
You must suffer your selves to be lead by the motions of my rashness; you must
dare more then wise men should; and at least, have the honor of not surviving
your Princess and liberty: as for my self, unfortunate slave that I am, bred
in the depth of Africa, I do here vow to die with my sword in my hand for the
service of Alcidiana: and when by a prodigy (which is not to be imagined) it
shall happen, that a just cause shall be abandoned, and you compelled to be
false to your Sovereign and your selves; I alone will engage my self to
oppose the Spanish usurpation. After Polexander had ended, the eldest of the
Priests, casting up his eyes, Thanked be Heaven, said he, since I see approach
the accomplishment of such things as it deigned to reveal unto us. That Priest
by such exclamations troubled all his auditors, but presently addressing his
discourse unto them; What my friends! (said he) it seems you have let slip
from your memory the Prophecy, which for this eighteen or twenty years has
been the terror of all this Kingdom: if you can call to mind the threatenings
it contained, you cannot doubt of its truth, since you this day see the
rebellion of our brethren, becoming a slave to the ambition of strangers,
violates all the laws of duty and discretion, lays waste the whole country
with fire and sword, and for the height of all impiety, shakes our very Altars
in going about to overthrow the throne of our Sovereign. These strange
revolutions amaze you, and truly not without cause; but quiet your selves, and
be settled; hope from the propitious care of heaven, those favors which the
offenses of your lives permit you not to ask: if the thunder roar, it is
rather to threaten then to beat you to dust; nay, the storm was no sooner
formed, but the calm appeared, and the wound no sooner given, but you have
wherewithal to close it. In a word, if your Isle be abandoned to the mercy of
strangers by the treason of your fellow Subjects, see here this fatal Slave
come from the depth of Africa, (with that he showed them Polexander) for whose
valor Heaven has reserved the ruin of your enemies, and the re-establishment
of your former fortunes. The reverend and discreet Priest thus ended his speech
and by the praises he had given Polexander, put him into as much disorder, as
if he had been convicted of having intelligence with the Spaniards, or had
attempted against the honor of Alcidiana. In the mean time, the Queens
Ambassadors and her other subjects who were alike filled with the threatenings
and promises of the Prophecy we spoke on, fell all at Polexander's feet, and
embracing his knees, besought him by the powerful name of that Deity which
engaged him to their defense, and by the interests of honor, to take in hand
the exterminating sword of Tyrants, and to hasten to the succor of their
distressed and even perishing Country. You cannot doubt of my willingness
(replied our Hero) since first I am dedicated to the safety of this kingdom;
but if you wish our arms should be prosperous, leave off the irritating that
supernatural assistance (from whence you are to expect so much happiness) by
your irrational imaginations. I am indeed a slave, come out of the inmost of
Africa, yet do not imagine me to be the man is promised you by such solemn
Prophesies. Polexander could go no further; all that heard him, cried aloud
that if they durst call in question so clear a verity, they should make
themselves unworthy the felicity it proposed for the Salary of their belief.
What hinders us then, cried the Ambassadors? and since we all equally see our
safety, what deterres us, that we do not all hand in hand run to embrace it?
Polexander, unwilling to contest any longer, told those that urged him, he
would absolutely put off that power which they desired to confer again on
himself, and confining him to his condition of a slave, he was ready to obey
whatsoever should be commanded. Hereupon, the Priests and Ambassadors made
known what was fit to be done, to hearten the people to their own defense, to
keep back such as were not yet in rebellion, and to withdraw those who either
through ambition or ignorance were engaged in it. To effect it, 'twas thought
fit to send first into the city of Arzilea, and from thence through all the
Provinces, to advertise the people, that the time of the Prophesie's
accomplishment was come, and to perfect it, the slave, which it foretold, was
arrived in the Island, and had begun the important business for the common
good, by the defeat of part of the strangers. These who were chosen for that
Commission, presently departed, with command to be heard from, as soon as they
had had audience of the Arzileans: Whilst they were in their voyage, the rest
prepared all things fitting in the three ships, that our pretended slave might
enter into Arzilea in such a pomp, as might be able to astonish the vulgar, and
by consequence of power, to persuade them to what was needful they should
believe. The rest of the day and part of the night, was employed in those
preparations; and it was almost done, when one of them that had been sent to
Arzilea, returned, and made known, with how much longing the Arzileans desired
to be cleared of their doubts and suspicions. As Soon therefore as the flood
entering the river had made it navigable for great vessels, Polexander and his
company set sail: the fourth part of the mariners belonging to Alcidiana's
ship, which had been put into the two Spaniards, having taken from them the
little remainder of their ancient braverie, made them attend the victor.
Alcidiana's stately vessel, besides her purple sails, her flagge of azure and
gold, and an infinite number of less and longer streamers, which on all sides
waved with the wind, were enriched with trophies so much the more magnificent,
since the Spaniard themselves contributed to it. They had laid a great many
corslets, pikes, muskets, halberds, and other arms on the ships prow: many
ensigns co^ch'd by the arms skim'd along the water, and four Spaniards, their
hands bound behind their backs, and their legs fettered, made appear by
their several countenances, that one same disaster produces as many different
thoughts and sensibilities, as the minds are of such who are touched by it.
As Soon as the three ships were within kenne of Arzilea, the artillery of the
sacred vessel made the less curious to run out of their houses, and fill all
the key of the port: others came hurrying out of the city gates, and stood
ranked on both sides of the river; the two prizes, bearing but half their
sails, did not ill imitate (at least in the ridiculous opinion of the
multitude) the dejected countenance of slaves, which sorrowfully follow the
triumphant chariot of the conqueror. For mine own part, I will say, without
fear of being accused for too daring an amplifier, that the ship which bore
Polexander was touched with some sense of honor, and that her first pride
(being augmented by the Princes incomparable merit, with whom she seemed to
triumph) did no less fill her sails then the wind which drove her. This
glorious and unexpected spectacle, carrying (in an instant) the Arzileans from
one extremity to another, quite blotted out of their memories all that they
had promised to Tantalus, and called them back to her obedience, whom the day
before they had used as an enemy. Publicly they accursed Tantalus revolt,
asked vengeance for the Spaniards attempt, and thinking their revilings and
imprecations were powerful enough to drive them out of the Island, never gave
over vomiting enough against them when they were in sight. As Soon as
Polexander came into the Port, he landed with all his company; and the Priests
inviting him to give thanks for his happy success, they marched through the
multitude to the chief* Temple in the city: there the Hymns of thankesgiving
were sung, and many prayers made for Alcidiana's prosperity. All the people
ratified it by their acclamations and appla^dings, and Polexander perceiving,
without going further, he might compose out of the people very good troops for
Alcidiana's succor, spoke to them with the consent, and according to the
intent of the Priests and Ambassadors. At the very first, he promised them on
the behalf of Heaven which had sent him, the strangers ruin; and the
perpetuity of that happy estate wherein they had lived so many ages. These
assurances being seconded by many others, made even those men to take arms that
were no more (through age) able to bear them. In the mean time, at the news
of our Hero's arrival, the Provinces changed countenance; the rebellious
party visibly lost their former courage, and the disinteressed won by the
example of such as either affected the kingdom or liberty, came in great
troops to augment Polexander's Army. If slownesse be necessary to the
deliberatio^s of war, promptitude is far more requirable in the executions:
our Hero who knew too well his trade, to be ignorant of the Principles, was
desirous to make profitable use of his Soldiers eagerness; leaving therefore
Pallantus within Arzilea, for his sooner recoverie, and to render the Princess
Philesia her funeral dues, he put himself into the field. Five days he
marched, and met no opposition; the sixth, he saw himself compelled to force
a passage, where the rebels lay advantageously entrenched: the business was of
passing a river not fordable, and to force the intrenchments that flanck'd it;
to that end, he assembled all the chief Commanders in the army, and advising
with them, (not to deliberate whether the enterprise was to be undertaken, but
in what manner they should fall on) he won the least adventurous to follow a
resolution, which indeed had in it somewhat (though I cannot name it) of too
much rashness. The cavalry served for a bridge to the footmen, to pass the
river, and the terror which Polexander threw into the rebels Army by the
death of their Chiestaine, opened a large breach into their intrenchments. They
were above ten thousand, but there fell not of them above five hundred, for at
the sight of Polexander's troops, their hearts failing them, they fled, and
saving themselves without arms or baggage, got away from the just indignation
of their compatriots. Though this victory was not very bloody, yet was it of
great consequence; for as much as the runawayes returning into their own
Provinces, spread abroad with the newness of their defeat, the terror which
had can^'d it: Every one then began to disavow the part he had followed; the
name of Tantalus was execrable; they proclaimed all those enemies to the
Princess and the State, which raised any forces without Alcidiana's
Commission; and for accomplishment of their levitie, all of them styled this
pretended slave (which was scarce known to them) their Defender and visible
Deity. In the mean time, Polexander quelling the Queens enemies, came into
the territory of Eliza: The Spaniards who had news of his victories, left him
the Country free, and thinking they could not be beaten out of such places as
they had fortified, resolved to continue the siege of Eliza, to gain a part at
least, if they could not vanquish all, and enrich their fleet with the riches
of so populous and brave a city. The situation of that place may be termed one
of the miracles of nature; the river (whence it has its name) falls from some
high mountains which lie on the West, and after it has run through many
fertile plains, and grown great by the access of diverse other currents, makes
a lake of about seven leagues long, and not less then a league broad, where it
is narrowest: some two hundred paces, above the mouth by which this river runs
out of the lake, and betakes him to his course again, there is a rock of a
most strange and odd figure, from what part soever you descry it: For besides
its not rising above twenty or thirty foot above water, it perfectly represents
the form of a man laid all along, with his legs open and shrunck up, his arms
alost, his neck unmeasurably long, and his head far greater. This form, does
not only make the city very pleasant and commodious, but so regularly
fortified, that all which the later ages have invented in the art of
fortification, was found there exactly put in practice by the sole industry of
nature. The hands and feet of that humane figure, were four great bastions
which defended one another, and in all likelihood made the place impregnable:
notwithstanding by the treachery of some of Tantalus confederates, the
Spaniards were gotten masters of some of the principal parts, and making use
of them against nature's intention, employed them for the ruin of their whole
body. I would say, there was no more but the last town where Alcidiana was
blocked up, which held good against the Spaniards, and was no more shaken by
their fair promises, then by their continual assaults. The very day
Polexander came before the town, he went to take notice of it in spite of the
enemies cannon, and having chosen a fit place to encamp himself, the night
following began to lodge his Army: the place was opposite to a tongue of land
which divided the two towns, and was shadowed by many little hills, which
besides the commodities of water and wood wherewithal they furnished the camp,
served for defenses to safeguard them from all surprises and assaults. After
Polexander had spent four or five days in skirmishes, if not unprofitable, at
least very little advantageous, and seen that he could not draw the Spaniard to
a land battle, perceived he lost time, and that if he had not ships, he must
have the misery of beholding Alcidiana and her town lost before his eyes. To
avoid that disaster, he sent to demolish all the houses of a Bourg which had
felt the Spaniards fury, and of the timber which had escaped the fire, caused
some thirty ferry-boats to be made, and sixscore others which were able to take
in four rowers, and twelve soldiers a piece. Whilst a great many Carpenters
and Shipwrights were busied about the building these vessels, Polexander
hazarded some of his followers that were most skilled in swimming, to get into
the besieged city, and give notice to the Queen of Tantalus death, and of her
subjects resolution, to lay down their lives for her preservation. But the
barques which the Spaniards had laid in guard all round the city, drowning some
of them, and forcing the rest to swim back again, were the cause, that what
should have given hope and comfort to the Queen, increased her despair, and
fully overwhelmed her with melancholy. As Soon as the ferries and boats were
finished, Polexander advertised the principal Commanders in the Army of an
enterprise he had on the Fort, which the Spaniards had built in the midst of
that tongue of earth which we called the neck of our figure: after he had made
known to them the importance of that design, and the reasons he had to
undertake it, I know (said he) it is a great deal of hazard, but before we came
out of Arzilea, I intimated fully to you, that if we would preserve this State,
we were to take such ways by which others have usually bin ruined; I mean, in
rejecting the counsel of wisdom, and abandoning our selves to all manner of
rashness. One of the most eminent and considerable in the Assembly replied, When
my companions and my self resolved either to loose our lives with you or to
save our Country and Sovereign, we despoiled our selves of our selves, and
marching on the faith of prophecy, believed, that he whom heaven had expressly
sent for our good, could not advise any thing amiss. We are still of the same
opinion, and though the proposition you make us, seems out of all likelihood,
yet only because you counsel it, we believe there is nothing more facile.
Polexander rejoicing that his soldiers errors were so advantageous to him,
would confirm them in it, to the end he might meet with no opposition in all
he should command them to ^dertake. He therefore assured them from their Deity,
that the Spaniards should be beaten, and their Fort won in spite of all
their resistance. After this counsel he presently chose out such as he meant
to make use of in this exploit; and giving order for the manner and time of the
assault, planted eight Culverins in a place whence they might extremely
incommodate the enemies ships. Whilst his Ordinance played, and made them
change place and design, the night came on; and with it so violent a wind and
mighty a rain, that they both seemed to be of confederacy with our Hero, for
the depriving the Spanyard of all means of preventing their misfortune. All
the time the ill weather gave him the commodity of sure laboring, he launched
all his ferryes and boats into the Lake. The first, he armed with forty small
field Pieces, and filled the others with men armed at proof, who had all made a
vow even to devour the Fort but they would carry it. Polexander, assured the
success of their enterprise, promised them the visible assistance of the God
of War, and putting himself in the front of all; Companions (said he) do not
think it is to excite your valor by mine example; or to dispute with you the
honor of this action, that I fall first on: I know your courage needs not to
be solicited, and my pride would deserve punishment, if it won me to con^est
for a thing which cannot be granted but to those wonders which with full
resolution are to be performed by you, Go on then, my companions, go on,
whither ^lse Laws both divine and humane call you. Finish the resolution of
heaven. Make it appear, that the power which you adore promises nothing
untrue, and fighting on his word, you run certainty to the victory.
Alcidiana's four Ambassadors entered all into Polexanders boat, and seeking no
other glory then to have that Prince witness of their actions, told him with
a great deal of jollity, that the occasion presented it self in which they
should have the honor to be applauded of him dead or alive. The feigned Araxes
^mbraced them one after another, and inhancing himself on their words: Yes
(said he) I will commend you, and if the Queen ever triumph over these Monster:
that have outrag'd her, she shall be forced her self to confess that you have
been their exterminators. The most part of the night being spent in this
discourse, and in ranking the greater and lesser boats in the order they were
to floate; Polexander commanded them to put on under favor of the wind and
darkness. Both which, made the voyage so private, that but for the noise the
soldiers made at their landing, the Spaniards had been vanquished before they
had been prepared to defend themselves. But before they well knew whence the
noise came, they were set on. Polexander, all at once assailed all parts of the
Fort, and made so happy use of the bavins and ladders he had caused to be
brought, that the place was won, and all the Spaniards put to the edge of the
sword. Our Hero, there lost two or three hundred of his men, and was himself
shot in the leg, but so favorably, that it took not from him the liberty of
walking above ten or twelve days at most. At the beginning of the assault he
had planted eight field Pieces betwixt the Fort and the Town, and so levelled
all those that were in the greater boats, that they swept along the tongue of
the land, and made every one who showed himself on that passage to run the
hazard of his life. And when the Spaniards would have assisted their
companions, they were so ill dealt withal by the Canon, that they were forced
to stay within their walls, and to send their barques to beat off their
enemies barges. 'Twas in this Combat that Polexander made them believe he was
not (as other men) subject to the damage of wounds: For as lame as he was, he
fell in amongst the Spanish barks, burnt some ten or twelve of them, sunk
above fifty, and beat the rest before him under the bastions of the gotten
town. Whilst he was performing these admirable exploits, one of Alcidiana's
Ambassadors ravished that he had so good news to carry to his Princess, left
the fight, and went straight to the gates of the upper town: all the night
they had been there in a great alarm, and the Queen's guards, with the most of
the inhabitants, were still in arms, at the gates, on the walls, and market
place. Nor would the Clergy allege their privileges to be exempted from that
service, but on the contrary, were the first weapon'd, and by their example
drew to the common defense, such as were accustomed to free themselves from all
travel and danger of war. When the Queen's Ambassador came near that gate
(which they called the East) he was staid by the sentinels; as soon as he had
told his name, they straight went and made it known to Radiotez the chief
Priest, who, not able to believe this unexpected news, ran to the gate, and
causing the wicket to be opened, took in the Ambassador; and then had as much
ado to persuade himself 'twas the same man, though he knew him very well, and
asked him often if it were possible he was not deceived. If you take me for
Amyntas, replied the Ambassador, you are not mistaken: but if the sight of me
has astonished you, that which I have to relate will do it far more. Bring
me quickly to the Queen, and know now the while, that we have gotten the
Spaniards Fort, that neither the strangers nor rebels can endamage us more; and
that hence forward, you shall not be employed but in giving thanks to that
eternal Bounty, which has showed it self so punctual in sending us the
succor long since promised. The Chiefe-prelate strove by all means to get
Amyntas to speak more clearly, but perceiving he was resolved to speak no
further till he came to the Queen, he brought him to the palace, where he
found the Princess prepared for all manner of accidents; and resolved, rather
to die an honorable death, then to be exposed to the insolence of her enemies.
At the sight of Amyntas she startled again, and her longing furnishing her
with many demands at once, she would even have been glad that Amyntas could
have prevented her questions. When he had leave to speak, Madam (said he) I
bring your Majesty so great and so happy news, that I will not think you
have lost any thing of that good opinion you have heretofore had of my
fidelity, though you doubt of those truths I am to make known to you; yet I
beseech you to give credit to what I shall relate, and to believe your self so
dear to the Deity you have so religiously adored, as not to doubt of the
assistance it has miraculously sent you. That Slave (said he) which the
Prophesies promised ^s in the time of our calamities, is in your dominions, he
is at your gates, the vanquisher both of the rebels and strangers: disloyal
Tantalus has felt the power of his invincible arm, and as he was the first
that attempted against your authority, so has he been the prime man that was
sacrificed to your indignation. After this victorious Slave had slain him, he
cut his troops in pieces, and came to this town with above twenty thousand of
your subjects; this very night has he surprised the fort which the Spaniards
had built to cut off from you all hope of relieving. Whilst Amyntas spoke,
Alcidiana often changed color, and sometime felt her self as cold as ice, and
then again as hot as fire; her dis-rest at last, not permitting any longer
silence, Of what Slave talk you? said she, sharply to her Ambassador. Who is
that stranger? whence comes he? where found ye him? and how long have you been
the Interpreter of our Prophesies? Amyntas, believing he had wherewithal to
please the Queen; I will (said he) fully satisfy all your Majesty's questions,
and tell you before hand, that they have not well understood the mystery of
our predictions, who casting a dread on the hearts of our late King your father
and your self, for the Slave that was to come out of the deserts of Africa, to
whose valor you are to owe your estate, every private man his safety, and the
whole Island its entire deliverance. But that I may omit nothing can be
expected in what I am to say, I will begin (if your Majesty please) with our
arriving in the Island of the Sun. Alcidiana then bending to the back of her
chair, and leaning her head on her left hand, seemed to be very attentive,
when Amyntas began thus: After our landing in the Isle of the Sun, and the
accomplishing the Ceremonies of the sacrifice of Alliance, we propounded (as
the custom was) the celebration of the bloody sacrifice; but the
Chiefe-prelate, and the Prince of the Clergy, let us understand by two learned
and eloquent speeches, that in lieu of making our selves acceptable to the
invisible Sun by our humane immolations, we became the enemies of his glory,
and profaners of his purity. We gave credit to it without contesting against
their Doctrine, unanimously consented to that reformation, and obliged our
selves, not only to give you notice of it, but to win you to a speedy
abolishment of all bloody sacrifices. The day of our departure arriving, the
Chiefe-priest took us into his private chamber, and after he had many times
entreated us not to let slip a word he should say, thus bespoke us; I must (my
Lords) discharge my trust, and give satisfaction to the passionate desires of a
Prince which holds Alcidiana for a visible Divinity: I think there is none of
you all but knows him, as well by the magnificence of hi^ offerings,
wherewithal he has enriched the Temple of the Sun, as by the royal
presents which he has often sent to the Queen your Mistress: before he passed
from this condition to a better, and time had involved him in that obscurity
where he now lies buried, he sent (and 'twas the last time) his Ambassadors
hither; and after he had contented his zeal, desired likewise to give
satisfaction to his passion. To that end, he besought me by his letters and
Ambassadors, that presently on your arrival here, I should deliver into your
hands the last presents he had appointed for Alcidiana: I am the guardian of
his treasure, and to acquit my self of my promise made to that Prince, I
intend at this time to give it you in charge. That which is most to be admired
amongst his gifts, is our Prince Araxes, who as the wonder of his age, and the
glory of men, has been consecrated to heaven, and destined for Alcidiana. You
may tell me, that since for this great service to this Island he has been
infranchis'd, it would be a great deal of Injustice to your Queen, if she
should put him again amongst her slaves: but let not that thought hinder her;
Araxes so passionately loves the Prince who has deemed him worthy the service
of Alcidiana, that he preferres that Kings command before his liberty and
life: the Queen may treat him as she pleases with respect to his merit, and
either put him into her chains, or give him his liberty. When the
Chiefe-prelate had made us this declaration, he delivered into our hands the
slave Araxes: But what slave (Madam) think you he is? surely some Deity
hidden in the shape of a man, who has left heaven for the general good of the
world: the King of Gheneoa held him so, since the happy day wherein by his
valor he was plucked out of the lions paws; and as such a one, gave to him
the election of his Crown, or your fetters. But that great heart, prizing the
advantage of a Kingdom beneath the honor of your service, voluntarily cast by
the scepter of Gheneoa, and out of an excess of nobleness came to sacrifice
himself to the Sun, and to receive from the hands of his Priest the marks of
his slaverie. The first act he did at his arrival in the sacred Island, was his
defending the treasure, the Altars, and the Priests, from the rapine and
inhumanitie of a great many pirates. That miracle of valor seemed to us
incredible when it was related; but that which the victorious Araxes has done
since he embarked himself, has thoroughly cured us of our incredulity: But
for him (Madam) we and the sacred vessel had been lost: But for him, the
Spaniards had divided your estate with your rebellious subjects; and if I dare
say it, without him you had certainly been the prey of a barbarous Nation.
Shall I say again that he has saved your Island, that he has called back
respect and obedience into the hearts of your most ungrateful subjects; and
that the execrable Tantalus has through his valor received the reward of his
rebellion? Doubt it not, Madam, this is the slave which Heaven has chosen for
the re-establishment of your authority, and the happiness of your Empire. But
let not your Majesty wholly rely on what I have spoken, look over the
predictions of the ancient Hermit; advise with the venerable Rhadiotez; in the
mean time, I bring you for the height of all good news, that of taking the
Spaniards fort, and the hope of a victory which will justly give this Island
the title of most happy. After Amyntas had spoken, he expected from the Queen
some favorable answer; but she arising extremely vexed, Return (said she) and
adore that Slave whom you would give me for my deliverer; and tell him, that
Alcidiana is not reduced to the shameful necessity of borrowing another hand
then her own, to free her from her enemies. After this rough treating her
Ambassador she retired, and being in private with one of her Ladies and the
venerable Rhadiotez; What think you (said she) of Amyntas relation? The
Chiefe-prelate (though he knew well with what intention she made that question,
yet unwilling to witness his complaisancie in a business of so great a
weight, or to betray his country in soothing the passion of the Princess)
replied, If Amyntas (Madam) were the sole man of his opinion, or if the only
vanity which accompanies youth, had furnished him with the interpretation by
which it seems he has offended your Majesty, I should be the first to
condemn his boldness, and even find a great deal of indulgence in the manner
of your treating him: but since he is of the same opinion with all your
subjects, and speaks not of the slave (which is expected by all) but in the
terms of the Prophecy; we must even wilfully pluck out our eyes that we may
not see he speaks as he ought, and that the African Slave is the very same
that is promised you, as the fatal stay of your tottering Throne. I see well
(Madam) you look angerly at this verity, and you are jealous of it, because
it is not conformable to your mind: but let not your Majesty be too ingenious
to wrong your self; give care as well to your great judgment, as to the
height of your heart; suspend a while all kind of resolutions; and constituting
your self the sovereign arbitrator betwixt Fortune and your own person,
judge definitively, but with full knowledge of the cause, which of the two
shall go off victorious. You cannot be better instructed, then by that which
should decide the difference: command therefore, that the original of the
Prophecy may be produced, which has been always very carefully kept amongst
the most precious things in your treasury; weigh well all the words, interpret
them, and if you think it fitting, the most favorably for your satisfaction;
and if you find in it another explication then Amyntas his, then mine, then
what all your subjects give it; you shall then have cause to condemn us all,
and persevere in your first intention. Alcidiana hereat sighing, in lieu of
replying, made show of the violence of her disturbances; but having calmed them
a little, she commanded the Lady that was with her, to cause the little coffer
to be brought wherein the Prophecy was kept; and she that was in more pain
then her Mistress, went presently, and a good while after returned with that
fatal piece. Rhadiotez opened the box, and Alcidiana with some trouble took
out the plate of brass on which the prediction was engraven: she laid it on
the table and commanding Rhadiotez to stand on the one side, and her confident
on the other, with order of much attention, read what follows.

THE LAST TESTIMONY OF LOVE WHICH HELIOPHILUS BEARS TO HIS KINGS AND COUNTRY.
WHen this Kingdom shall be raised to the supreme point of all prosperity, by
a precipitated death, it shall be exposed to the rage of minds most ambitious.
The deaths of the first rebels shall no way terrify the second. Bloody
examples shall but stir up the treason; and that unfortunate age shall
produce such monsters, who to satiate their brutishness, will lay waste their
country with fire and sword, and shall be so base as to enter into confederary
with mere strangers. Me thinks I already see those Usurpers appear on our
coasts; they are within our ports; they have besieged thee miserable Eliza, and
keep thee captivated: stay thy fury, unmercifull Nation; thrust not thy boudy
weapon into the throat of the innocent. But behold, I see a Slave come out of
the bottom of Africa, who already having vanquished many nations, arrives here
to exterminate both the rebels and usurpers. Courage brave Prince, thy
Inheritrix shall be preserved at the instant of her ruin. But thou young
Princess, oppose not the felicities Heaven reserves for thee: force thy
deceiving opinions; in this occasion take thy self to be thine own enemy;
and since thy happiness cannot be perfected unless thou become the glorious
reward of the fatal Slave's travels: sacrifice thy aversions, thy desires, and
thine own will, to the safety of thy Country. It Is a business resolved in
heaven, thou must swallow this potion, which has no bitterness but whilst
thou refusest it; on then, and let not thy brave heart fail thee at need;
taste those sweets thy virtues have deserved. O new age of gold! O Island truly
fortunate! O Slave worthy the regal throne! O Princess happily deceived! O
glorious alliance! O illustrious posterity!

In all likelihood, Alcidiana at the reading of this Prophecy might have
received some contentment; but she renewed her sighings, and unable any longer
to refrain from tears, even let them fall down on the Prophecy in such an
excess, as if she had believed she could with the Characters have drowned all
the misfortunes they seemed to threaten her. Rhadiotez seeing her discontent,
spoke all he thought fitting to quiet her afflicted mind; but Alcidiana not
enduring his discourse, Retire father (said she) and assure your self, that I
have not so little profited in your school, but that I know well how we must
die when we can live no longer, but with dishonor. I was borne free, and you
propose to me something worse then death, when you propound I am not to live
but by making my self the slave of a Slave. Rhadiotez willing to give the
Princess time to advise with her self, and more seriously to meditate on the
Prophecy, returned to his palace; and Alcidiana seeing her self then at
liberty, began again her lamentations, and turning to her confident, Come
Amintha (said she) am I not now at last arrived at that utmost point of
misfortune, which long since, my visions, my disrests, and melancholy foretold
me? O cruel Fate! certainly thou too tyrrannically abusest that sovereign
power which is given thee from above on us poor mortals: What will thou shall
become of me? But do what thou list; my good or ill shall not depend on thee:
the command I have over my self is no less absolute then thine; I will keep
it in spite of all thy violence; and since death has deprived me of all that
could make me in love with life; it is in vain by the object of greatness and
felicities to bustle with my resolution and tempt my courage. Cast thine eyes
on me, dear and worthy subject of my sorrow, turn thine eyes on me, and
upbraid me of falsehood, if thou read'st in my soul any motion that counsels me
to forsake thee for another. The Princesse's confident seeing her tears and
sighs had taken away her power of speech; Polexander (said she to her) is
worthy of these testimonies of love you bestow on his memory; and, Madam, he
having loved you, what said I, loved? having adored you as he has done, I
doubt not, but amidst all the pleasures which inviron him, he resents your
displeasures, and seeing you afflicted, is even pensive and sad in the very
source of all happiness. Ah dear Amintha, cried the Queen, how do thy words
pierce me, and mournfully re-imprint in my memory, the remembrance of my folly
and ingratitude! She could not speak further, for word was brought her, the
multitude was round about the palace, and threatened to break the gates if they
were not let in. All conspires against us Amintha (said she to her confident,)
but let us resist to the last, and at least show that fair soul which looks
on us from heaven, that we abandon not his party though it be to the weakest.
With that she went out on a great Terrasse which ran along the first court of
her palace, and commanded the gates to be opened. Presently the people rushed
in headlong, but at sight of the Princess whom they never looked on without
respect and wonder, they rained in their fury and fell all on their knees.
Alcidiana, seeing them in such a reverence, commanded them to stand up and
declare the cause of the tumult: the multitude after their wonted manner,
speaking in confusion, began to cry out, that the Deliverer which had been
promised the State even from Heaven, was at the town gate, and they besought
the Queen's permission to go meet him, to see him, and petition him for an end
of their present calamities. Alcidiana, unable to endure the continuation of
their discourse; How, my subjects (said she all enraged) you do not think of
me then otherwise then as of an enemy, or at least as of one without power?
What, do you expect from a wretched stranger, what you hope not from my
vigilancie, from my forces, nor your own courage? who is the seducer that has
impoison'd your minds with a prediction as idle as it is intricate? You see at
hand the safety my care has acquired you, and yet you tread underfoot what is
sensible to run after Chimera's and mere leasings. Assure your selves, the date
of your misfortune is passed; the revolt is buried in the graves of the
authors, and the strangers are no more in case to annoy us: have a little
patience, and you shall soon see them shamefully quit our coasts, and carry
nothing of their crimes with them, but their grief for committing them. The
people replied, she promised no happiness but what was most certain; but that
she might not be unworthy of it, 'twas fitting the person should be honored
who had wrought it. That reply absolutely angring the Queen, she withdrew
without giving the people any contentment, and shutting her self up in her
closet with Amintha only; O ungrateful people (cried she) that have neither
thought of me nor my predecessors! Reeds, shaken with all winds, minds adoring
novelties, you are then weary of my Government, and without the knowledge of
what is beneficial or hurtful to you, desire a Slave for your King; and that
Alcidiana, who would not bestow her chains on Polexander, should offer her
Crown to Araxes! Here she was silent, and after a little musing, threw her
self (weeping) on her confident's neck; And my poor Amintha (said she) see I
pray thee with what eagerness my misfortune pursues me, and think what I
should resolve on to avoid the accomplishment of our dismal Prophecy: Do
thou imagine that Alcidiana has so base a spirit as to prefer before death,
a Slave who without doubt is come from among that barbarous nation which
wretchedly inhabits the inland deserts of Africa? No, no, let Fortune arm the
whole universe, to force me to that necessity; I will see my kingdom all of a
flame, if my blood cannot quench the fire, rather then undergo the reproach of
doing an act unworthy of Alcidiana. Amintha, desirous to intertaine the Queen
in this just aversion; There is nothing (said she) but your Majesty is bound
to suffer rather then the dangerous belief which is slid in among your
subjects. Weak minds (as your Majesty knows) are susceptible of all: we need
but propose things to them beyond their understanding, to fill them with
foolish admirations, and from those idle wondrings, carry them to beliefes more
ridiculous and extravagant. If once your subjects strongly conceive that their
fafetie depends on this Slave, and that you ought to be the sacrifice to be
offered for their good; your forbiddings, how severe soever, shall never pluck
that opinion out of them: I fear, lest at the upshot they come to violate the
respect they owe you, and to avoid the falling into such misfortunes as
threaten them, they cast your sacred person into the greatest that can betide
you: pluck out this error before it have taken too deep root, and suffer not
this African Inchanter to bewitch the minds of your people, and forbid on pain
of death, any man whatsoever to have the least communication with him. I would
willingly follow your advice (replied the Queen) but the love I bear to my
subjects forbids me: What shall I do miserable wretch that I am? the sorrow for
what is passed, the horror of the present, and the fear of what is to come,
present themselves to my thoughts all at once, like so many monsters resolutely
bent to be drunken with my blood. I confess Amintha, my Philosophy yields to
my fortune, and my constancy leaving me, I float incertainly in my self, and
know not what to resolve on: think on it for me (dear Amintha) and as a
charitable Physician employ your judgment and remedies for the comforting of a
Patient whose sickness is all in extremities. If your Majesty (replied
Amintha) gets not from your self the remedy that may give ease to your
malady, do not expect that any which may come from without you, can render
you your health. I am capable of all (replied Alcidiana sighing) excepting two
things, which I find alike impossible; the one of comforting me for the loss
I have suffered by mine own indiscretion, and the other of assuring my peace
in hazarding that of my subjects. As she had spoke thus, the Ladies which kept
the doors of her severed lodgings, came and told (...) that Rhadiotez demanded
audience, not only for Amyntas and his associates, but for Araxes deputies, to
give her Majesty an account of his actions, and to know her resolution for
that which remained unperfected. At this news Alcidiana was extremely
perplexed; her anger forbad the hearing of her own Ambassadors, whom she
thought had been won by Araxes, and those, whom the Slave had taken the
boldness to send to her; on the other side, the love of her people overcoming
all her resentments, represented to her, that to offend a person chosen for the
safety of the State, was to make a public declaration that she had sworn
the destruction of it. After she had been long without resolving what part she
was to take, her affection carried her at last on that of her hatred; and she
told her Ushers, that within two hours she would be in the Hall of public
audience. Presently, all the Officers had order to perform their several
charges, and the Ladies which made up her private Court, dressing themselves
all in haste, assembled in the chamber where they were wont to attend at the
like Ceremonies. Alcidiana, covered with a large veil, (as if she would let
them know, that during her subjects misery, she resolved to be in mourning)
came out of her chamber, and so went with all her Ladies into that Hall
(shining with gold and jewels) which we have already made admirable to our
Readers. As Soon as she was placed in her Throne, the Officers of her Guard,
went for the Ambassadors: Rhadiotez and the high Chamberlain, brought them to
the audience, and coming to the foot of the Throne, one of Aminta's associates
made an ample narration of all that which passed in their voyage to the Island
of the Sun, and offered her all the King of Gheneoa's presents. I err, for
the best was not there, since the victorious Araxes, kept back by his wound,
and the necessity of affairs, was still in the Fort: and indeed, the
Ambassador making known that present was missing, turned to those whom Araxes
had chosen for his own particular, and giving them the place, Your Majesty
(said he) may be pleased to understand from these what has been done since our
return. Alcidiana, giving them leave to speak, one amongst them particularly
recounted all that which Araxes had performed from the very day he had devoted
himself to the Queen's service; and ending his relation with the wound he
received at the taking of the Fort, presented her a Letter. Alcidiana was
surprised at it, and blushing for anger, sat awhile so extremely confused,
that 'twas well perceived, she deliberated with her self, whether she should
receive or refuse the Letter: at last, the good Genius who had resolved
Polexander's happiness, forced the Queen's will, and won her (spite of her
self) to extend her hand to receive that which she had looked upon with
horror. Yet had she no sooner touched the paper but she repented it, and to
discharge her self of a burden, which (as light as it was) seemed to her
insupportable, gave it to the chief of her Secretaries; Read (said she) this
aloud, that my subjects may know, the love only which I bear to them, makes
me forget what I owe to my self. The superscription of the Letter was thus:

The Slave ARAXES to his Sovereign Princess.
After he had read it, he opened the Letter, and read what follows:

THis is not the first time (Madam) that a Slave urged by an extreme zeal for
the glory of his Master; has dared more then was permitted him by the Laws of
servitude: I confess I am bold, but my boldness is justified by that
Sovereign Law, which from the hour of my birth imposed on me the necessity of
not living but for your service. It commands me now to persevere, and not to
laydowne arms till the name of your sacred Majesty be avenged for the wrongs
of a barbarous nation, and your kingdom freed from all its enemies. Those that
have been witnesses of my actions, will relate to your Majesty particularly
what has passed; I should fear to go beyond that which is permitted me, if I
took the boldness to propose what is to be done for the good of your service.
You may vouchsafe (if you please) to send me your commands, and let me know
what you have resolved touching the Spaniards; in the mean while, I submisly
beseech you to believe that the Slave Araxes would repute himself unworthy the
glorious chains he wears, if he had not courage enough to promise his
Sovereign Princess, that within few days he will compel the Spaniards
dishonourably to abandon such places where of their excessive pride had
promised them the conquest.

After the reading of this Letter, there grew a deep silence through all the
Hall; Alcidiana looked on Amintha, she again on the Queen: So sometimes did
Polexander write to me, said the Queen to her self: so (said Amintha
presently) would Polexander have written to the Queen had he been now alive.
At last, the Princess recollecting her spirits, and repulsed all other motions
but those of her indignation; I should be an enemy to my people (said she to
the Ambassadors) if I thanked him not that sent you, for all he has done for
this State; let him be assured, I will treat him as the King of Gheneoa's
heir, and not as a Slave; and for the continuance of his prosperous success
in arms, I will go add our Prayers and Sacrifices to those troops which I
have appointed shall join with him. Every one being somewhat satisfied with
this answer, the Ambassadors withdrew; and the Queen presently freeing her self
from all her attendants except Amintha, shut her self into her closet with
that Lady. She was neither so indiscreet, nor so much an enemy to her self,
to wish the feigned Araxes ill for his coming so fortunately to deliver her
from the fury of strangers: but the threatenings of the prediction filled her
with horror, and when she came to think, that she was intended for the reward
of the Slave's brave actions, her great heart advised her to nothing but
tragical resolutions. Though she extremely loved her people, yet could she not
consent that they should grow happy at the cost of all her peace and
contentment: I refuse not (said she) to purchase the ruin of their enemies
with the price of my blood; but from a Queen as I was born, to become the
companion of a Slave, it is a condition, that no subjects how irrational
soever, should exact from their Sovereign. Amintha, seeing her in this
perplexity, and being not much more merrier then she, rashly blamed Fortune,
for that which she should heartily have thanked her: Ah! (said she)
giddy-headed fancy, to whose will heaven seems to have remitted the guidance
of my fortunes; why take thou pleasure in blending the good with ill, to
beset roses with thorns, to ravish from us what we affect, and to work our
safety by the mediation of our enemies? Was not Polexander more worthy to
serve Alcidiana, and to preserve her country, then a Slave bred in the sandy
deserts of Africa? Who engaged thee to murder the one in an Island almost
unknown, and to pluck the other out of his miserable loneliness, to triumph
at once both over the pride of Spain, and Alcidiana's liberty? The Princess,
here imposing her silence, We complain (said she) too much on Fortune, since it
is in our own power to deliver us from her tyranny. Let Us make use of our
liberty whilst we have it, and not attend till it be taken away by a Slave or
a Spaniard: Let Us die, Madam, replied Amintha, but let us not die till we know
certainly 'twill not be permitted us to live any longer. What knows your
Majesty, but that this Slave may be endowed with more wisdom then so many
others whom Fortune has raised out of the mire, and carried even to the skies?
It Is possible, he will neither lose his judgment nor the remembrance of what
he has been, and unwilling to soil the fairness of his life with the impudent
desire of enjoying you, content himself with the title of your peoples
Deliverer. Alcidiana being a little revived at this, We shall (said she)
shortly see (Amintha) what heaven has resolved; in the mean while, (if it be
possible) let us take a little rest, and not altogether despair of our fortune.
Herewith she betook her to her bed, and Amintha withdrawing, left her a prey
to all her troublesome thoughts. She vexed her self as she was wont, as long
as her eyes were open; the unfortunate Image of Polexander which appeared so
often to her troubled imagination, presented it self at her bed's feet, showed
her his wounds, made known his love, and recounted all the accidents it had
surpassed, to make his fidelity triumph over time, fortune, and her
insensibilitie. With these thoughts she fell asleep, but she had scarce begun
her first slumber, when the same phantasme, showing it self under all shapes
that a dream could present her, sometimes appeared wounded, sometimes whole;
now miserable, then happy; now a Slave, then a King: and Alcidiana thought her
self a hundred times a prisoner, and as often delivered; as many times Araxes
wife, and as many, Polexander's. The night thus passing away she awoke, and
awaking, recommenc'd her ordinary exercises, to complain on Fortune, to lament
Polexander's death, and to bewail the miseries of her people. Amintha hearing
she was awake, came into her chamber, and placed her self at the beds-head to
speak more privately. The Princess who was yet affrighted with her dreams,
turned toward her her eyes yet swollen with watching and tears, and looking as
pale as if she had been ready to swound: Amintha (said she) I have spent a
night which I can neither call good nor bad; poor Polexander's ghost has
continually haunted me: but I cannot represent to thee the horror and
contentment which accompanied the apparition. I saw Polexander covered with
wounds, laden with chains, wandering among fearful solitudes; I heard him
calll me to his aid, and having nothing more in his mouth then the name of
Alcidiana, intimated, that only on my will depended either the continuance or
end of his miseries. In that extremity my love made me forget what I was; I
ran to that miserable man's aid, and thought I could assuredly have redeemed
him from his disasters, when with a great clap of thunder I saw the Slave
Araxes fall at my feet amongst a great deal of blood, and a number of dead
careases: saine would I have fled, but I could not possibly. The Slave in the
mean while lay at my feet, and having told me part of what I have seen in our
dismal prediction, made use of all that eloquence has both of cunning and
beauty, to make me confident of his respect and loyalty. He swore, that he
had not taken the boldness to serve me, but that it was a necessity imposed
on him by the decrees of heaven, and those of my beauty. You believe (Amintha)
this discourse did not greatly please me; I looked on the Slave with mine eyes
full of disdain, and straight turning away my head; Go Wretch, said I, and
know that Alcidiana is not capable of change. I wish it so, replied the Slave;
No sooner had he spoken the word, but Polexander appeared to me, as brave and
comely as the first time I saw him, and forcing his enemy to vanish, took me
by the hand, and as 'twere in spite of me, lead me to the great Temple in this
city. Is not this dream (altogether) very pleasing, and very terrible? and if
the one way it displeases, does it not on the other promise a great deal of
contentment? Yes truly (replied Amintha) and I hope that at last the Chaos and
intricacy of your fortunes disclosing themselves, and Heaven laying open what
it has concealed of that which is come; those things which we fear most, will
have a happy success. It may questioulesse be fortunate (replied the Queen)
but not as you believe: Death only shall produce that felicity, and by its
mediation I shall gain, what I could not obtain by any other means. If you
search into, and meditate deeply on my dream, you shall find, that Polexander
fair and lovely as he appeared to me, is that Polexander which is above in
heaven; and seeing me at the point to be sacrificed to this ambitious Slave,
plucked me out of his hands, and lead me to the Temple where my Ancestors are
interred. But O happy soul! which in the fullness of thy beatitude have a care
of the unfortunate Alcidiana; assure thy self, she will willingly go to the
place whither thou will conduct her; and though that youth, and the love of our
selves, seem to oppose the intent she has of dying; yet in spite of those
obstacles and resistances, she will let thee see, that thy consideration is
more powerful over her, then the most choicefull life can be shown her on
earth. After this speech, the Princess making show of the greatness of her
courage, seemed less dejected, and less troubled then at first: she wept no
more, her palenesse gave place to the cincture of the rose, which made her
admired of all that beheld her, and her constancy treading under-foot all her
disquiets, restored her (at least in show) to that state of contentment wherein
she had passed the two first years of her government. She presently arose, and
spending a part of the morning, either in dressing her self, or in reading the
intelligence she received from diverse parts, went afterward to the private
oratory of her palace, to offer her life and crown in sacrifice to the Deity
which had given her them both. A while after she went to her repast, and as she
arose thence, Amintha told her, that Pallantus (cured of his wounds) was
returned from Arzilea, and humbly petitioned, he might have the honor to give
her Majesty an account of his voyage: she granted it, and sent him word, she
would speak with him toward the evening in the Phoenix garden. After dinner
she went to council; Rhadiotez as Chiefe-prelate was president, and as such
propounding what was most important for the state of the present affairs, made
the coming of Araxes, and the taking of the Spaniards Fort to pass for a
miracle. But (said he) we must not neglect our good fortune, and by not knowing
how to make good use of our advantages, suffer our enemies to render them
unprofitable to us: whilst they are terrified, it is fitting to keep them so as
long as we can, and give them no leisure to recover from their astonishment.
It Is true, Araxes is wounded, and as if his wound were the death of all our
Soldiers, those in the fort, nay even these in this town, are stricken with
such a consternation and dismay, that we can hardly get them to their arms:
but the best in this misfortune, is, that Araxes is but very slightly wounded,
and this morning going to visit him, he had left his bed, if I had not
entreated him in the Queen's name, not to hinder his recoverie in neglecting
his wound. Besides the people murmr, because their Deliverer is not taken
into the town, but in contempt of the express will of Heaven, he is treated
as an enemy, or at least as an indifferent person, whom they already look on
as their Prince and Redeemer. Alcidiana, at that word interrupting Rhadiotez,
Had I not resolved (said she) to suppress all my resentments, and to be
avenged on my self for my subjects ingratitude; I would complain of their
murmurings, of the connivence of Magistrates, and the consent which all you
that are here seem to give to their extravagancies. What? will my subjects
have me go meet the African Slave, and descending from my Throne to place
him in it, despoile my self of mine own quality to put on his? It Is not if
there were question of their safety, that I would make difficulty of dividing
my Crown, since I will never make any of absolute bestowing my life: but
because I think my self not yet brought to that necessity; if the misfortune
of our affairs shall engage me to it, be assured I shall demean my self with
all the love that a good Prince ought to have for his subjects; and will make
appear even by my death, that there is nothing so dear to me as the welfare
of my subjects. This speech drawing tears from the eyes of all the auditors,
they stood a while silent; at last Rhadiotez began, and entreating the Queen
to live for the good of her people, and not intimate her love by such tragical
resolutions, lead her by degrees to the businesses of war. They settled
principally on those of the sea; many spoke of preparing ships, and to have a
fleet always ready: but Rhadiotez alleging that the Fundamental Laws of the
kingdom absolutely for bad navigation, and only permitted three sailing ships
in the whole Island; it was concluded on the powerful considerations of the
Chiefe-prelate, that the ancient Ordinances should be kept inviolably, and some
other ways to be used for the expulsion of the Spaniards. This Council ended,
the Queen retired to her chamber with Amintha and some other Ladies, and at
Even went down into the Phoenix garden. As Soon as she was gotten into a grove
of Orange Trees, wherein there were alleys of five or six hundred paces long,
and fountains of falling waters from twenty to twenty paces, she called for
Pallantus. The Lientenant over her Slaves went to receive him at one of the
garden gates, and after he had embraced him as the best of his friends, brought
him to the Princess. As Soon as she saw him afar off, the blood flew into
her face, and straight growing pale again, she was constrained to sit down to
conceal how much she was stirred. Pallantus laden, or to speak more
properly, adorned with his illustrious chains, put one knee to the earth, and
kissed the hemme of the Queen's garment. The Princess to divert her transport,
I understood of your return (said she) and the accident which caused it; but
those that made the recital to me, were so ignorant of the particulars, that I
shall be glad to hear them from your self. With that she arose, and after she
had commanded all others to keep off, and called Amintha on her right hand, and
Pallantus on the left, she walked some few paces without speaking a word; but
then on the sudden coming out of her musings, she leant on Amintha, and calling
Pallantus nearer who kept a little behind, Relate to me (said she) all that
has betided you since you left this Island, and forget nothing that may serve
for a diversion to our spirits wearied with the time and its misfortunes.
Pallantus, obeying the Queen, thus began the relation of his voyage: The very
day on which your Majesty commanded me to depart, I embarked in that vessel
which (to my honor) you bestowed on me, and was so fortunate, that the fifth
day after, I landed in the Island of the Sun: I satisfied your zeal by the
celebration of those sacrifices which you commanded me; and acquitting my self
of the vow I had made for the prosperity of your reign, I left that sacred
Island to visit the principal Courts of Africa and Europe, and to cause that
wondrous portraict to be there adored, which without doubt participates somewhat
with the miracles of its original. But a tempest took me in that long
traverse of sea which is between the Island of the Sun, and the kingdom of
Senega; diverse days was I in danger to be cast away, at last, committing my
self to Fortune, I was desirous to see what she was able to do.' She was
not ungrateful for my confidence, but brought me happily in to that Island,
made famous even to the extremities of the earth, by the valor of Bajazet;
that Prince's reputation obliged me to discover to him the treasure I was
entrusted withal: but he had no sooner seen your Majesty's picture, then he
cried out, that art was gone beyond all that nature could possibly produce.
Iblam'd his incredulity, and told him, that art had been but a most imperfect
imitator of nature: My exclamation (replied Bajazet) is an effect of my
astonishment, not of my misbeliefe. I make no question but Alcidiana is far
fairer then this picture shows her, and if to confirm me in this opinion, you
had need of another witness then your self; there is a Prince in this Island
that would not deny you his testimony. A Prince (said I) and what Prince?
Never any but Polexander had the happiness of seeing Alcidiana. May be it is of
him I speak, replied Bajazet; with that Polexander came and embraced me, and
kissing the chains I wore: Thou feast (said he) O happy Pallantus! the
deplorable Polexander, whom fortune not only declares unworthy of re-seeing
thy divine Princess, but also of bearing the marks of her servitude. I
answered him in such a fashion, that he perceived well he had offended you;
and that the punishment of absence, was but a part of those to which you had
co^demn'd him. Hereat, not able almost to refrain from tears, Tell me (said
he) dear Pallantus the most cruellest of my destiny, and let me know what
punishment Alcidiana's just anger reserves for my temeritie. I thereupon
intimated the just causes your Majesty had to make him feel the effects of
your choler, and after that declaration, showed him the other, which you had
made against his life: with a great deal of respect he read it, kissed it
often, and made show to me of a great deal of joy for his ill fortune, because
it was your pleasure. I would presently have departed, but Bajazet having run a
hazard of being slain by one of his pirates, I thought my self bound before I
set sail, to see the success of his wound: as soon as I was confident of his
life, I took leave of Polexander and the Princes which accompanied him; he
left me not till I was embarked, and when he saw he must needs leave me, Know
(said he) my dear Pallantus, that my misery is increased by the hopes which
thou have given me, and if ever thy good fortune bring thee back again to
that blessed place where thy divine Princess reigns; tell her, that thou have
left the wretched Polexander on the point of finishing by some new kind of
death, the incredible torments which his absence inflicts upon him. It Is not
that which you promised me (I replied) nor do you expect that I speak of you
to our great Queen, if you persevere not in the resolution of ^ffering for
her. I will do it then (said Polexander) since it is for her glory, and
husbanding my life in the extremity of my affliction, will not put in any
hazard, but whilst I am forced to it by the desire of re-seeing the
incomparable Alcidiana. After he had thus spoke, he embraced me again, and
returned where he was expected; in the mean time (driven by a favorable gale)
I sailed along the coasts of Africa, and cast anchor in the port of Morocco.
The Princes which reigned there, entertained me with all manner of civilitie,
which the name and picture of your Majesty imperiously exacts from the most
barbarous minds. From thence I sailed into Spain, and came to Lisbone to make
your portraict admired by all the Court of Portugal. After I had gotten you a
great many adorers there, I took my course Northerly: I saw France, England,
Scotland, and upon some news brought me, as I was going out of that great
gulf, which is commonly called the Scottish sea, I sailed into Denmark, where
I saw that famous Phelismond, whom your Majesty's picture and indignation, have
raised to the highest point of honor. At that word, Alcidiana interrupting
him, said coldly, I think some body has heretofore spoken to me of that rash
man, but never made mention of him, without relating to me the advantages which
Polexander got on him. It Is true Madam, (replied Pallantus) Polexander had the
better of him in the combat he undertook for your quarrel: but if that
generous Prince may be believed, 'twas not his valor, but your Majesty's
anger, which conquered Phelismond. And indeed, since that time, that Prince by
a thousand glorious actions has made known to the world, that he sprung from
the bravest blood which ever formed Kings. It has been told me, said the
Queen, 'twas one of unknown birth, on whom Fortune and the King of Denmark's
fantastical humor, were desirous to practice all that they were able to
produce. It Is truth Madam (answered Pallantus) that at first the King of
Denmark divided his authority with him, and not content to see him the second
person in his kingdom, even before his death placed the Crown on his head.
But why defer I so long time the giving your Majesty a contentment whereof
you must be extremely sensible? Be pleased Madam, to know, that Phelismond is
your brother, Son of the great Alcidus your father, and of a Princess, who
but for her Uncles tyranny, and the usurpation of an English Earl, had been
seated on the Throne of England. At these unexpected and incredible news,
Alcidiana stood still, and earnestly regarding Pallantus, To what end (said
she) tell you me these fables? What you say, cannot be, and put case it is so,
how are you sure of it? I am so certain of it replied Pallantus, that if this
be not, there is nothing true in all the events which carry any thing of
extraordinary with them. Thereupon he related the loves of Alcidus and
Phelismonda, their flight into Scotland, the death of the wife, the affliction
of the husband, the birth of Phelismond, the retreat of Thamiris into Denmark;
and generally, all that we have written touching the adventures of that
admirable Favorite, and the love of the Danish Princess. Next, he recounted,
how Polexander being driven into a desolate Island, there met with that
Princess, and learnt from her the cause why she had abandoned her fathers
Kingdom. At last (said he) Helismena hearing of Phelismond's change, embarked
her self with the Ambassadors that Prince had sent toward your Majesty, and
had the happiness that after two months sail, she safely came to Copenhagen.
As Soon as Phelismond heard of it, he came not as a King, but as the Guardian
of the royalty to receive Helismena, and render her all the honor a subject
owes to his Sovereign. He declared, that he sat not in the Throne, but to
preserve for her the place which her birth and the peoples votes had given her;
and in case she were assailed, to defend her against all aspirers and usurpers.
Helismena answered these civilities, not with words, but with tears, sighs,
swoundings: she was (without perceiving it) carried to the castle, and the
Prince your brother despoiling himself absolutely of all tokens of royalty,
made diverse declarations, to let the Danes understand, that he pretended to no
other part in their State, then what an affectionate compatriot might lay
claim to. But his generousnesse won nothing on the mind of Helismena, nor the
opinion of the people; the more Phelismond strove to make himself a private
man, the more was he settled in the regal authority. The Queen who lived not
but by the sight of that amiable Prince, even besought him on her knees, to
comply somewhat with the excess of her love, and accept with her Crown, the
utmost proofs she could give him of her affection. At last, Phelismond yielded
to Helismena's entreaties, and assuring her he accepted not the title of King,
but to gain to himself the means of serving her, married her, with the
consent and joy of all Denmark. A few days after the wedding, I arrived at
Copenhagen, and making my self known for one of your Majesty's Slaves, I
received such entertainment both from the King and Queen, that the greatest
Kings of the world would have had cause to rest satisfied with it. So indeed,
Madam, was it to prime Princess of the universe that these honors were done;
and I was considered as a person your Majesty designed to make use of, to make
you adored by all the world. The King and Queen of Denmark, keeping me there
near two months, I besought them for my convey. They granted it me, but very
loathly, and loading me with Presents and Letters, entreated me to indeare them
in the honor of your favor. Those were the terms they both used, to intimate
to me the desire they had to be beloved of you. I left your picture with the
Queen, sore against my will, for I intended never to leave it: but her
entreaties, earnest s^ing, and if I dare speak all, pleasing violence, carried
it at last, in spite of my obstinacy. As Soon as I was under sail, I
commanded my pilot to touch at no place whatsoever, till we came to the Island
of the Sun, because I hoped to find Linceus there, and by his means return
to your Majesty: but being gotten on this side the Canaries we met with a
storm, which put us by our course, and when it was over, we were set on by two
great men of war. Long was our fight, and furious; my cannon suncke one of
the enemies ships; the other came up close to mine and fired her, but some of
my soldiers did the like to theirs. Upon this reciprocal firing we separated;
the wind then and the combustible matter in our ships increasing the flame
spite of all our labor to quench it, we saw one another perishing by a new
and fearful kind of combat. I had given my self for dead (Madam) when the
vincible Araxes came to my succor; and knowing I belonged to your Majesty,
had such care of me, as it put among the number of the greatest testimonials he
will ever show you of his zeal. How now Pallantus! (said Alcidiana) you are
then bewitched as well as the rest, and by the attribute of Invincible which you
have cunningly given the African Slave, you would have me believe, that there
is no way to save my self but by his valor? Your Majesty may give me leave,
if you please (replied Pallantus) to explain my words, and to say, that my
intention was not to tie your safety to Araxes valor. But considering what he
has already done, and what he is resolved to do, as soon as his wound will
permit him to leave his chamber; let me take the boldness to tell your
Majesty, that without doubt, you will owe to the great courage of that African,
the ruin of your enemies, and the re-establishment of your authority. I am not
of your opinion (replied the Queen angerly,) go, and if you be yet Pallantus,
have better thoughts. Pallantus much astonished, retired; and the Queen taking
Amintha by the hand, continued her walk: they were in the garden till 'twas
far within night, and Polexander was the only subject of their discourse.
Alcidiana at last, having her mind far more wearied then her body, withdrew;
and kept her bed four daye^, to frame absolutely an intention of dying, in
case she saw her self constrained to take Araxes for her husband. On the
evening of the fourth day Rhadiotez came to the palace, and making known he
had business of importance to communicate to the Queen, was brought to her
bedside: he told her, that Araxes being resolved to execute some great
enterprise, it was thought fit to have public Oraizons, and to get to the
Temple to celebrate such sacrifices as were appointed on the like occasions.
That he came to beseech her Majesty to approve of the Clergy's deliberation,
and since she was obliged to be at that Ceremony, as having with the royal
Character that of the Sovereign sacrificature, it would please her to make
ready betime, and give that testimony of love to the necessity of her State.
Alcidiana gave consent to his request, and calling for her dressing Ladies,
told them what she would wear the next day. At break of day she arose, and
took on a robe of black silk, open before and on the sleeves, and to be
closed with diamond buttons; her head dressing was not extraordinary; she put
on a veil of black tiffiny, bordered with pearls, and fast'ned with a little
Crown of diamonds, which ended in a point on the top of her head. As Soon as
she was attired, she went to the Temple of Wisdom, and parting thence with a
most royal pomp, went to another, which her predecessors had caused to be
built, and called it the Temple of divine assistance. The Ceremony was long
and fair, and all the people meeting there, showed by their earnestness and
offerings, that the time of calamity is truly the time of Heaven. Though the
Priesthood had for a while been separated from the royalty, yet was it not so
absolutely, but there remained some functions to the Kings. Therefore as soon as
the Chief-Prelate had ended the accustomed prayers, he presented a golden
Censor to the Queen, and marching before her, went to the High Altar. Alcidiana
kneeled down on the steps, and having a composition of perfumes on the burning
coals, made a long prayer for the diverting of heavens menaces, for the
continuance of its favor to her Subjects, and subverting and driving thence
their public and bloody enemies, And lastly for the preservation of him which
it had sent for their defense. After she had ended her prayer, all the people
confirmed it by their acclamations and applauses, and so went out of the Temple
blessing the Queen, and waited on her to the Palace, with such testimonies of
affection as were far beyond all that had preceeded. As she entered the second
Court of her palace, Diceus who had plotted that action with his Master,
presented himself, and humbly besought her to have pity on a Canarian who had
lately escaped out of the Spanish fleet. Alcidiana was so troubled and
diverted, that she took no heed to what the man said. But Amintha who attended
her, thought she should know the Supplicant, and staid to look on him. Ah
madam! (said Diceus) if the memory of a personage whom you have sometimes
affected, be yet dear to you, have compassion on that miserable estate whereto
his loss has reduced me. Amintha knowing Diceus by his voice better then by
his countenance, and unable to suppress that violent passion which she always
had in any thing concerning Polexander. How, Diceus, (cried she) art thou yet
alive? Arise and follow me. Alcidiana at Amyntha's noise turned her head, and
saw the Lady talking to Diceus, but not imagining whom he might be, kept on her
way and retired to her chamber; where she presently ^eil on a Couch, and
commanding all to withdraw, fell to her usual reveries. An hour after she
awoak and called Amintha. They told her she was gone. Let her be fetched hither
(said she) and after that Commandment fell again into her former imaginations.
Amintha came presently after, and approaching the Queen, your Majesty (said
she) may be knows not the man who this morning fell at your feet. The Queen
answering that she had not taken notice of him, 'Twas (said Amintha) that
faithful servant of Polexander who was only with him when he was murdered by
Astramadans Subjects. He was about to tell me in what manner he escaped after
his Masters death, and by what accident he arrived in this Island, when your
Majesty vouchsafed the honor to send for me. At these words, Alcidiana
coming as it were out of a deep sleep, How (said she) is Diceus here? O you
thou love me, Amyntha, let me see him. The recital he will make me of his
Masters death will serve me for a great diversion. A sad and dismal diversion,
replid' Amyntha. I do not think Diceus can relate any thing more particularly
to you then I have done. It Is all one (said the Queen) I shall be glad to see
him, and hear the reproaches he will throw on me for the death of his Master.
He has been too well bred (replied Amintha) to take such liberty as shall
not please you. I am in such an humor (said the Queen) that whatsoever he
shall say, will not be able to displease me. Therefore without losing more
time, let me see him. With that, Amintha making a low reverence went out of the
chamber, and calling for a Squire, commanded him to go call Diceus. The Squire
obeyed the command, and Diceus presently after entering the Queens chamber,
Amintha brought him where she lay, Alcidiana trembled at his sight, and finding
her self more troubled th^n she thought she could be; Alas! poor Diceus (said
she) thy Master is then dead? Diceus continuing on his kneees though the Queen
bad him arise; Madam, said he, my Master died because your Majesty thought his
life was not worth the preserving. Neither his life nor death depended on my
will replied the Queen. The will of your Majesty (said Diceus) has always
had more power over him, then that sovereign law on which depends the destiny
of all other men. It seems then by what thou say (answered the Queen) that
thou would make me guilty of thy Masters death. Heaven (said Diceus) who can
make us immortal, was never accused (but by blasphemers) for confining the
course of our life to so short a date: Nor has the King my Master, (who
always looked on you (though not as a Deity, (yet as its living image)
otherwise then with a benediction, received the sentence of death you
pronounced against him. And the last time he did me the honor to speak to me;
Diceus (said he) let my death come when it will, I will take it for a special
favor from heaven, since it is the only thing i^ left me, whereby I may
witness my obedience to the greatest Queen in the world. Alas! (replied the
Queen) how knew he that I bore so great a hatred to his life? He h^d read it
(quoth Diceus) in the declaration which Pallantus showed him in the Pirates
Island, but he read it more clearly in the effects of your anger; I mean by the
war which nature her-selfe had denounced against him, and by the ill success
of ^ll the voyages he undertook, to have the happiness of continuing to you
the testimonialls of his most humble Servitude. I should condemn my
Declaration (answered the Queen) though it were justly done, if it hastened the
death of your Master. But 'twas his valor and not Alcidiana that slew him. He
thought himself immortal as he was invincible; and judging of his enemies by
himself, imagined there was none base enough to commit a murder. He had too
much loved life, (said Diceus) or to speak better, he had been as he was, the
superstitious observer of your commands, if he had thought on the preservation
of a life which he knew pleased you not. He is dead Madam, and died the more
happily since he was persuaded in dying, he should give you a strong and
unquestionable proof of the greatness of his love and obedience. These last
words touched Alcidiana to the heart, so that spite of her self she sighed;
and feeling her tears in her eyes, turned her head toward Amintha, that her
too lively resentment might not be perceived. As Soon as her amorous tears were
wiped off, she began again, and would know of Diceus by what means he saved
himself after the death of his Master. I will not relate to your Majesty
(said he) for what cause the King my Master came to the Isle of Astramadan.
Amintha was by when he was engaged to sight with him; and I doubt not but she
has entertained your Majesty with it. I will therefore content my self with
the narration of the most strange and diversified Combat that ever was seen
since weapons have been used. He related how Polexander had sent to defy
Astramadan, with how many Knights he had to do, till he came to ha^die strokes
with the Giant; in brief, all that which we have descri'd at large heretofore.
But when he came to that part wherein we spoke of Tisiphone's arrival, and the
firing of Astramadans City; I had (said he to the Queen) the honor that day to
serve my Master in the place of his Squire; and to do somewhat worthy my new
quality; as soon as the Tyrants Guard assailed the King, I fell in amongst them,
and was so fortunate, that I was beat down, covered with wounds before that
multitude of murderers had overthrown the greatest valor of the world: I was
a great while ere I came to my self again; but at last recollecting my
spirits, and seeing all our enemies laid all over the field, I crawled to find
out the body of my Master. Me thought I heard him groan, and got to him, and
disingaging him from under a many bodies, took off his cask and the rest of his
arms: As Soon as he had taken air, his senses came to him, but he was so weak,
and so wounded, that he could not possibly rise. Presently I took some earth
which was very soft, being all soaked with blood, and stopping his greatest
wounds with it, brought him to a little more strength. With much pain he arose;
so did I; and helping one another, got out of that unfortunate place by the
means of the tumult and fire. But how (said Amintha interrupting him) did not
Polexander dye in the place of Combat? No Madam (replied Diceus) he escaped
that great danger, and should not be a languishing and wandering Ghost as he is
now, if he had not received more dangerous wounds then those were given him in
that detestable occasion. When I had lead him out of the town, and brought him
to the Sea side; Whither shall we go, said he? Let Us make an end of a thing
that is so well forwarded; and since it is forbidden me by Alcidiana her self
for ever to pretend to the happiness of seeing her again; let us Diceus, let
us shut up those eyes, which can serve me in no stead but to make me see what
a miserable man I am. 'Twas then (replied Alcidiana hastily) that Polexander
died? Could he dye better Madam, (replied Diceus) then to dye not by the wounds
^e had received from his murderers, but of those as pleasing as deadly, which
he received at the same time, both from your severe justice, and his
incomparable fidelity? It Is enough (said Alcidiana:) and in saying so, she
would not conceal from Diceus the tears which grief forced from her eyes.
And he, unwilling to lose so fair an occasion to further his Masters affairs:
O! too precious tears to be lost (cried he) why have you not already raised
again Polexander? Wheresoever his fair soul straies, she feels your virtue,
and I doubt it not but she will return and join again with his body, if she
could know for truth that 'twas their separation which had drawn you from the
eyes of Alcidiana. Believe it Diceus, (said the Queen heartily sobbing) and
assure thy self, that if the moi^y of my life could recall Polexanders, I
would give it with all my heart. That Prince (Madam, replied Diceus) shall rise
again since you will have it so; or rather he will dye once more, if he know
it is for his sake that your Majesty is so much discontented. Alcidiana, unable
to give any interpretation to Diceus last words, then what in all likelihood
they ought to have took them for a true, exaggeration of that love which
Polexander yet preserved for her even in his Sepulcher. She then dismissed
Diceus and told him she desired he would serve her. After he had given her
humble thanks, and spent the rest of the day in the Palace or with Amintha, he
secretly got out of the Town as soon as it was night, and hastened to the King
his Master. To him he related the happy success of his journey, and made him
so plainly see how much Alcidiana loved him, that Polexander feared to offend
the Princess, if he persever'd in in the ill opinion he had of his fortune.
But presently fear, blotting out of his Soul that which hope had traced
there: Thou deceiv'st us both, said he to Diceus. The love thou bear me has
assuredly made thee give a too favorable construction to the Queens words.
Did thou not look on her angry eyes, as if they had been pitiful; or take
that melancholy which appears in the face of such as we importune, for the
compassion thou would feign persuade me to? Art thou certain she wept? Did
thou surely hear her sigh? Can thou secure me that my life shall not
discontent her? Thou answerest not Diceus! Art thou (to my greater misfortune)
better informed now, then when thou gave me so great assurances? Sir (replied
his faithful Servant) your thoughts will never leave being ingenious in
persecuting you: They eternally doubt the truth of all good which betides you;
and the only appearances of ill pass with them for most certain realties. Yes
Sir, Alcidiana loves you, and I believe it, because she repents the rigor she
has shown you; because she bewailes your death; because she respects any
thing that puts her in mind of you; and finally, because Amintha has often
sworn to me, that the very moment she heard news of your death, she made a
vow to end her life in a rigorous kind of widow-hood. Ah! it is too much
(Diceus) replied our Hero, I now believe my self to be happy; but I must by
some important service make my self worthy of being so. Presently he resolved
to disturb that rest which his indisposition had lent his enemies, to hinder
their going on, and by a general assault to let them know that the winning of
Eliza was very ill assured them. At break of day, he was abroad in the Fort,
and calling all the officers of the Army together, to make them capable of a
thing which till then he could not propose to any; Told them, there was news
come to him touching the Spaniards; and that they only expected to be
assaulted, to gain an honest pretext for forsaking the Town, and to put
themselves under sail. All the hardy Islanders believed what he had spoken;
and by what had passed judging of the future, thought that Araxes as inspired
from the Deity which had sent him, could undertake nothing but what he was
assured of the succes. Every one therefore preparing himself for so daring an
action, they sent Rhadiotez news of it. He presently hastened to the Palace to
inform the Queen, but perceiving her to be in an extraordinary insensibility
for what so much concerned her, he thought it fit to treat her as some sick
person, whose violent disease and the distaste of remedies had deprived of all
desire of life. He caused all the best troops in the Town to march forth,
sent Artillery to the Fort, and having almost all the day executed the charge
of General of an Army, employed all the rest in the functions of his
Priesthood. Orders was given for prayers, and the Temples were open all night
long. Mothers carried thither their children, as innocent offerings they
pretended to heaven to appease its anger, and to obtain out of pity an end of
their calamities. Polexander, in the mean while unwilling the enemy should
know his design, beat them all night with the Canon. The Pieces in the
Barges, and on the Caus-way, shot continually, and hid by the thickness of the
smoke those Troops which marched toward the Town. At break of day, two
thousand men came before it. Twelve pieces of Canon which had been planted in
the night began to beat their defenses, and two Petards were stuck by the
incredible resolution of twenty determinate Soldiers on a gate that opened to
the ditch. They did their effect, and presently those that were to fall on, got
into the ditch with ladders, and though the most of them were lost; yet the
rest won the gate, and there planted Alcidiana's rising Phoenix. The feigned
Araxes sent fresh supplies to preserve what the first had gained, and himself
leading the way, lodged them in the forced gate. But when he saw beyond it an
intrenchment harder to be carried then the ditch; he re-intrench'd himself
against the Town, thinking no other way better, then to keep what he had so
well advanced. Presently he commanded the ditch to be filled with Bavines, to
throw a bridge over, and to bring on ten or twelve Pieces to beat off the
enemy. The fight lasted as long as day, and above twelve hundred men fell on
the place. Whilst this was doing in the lower town, there happened great
disorders in the upper. A murmr and noise whose Author could not be known,
gave an alarm to all the Inhabitants. All cried out that the Spaniards had
received a mighty supply; that Araxes had the worst in his assault; that he
had not won the Town; and that all these miseries had their source from the
Queens retarding the execution of the Prophecy, and the express command of
Providence. These murmures were seconded by menaces, and colored with so
powerful reasons, that the Magistrates and Rhadiotez himself were forced to
allow of the sedition. The Queen (said these Mutineers) who is certain in all
extremity, that a composition will bring her out of all that danger in which
we shall be inveloped, rejects our prayers, and remonstrances; sees with a dry
eye, the tears of so many Innocents which implore her goodness, and seems to
have destined for her ransom, our goods, our lives, and the honor of our
wives. If the remedy which we propound to her for the common safety, were a
remedy invented by our selves, she might have reason to contemn it, either as
dangerous, or unprofitable. But being prescribed by heaven, and writ by the
hand of the Author and preserver of all things; can she refuse it without an
express testimonial either of an extreme neglect of the Divinity, or as
great a hatred against her Subjects? Rhadiotez, to appease them, promised to go
to the Queen, and to let her know they were loyally intentioned. We will go
with you, (cried the seditious) and if reason be not able enough to persuade
the Queen, we will bring number, and force to assist her. Rhadiotez, did all
he could, to go without so many followers; yet thinking it not fitting to
incense any further the furious multitude, he put himself in the front, and
sent word of it to the Queen. When she heard the news, she was almost beside
herself; but the extremity of scorn and choler, depriving her of sense and
reason, she stood a while as immovable. Amintha who was by her, entreated, she
would force herself, and not give her enemies the contentment, to see that she
contributed to her ruin as much as themselves; but that she would at last take
on her a resolution worthy her birth and virtue. It is taken (replied the
Queen with a settled countenance) it is taken Amintha. I will dye; and though
my People be unthankful, yet I will save them in expiring, As she spoke these
words Rhadiotez entered her chamber, and though he had spoke nothing, yet did he
sufficiently make known by his pace and countenance that he brought very ill
news. What father (said the Queen without any dismay) you come to tell me of
my subjects rebellion, and to advise me to submit to what they demand. No such
matter, (replied the Prelate) but I come from them to make an humble petition
to your Majesty, and to beseech you by that goodness which is so natural to
you, and by that Sovereign power which reigns in heaven, to take pity on a
great number of weak and unarmed persons, who see themselves ready to be
given in prey to the utmost fury of their merciless enemies. O! Let your
Majesty be therefore pleased to harken to the cries of so many mothers, and
children, so many virgins, and widows, old men, and fearful; and to stop
their complaints, imitate those good Princes, which have ountarily forgot
themselves to think of nothing else but the preservation of their Subjects.
From the eternal Justice we all hope that your Majesty shall not suffer by
doing a good Act; and that the Prophecy which promises you so many blessings,
if you can subdue your self, shall not be less true in this particular then
in all the rest. With much ado, Alcidiana (not making show of her perplexity)
replied. Tell me then, what is it my subjects would have of me? That which the
voice of heaven requires, (answered straight Rhadiotez.) Yes Father said the
Queen, I will do all that is commanded me, Long since the cries of my people
have gone through my cares to my heart. I am sensible of every ones particular
misery, and may say, that I alone suffer all that the fathers, and husbands
suffer in several. If to stop the current of o^ common calamities, there
needed but the parting with my crown, I would be the first should take it off
my head; and if (to it) there be required the loss of my liberty or life, I
am ready to undergo the one, and to lay down the other. After she had spoke
thus, she gave Rhadiotez time to render her thanks in the name of her
subjects. He be sought her, as he had petitioned already, to preserve
her-selfe for them, not to show the subject her affection by deliberations,
which would be no otherwise then sad and mournful unto them; and to believe,
that on her life, and peace, necessarily depended their lives and tranquillity.
See then (father, said the Queen) what is fitting for me to do: But if any
remainder of respect keeps me yet considerable, let me not be obliged to any
thing that is unworthy of me. In the mean time return to those that sent you,
relate my resolution, and wish them without clamor, and tumult to advise for
their own safety. After this the good Prelate retired to the impatient and
surious multitude; and making known what he had done with the Queen, got them
to retreat, and expect till the next day the execution of the Princess will.
By his good words the mutineers (being thus calmed) promised aloud, that if
they were not forced to it by an extreme necessity, they would not press at
all the accomplishment of the Prophecy. Night now shutting up every one within
his own doors, the upper Town was all hushed, but the lower was in an
uproare. Polexander had lead many troops into the enemies intrenchments, and
had forced them as he had done the rest, if his soldiers galled with the Canon
had not been forced to shelter themselves behind the Gabions. Each party was
all night in arms, and continued their vollyes and skirmishes till break of
day: When the Spaniards seeing themselves threatened by a revolt of the
Inhabitants in the lower town, and fearing to be involved, resolved to drive
Polexander from what he had fallen into. To that end, they planted on the top
of their intrenchment five Cannons, which for three hours together never left
shooting. Four Towers and a great Pavillion which made up the Entry Polexander
had won, were beaten to dust; the place where he was lodged laid open, and
many of his men buried under the ruins, or maimed with the slattering of the
stones, or the walls r^ptures. The Spaniards were paid well back again: For
our Heroe^ very advant ageously planting his Canon, beat their houses about
their cares, and ten Pieces charged with chayne-shot, being planted along the
intrenchment, cut off all those that undertook to fall on Alcidiana's troops.
That whole day almost passing thus, a little before night they descried above
an hundred sail on the Lake. The Inhabitants of the upper town imagining them
to be the supply which their enemies expected, were stricken with their former
terror, and ran out of their houses with terrible outcries, and extreme
confusion. Some betook them to their arms, others flew away from them. In
this moment, the streets were so full, that men were ready to be stifled, and
in the turn of a hand after they were all empty, and no creature to be seen.
The Market places, and Temples, filled withold men, women, and children,
resounded with lamentations, and every where wandered the image of death, and
despair. See what it is (said they) to wrong the blessings of heaven, and to
neglect the means of our safety. Every man would have witnessed his respect
and obsequiousness to the Queen, and every one confessed that their respect
and complaisancy had loft them. If yesterday the Queen had been forced to do
that which now they must be obliged to compel her, she might have been already
freed from this violence, and the publik secured of the success of a business
which now may chance to have but an ill issue, because it was so long deserr'd.
Whilst one part of the people was talking thus, and the other gotten to the
Palace gates, calling for the Queen, and threatening to take her thence,
Rhadiotez and Amintha were with the Princess, entreating her to bear with the
infirmities of her subjects; to pardon their rashness, their indiscretion,
their revolt; and to weigh, to how many other violences the extremity of fear
is able to hurrie weak minds. Alcidiana, appearing full of an extraordinary
Majesty: I intend not (said she) to defer the contenting my people. Go you
father (said she to Rhadiotez) and tell them, that precisely at midnight I
will depart my Palace and go to the Temple of Wisdom. The good man, loath to
debate more particularly with the Queen, for fear of offending her, caused
the Palace gates to be opened, suffered all to enter that would, and publishing
by a Herald his Princesses will, went to prepare himself for an action, which
his judgment as well as his loyalty assured him would be as glorious for his
Queen, as advantageous for her Subjects; she had not the same thoughts: For
being retired into her closet, (only with Amintha) sh opened a little Cabinet,
and taking out a Poniard; See (said she without any emotion) that which shall
disingage my word, and deliver me from all prepared Slavery. Yes Amintha, I
will dye, but not till by the accompishment of the Prophecy, I have laid an
eternal foundation for my peoples felicity. Think not to stay mine arm
either by your tears, or remonstrances. If you have truly loved me, you will
approve my resolution of being still Mistress of my self. And if Polexanders
memory do any way touch you, you may be glad to see me labor so courageously
for the preservation of that which has been so dear unto him. Let us prepare
our selves therefore seriously for the most important, and considerable of our
actions. Let us on bravely to the end of our miseries. Leave we not our
fetters sadly, but believe that the life which we expect hereafter, is too
glorious and of more bliss then to make any account of that which we are
likely to loose here. And thou dear Soul, which art ready to be remitted to
thy halfe-selfe, descend from thy everlasting abode, meet with Alcidiana, be
present at the Sacrifices she is at the point to offer, and judge by the last
act of her life the intention of all those that have preceeded. After these
words, she went to her Ladies, and carrying in her countenance a gaity, and
extraordinary calm, told them (smiling) that at last the day was come wherein
she was to submit her self to the power of a man. Let therefore (said she)
every one prepare her self for this solemnity; but with moderation, for too
much magnificence, and rejoicing, will not be approved of such wretches as
shall be witnesses of this fatal action. After she declared by these words, in
what manner she would have her Ladies, and Maids to be dressed for the
Ceremony, she attired herself as she was wont to be on the days consecrated
to the memory of the Kings her predecessors. As Soon as she was free from this
necessary amusement, she commanded that all those that were to attend her
should be ready before midnight; and to that end dismissing all that were in
her chamber, she entered her closet with Amintha. That Lady extremely afflicted
for the Queens resolution, began to look on her with such eyes as spoke enough
that which her mouth durst not utter; and falling (at last) at her Mistress
feet, was even there like to have taken her last gasp. Alcidiana seeing her in
that extremity, raised her up; and after a many times kissing her: What (said
she) is become of that brave spirit which has so courageously brought you
through rape, exile, imprisonment, and more insupportable miseries? Whither is
that Constancy fled, which has withdrawn me many and many a time from those
precipices which mine own weakness has hewn out? Whence is it, that
Amintha is no more what she was, and why endeavors she to dissuade me from
what she has so often advised me? Is not a speedy death far better then a
languishing life? And where shall the miserable find comfort, but in shortness
of their tortures? No, no Amintha, the resolution I have taken, is not such as
you imagine it. It has nothing of sad and dismal but in appearance. The
interior is brave, pleasant, alluring, and delightful. It Is true, I quit my
Crown, and quit it in the eighteenth year of my life; but to consider things
aright, what is a Crown? What is Youth? And if you will, what is Beauty?
Surely nothing but so many extreme subtle, and almost inevitable snares to
draw us into mischief. I have lived long enough Amintha, since (if self love
deceive me not) I think I have reasonably well employed all the moments of my
life. But (if I may be permitted to speak more) I say, I have lived too long,
since I have survived Polexander. Amintha finding by the excess of resentment,
that speech which the same excess had taken from her: Then (said she) you are
resolved to dye. That beauty, which heaven admires as its Masterpiece, must
even in its birth be the prey of steel and death: and that wonderful wit which
has confounded the wisdom of the Ancient, and the subtilty of Philosophers,
must now turn its weapons on it self; and meeting with nothing that can
vanquish it, denounces a war against it self, because it would not be still
invincible. Come Polexander, come, and relieve Alcidiana, if there yet remain
any thing of thee. Employ that power which men attribute to Souls freed from
their bodies, in averting a blow whereat Nature it self trembles; and if the
fear of being another then thine, puts the steel into thy Princesses hand,
free the world from the cause of that apprehension. Alcidiana smiling at
Amintha's exclamations, you (said she) shall be heard, for Polexander loves us
too well to abandon us in this extremity. The Princess spoke truth unawares,
for at the same instant when Amintha invoked him to the aid of Alcidiana he
was mightily laboring the ruin of her enemies. He had discovered an ancient
Aqueduct under the ditch, by which in all likelihood the water of a fountain in
the upper town was conveyed to the lower. But time had ruined part of the
Vault, and buried the knowledge of it under the same earth which covered it. A
Pioneer first discovered this means to get into the town, and secretly gave
notice of it to Polexander, who presently going to se the Vault, made it be
searched, and understanding it went through the enemies intrenchments, attended
patiently till the night were well come on to convey some companies that way,
and so more easily work his ends of the Spaniards. That which made him the
more to hasten it, was the arrival of the Fleet on the Lake, on the side of
the upper town. They had cast anchor a little before night, and ranged
themselves along the shore, no man knowing whether they were friends, or foes.
The Inhabitants of Eliza who had never seen the like there, certainly believed
they were Spanish ships; and on that belief grounding their absolute ruin,
hastened as much as in them lay the marriage of Alcidiana with Araxes, as the
only refuge they were to fly to in their calamities, and the last remedy they
could get for them. Rhadiotez, whom they had not forsaken, and from whom at
every moment they demanded with threatenings, the accomplishment of his
promises, was compelled to find out Araxes at the beg^ning of the night. He
related to him at large the particulars of the fatal Prophecy, the Mutiny,
and all the Elizians desires, and finally, the Queens last resolution.
Polexander had not so ill a servant of Diceus, nor so little intelligence of
that which passed at Court, but he knew already part of what Rhadiotez had
told him. Yet he made semblance to know nothing of it, and aggravating the
incertainty of most predictions, condemned the Elizians proceedings, and above
all, entreated the Chief-priest to go to the Queen, and beseech her in his
name that she would not so far forget herself, as to share her Crown, and
life, with the most unknown and miserable of men. Rhadiotez admired the virtue
of our feigned Slave, and fixing on his last words told him, that his
moderation, and the respect he bore the Queen merited an infinite applause;
and if time would give him leave, he would go and fully make it known to the
Queen, and free her from the remains of aversion and fear. But (said he) the
multitude, more urgent then time, will not admit of this delay. They are in
arms at the gates of the town, and the Palace, and if at the stroke of
midnight they see you not in the Temple of wisdom; prepare your self for the
most horrible spectacle, that the fury of a desperate multitude is able to
bebloudy the Chronicle of their own times withal, or affright all ensuing
ages. Polexander answering the Prelate, that this disaster was to be prevented,
and for himself he was ready to obey; dismissed him with an assurance that he
would march on with the first command he reciv'd from him or the Queen. As Soon
as Rhadiotez was gone, Polexander retired with Diceus, related to him the state
of his affairs, and showing him a timidity which only love could justify,
seemed no less irrational then the very multitude which he but newly
condemned. But Diceus o're-throwing all his scruples, and nullifying all his
difficulties, advised him to be present in all pomp at the glorious
assignation, and by a happy deceit, terminate for ever his own misfortunes and
the Queens discontents. Thou know Diceus (replied Polexnder) through how
many tempests, and shipwracks I have sought for the haven thou show me, and
would even have bought the sight of it with my blood and life. Thou know
whether in these twenty days that I have been in the Inaccessible Island, my
desires and actions have tended to any other end, then the advancing the happy
moment wherein I was to be enlightened by that incomparable star which has so
long time not vouchsafed to shine on me. Yet me thinks, I know not what fear,
which seems just to me, congeale^ my blood, slackens my longings, disavowes my
former wishes, and accusing me to my self of subtilty, and treasons, threatens
me with some new misfortune if I dare present my self before Alcidiana. It Is a
suggestion (said Diceus) which the ill Angel of your quiet, throws into you.
Reject it boldly, and without losing time (which should be better employed) in
unprofitable deliberations, prepare your self to receive this night the Crown
of your travells; and perseverance. Polexander, vanquished by a persuasion
which so pleasingly flattered his inclination, resolved to obey his servant.
But before he would leave the lower town, he reinforced his guards, surveyed
the places he had won, disposed of all things in such sort that he doubted
not but at his return to put his great design in execution; and left the
command of the troops to Alcidiana's Lieutenant General. The orders given, he
went to the Fort, and shutting himself into his chamber, was there clad,
according to Diceus intention more then his own. A very rich suite he put on,
with the chains given him by the King of Ghenoa, and was forced to wear the
long p^ple cloak, imbrodered with gold, and pearls which he had presented him
from the Priests of the Sun, as their Prince and Defender. But he had no sooner
put it on, but his Guard came and told him that above two thousand men were in
arms on the Counter-scarfe of the Moate, and intimated a great desire to see
him. Let Us go to them (said he) turning to Diceus, and make our prayers to
Love, and Fortune, for our good success. With that he went out of the Fort to
meet the Inhabitants of Eliza: He chid them, but very wisely, for the violence
they offered their Princess, and in the very instant assuring them, that in
four and twenty hours the Island should be rid of the Spaniards; made them
break out into such loud and reiterated showtes of joy, that they were heard
in the Temple whither Alcidiana was to come. As Soon as she heard it strike
midnight she arose from a bed whereon she had all alone entertained her-selfe,
and forbidding Amintha the continuance of her tears, and lamentations: It Is at
this time (said she to her) that it shall be seen whether Alcidiana, and
Philosophy, have not too much presumed of themselves. In the mean while,
advertise Diceus of my resolution, that he may be in the Temple, for I desire
he should be present at the last act of my life, and that the same eyes which
were witnesses of Polexanders death, may be so of Alcidiana's. Amintha replied,
that for two days she had been so perplexed, that she did not so much as think
of him whom she spoke of. I thought so, said the generous Queen, and therefore
I would quicken your memory of him. Cause the man to be found out, and forsake
him not when I shall be no more in case to assist him. At those words Amintha
began to weep again; but Alcidiana intimating she desired other proofs of her
affection, absolutely forbad her to be sorrowful, and presently taking up her
poniard, put it under her robe, with such an indifferency, and coldness, as
were worthy to be considered as something more heroic then all the height of
magnanimity. Amintha was ravished with wonder at it, and from thence only
conjecturing of unlikely prosperities, suddenly lost the terror of what was to
be executed, and even solicited the Queen to hasten to the Temple of Wisdom as
fast as she could. The Princess noted this alteration without making show of
it, and coming out of her Closet found all her Ladies ready; but all rather
dressed for a funeral then a marriage. Alcidiana would not make known that she
took any notice of it, and went into her chambers of Ceremony, where all the
chief officers of her house and Rhadiotez were assembled. They presented
themselves before her with such countenances, as made it well seen there was
nothing of good to be expected of that voyage. Every man appeared thoughtfull,
and melancholy, and though Alcidiana excited every one by her gayety, none was
able to suppress his sorrow. As Soon as the Queen had given the word, they
began to march, and the people who waited for her at the Palace ga^es, received
her with acclamations, and applanses, which had I know not what more of
sadness, then their wonted congratulations, and rejoicings. The Queen went on
foot from the Palace to the Temple, and as soon as she was entered, retired into
a Chapel, from whence she usually came when she was obliged to take the
Censor, and perform some act of Sovereign Sacrificer. The Temple shone again
with gold and lights, and the Scaffold on which stood the Princesses throns,
was environed with so many crystal Candlesticks, that when she was seated on
it, the Spectators took her for a Goddess, which was not so well hid, but that
she let sparkle through the veil she had on, some rays of her Divinity.
Presently after Polexander, clad as I have described, came to the temple.
Diceus bore up the train of his royal robe, and four black slaves part of his
chains. No sooner had the peoples showt given notice of his coming, but the
crowd separated, and the Queens guard made away from the principal gate of the
Temple, to the Queens throne. From as far off as she saw him she cast down her
eyes, and leaning on one of the arms of her chair, began in good ernest to
contest with flesh and blood, and called to her aid all the faculties of her
soul. In the mean while, not only the people, but the Court cast their eyes on
the pretended slave, and as he advanced, a kind of humming noise witnessed the
admiration, or impatience of the Spectators. The Ladies above all had their
eyes fixed on him, and even those which looked on with an aversion, could not
choose but speak of him with astonishment. They all confessed, they never saw a
more admirable personage, and said, it was incredible that Africa, nay, Africa
the most monstrous, could produce so complete a creature. His stature,
countenance, sweetness, majesty, his head, his eyes; in brief, all that they
saw of him belied the common report, and made strange revolutions in the
passions of most of the Ladies. Amintha her self, who had made a vow not to
look on Araxes, had not power to refrain, but as soon as she heard the general
admiration, desired to have part in the contentment, and cast her eyes on the
feigned Slave with so much curiosity, that infallibly she had known him, but
for the infinite number of lights, which reflecting their luster on all parts,
deprived her of the means of well regarding him. The old Stenelica calling to
mind her last love, and the pleasure she took in his being pleasant with her,
no sooner saw him, but she knew who 'twas. Her eyes, though weakened by her
cares, getting heat from her heart, and impressions from love, those spirits of
fire which inlighten the sight, were more penetrable, then those of younger
bodies. It Is Polexander, (said she to her self) it is he; and I believe it so
certainly, that could I come near the Queen, I would tell her of the treason
is wrought against her. Whilst that Lady thought thus, our Hero came to the
foot of the Princess Scaffold, and there stood firm. Alcidiana for fear of
seeing him, kept her eyes fixed on the people, and commanding them silence: At
last (said she) all things are come to the point you have wished them. I
entreat that Eternal Providence under whose belief you are come hither, that
you may have rightly interpreted the Oracle, and that by virtue of the Act
whereto your only interests engage me, you may be avenged of these strangers
cruelties, free this Isle for ever from all revolts, and desolations of war,
and so powerfully reestablish the rule of Peace, and Justice, that your
posterity may hold the present miseries but for fables, or at least for
prodigies. What hinders then the accomplishment of the Prophecy? Why does not
the Archpriest perform his charge? And who hinders the African Slave from
receiving the reward which heaven has allotted him for the redemption, and
safety of you all. At that word, all the assistants began to cry out, that the
State was preserved, the strangers defeated, Alcidiana was victorious, and
common happiness secured. Rhadiotez attended with all his officers, came near
the feigned Araxes, and entreated he would ascend the Queens Scaffold with him.
Our Hero did so, but as soon as he was mounted, he humbly besought her to
give him Audience. And as soon as she had granted it, he placed himself so,
that he had his face alike turned to her, and to the people, on one knee he
kneeled, on the last degree to the throne, and addressing himself to the
Princess, thus bespoke her. I do not wonder (Madam) that this Assembly shows
so little resentment of the good it receives from the excess of your
goodness: It is so great, that far from being sensible of it, they are not
capable of the conception; and I, who strive to imprint it in others, find i^
so far beyond belief, that I can hardly give credit to it my self. Truly,
that which your Majesty has resolved on for the preservation of your estate,
is infinitely above all the examples of love, and magnanimity; and succeeding
times will look on it, as a fiction invented by this age, to over-whelme with
shame, or despair, all such as are to lend a hand to the helm of the worlds
government. That the glorious Alcidiana should tread under foot (I must say so)
her birth, her greatness, her renown, her beauty; that to divert and hinder
the affliction of her people, she should voluntarily make her self the most
miserable of all women, and give her self up to the mercy of one of those
monsters bred in the deserts of Africa; It Is an abasement; (Madam) it is an
humilation; It Is such a prodigious nothinging of your self, that your Majesty
would do far less for your people, if you laid down your life for their
preservation. The notice I take of this wonder, confounds my ambition, in lieu
of satisfying it; and forbids me to aspire to what in all the world is to be
most ardently longed for. But suppose this rigorous and powerful necessity,
which compells you to lessen your self to nothing, should use all its
severity, and command to make me go beyond that which is permitted me; I
should be far (Madam) from conforming my self either to the votes of the
people, the seeming desire of your Majesty, or the very decree of Fate. Should
I act it, I were Ignoble, a Traitor, and a Villain. For I am neither Araxes, a
slave, nor an African. I am Madam the unfortunate and rash Stranger -- at that
word Polexander was forced to stop, for in the instant such a horrible cry
arose at the gate of the Temple, that our Hero thought the Spaniards had
surprised the upper town, and came with fire and sword to destroy it. The
Ceremonies were interrupted by it, the hopes of all the Assembly alike
confounded, the Temple filled with howlings, and confusion, and in a thought
abandoned, not only of the people, but the Priests and the Queen her self.
Polexander, having thrown off his long robe, broke his chains, and drawn his
sword, hasted out of the Temple, and presently saw a fire, which flying over
the lower town walls, seemed as if it would wholely consume it. Presently he
made to the Fort, and from thence to the seeming-inflamed town; but he
perceived the flame came from another place, and straight knew 'twas part of
the Spanish fleet, which were set on fire by some fire ships thrust in amongst
them. Straight he sent Diceus to carry this good news to the Queen, and to
assure her that he was going to finish what fortune had begun. It held more
then he promised her; for by the help of a great tmult which he heard in the
lower town, he got slide some troops into the enemies intrenchments, and
finding them forsaken, instead of making use of the Aqueduct, he entered the
town, by the way which was offered him. In the instant he had news that the
Inhabitants had taken arms against their tyrants. To sencod their resolution,
he caused to resound again every where the word Liberty, and the name of
Alcidiana; and strove to cut the enemies their passage for regaining their
ships. They were entrenched on a tongue of land, which thrust it self out
beyond the fortifications of the town, and whilst one part of them made good
their ground, the rest stole along the tongue of land, and hastened to their
ships. Polexander perceived their drift, and very loath the Strangers should
vaunt they had uncorrected laid waste part of the Inaccessible Island, embarked
two thousand men in his own vessels, and got with them the back part of the
reintrenchment. 'Twas there, where I may say the skirmish was hottest. Night
added her horror to war, and seemed to bring on more fury to the Combatants.
Day broke in the height of the skirmish; and Polexander then meeting the Prince
of Sidonia, vowed to dye, or to make him beg his life, and then send him
Alcidiana's prisoner. His vow was more then accomplished, for the Prince of
Sidonia knowing him, and desirous to be avenged for the affront he had received
by his valor, came toward him with all the resolution that hatred can breath
into haughty courages. The Duel was long, and the victory sometime doubtful;
but fortune now reconciled to Polexander, made her fly on his side, and the
Prince of Sidonia lost his life, with all that he had won in the Inaccessible
Island. His Army sped no better: Those that escaped the sword were made slaves,
and before noon, of all that great naval Army there was naught to be seen but
the remainder of their burnt vessels. Our Hero had but newly left the Prince
of Sidon a when he met with Pallantus. He fell on his neck, and relating to him
in few words all that he knew not, of his fortune: What (said he) will the
Queen think of my disguise? And can she persuade her self there is any
sincerity in the Soul of him who has made show of so much artifice in his
actions, in his discourse, nay in his very habiliments. Ah! Pallantus, if thou
work not my peace, if thou win not Amintha to undertake the defense of my
affection, I see my self more miserable then ever. Go therefore (dear
Pallantus) and labor for my peace. It Is possible it may betide, that in
consideration of the victory the Queen has had on her enemies, she may lend
an ear to my Justifications. Make use of your eloquence on so fair an
occasion; but above all, make known at large, that Fortune and Love have been
the sole Authors of my disguise; and that I never heard any speak of that
fatal Prophecy, which gave Alcidiana to an African Slave, when the King of
Ghenoa's amity, and mine own inclination made me take on the marks and title of
a Slave. If Polexander would have talked till the morning, I think Pallantus
would not have interrupted him, for he was so transported from his self, that
he scarce knew who spoke, or where he was. At last our Hero made him recollect
his Spirits. He came again, and held long time his eyes fixed on Polexander, as
if he had suspected his ears, and willingly would know, whether the one would
confirm the verity which the other would have persuaded him. Though he saw
himself fully satisfied, yet he persever'd in his doubts, and looked for
Polexander in Polexander. What (said he) you live then, and are not the Slave
born in the depths of Africa, for whose valor heaven reserved the safety of
this Kingdom. Yes, (said our Hero) I live, and am a slave come out of Africa.
But I am not so happy, nor so valiant to believe, that the safety of a Kingdom
such as this is, should be reserved for me. You are (replied Pallantus) both
too fortunate, and valiant then needs to accomplish so great a business, but I
place not on that the height of your felicity. I fix it on this, that
Providence it self (who from all Eternity had destined you to the government of
this Kingdom) has lead you to it, by ways so fair, and ordinary. I suffer
not my self to be dazeled by my friends flatteries, (replied Polexander) I know
mine own value, and what I ought to hope for; and if you will give me leave to
declare my mind freely, I shall tell you (dear Pallantus) that the highest
pretention I have is, that my service may at last obtain me (from Alcidiana)
the honor to wear her chains, and to watch for her amongst her Slaves. This
converse had lasted longer but for Diceus coming in. As Soon as Polexander saw
him, he stepped forward, and asked (with a trembling voice) if he had had the
honor to see the Queen. I newly came from her (replied Diceus) and bring such
news as may much amaze you. Pallantus thinking Diceus would not speak before
him made a semblance to withdraw, but our Hero staying him by the arm; You
(said he) shall wrong me if you imagine that that I am distrustful of your
discretion. Do you not know that you have undertaken to justify me to the
Queen, and how can you do it, unless you know how she is disposed, and what
thoughts Diceus has put in her? Tell us (said he to his servant) what you have
done. Diceus dissembling his joy, Before (said he) I acquit my self of the
command you imposed on me, I thought it fitting to visit Amintha. I went to her
lodging, and met her as she was entering. No sooner had she an eye on me, but
she came forward, and feigning to be all in choler: What Diceus (said she) you
have been capable of this treason? and Polexander could conceal from me a
thing wherein I might so effectually serve him? Surely you have both done very
fairly. Now see for some body that may repair the faults you have committed.
Madam (said I) if the King my Master have been in an error, do not (if you
please) impute it, either to the diminution of his affection, nor any other
cause as culpable. Fortune is guilty of all, and if you will have me name her
Accomplices, I must say all Alcidiana's Subjects. No sooner had the King my
Master set foot on the Island, but they took him for a certain African Slave,
foretold of by some prophecy, and on that foundation building all that a
popular extravagance can produce, they won him to take arms, and march to the
relief of this City. The very day he got the Spaniards Fort, he was wounded as
you have heard, and but for my ordinary curiosity he had not known either of
your re^ hither, or whether you were alive or no. I can assure you it for
truth, because I have seen him many a time lament you for dead, and he no
sooner knew from Alcippus by what unhappie accident you had been as it were
forced out of his arms, but falling as it were dead on me, Let heaven (said
he) hence forward do what it pleases, since Amintha is lost, and since with
her I lose all the hope of my reseeing Alcidiana; I have nothing else to be
deprived of. Amintha was so inly touched with these words (said Diceus) that
the tears stood in her eyes. A while she stood and could not speak to me. At
last, being recollected, Come, said, she into my Closet, and let us endeavor to
recompose such things as Polexander's ill fortune has disordered. As Soon as we
were in private, Before all things else (said Amintha) you must relate to me
all that your Master has done (I may say) since his resurrection. I replied,
Madam I recounted to you before Alcidiana, how he dyed; I will now tell you the
manner of his reviving, and the brave adventures which have befalne him in his
second life. After that, I related to her your Majesty's death, and
resurrection, as I took it; and forgot nothing of what had betided you both by
Sea, and Land. I will not tell you how often Amintha wept during my recital,
nor how often she made me say over again the same things, that she might make
them credible to her. When I had done; Diceus (said she) it is to be confessed
that the generousnesse, and constancy of the King thy Master were impossible
to be rewarded, if heaven had destined them a recompense less then Alcidiana.
But note with me, how that Eternal Spirit which so wisely presides over the
fates of men, has by secret, insensible, and unconceivable ways, brought
Polexander to that high point of honor, and felicity, where his virtues are to
be crowned. Indeed, that Providence would not by common means work the
conjunction of two such extraordinary personages as Alcidiana and Polexander.
It has done well to hide that admirable effect of Justice in thick clouds, and
to inviron it with seeming invincible difficulties, to the end that the one
becoming dissipated, and the other surmounted, that admirable work of its
powerful hand, might amaze all minds with joy, and admiration. Or, if thou will have me say so, to the end the Deity making appear what it is by so
visible a miracle, might deeply reingrave its love, and fear in all such hearts
from whence it was alike effaced. Our Prophets threatened Alcidiana either to be
taken away by strangers, or to be the wife of a Slave com'd out of the deserts
of Africa; and denounced, how without that fatal marriage her estate ran
hazard to be lost, with her self. Whilst all things were preparing here to
bring to light the beginning of that Prophesi, Heaven labored in the depth of
Africa for the Accomplishment of the rest. It sent tempests, discovered rocks,
and ordained Shipwracks, to the end that a great King losing all the signs of
Dignity should become effectively a Slave, and under that miserable condition
wander long time through the deserts of Africa. But thou see not Diceus the
mystery of this inducement. Heaven made not Polexander a Slave but to witness
its decrees are unchangeable; and withal, to provide for him a way right, and
open, whereby it might be easy for him to arrive to that happy port, whither
neither his ^avells, his watchings, nor industrious searches had ever been able
to have brought him, All these things have I represented to the Queen, and have
so well persuaded her to them, that she has in part lost the displeasure she
had conceived against Polexander. She believes now that if he erred, 'twas by
the inevitable order of heaven; and humbling herself before that absolute
Power, O Eternal Wisdom, cried she! I admire thee, and am confounded in
these Events, I have no more election, nor will. Do at last what thou have
resolved for thy glory. But what think thou Diceus to what this Princess was
driven when Polexander (after he had sufficiently made himself known)
vanished from her as a flash of lightning? I will not say that she changed the
fair intention she bore him to an excess of hatred, since after that which
she spoke to thee her self, it is possible she never had it. Yet I may well
tell thee that never any great affection was contested withal by so many
different enemies, as that which Alcidiana bears to Polexander. As Soon as she
was retired where she might with seemlinesse speak her thoughts: What Amintha
(said she) hold you correspondencie with mine enemies? Have you betrayed mine
innocence, and will you suffer a stranger to triumph over Alcidiana's honor?
By one only word you might have stopped those extravagancies my credulity
wrought me into. You might without failing in any fidelity to your friend, have
drawn me from those errors which have hurried me to unreasonable resolutions,
and have prepared me by degrees for the presence of that supposed Slave. But
you have unworthily left me to the frenzy of my subjects, and mine own.
Amintha, Amintha! how shall these faults be excused? But I know their cause.
Polexander's contentment is more dear to you then mine. You desired to build
his fortune on the ruin of mine honor, and never cared what, became of
Alcidiana, so that Polexander attained his desires. In a word, you have wished
that he himself might be witness to those follies whereto his affection might
sway me, that so he might glory and boast of my being enamored on him. This
contentment he has had, Amintha; and I think there is nothing now left for
me to act, either for his or your satisfaction. But as I labored both for you
and him, it is fit I have my turn, and now do somewhat for my self. Since I
have so often assured you of my love to Polexander, I will not now say that
Prince is indifferent to me. I confess Amintha I have loved him, and I love
him still; but since I am deceived in my affection, I will stay the course of
it, and do in hatred to my self, what I had resolved to perfect for the love
of that Stranger. Do not doubt it. I will accomplish all the Prophecy. The
slave that came out of the utmost of Africa shall be Alcidiana's husband. But
she will ever regard him according to what he seems, and not what he is; and
will well find a means to deprive him of the applauding himself for his
cunning, or reaping the fruit he expects by his infamous victory. The Queen at
these words being enforced to stop, (so much had grief and indignation
transported her) I presently fell at her feet, and most earnestly beseeching
her to hear my justification, swore to her by all that is most sacred in
heaven, that I was innocent of the treason whereof she accused me, and that
the King thy Master had first beguiled me, to the end I might be the more fit
to deceive her. Though I have much ado to believe you, replied the Queen, yet I
will persuade my self that Polexander is only guilty. But since he is a
priviledg'd Offender, an Offender sustained by heaven, an Offender maintained
by the same Justice which uses to cut off others; I renounce the intention I
had of prosecuting his crime. Let him live, Amintha, since heaven ordaines it,
and my people require it, and let another die for him. It shall be the
indiscreet Alcidiana; yes, it shall be that wretch, which is to be offered a
sacrifice for the safety of this State, and the glory of a Stranger. Let Us
quickly then to that immolation, and live no longer after so much shame. Let
me die, that I may no more look on Polexander. Her sighs here hindering her
further speech, I besought her to consider things passed on that side which
appeared not so monstrous, and to conceive, that being guided by the providence
of heaven, she could not look on them as things prodigious, but that withal
she must believe that very Providence subject to error and disorder.
Afterward, I went on with what I began this relation, and brought her, after
five or six hours of contestation, to give me the victory, or to say better,
to reduce her to the absolute power of him that masters Kings. But I could not
win of her so much, as a consent to see Polexander. She always upbraided
his treachery, and would not believe he loved her, since he feared so little to
offend her. When Amintha had related thus much to me (said Diceus) I was much
confused. Yet at last, necessity encouraged and lent me wit. I justified your
arrival, your disguise, and silence; nay, all that I had spoken touching your
death too. If after all this (said I) there remains any other crime, it is I
that committed it, and Polexander is clear. Thus we parted. At the recital of
these mistidings, Polexander became as dead, and ruminated something dismal in
his mind, when diverse armed men coming in where he was, interrupted his
thoughts, and obliged him to give them audience. Pallantus conducted and
presented them: See (said he) the men from whom the Spaniards have received one
of their mortall'st blows. They are the Inhabitants of a little town at the
head of this Lake. By means of a very fair haven within the enclosure of
their walls, they have been chosen by our Kings to keep such Vessels as at any
time by tempests were thrown on our coasts. They had a great many of all
burdens; and seeing this Island in so much danger, thought it fit to try all
ways for the public safety, and have recourse to other means then that of
force. To which end, they resolved to fill some ships with wilde-fire, which
set under sail, and steered near the Spanish Navy they fired, and quitted so
happily, that with a little or no loss they have defeated the principal
strength of the Enemy. Polexander entertaining those generous Islanders with
the best precedence of spirit which his private discontents had left him,
praised their industry and courage; confessing, they had extremely contributed
to the deliverance of their country. With which good words he dismissed them,
and taking Pallantus aside, let him know of Alcidiana's new choler. Pallantus
could not reply, because at the instant he saw a great many people descend by
the causey leading to the upper town. They were such as first heard news of
their entire deliverance, and the metamorphosis of the slave Araxes into the
Prince Polexander; and came to see him with all the expressions of an
extraordinary joy. Some carried branches of Palm in their hands, others of
Cedar, some had Laurel Crowns, and others had Olive. Those that marched
foremost, meeting with our Hero sooner then they thought, witnessed their
astonishment, and gladness by shoutes and clapping of hands. Those that
followed, desirous to break their order and come in the first rank, that they
might not be the last in rendering what they owed to the deliverer, made such a
confusion; that diverse of them fell into the Lake, and Polexander himself was
almost stifled in the croude. He was compelled whether he would or no to answer
that unmeasurable affection of the multitude, by long kindnesses and great
demonstrations of joy. But when he saw himself solicited by those indiscreet
zelots, to go in triumph into the upper town, and then to the Temple of
Wisdom, to render thanks for the happy success of the war; he mildly
remonstrated their fault, and told them, that although their desires were just,
yet they could not (without offense) be satisfied, but by order from the Queen.
That they ought to attend her commands, and respect her as the sole power by
whose wondrous effect the Spaniards were beaten from the Island. The multitude
being a little held in by so discreet a remonstrance, by little and little
retired into the town; and our Hero seeing most part of the Lords of the
Island who had fought under his command, to come toward him, was again
obliged to constrain himself to treat them according to their merit. They
congratulate with him for the victory; and by a proposition reduced him to a
necessity far more harsh then that which he had newly avoided. For they
besought him with one voice, to go and declare to the Queen how the Enemies
had been defeated. He answered that Pallantus, and some others, had already
retated it. But that is not enough (replied the Lords). She should (if you
please) hear it from your own mouth. There is none but he by whose valor we
have been delivered, that can fitly declare how it was done. Polexander, having
nothing to oppose against so much reason, but a great deal of wilfulness,
which in all likelihood had been ill grounded, made no other answer but that he
was ready to obey them. Presently Pallantus, Amyntas, and two others were sent
to Alcidiana to entreat audience for Polexander and his followers. Upon
consideration she granted it; and as soon as the Messengers were gone, It Is in
vain for me (said she to Amintha) to resist a stronger power then mine own.
I see well that Polexander must have the best of Alcidiana as well as of his
Enemies. That which I feared most is betided, and to my shame, I am enforced to
show a fair semblance to a man that has cruelly offended me. Whilst the
Princess made these and other the like complaints to her confident, the
Ambassadors returned to those that had sent them, and intimated, that presently
after the Queen had dined they should have audience. They were glad of the
time, lest they might appear unfitly before the Princess. For Polexander he
never thought much of trimming or adorning himself. His fault, or (to speak
more truly) his misfortune was still before his eyes. He imagined that
Alcidiana truly mislik'd him, and gave no way to see him but for her peoples
sake. Whilst these cogitations perplexed him, Diceus presented a letter to him
from Amintha; without knowing why, he trembled at the receiving it, and at the
opening found these words:

The true Amintha to the false Araxes.
I Have not leisure to reprove you so much as your cunning and little
friendship requires. Nor do I write to you as one offended, but generous,
that even pities the misfortune of an Enemy. Make use of my freedom, if you
intend to be happy, and entreat it to forget your ingratitude, that you may
after your public Audience have by that means a more particular.

Polexander took not long time to deliberate what he was to answer so generous
a friend, but calling for things fitting made this reply:

Araxes and Polexander equally unfortunate, to the virtuous Amintha.
HE whom you style ungrateful, without a murmr undergoes your reproaches,
though his own Conscience assures him he deserves them not. Nevertheless, he
renders you many humble thanks for the remedy you promise to his afflictions.
But it is not enough, generous Amintha, that your charity has found out a
salve for those wounds which I thought to be incurable: It behooves you (if you
please) to perfect the Cure, and instruct me how I should demean my self.

This Answer brought to Amintha had all the success Polexander could expect.
For that worthy Lady with such discretion served him, that she obtained from
Alcidiana a tacit consent of seeing him, and to hear his justifications. But
the blinded and indiscreet love of the people hindered the execution of this
design. They assembled by troops in all quarters, and imagining their quiet
would never be secured so long as the Prophecy had not its full
accomplishment, beset the Palace as they had done the day before, and cried out
that the Queen should perfect their happiness. What Is the cause, says one,
that her Majesty acquits not her self of the duty she owes the eternal
Wisdom for her own safety and that of her subjects? Is she so insensible of
the favors she has received from so powerful a hand, that she deferres to
give thanks for them? But, says another, with what pretext can she color her
refusal and delays, since there is no more talk of putting an unknown Slave
into her throne? See what it is (quoth a third) to be too happy: we forget our
selves in the excess of diversifi'd good fortune. The Queen (who at length saw
her self either a Slave, or engaged to wed a wretched African, is at this
hour, not only victorious over her Enemies, but on the point to be the wife of
the famousest Prince in the world) loses her self in the greatness and
abundance of her bliss, and believes she lessens something of her glory in
making her self the companion of a man. Those insolent and rash heads, having a
long time entertained themselves with such discourses, pressed on the Palace
guards, and said resolutely they would speak with the Queen. Rhadiotez came to
them, and remonstrating instantly that the continuance of their violence would
make them all subject to the Law, boldly and rigorously demanded, if they were
not freed from all fear of their Enemies, and what they requested more? We
come (replied they) to beseech the Queen, not to put off to a further day those
thanksgivings which the divine Protection expects from our resentments; but
conferring on our deliverer the reward destined him by heaven, by her obedience
make our present felicity everlasting. Rhadiotez, who was as desirous as they
to see Polexander and Alcidiana seated in one throne, but conceiving by some
speech let fall by the Princess, that she never intended to marry unless she
were forced to it, mildly bespoke the multitude, praised their good intention,
and promised them to represent to the Queen the justice of their demands.
Whilst he went to make this relation, those who were to accompany our Hero to
his Audience, failed not at the time assigned to be with him. They entered the
Fort, all covered with Gold and Jewels, and finding Polexander very melancholy,
and in a too perceiveable neglect, told him, he either seemed to envy their
happiness or his own glory. He answered them not, but with a smile, and
seeing himself urged to be gone, took the place these valiant men appointed,
and marched toward the Palace. No sooner was he out of the Fort, but Fame,
which still flew before him, got to Eliza, and proclaimed from street to
street, from one Carfour to another, that the deliverer of their country was
coming to give their Queen an account of what hehad done. At which news, that
part of people before the palace descended to the gate where Polexander was to
enter, and receiving him with acclamations and all signs of joy; entreated,
that he would not leave his miracle imperfect, but rather since it lay in his
power, that he would confer on future ages also, th^se sel^ which he had
gloriously acquired in the present. Polexander would again have ^den the
multitude, but all the Lords in company, intimated to him they were of the same
mind, and said 'twas fitting the Queen should end what she had begun. When
they came into the first Court of the Palace thronged full with people,
Rhadiotez met them, and made known that the Queen no longer enduring the
cries of her people, and desirous to begin her new government, by such
thanksgivings as she owed to the Eternal Wisdom, put off their audience till
after the Sacrifices. But (said the Priest) let every one prepare with joy for
the Solemnizing so holy an action, and nev^ think more of our former miseries.
We are now come to those happy times our Prophesies so long ago foretold us.
All the Auditors understood well what he meant Even. Polexander (that would
have been willing for conforming himself to what he believed of Alcidiana's
thoughts to have found out somewhat that might have added to his discontents)
took notice of too visible assurances some certain happiness was betiding
him. He instantly departed the Palace, with his pompous attendance, and retired
to the High Chamberlaines house, where all the people following him, by their
submissions, and acclamations acknowledged him for their King: And withdrawing
every one to his own home prepared themselves for the comfort, and mirth they
expected from Alcidiana's resolution. Diceus in the mean while (who was still
careful for what ever concerned his Masters service) came to him, with his
Slaves, and all other necessaries; and was so eloquent in persuading him to his
happiness, that he made him consent to change his habit. The High Chamberlain
getting away the multitude, to leave the Prince at more liberty, went
afterward to perform his duty at the Palace, and receiving there the Queens
Commands, returned to give fitting Orders to the town, and those of the
Temple. When he came back, he found Polexander in case fit to appear before
Alcidiana, and asking him how he would spend the remainder of the day, proposed
their private going to Amintha's lodging, and there pass that time with her.
Polexander made some difficulty, though he much wished it. But Diceus advising
him not to lose that occasion, he, with the High Chamberlain (in a close
Chariot) went to the Ladies lodging. Had she expected that visit she could not
have been better prepared. She welcomed Polexander with an unexpressible joy;
and after a discourse of many things able enough to consolate him, said in his
Ear, she would make good her word, and bring him to Alcidiana in private. But
(said our wary Lover) will it not offend her? Fear nothing, replied Amintha,
let the event of the Counsel I give you light on me. I obey Amintha (said
Polexander) and go boldly on the word of so good a guide. The High
Chamberlain discreetly slipping away during this conference, left them in full
liberty. Presently Amintha, commanded her Chariot to be be made ready, and in
the mean time sent to know what the Queen did. Word was brought back, she was
retired into her Closet, and command given that none shall have admittance.
Let Us try our fotune yet said Amintha, turning to Polexander. Not so Madam by
your leave, (replied the Prince timorously) let us not endanger the displeasing
her again. I have offended but too much already, With that Amintha looking
merrily upon him, Is it possible (said she) that so fearful a man has been
able to subdue a Nation esteemed the the valiantest in the world? Ah Madam!
(replied the Prince) this is no time to jest. I know Alcidiana, and what I am.
Well, howsoever (said the Lady) we must to the Queen, we will war upon
sight, and undertake nothing rashly. With that she, accompanied with
Polexander, and two of her women, took her Chariot, and descended (as she was
wont) at an entry of the Palace where no men were permitted to come. Thence
she went up into her chamber, and leaving our lover there with her women, by a
private Gallery came to the Queens Cabinet. The Ladies which were the Ushers,
understanding who it was, opened the door, knowing she had a particular
permission to see the Queen in what case soever. As she entered, she asked
aloud and of purpose, what the Queen did? She heard her, and called her to
come in, and said she should see. Presently the lesser Cabinet door was
opened, and she saw the Queen had before her the plate of brass on which was
engraven the Prophecy we have so often spoken of. See (said she) my obedience.
I do all that you prescribe me; for above this hour I have been troubling my
brains to give this Prophecy some favorable interpretation. Amintha, with a
great reverence replied: If your Majesty find any thing difficult in it, I
will go fetch you an excellent Inteprreter. I shall do it well enough alone
said Alcidiana smiling. Yet it is fitting and necessary (answered Amintha) for
your Majesty to know that Interpreters opinion. If you please I will bring him
to you. Why Amintha (said the Queen hastily) is he here? Yes Madam, replied
the Lady. I took on me the boldness to bring him hither, on your Majesty's
word. O heaven! (said Alcidiana sadly) let me not see him. I think Madam
(quoth Amintha) you are both of one mind, and will. How (said the Queen) will
he not see me? Yes, (answered Amintha) but he dares not. You believe then (said
the Queen) that I as extremely desire it, but have not boldness enough to say
so. Your Majesty (replied the Lady) may give my words what interpretation you
please, and I will endure it, provided you give not to your own such a one, as
may be contrary to my intention. At last said the Queen, I see Amintha that I
must obey. No sooner had she spoke the words, but Amintha went forth to bring
in the affrighted Polexander. Never was the like seen, as in the Princes
action, and speech, when he saw himself engaged to see Alcidiana. The most
violent cold of an Ague, puts not a man into such an estate as he was, by the
excess of his passion. He staggered at every step, and was oftentimes like to
fall down the stairs. Sometimes he stood so glew'd to a step, that he could
go no further, and by and by descended two at once. Amintha was near stifled
with laughter; and every foot asked him if he truly in his conscience knew
where he was. How can I know that, (replied the Prince seriously) since I do
not so much as know my self? At last, with much ado they came to the Cabinet
door: Those who attended there opened it, and told Amintha that since she went
forth, so great a giddiness had taken the Queen, that she was feign to lie
down on her bed in the greater privy chamber. Thither she went, and finding
part of the windows shut, and the rest darkened by great fine-coloured taffata
curtains drawn over them, came softly to the bed, and presented herself to
Alcidiana. Come nearer Amintha (said the Queen) and see how I am. I was like
to swound since you left me. But where is our deliverer now, said she raising
her voice? He is at last (Madam replied Amintha) come to your chamber door. How
at last come, said Alcidiana? Because (replied Amintha) he has been twenty
times like to break his neck in coming down the lesser stairs. He could not
find the steps, and I believe he will hardly be able to come in hither without
swounding. Go bring him in (said the Queen,) and raising her voice again, Come
near, come nearer our deliverer, said she. With that, Amintha took Polexander
by the hand, and one might say without exaggeraton, drew him to the Queens bed
side. Presently he threw himself, or rather sunk on his knees, and not daring
to lift up his eyes to see that Sun which had purposely hidden part of her
light for fear of dazeling him, kneeled so without speech, memory, or
judgment. Polexander, (said the Princess) I understand by Amintha you intend
to justify your self for what has passed. But it needs not. That absolute
Power, which disposes of us as it pleases, is your justification. If you have
erred, you have erred by its decree; and I should not have the thoughts which I
ought, if I were not extremely sensible of those miracles you have done for the
safety of my subjects, and my self. During this speech, Polexander recovering
his senses, and speaking to her, but more elegantly with his eyes, then his
tongue: It Is now Madam (said he) that I must call you the lively Image of that
Eternal Spirit, which shows too much love to his Creatures. Like him, you
pardon infinitely, and like him, you heap favors on those, who by their
demerits were to expect nothing but tortures, and punishment. I therefore
(since it pleases your Majesty) turn those excuses I had prepared into
actions of thanksgiving. At that word, Alcidiana interrupting him; I will (said
she) neither have thanks, nor excuses. They are both due to you from me, but I
know your generousnesse is so far elevated above what is ordinary, that it
would be taken for an offense, if I went about either to excuse my self, or
render you thanks. Polexander has done nothing (replied our Lover) as a
Prince, or a Slave, which may be thought worthy that which he owes your
Majesty, or his affection to your Majesty. By that name of Slave (said the
Queen) you make me call to mind, what Amintha has related to me touching the
many dangers and troubles you have passed in search of thi^ Island. Is it
possible that things have so happened as she has declared? Or w^d you please
to make me a recital of them your self? If it were not too irksom to you, I
should a great deal of content in hearing all that which has beflne you since
our separation. At that command Polexander began to be a little more imboldned
then before, and fixed his eyes on the Queen, At the very first hour (said he)
when I had the ^nour to see your Majesti^ I made a ^ow perpetually to serve
you, and that vow was accompanied with a blind obedien^e; I think to give you a
proof of it, in re^ng such adventures as it is possible may be unpleasing to
you: But if I therein offend, I beseech you to impute it to that obedience.
This preamble was followed by an ex^ct and judicious narration of those many
strange and wonderful E^ts yo^ have read during this long discourse: Alcidiana
many times inti^ated how much the loved him; and the strength of her
imagination seconding the greatness of her love, threw her into all those
perils wherein Polexander had been engaged. She took as many wounds as he,
underwent as many discommodities, and triumphed as well over as many enemies.
Polexander was very generous in his good fortune. He remembered Almanzor; and
desirous to acquit himself of what he had promised to his memory: How well
knew'st thou great Almanzor (cried he) that Alcidiana was the only felicity
which all Heroes were to seek for on earth; and how well did thou to end thy
days, when thou had lost all hope of attaining to that blessedness.
Alcidiana being surprised with this transport, asked Polexander, who that
Almanzor was. A Prince (Madam said he) that had never his equal. He was
endowed with all manner of high qualities, and aspired to nothing but what was
extraordinary. By the sight likewise of one of yo^ Portraicts, he became one of
your most zealous adorers. The (...) of half Africa (...) and ^rod under (...)
^owns the Queen his Mother had got s^r him, only to obtain the honor to be
(...) ^ves. But the redoubted destiny of your Island, ruined his aspiring
hopes; and the (...) ^'d, or rather the just anger that inflamed him, to see a
wretched King of the Canaries, dare pretend to the honor of adoring you, made
him turn his arms on himself. Polexander (replied the Queen coldly) is
without doubt that wretched King. But if I remember well what Amintha told me,
that Prince whom you so little esteem, gave that great Hero his life. It Is
true Madam (said Polexander) that Almanzor, attempting with my life, to deprive
me of my insolence in addressing you my vows; the Chance of arms, which is
almost always unjust, gave from him that advantage which his valor deserved.
Whereupon grown desperate with the disgrace, he resolved to dye, and thought
after his misfortune, he was not worthy to continue his adoration. He therefore
caused a Tomb to be built in one of the Canaries which may go for one of the
worlds miracles; and after he had shut himself into it, and invoked your
Majesty, as the sole Divinity he acknowledged here below, resolved to immolate
himself to your glory, and to make his Victime the more admirable, was himself
both the Priest, and Sacrifice. Before he dyed, he commanded his dear
Almandarin to pluck out his heart as soon as he was expired; and to assay all
means to come and lay it at your Majesty's feet. By a strange adventure that
heart, so noble and so famous, is in my hands, and I engaged my self to see the
last will of that Prince performed. But some two year, since, loosing that
Treasure, with the vessel in which I inbark'd from the Canaries, to my great
sorrow, I cannot but imperfectly accomplish the desires of that Semi-god.
Polexander thus ending, Alcidiana replied, that she held Almanzors heart as
received. And for fear said she, you may be the cause of a new tumult, go and
prepare your self for the thanksgiving, which you, as well as my self, do owe
for the saving of this Kingdom. Those last words which could not be more
obliging, ended this sweet conversation. Polexander arose, as he stooped to
take leave of the Queen he happily met with her hand, and kissed it with such a
transport, as none but a discreet Lover is able to imagine; and leaving Amintha
there, got into her Charior, and commanded to be set down at the high
Chamberlains. 'Twas there that in good earnest he began to taste the sweets of
his fortune. He related to Diceus all that had passed; and his memory to
please him making use of some privileges of the imagination, represented to
him as entire, and consummated felicities, a little Essay of his happiness to
come. And to make an outward show of the joy he concealed within, he clad
himself as for a day of Triumph, and was loaded with so many Diamonds, as by
their only richness he gave convincing proof of the greatness in which
heaven had ordained him to be borne. Night shortly after coming on, every one
prepared for the Temple. All the streets were enlightened with an infinite
number of torches, and so full of goers and comers, that 'twas easy to be
perceived, the people looked after the action they were to perform as a
certain Gage, and infallible Sign of their peace and perpetual quietness.
As Soon as Alcidiana; with her Court, were come to the Temple of Wisdom, she
sent the high Chamberlain (her Viceroy) and her Captain of the Guard, with
his band to meet Polexander. They intimated to him the command they had, and
brought him to the Temple, followed by all the great Lords of the Realm. All
those of the town which either by crowding, slight or entreaty could get in,
had been there expecting him above six hours; and persons of condition were on
Scaffolds, from whence they might see the Queens throne. As Soon as the Slave^
were come to the doors, they dispersed such as might breed any confusion, and
then opened them to Polexander. He was received by the chief Prelate, and
conducted to the Incense Altar. Presently after, the Queen, of more luster, and
far more glorious in her own beauty, then in that of her Jewels, came and
kneeled down on the same degree with Polexander. Instantly he rose up, and
would have retired. But Alcidiana staying him, You must not, said she, at this
time (if you please) have any will. Our Ceremonies require that resignation.
Polexander taking those words as they were spoken, kneeled down again, and in
the very instant, twenty Priests clad in linen robes, took their golden
trumpets, and by a very pleasing sound, imposed silence on all the company.
After that the Quire sang an Hymn of victory; which done, they celebrated with
a great deal of devotion the sacrifice of thanksgiving. At last, the
High Priest arising, took a golden Censor, and putting fire on the little
hearths where they stood, the air was presently filled with a most extreme
sweet and pleasing odor. All the time the perfumes lasted, the music sung,
and when they were spent, the venerable Rhadiotez put himself betwixt the
Queen, and Polexander, and lifting his hands and eyes to heaven, thanked the
Eter^all Wisdom in most grave and holy man^ for the bless^gs it had show^
(...) on the Kingdom. Which action ended, he pres^ (...) Cen^or to the Queen,
and engaged her to perform what belonged to her Sacerdotall di^y. S^raight she
went and perfumed the Incense Altar, and ascending a little Theater whereon
were two chaires of Gold and Ivory, sare down in that on the left hand, and
presently intimated she would speak. Presently the noise ceasing, all were in a
deep attention; and she arising and presenting the end of her Scepter to the
Company:

My Friends (said she aloud) you have made me sufficiently know by your late
actions, that you are yet in doubt of your happiness, and that you cannot take
for a true content, a quiet which you imagine not perpetual. If the object of
things present has at first sight darted any mirth in your minds, the fear of
what might happen has as quickly driven it out again; and you believe that
your deliverance being not accompanied with all the circumstances which heaven
desires, it is impossible it should be secured you. You foresee new troubles,
you fear new enemies; and the love to your children being as sensible to you as
the love of your selves, you do not think your selves perfectly happy, because
you see not your happiness likely to descend to your posterity. But give over
your foresights and fears, since it is in my power to give you an end to both.
Yes, my Subjects, I will surmount all those difficulties which any way hinder
the perfection of your felicity. I lay this Scepter at the feet of the Infinite
Wisdom which we adore within this temple. To which I offer my liberty, and
qu^tting all sovereign power, which was thence given me with my life, I give my
consent it may be transferred to him who by his wondrous acts has deserved to
be both your Master and mine. The Princess had no sooner ended this short and
judicious speech, but there arose amongst the People a kind of humming noise,
intimating the content of all the Assembly. Rhadiotez presently, according to
the order he had received from Alcidiana, took Polexander and led him up the
Scaffold where she sat. She straight rose, and making two or three steps to
receive him, presented Polexander the Scepter she held, who did what he could
not to accept it. But the high Priest laying before him the necessity of that
Ceremony, and moreover Alcidiana entreating him to give her that last proof of
his obedience, he was enforced to yield to his honor. The Scepter being in his
hand, all the people began to cry, Long live the King and the Queen: after these
acclamatio^s, the Quire sung a Hymn of peace, and another for that
incomparable alliance. The chief Prelate ended these first Ceremonies, with
those whereby he knit in an undiflolvable knot, Alcidiana and Polexander, and
put off the rest to their solemn Coronation. Midnight striking, they departed
the Temple, and followed by the Court, and almost the whole Town returned ^o
the Palace. When they entered, the shoutes, the clapping of hands, and other
signs of joy began again. The Canons went off on all sides the Town,
fire-workes crowned with a great light the Turrets and Domes of the Palace,
and the Trumpets by their sound intimated the resounding noise of the people,
who had continually in their mouths the names of Polexander and Alcidiana. Two
hours after midnight the High Chamberlain went out of the palace, and
thanking the People in the name of their Kings, invited them to the pomps and
sports which should be celebrated a whole months time, to solemnize so great a
feast. At these promises they clapped their hands, gave a shout, and retired.
Those who had the permission to follow our Semi-gods into their Sanctuary, came
forth as soon as the People were gone. Let us imitate them that knew so much
civility, and not boldy knock at so sacred gates, but be contented to know that
Polexander and Alcidiana are together; and since we have so long time enjoyed
them, have so much justice as to think it fitting now they should likewise
enjoy one another

The End of the last Part of Polexander.

