A SOBER REPLY TO THE SOBER ANSWER OF REVEREND Mr. CAWDREY, To a serious
Question propounded, viz.

Whether the Ministers of England are bound by the Word of God to baptize the
Children of all such Parents, which say they believe in Jesus Christ, but are
grossly Ignorant, Scandalous in their Gonversations, Scoffers at Godliness, and
refuse to submit to Church Discipline?

The Affirmative is not sufficiently cleared.

ALSO, The Question of Reverend Mr. Hooker concerning the Baptism of Infants,
of Parents non-Confederate is cleared, and it may serve for an Answer to Mr.
Cawdrey's Diatribe, with him upon the question.

With A Postscript to Reverend Mr. Blake.

By GI: FIRMIN Minister to the Church in Shalford.

JOB 6.24. Teach me and I will hold my Tongue, and cause me to understand
wherein I have erred.

Imprimatur JOS: CARYLL.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. and are to be sold by Robert Littlebury at the
Unicorn in Little-Brittaine, 1653.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
THe Searcher of hearts knows with how little pleasure I appear in this
Controversy, and what little content I have in refusing to baptize the
children of such as the question mentions: it would have become a man of a more
holy spirit (as well as stronger parts) because it pleades for purity of an
Ordinance: but for an impure heart to plead for a pure Ordinance is a most
loathsome thing. Had not such persons as the question mentions, pleaded the
examples of other Ministers as their strongest ground, (telling me that other
Ministers laughed at me for my practice) and also publicly opposed me when I
had dealt with them lovingly in private before, I had never appeared in print,
which I did with an eager desire of satisfaction, supposing that Ministers
would not laugh at others, unless they had strong grounds for their own
practice, which now I hoped to see: the practice being not mine alone (for then
I had justly deserved blame) but of many others before me who baptize not all.

As for Mr. Cawdrey who has pleased to undertake the answer [for which I
really thank him] I saw not his piece against Mr. Hooker till I had printed;
but now I have read over that Diatribe and his answer to me, I confess I am
still unsatisfied: yet small matters would carry me to that which my own will
chooses most readily (God is my mitnesse I have no sinister respect in my
practice) and which would be to my advantage in several respects if I might
baptize all.

I was somewhat ashamed to see so holy and able a man's as Mr. Hooker, to be
joined with me by Mr. Cawdrey: if the neereness of a holy man will shame one,
what will the neerenesse of a holy God do? But since Providence has done it,
I did a little more seriously consider of Mr. Hookers question, though
different from mine, and I hope (...) have so cleared Mr. Hooker out of
himself, that it will give content to the Reader. If I write against the
Truth, Christ will, and I desire he would blast it.

The Reader may perceive by the mentioning of that eminent man of God Mr.
Daniel Roger^, of Wetherfield, that this Treatise was finished before his
Death, and I sent this Reply to him to view over; he sent me them back with
this Letter.

Dear Cousin Firmin, I have sent you both your Books again, I have read them
over and see nothing wherein you fail in answer to Mr. Cawdrey: But I confess
my thoughts are not so thoroughly heat, as yours are, to weigh all
circumstances, and passages of difference between you and him: its only the
concernment of such as are (...). But as for further following Mr. Cawdrey, you
do well to tell him you will henceforth manum de tabula, and I pray hold your
mind: if of reading Books, then surely of writing such as these, there will be
no end. I suppose your have of printing has made you think long; I doubt not
but you have sufficiently proved, that your Arguments are not so weak, as your
adversary in his disdainful conceit has imputed to you.

Yours, DANIEL ROGERS.

A SOBER REPLY TO A SOBER ANSWER, etc.
IF Baptism were a means of Regeneration, as is the Preaching of the Word,
then I should not dare to refuse the Baptizing of any person, what ever: or if
Baptism were so necessary to Salvation, that all those Children which are
Baptized, and die in their Infancy shall be saved, and those which are not
Baptized, and die in their Infancy shall perish [as Augustine affirms (I
think) ten times in one Epistle] then Mr. Cawdrey did justly tax me with
rigidnesse [as be does P. 28. and if he had said worse I should have submitted]
for non-admitting of some Children to Baptism. But neither the first Walae.
To. 1. p. 85. and 491. Syney. pu. th dis^. 44. th. 27.28.
nor the second Chamier. To. 4 l. 5. c. 8. Bell. Ezerv. To 3 d. 2. c. 1.
do our Orthodox Divines affirm. Baptism then being not appointed to bring
persons into union with Christ, but suppose union, or to bring persons into the
Covenant, but suppose a person already within the Covenant, being a Scale of
it, and of all those glorious privileges contained in the Covenant, certainly
this is not an Ordinance that is lightly to be regarded, [nor shall be I am
confident when Christ comes to reform his Church indeed] but those who do
Administer this (being stewards of it) had need look to whom they give out
this sacred privilege. Had God tied up Ministers so, that we should administer
it only to real Believers, then we had a hard task. he has left us a
greater latitude, but whether such a latitude as now the question mentions, is
that we are searching out. Reverend Mr. Cawdrey has yielded P. 16. That such a
person as the question mentions is not sufficiently qualified to be a Church
member. Also P. 17. he says thus, when we say a Profession of the Faith is
sufficient to qualify a Man to be made or continued a Member: we do not mean
a bare profession with his mouth, that be believes in Jesus Christ, though
visibly he lives like an infidel: but thus at least, when nothing in his life
appears to the contrary, though there be yet no great positive signs of his
holiness. Let there be little positive signs added to a competent measure of
Knowledge, and Conversation as you say, and we shall agree in that point. Also
in his Review of Mr. Hooker, P. 89. he affi^meth; That, wicked Men are no fit
materials of a visible Church. And p. 94. 95. he moves a question because it
is hard to judge of the minimum quod sic of Knowledge or Holiness to make a
man a fit matter of a Church, whether it were not safer for the Church to
proceed by ^egations at her then Affirmation: That is, in admitting or allowing
of members, there is nothing appears to the contrary, but that the p^^ty they
have so much of saving Knowledge, and so fair a conversation in holiness, as
may consist with true grace? This is very fair, and certainly there will be
some little positive signs in such a person, and you may admit him by
affirmation. Mr. Cawdrey has fully confirmed me in that which is the ground of
my scruple, for when I observed diverse persons came to demand Baptism of me,
for their children, and I found them grossly ignorant in the necessary points
of Salvation, and far from understanding the nature of the Sacrament, and
also when their conversation was proved by witness to (...) scandalous, and
far from what Mr. Cawdry has set down, I questioned whether I was bound to
give away such a seal as this, and did therefore lovingly request them to
forbear a little, and lay in for more knowledge (offering to help them) and so
to labor to reform their scandalous conversations, then I would do it.

M. Cawdry condemns my practice, P. 15.
and tells the World I have confuted my Opinion and my Practice, and while I
go about to prove the Nega^^^e, I have concluded the Affimative: and that is
by one sentence which I have affirmed, viz. So long as wicked persons are
telerated they may challenge, etc. [what my sentence is I shall presently give
it you plainly.] This sentence (says he) confutes (as it contradicts) both
his Question and his Practice, and it unto gives us an answer to all his
Arguments. You have said enough; He says in the same Page that I have three
times at least affirmed that Proposition: what I have affirmed I will own,
there is a fourth place where I have said the same words in P. 41. 4. 2. (it
should be, the numbers are false printed) That such persons as are ignorant and
scandalous, if they be owned for Church members, they have a remote right to
Baptism, (...) and to the Lords Supper, you must not deny it, by these words,
you must not deny it; I suppose you do not understand me, you must not deny
such the Lords Supper, that is far from my thoughts, for then I should condemn
our old holy Divines and others now, who alone will keep back, it may be half
their Parish from the Lords Supper, I condemn them not at all, but think they
have done well, As you say Review Mr. Hooker p. 94.
though you scarce think so by your passage. P. 21. that then is the meaning of
it, You must not deny it, but they have a Remote Right to the one as well as to
the other. But I suppose you well understood my mind, that I (...) no more
there there th^^^in the s^^^^^ pla^^^, which now I shall consider in may Book,
(...) there you say I have it t^^ies, once from the (...) giving of title to
Circumcision so long as Church members. For the Jews I shall say this once for
all: if you can prove unto me that the grounds of the Jews administ^ing
Circumcision were only the same and no other of our administering Baptism,
then I shall be very much swayed with Arguments you draw from them: but if
there were something peculiar to them as being such a Seed, and such a Church,
(which I do verily believe, and shall speak to afterward) then what
Arguments you draw from them (excepting this, that as God made a Covenant with
believing Abrabam, and gave him the Scale, and likewise his Children, (being
reputed believers with their believing Father) so the believing Gentiles, who
are Abraham's seed have right to the Scale of Baptism for themselves and their
children, which I see confirmed in the Gospe I do very little regard.

You mention the same Page again e it is true sir, there I have s^^ down my
mind plainly, and that I will stand to. There was a question moved, whether
such a b^^^ profession (as the cas^ which I sta^ed mentions) with gross
ignorence, etc. were sufficient to make and continue a Man a Churchmember!

I said suppose that our Divines, who Baptize all go upon this Notion, all
persons in England do profess they believe in Christ, hence all are Church
members, Ergo all are Baptized.

My answer to this was thus: This I confess as some disadvantage to me, [Mr.
Cawdry might have showen me so much favor as to let his Reader know, that what
strength he has against me, I gave it him knowingly, but he never mentions
that I saw the difficulty, though I have expressed it, but triumphs over me, as
if what I had said was unawares, but I look for no favor as his hand.] For if
a Man be looked upon as a visible Saint, and reputed a Member of is true
Church, if that Member be very scandalous, and the Church let him alone, and
not d^^le with him, that person may challenge any Ordinance in the Church, both
Baptism and the Lords Supper: This I have said and will not recall, make of it
what you cannot and here you have my mind fully, with the next words adjoined,
which I will rehearse presently.

From this you have drawn up a ^yllogisme to show the World, Page 15.
how I have Confuted and Comtradicted my self, and thus you have cast it.

The Child of a sandalous Member tolerated, may be Baptized. But the Child of a
scandalous Member not Excommunicated, is the Child of a scandalous Member
tolerated.

Ergo, it may be Baptized, and is Minister may lawfully Baptize i^.

Thus you have killed me with my own Weapon, but sir when I look on your
Syllogism, it comes at first view as if you must out off one of the see^e of
it, for I (...) it (...) on four: I pray wheat was this ^^^me, and a Minister
may lawfully [that is, the word binds him to it, which is the pinch of the
Question] Baptize is, disposed in the premises? if you say, it was included in
the Major, when I said it may be Baptized. Sir I cannot tell that, if a
Minister will admit a Man into the Church as a Member, though the Man be not
qualified as you have told us Members must be, but very scandalous in
conversation, and grossly ignorant, yet the Minister thinks he have enough to
admit him a Member, and consequently he Baptizeth him; Such a Minister may
Baptize him if he will, he may say, (A Member admitted may be Baptized, but
this is a Member admitted) But the word does not bind him, no, he prophanes
the Ordinace, though he will admit him a Member.

However Sir you should have expressed this in the Major, as you have done in
the Conclusion, then your Major I would have denied; you will say to me, the
Major is my one proposition, and upon that I argue, and show you and the World
how you have confu^ed your self. No Sir I do utterly deny it; show me such a
passage where I have said that Scandalous Members [such us our English persons
are, named in the Question] tolerated, may have their Children Baptized, and
the word binds Ministers to do it. Show your Reader that, and then you say
something: but how far I was from thinking or speaking so, the very next
words unto that which you say is my sentence, and out of which I have consuted
my self, do declare: my words are these.

But I conceive such a person is not sufficiently qualified to make a Member of
a Church, nor ought to be continued a Member of the Church: but the Church
ought to seek to reform him, or if not, to cast him out, so that if the
Church will let such a person alone, and give him these Ordinances, there will
be guilt charged upon that Church.

This sentence I conceive (if the Reader be but indifferent, and not prejudiced
against me) will save me from selfe-confutation: if the sentence be not true,
but Mr. Cawdry had proved that the Minister is not too blame though he lets him
alone, and yet may lawfully Baptize. Then had he spoken to my scruple indeed,
and I would have thanked him heartily, but then I had not confuted my self.

But still Mr. Caw. will urge from my own words, thus I have said, Scandalom
Members, if tolerated, let alone by the Church, they have a remote right to
Baptism and the Supper; Ergo, they may lawfully have their Children Baptized,
and the word binds Ministers to do it.

To this I shall answer, first to the Antecedent, then to the Consequence.

To the Antecedent I answer, first [according to our Congregationall
Principles] that which gives a Man the first right to a Sacrament, viz. his
interest in the Covenans of the Gospel [which you use very much against Mr.
Hooker taking the words from himselfe] this Man has not: for he^ does visibly
declare to the Churches that he has no interest in that Covenant, and your
self deny it not, by what you have affirmed concerning the qualifications of
Church Members. So then he has no right, in that respect, all the right he
has is by the toleration of the Church, which the Church had best look to,
now I do confess that first right is the maine in my esteem, though not all
that is required: as in a Minister, the great matter is the qualification of
the person, which is his inward call, yet it is not all, but his Ordination is
also requisite: but if Bishops, or Presbyters should ordain a scandalous and
ignorant sot, not able to teach himself, nor the Church, I should extremely
doubt of such a Minister: so here I conceive this first right is the chief,
but yet as Mr. Hoolter says Baptism he must come by in a right Order, i.e. he
must be a Member of some congregation; and not an individuum vagum, belonging
to no particular Congregation, nor any body to have inspection over him. But if
Ministers will admit persons that have not this first right, and continue such
amongst them, here indeed is a kind of right, but this let the Ministers look
to.

2. I answer according to your Principles: you make a Man's Christianity alone,
without his joining of himself to any congregation, to be that which gives him
right, and you oppose Mr. Hooker, and the Congregationall Divines for requiring
that joining to any particular Church before they will Baptize: thus you say;
All Children of Christians, as Christians have such right to Baptism, and in
the same Page, Diatri. p. 186.
All Children of Christians, as such, have right to Baptism. Thus in your
answer to me P. 12. you say, a person Excommunicated gives right to his child's
Baptism, because for state be is a Christian, and retains his Baptism. Now
Sir I hope you mean it must be such Christianity as your self have said is
fit to make a Churchmember [I hope you do not mean such Christianity as our
question speaks of] by virtue of that say you he is a Member of the
Catholike-church. Now Sir if that only gives a Man right and his Children, and
yet a Man have not that, I can see no right he has at all, it seems strange
to me that Men should be Members of a particular Church and not of the
Catholike-Church, of the latter these are not Members, for they have not so
much as should give them a right to that Membership, if you will hold to what
you have said about the qualifications of the matter of a Church: for only such
Christianity makes Men Members of the Catholike-church, which these fall very
short of. We use to unwinde a bottom the same way we wound it, if you will
wind the bottom thus, a Professor, or Believer (such a one as you say is
fitly qualified) as such, have by vertus of his profession only, a right to
his own and Child's Baptism, then I unwinde it the same way, he that is no^ a
Professor as you mention, has no right at all. Such are those our Case
speaks of.

Now Sir here lay my trouble, that since these persons in the first and maine
respect have no right, but what they have is only by my toleration, this
question arose; whether in the beginnings of Reformation [wherein as Innius
says, something will be extraordinary] the persons being numerous, and not so
fit it may be to Excommunicate in regard of number (...) though in respect of
their wilful igno^, and co^^^ nuing scandalous after admonitions, they des^^^
(...) not the Church suspend such from the Seal of the Cover^^^ a for thus I
conceive while I first adm^nish people ^on their ignorance, and scandalous
living, Suspension is Excommunicatio Minor.
and they refusing to hear me, I do with ^^e consen^ of the Church suspend I
do not rol^^ort^ but you speak as if there were nothing opposite^ to
Toleration, but Excommunication.

Or thus, according to our Congregationall Principles; which maintain^^ a
Non-communion in case Excommunication cannot be exercised against a multitude;
so I do here exclude them from such Ordinances as do hold forth Communion, and
so it is Non commanion in effects. Noncommunion or Separation in some cases
when there is a (...) ^^^^de, the L^yden Prosessort Synop. pur. Theol. dicp.
48. These. 28.29.
maintain.

To the Consequence I answer, by denying it, viz Ministers are not bound by the
word to Baptize all the Children of persons grossly ignorant, and scandalous,
though tolerated.

I still carry it in reference to England, where you say all are Christians,
and Church members: here now I shall speaks more then I would have done,
feeling the temptation of my Brethren in my own hear^; but your triumphing over
me, and celling the World, how I have at once confuted my self, makes me by
way of discourse to clear my self, though I think it is done already. Thus
then I argue.

1. If such Members as the question speaks of be continued such, 1. Argumant.
through the Ministers negligence and contifulnce, then the word does not bind
Ministers to give the Seal of the Covenant to their Children, but the
Antecedent is true, Ergo, the consequent is true.

The Antecedent I had rather have applied only to my self, then any other
Ministers being far more holy then my self, I should think ^ay self to have
been guilty of connivance, but my question, and Mr. Caw. (as I said before)
puts me upon this.

If the Antecedent be denied, I prove it.

When Ministers have power put into their hands, whereby they may reform if
they will, and will not, then their Toleration comes from connivance; and so is
sinful.

But Ministers have now power put into their hands, whereby they may reform if
they will, etc. Ergo:

The Minor is clear: for what power opposes? Church power there is none above
the Ministers; for the civil power that does not oppose, but that power
actually defends such Ministers, and Churches as do reform, and do deny
Baptism to such scandalous ones; This favor once would have been esteemed
very great: what ever we conceive of Toleration, as now it stands, yet this
benefit we have by Toleration, that Ministers need not Tolerate such persons if
they will. It is an ill wind, blows no body good.

But I perceive your Answer in P. 30: you tell us, of a Pope-like power (...)
such a Minister does usurp, who alone shall reform though by su^^ention: you
suppose others will charge us with it, but whether Mr. Cawdrey will not say so
also. I somewhat doubt, by observing this place and Page 20.21. I will not
conclude so of him; but that he is against any Minister that shall do so, that
is clear. By a Minister alone, if you mean thus, that a Minister alone
without his people, or against the Christians consent shall suspend, whom he
please, indeed I doubt of such a practice: but if the Members (visible
Believers) shall come and bring in witness against persons, and desire to have
them debarred, till they will amend, and thus they consent to their Officer in
suspending. I know of no Pope-like power here usuped.

To this therefore I will answer further.

1. If you and ten Ministers more, or as many as you please, will combine
Classi^^ll form of Government [and then you conceive you have power] you may
if you will, who hinders you? I know of no power that oppose you. Therefore
this is not a sufficient P^^^.

2. But is (...) your meaning (in good earnest) to deny to a particular As for
Reverend and Learned Whitaker, whose Testimony he makes use of P. 52. ^as he
grants but what w^^^^, Review Mr. Hooker p. 111.
that every particular Church has a power owen (...) own Members, what power
you mean is plain by the D^scours^ of Mr. Hookers and learned Whitaker M.
Cawdrey writes himself, Pastor of the Church at Billing; Now I pray give me a
reason why so godly and able a Pastor with his Church should not have power
over his own Members, unless he will contradict himself (as he says, I do)
but I hope you do not mean, there is no particular Church, but a Classical
Church, for that apposeth what before you have said of your self: our (...)
runs 14 miles in length, and 20 several Parishes in it, to make all (...)
o^^ particular Church, is very hard, but if the Church at Billing have power
over its own members, why may not the Church at Shalford have the same power?

3. Would you have Ruling Elders to join with me? I observe diverse Classical
Divines question, whether there be any such Officer distinct from the Preaching
Elder. But though I have not Elders actually ordained [I perceive also here you
do not ordain your Elders, which is strange, if Deacons were] yet I have
those whom I look upon to be Elders, and without whom I do nothing that
concerns Discipline. That which has hindered us, is (...) uncertainty of my
maintenance, being cut off from a ^o^^ put which I (...), from a Sequestration,
when I was first called; The maintenance their if from the place being not
sufficient to maintain my charge, I am uncertain of my abode here.

4. When I was ordained by the Pr^sbytery, I thought I had the power of a
Pastor conveyed to me: now one part is to Rule, I think, but to say I cannot
put forth that power alone, but I must have more Elders to join with before I
can do any thing; I desire to see a Scripture for that, because Discipline was
carried on by more then one in the Examples we have in the Scripture, there
being more then one Officer in those Churches, must this needs conclude;
Therefore the power of a Pastor must lie dormant, if he have no other Elders
to join with him, though his people do as I said before, I should deny this
consequence.

5. Classis be formed and Act, shall we have power then to reform? But suppose
my people ask other Ministers of the Classis besides my self, what power they
have to reform them, who made them Rulers over the people against their wills
and consent, having called none but my self for their Pastor? you must have a
call you say to put forth your power actu secundo, in another Church.

6. Island, where there are no more Churches that can combine, and so help one
another, as to be in another place where are thousands, but none will: it is
cannot there, it is will not hear. Yet Sir, there is a Congregationall Church
in the next Town, and when need is I seek counsel of that reverend Officer
Mr. Dan Rogers.

I could say more, but I forbear. What you say concerning Mr. Icanes, I have
not seen that worthy Man's labors, for I live in an obscure Village remote
from London, and seldom hear of Books, neither will my means allow me to
buy all Books that come out. But Sir, I take your Opinion, for you say in your
Epistle, it is hard to judge, whether his way or mine be the best, or worst way
of Cure. Now if it be hard to say, then I perceive you are not clear your
self, for what he has writ.

So much for the Antecedent; now I come to the Consequence. viz. If it be
connivance and negligence that is the cause of this Toleration [which I doubt
is true in many] then the word does no^ bind me, or I may not lawfully Baptize.

If sinful admissions will not justify a Minister in administering the
Ordinance of Baptism, then neither will sinful Tolerations justify a
Minister in administering Baptism.

But the Antecedens is true, Ergo, the consequent is true.

Sinful admissions will not: A^ro. rod. p. 515.
learned Gillespy says: no Conscientious Minister would adventure to Baptize
one, who has manifest and infallible signs of unregeneration, we cannot be
answerable to God if we should.

Also he says, Page 544.
it were a profanation of Baptismel, to Baptize a Catechumene, being
manifestly under the power of abominable finnes, although he could give a
sound, and Orthodox confession of Faith. This is more then thousands of the
Church members of England can do, and yet live under the power of sins bad
enough. His grounds I have quoted before with Augustine, and the Schoolmen,
Aquinas, Durandus, Serious Quest. p. 21, 22, 23.
Greg. de Val.

For the consequence, if it be said, there is more required in one who is a
Member, he must first be cast out: this takes not off the force of the
Argument, the person is sinfully tolerated, as well at first sinfully admitted;
as he might have been and should have been denied admission, and so the
Ordinance had been saved, so this person may and ought to be dealt with (there
being now power in the hands of Ministers) so the Ordinance is saved, sinful
admission caused the Ordinance at first to be profaned, sinful toleration
cause it now to be profaned.

If you would turn me off here (as you do afterward) by telling me the
Argument should proceed of the same person, which it does not, the Child and
the Parent are different persons. Sir, this will not serve the turn, my
Argument proceeds upon one and the same Title, the Parents Title is the Child's
Title, the Child has no other Title, nor pleads any other but the Parents
Title, the Parent expresses his Title for himself, and his Child being a
branch of that stock; if the child pleaded a Title distinct from the Parents,
as a Title of its own, then my Argument were fallacious [as I shall charge you
anon] but if the child could speak, it could plead only this, my Parent is
within the Covenant, the Covenant is made with the Believing Parent, and his or
her seed; Therefore ^give me the Scale: by virtue of him, or her it is made
with me.

You tell me afterward. P. 25. I may Baptize the Child of the prophanest Man in
England, as of the godli^st [my Argument tends to that] Man; only you would
have me grieve that I cannot reform this abuse.

Whence I observe. First, this ordinance may be abused. Secondly, de Facto it
is abused in this administration to such vile persons; only say you his saves
all, you have no power to reform this Abuse, and for that I much grieve; but
this I deny, I have power, and so have you and many more, but by you I cannot
conceive the Ordinance is abused, for if the word binds me to give such a
person the Ordinance; I know not how I abuse it in following of the command of
the word, so that I have no such cause to grieve in respect of the administering
of the Ordinance, for that is well enough, while such a one is tolerated; I am
bound to do it [that is our Question] say you, the grief must be in regard of
the Man's toleration in the Church. But Sir, remember one thing more, you tell
us though such a person be Excommunicated, yet because be is a Christian, and
retains his Baptism; Page 12.
Therefore the Minister must Baptize his Child: what cause of grieving is there
now, for what power is there beyond Excommunication? so that you do but deceive
us in talking of Reformation.

If Toleration, though sinful, will save us from profaning of Ordinances,
then Ministers may take their ease as to that point, and let all corrupt, and
vile Members alone, let them partake of both Seals, for so long as tolerated,
the word binds you ^o give them Baptism, and the Supper, and the word does not
bind me to profane an Ordinance.

So much for my first Argument. 2. Argument.
I come to a second Argument, viz. to prove, though scandalous Members in
England are tolerated, and by virtue of that Toleration they will challenge any
Ordinance, yet the word binds not me to give.

If so, then the Ministers of England are bound to administer the Lords Supper
to the grossest ignorant persons, horribly scandalous, Ranters, etc. in England.

But the Consequent is false; Ergo, the Antecedent is false.

The Consequence is clear, they are Church Members tolerated, says Mr. Caw.
we have no power to help; Therefore they may by virtue of that Principle, by
which he has me on the hip, as he thinks.

I think Sir you speak the same words, P. 94.
in Review of Mr. Hooker, notoriously scandalous Men, tolerated in a Church,
whilst tolerated they are Members to all Ordinances for themselves, and their
posterity. Then all the Ranters, etc. are members to the Lords Supper, and you
have no power, you say to help it. Yet I presume you would sinde power before
you would admit all such to the Supper.

This I would saine have cleared to me, that the Officers are bound to look to
the Members more in admitting them to the Supper then to Baptism: and the
Supper, respect both the same Covenant, there is but one condition [whether
there be Conditio propri^dicta Twiss. Vind. grapraefa. Sect. 8.
in the Covenant of grace is another question] of the coun^^ll of grace, viz.
That man then, who can rightly take a Seal, or Convey a Seal of this Covenant
to his, must visibly appear to have the condition of the Covenant, [which is
the first and maine right, Ames Medal. Th. c. 24. Th. 19. Rhaetors. Exar. Apol.
p. 313.
] if he do so appear, and therefore can convey the Seal to his Child, why he
may not have the other Seal for himself, appearing to be a Believer, and also
being in right Order for my part, I see no reason.

I must not here condemn the holy Divines, who have before kept this
Ordinance; neither dare I say the Assembly of Divines did very weakly, to
trouble the Parliament in requesting the Houses to make an Act against such
persons, that they might be debarred from the Lords Supper, which I must do,
if they were bound to give it while such were tolerated Members, they would
find hard work to have Excommunicated all these. If any say I condemn the
former Divines for Baptizing all: I pray let them say no more then they hear
me say, I do not do so, only I would gladly see the reason of the practice,
and for those, who lived before these times, I can answer my self another way.

I pray remember my Question, how it can be proved that the Officers must look
more to this Seal then the other. 1 Cor. 11. It is said, Let a man examine
himself, etc. True, so he has need before he comes to Baptism: but what is
this to the Officers of Corinth, the Lords Supper was administered every Lords
Day in those times, what must the Officers examine them every week? here is
work enough, they looked to them [or should have done] when they first took
them in to be Members, and so if they did not walk as such ought to do, they
were to looks after them, reform, or cast out, but in so doing they saved
other Ordinances as well as this. But we have a notion taken up, as if
Discipline were appointed only to save the Lords Supper from being profaned,
and no other Ordinance.

Will the 44 (...) 9 prove it? I pray prove that Sanctuary (there mentioned)
means only the Lords Supper, that Sanctuary and Lords Supper are (...), those
who interpret, they ought to prove their interpretation, which you must clear
to make your answer good, in P. 26.

Will 1 Cor. 4.2. prove it? Stewards must be faithful, this must be only in
the Lords Supper.

Will Mat. 7.6. prove it? Holy things must not be given to Dogs. De Bapt.
Tertullian applies this Text to the Administration of Baptism, as well as to
the Supper. And if it must be at the first, then why not as well when it comes
to be administered by virtue of one, who is a Dog. [The word I love not to use
in respect of others, knowing my wicked heart] there may be many who are
Church Members by reason of Toleration only (and that Toleration its doubted
if it be not sinful who yet are such Dogs as that Text mentions, and upon this
Notion Ministers have before excluded them from the Supper. Your self speak
to this purpose Diatar. Page 184.

3. One Argument more to prove, though such may challenge by reason of my
Toleration, yet I am not bound to give, 3. Argument.
and here I will give examples of of what I have found, and know concerning
ignorance, then draw up my Argument.

In my own Parish, I was questioning with one about his estate, he had lived
long in Essex that which the Man builded upon was this, said he, I have been no
Drunkard, and I Repent. What it was to Repene? he could not tell: but then I
enquired what knowledge he had of Christ; The Man I perceived knew nothing of
him, but when I told him how Christ was God-man sent to fulfill the Law, to
die, to make satisfaction to Divine Justice, and such ordinary plain things.
The Man wondered to hear such things, in so much indeed that I could not but
wonder my self that a man should live above 50 years in such a place as Essex
is, and not know these plain things.

Another was asked, what Christ was? the man could give him no answer: to help
him, he was asked again, whether he were a God, or a Man? he answered plainly
he could not tell, but said, he thought he was a Spirit.

This is an Observation that I have made, [because Mr. Gaw. says we are all
Christians, P. 4.] when I have been discoursing with people about their
conditions, they will tell me stories of what they have not been, and some
other silly matters, but for Christ, not one word of him, unless when I have
put it upon them; what is Christ nothing? then they will tell me, yes, they
must believe in Christ, God forbid the contrary, but to know Christ, and what
it is to believe in him, alas they are far short of this. And this is not only
my observation, but a godly Minister in Northamptonshire told me the very same
thing he observed in his Parish, not one word of Christ, till he put it into
their minds, then having taken up Christ by Tradition, they must say something.

But for the Covenant of Grace (which Baptism respects also) that is the
strangest thing to people, they know not what it means.

For Sin, people have a Tradition that there is that which people call Sin, but
for themselves to be guilty of any particular sin, I have been forced to run
over the Commandments, open them, and tell them how my self have been guilty,
and yet could I scarce convince some, they were guilty, only all are sins,
and so are they.

A godly friend of mine told me he asked a Woman that was talking with him,
what she had for Heaven? she answered him roundly, she had never effended God
in all her Life: yet she was above 50 years of Age.

Another told him, she had kept all the Commandments: she was not so old
indeed, but he had much a do to convince her, she had broke one, yet these
persons lived where there had been excellent Preaching.

Another coming to a near friend of mine to have his Child Baptized, he asked
him why he would have it Baptized? he answered, because others had the asked
him what good it would do his Child? he answered, As much as heretofore.

Another came to him, he asked him, how many Gods there were? he answered, Ten;
supposing he mistook himself, for the Commandments he asked him, how many
Commandments there were? he answered Two, he asked him which was the first? he
answered Salvation; the second I know not what it was: the Man professed he did
answer as well as he could.

I think you are not much better in Northhamptonshire, for a godly Minister
told me of one in his Parish, that had a Prayer, but I think there was never
such a one heard before, this sentence was often repeated, And Jesus was Her
Name.

These instances have been since our Reformation began, and if Ministers should
search all, certaintly we should be amazed to hear the Answers.

Now Sir, I apply this: you say all these are Church Members tolerated, they
can therefore challenge Baptism, and because their Toleration give them a
Right, Therefore the word binds me to Baptize their Childen. But Sir, may I
not better put these off for a time until by Catechizing of them, they come to
understand Sin, Christ, and the Covenant of Grace? the word says, Teach and
Baptize, yea say you, at the first constitution; but if we find such persons
as you call Members, continued in constituted Churches that are ignorant in the
knowledge of Sin, Covenant of Grace, yea and of Christ [save only they have
taken up such a Name that there is one Christ, and the Nation receives him] as
are the very Heathen, (nay for sin, the Heathen know more) is there not as much
and more reason to Teach these before I will Baptize by virtue of them, let the
Reader judge.

Am I bound to Baptize a Child presently so soon as it is brought? They make
nothing to keep Children a fortnight, a month, yea more (according as their
occasions are) before they will offer them to Baptism, may not I th^n, finding
the Parents unfit, delay if it be two months, till they are taught before I
will Baptize? What is the danger, where is the Rule broken, where am I tied to
Baptize one so soon as offered, though never so unfit? the eight day that was
set for Circumcision, concerns not us, we can Baptize before if we will.

So for Scandal, if unclean persons shall bring their Bastards, the Ranters,
or who you will, must I presently Baptize, because you say a Church member
tolerated will challenge a right to the Ordinance? shall I not first require
Repentance?

John required Repentance: yea say you at first constitution, he and Apostles
did. But Sir, You know Tertullians mind, concerning Adulterers, 2.1. De
pudicitid. And Cyprian te's us it was the practice of some not to receive such
again. Ep. 52. Synop pur. Disp. 48. Tb. 31.
shall persons now be as vile and worse [for the continuance in the Church,
aggravates their ignorance and scandal,] then at the first constitution, and
shall I not now require Repentance of such before I Baptize by virtue of them?
yea, and that the Repentance may in judgment of Charity give hopes of a true
Repentance: and if any will grant it for this one scandal; I know not but the
same Rule will reach for other Scandalls.

If you will Baptize all these ignorant ones, and the Scandalous ones without
any more a do, but to press the Covenant [which they know not] on them, as
you say, do if you please.

To conclude this Head of Self confutation: I am not yet beaten off, but that
passage of the Leyden Professors, do a little favor me, the question was,
whether if there be a great number in the Church, who off^nd in Doctrine of
Life, may we now use Excommunication? The answer is, If men be openly and
contumaciously corrupt, Let the multitude be great, yet to such, godly Pastors
ought not, nor may give the Sacraments of Divine Grace, but with one consent
they must be denied, and commit the event to God: because godly Pastors may
not communicate the Signs of Grace to them, to whom Christ does openly deny
them, and forbids the Communicating of them.

Here I observe, they do not stand for the Excommunication of a multitude, for
these words Sacraments, and Signs of Grace, if there be Enallage numeri, that
they should mean only the Lords Supper. I should marvel at it, that there
should be so much pains taken in solving of the question, and then to come and
tell us only of Suspension fromthe Supper, which is so common a thing.

But for their reason I would make use of that, and when they have brought me
the Scripturall ground, where Christ forbids the Ministers to give the Parent
one Sign of Grace, I will see if the same ground will not ^eny us to give the
Child the other sign of Grace, by virtue of this Parent.

For your Pro-parent, and Adoption, that comes in to be confidered in another
place, I must now answer to selfe-confucation.

Dr. Ames speaks something for me. Conse. l. 4. c. 27. Sect. 6.
Qui aliquo modo in professione sua ad Ecclesiam pertinent, sed foedus tamen
Des apert^ violant, little Infantes cum aliquo discrimine debent Baptizari: it a
scilicet ut quod foedus requirit, and in ipfis deest, per aliquos quantum fieri
potest suppleatur. 1. Nam distinctio aliqua inter puros and impuros debet in
sacris omnibus observari, ad bonorum consolationem; correctionem malorum, and
omnium adificationem. 2. Instituta Dei non possunt aliter ab omni pollutione
couservari. The Doctor I suppose would have Sureties joined, but if these
Sureties cannot be proved to be an appointment of God, then he is yet
stronger for me.

By this time I hope I have cleared my self in the Judgment of an indifferent
Reader from Selfe-confutation; I knew this Church Membership was the strongest
Argument that could be brought, and therefore mentioned it; that Church Members
might challenge any Ordinance, while let alone, I could not think otherwise,
but that therefore I was bound to administer the Seals, as if their
challenging, which comes only by reason of their Toleration in the Church,
would make my Administration warrantable, though they are never so wicked, and
tolerated sinfully, this I could not believe. So that my Self confutation
arises from something, you put upon me, which I own not; the great strength
then of your Book against me, I hope is weakened, and all those answers from
hence, which you make great use of, are no answers.

Before I pass to a further examination of your Answer, let me propound one
thing more, wherein I heartily desire satisfaction from you, being not clear
in the thing my self, viz. Whether all the People in England (under which we
comprehend Wales) be Members of true Churches? for if it can be proved that all
the Congregations in England, are not true Churches, then I should have an
Argument strong enough against you: but sir, I am not so satisfied to say they
are not, nor yet so clear to say they are; Therefore I desire to learn.

In my Book P. 43. I said I did but faintly acknowledge such a thing that all
are Church members: but afterward when I came to write in defense of the godly
Presbyteriall Ministers [whom I honor and reverence] against the Separatists,
I said I dare not undertake to prove all the Congregations in England to be
true Churches: so that I do not fly back, because of your Book, Page 4.
it was done long before, seriously debating with my self, what the
Separatists would urge against me, thus I phansied they would argue.

A Church is a company of those who are called [and this call must be answered,
or else it is nothin To the visible profession of Faith in Christ, and
obedience unto Christ, Ius Divin. p. 37
according to the Gospel. This is the Preybyterians definition, say they.

But diverse of the Congregations in the North of England, and Wales, and other
places, are not such Companies, etc. Ergo, they are no Churches.

Definitio constat ex essentialibus: and definitions if true are eternally
true. Now how can there be the effect where there is not the essential cause,
according to their own grant?

I would have answered, if you speak of a pure visible Church, you say right:
but there may be a true Church visible, though diverse corrupt Members, as in
Corinth, Sardis, etc. To this I conceived they would reply thus, as for
Corinth, Sardis, etc. We do not deny it, for there were real Christians, and
visible Christians also, (though there were corrupt ones,) and these held up
the essential cause of the Church: but in diverse of these Parishes we shall
not sinde four it may be so much as visible Saints, if we take in knowledge,
and what that definition, and Mr Cawdrys qualifications require for a visible
Saint.

Besides what Corinth and Sardis had, Ibidem.
was only by way of Calling as say the London Ministers: but what ours are, was
and is by the Sword of the Magistrate, King Henry the highth he left us Popish.
King Edward the sixth, he takes away the Masse-booke, and sends the book o^
Common Prayer, though the people love the other way, yet if the King will have
it so, it must be so. Queen Mary comes and she turns about again, the
people follow her. Queen Elizabeth she takes away Mass again, if it were
ten times in a year says Mr. Rogers, Fox Mart. vol. 3.
the people will turn with the state. This is the Call, and what have we now?
but diverse ignorant so^s sent into these places to read a book of Common
prayer, and this is their profession: this is strange making of Churches, this
was not so in the times when Churches were first constituted.

Such Churches they were at their first constitution, according to Mr. Cawdric
Papge 7. who does not regard what they were before this time, so from first to
last it is hard to say of diverse Parishes that there have been so many visible
Saints as might make a Church.

In the same Page you tell us. That some people received the Gospel after the
Example of Kings, and were Baptized for company ( as Simon Magus it seems) but
stay sir, the Text says, he believed (I know not in truth) and continued with
Philip^ his conversation was such as for ought I can see till Peter came down,
they had good opinion of him. 8 Act. 13.
Reverend Calvin upon the Text does not judge so slightly as you here express,
and your self, Pape 17. speak more clearly of Simon Magus, then you do here,
and nearer the truth.

Now sir you say though the People thus follow only for company [though the
case was otherwise here, for the People would not have changed had they been
left to their own Liberty, but the sear of a King or a Queen compelled them]
Yet if they take upon them an outward profession, that was sufficient to give a
right to themselves, and their children for Baptism: and consequently they
were a true Church, though not a perfect and pure Church.

But sir, you are speaking of the first Title to Baptism, what a strange
Profession do you make here to give Title, how much different from what you
have said before, is required to make a Churchmember?

You say, Page 7.
it is a true Church, how will you predicate Truth of an effect, when it wants
the essential cause? to predicate verum or vere of ^us is good, but how is
here the entity of a Church, when the material cause is wanting? and if the
material be wanting, the formal is also, The formal cause, suppose the
material which it does inform, and distinguish, etc.

I should further have objected against the Separatists; what will you make of
those Parishes, are they Infidells? They would answer, let them be what they
will, they are not, nor ever were (that we know, or others) fit matter for
Churches; if the Presbyterians will stand to their own Definition, but they
would say again, they are State-christians made such by the power of the
Civil Sword, not Church-christians made by the spiritual Sword. And this
shows it that in their Religion, they will not go one step beyond, what the
State commands: and had the State let them alone, they would still have held to
their Popery. And talk to them of any other Church, but the place they met in,
they understand you not.

Had I said, But they are Baptized, they would answer, if men will abuse
Baptism, as if a Minister should go and Baptize Indians, must we needs say
therefore they are a Church? Baptism does not make a Church, for it
presupposes a Church.

The sum is, I saw so much difficulty that I did rather avoid that, so
undertook to prove that many Congregations were true Churches, besides those
which you call Independent Churches.

In this therefore I desire satisfaction, and hope I shall see something by
this occasion, but I am sure it would trouble holy Ministers to go into such
places, and Administer Baptism to the people abiding, as now they are.

And now sir, I come to examine your answer, and the many faults you find with
me, I shall take the Book as it lies, and go over every page, as briesly as I
can.

First, Page 1.
your question, whether I mean that all these meet in one person, Ignorant,
Scandalous, etc. or singly of any of them. Sir, I was thinking of it my self,
but I did suppose the Reader would understand me to mean singly, if men were
grossly ignorant, and would continue so wilfully, though they are entreated,
and assistance offered to help, but will not (as is the case with us) such
deserve Excommunication, and you affirm as much P. 17:19.

For Scandalous conversations, Scoffing at godliness, I supposed no question
would be made of it.

For Submitting to Church Discipline, Page 2.
though I know some few Erastins did deny it, yet the bulk of Christians would
never question it, being so plain; but however you find afterward that I
speak of such as are convinced of it (which was my case) but because I did not
put it into the question (though I express it afterward) you take advantage
against me p. 18, 19, 20.25. no less then sour times to make it serve for an
answer torn. Well Sir, I perceive your mind is not to make any favorable
construction, though you have my mind cleared in another place, only you lie
on the catch.

Come on then Sir, since this is your spirit, let us see whether this will give
you such an advantage: the question is, whether Ministers are bound to baptize
Children of Parents groslyignorant, etc. Yes, says Mr. C. the Parents are
Church Members, and though notoriously scandalous they are Members to all
Ordinances, while they are tolerated: tolerated say I, what mean you by that?
you answer, the Church has not proceeded to Censure and Excommunicate, for
till excommunicated they are Church Members [yea and then also by your
Doctrine] but then say I, for excommunication, I know no such thing, nor any
Church Discipline: you say there are godly ones not covinced of this Ordinance,
and if godly ones, then not wicked ones, sure enough they may as well renounce
it: thus Discipline is rejected by all: so then non-excommunication,
non-censuring does not help one whit, but their gross ignorance, etc. is
sufficient for me, for Excommunication there is no such thing, so my arguments
stand the stronger, unless there be a way to help by the pro-parent and
Adoption, which are your notions.

I see Sir you will plead any thing to make an answer, and seem to shake hands
with the Erastians, but if you and other Ministers (as I perceive some such) be
so favorable to the opinion, then never open your mouths more for Church
government: O say you and others, there are godly people of the opinion, well
Sir, what then? put case Master Caw. is not of the opinion, but his Members
are; suppose there were some scandalous Member to be excommuicated, you would
do it, and you exhort the body to consent to you in it [to do it, renitente
plebe is a poor thin they rise up, no sir, we will not consent to you in it,
for we know no such Ordinance, we will hold Communion with him, these are
godly persons, now what will you do? what brave work we make in pleading for
opinions.

For the explicit Church Covenant you speak of in this page, I will let it
alone till p. 5. where you revive it again.

Then your chearse Mr. Hookers sentence and there sinde that I do not accord
with him: If not, then I pray lee this convince you, that you have not spoken
right, when you said, I borrow my grounds from Mr. Hooker, In your Epist. to
the Reader.
how do I borrow my grounds from him to whom I go Cross, as you say I do?
if I had done so, Mr. Hooker is a man of whom one may borrow, but I do not
remember what ground I borrowed, but I was glad when I saw so learned and holy
a man to defend some things which before I conceived were right but, as to this
difference here, I am sure Mr. Hooker were now alive in England he would not
baptize all the children of any of the Congregalons d^^ England without any
more ado, I can gather so much out of his Book, and therefore we do not
differ in this.

Then you come to my first premise, which is, [The Infant abstracted from the
Parens, Page 3.
gives no reason why it should be baptized] this say you is otherwise
propounded by Mr. Hooker [then its unlikely to be borrowed of him] then you
tell me it is not rightly proposed: yes Sir; very right: it is ordinary with
Divines to lay a proposition first further off, Page 4.
then to come nearer; neither do I see that you have one whit consured it but
yielded it: do you baptize any Child in your parish without considering it in
relation to a Parent? do you consider it in it selse abstracted from any other,
and yet baptize it? I pray make an argument out of that Tex^ in your Titlepage,
Mar, 10.14. (which I preslime you bring for Infants baptism) and consider the
Infant alone as abstracted from the Parent: you say presently here, the
Children of England are Christians borne, how? by reason of the house, soil,
or the Parent? then its a Christian child, and in relation to such a one it is
baptized. Thus you find fault with Mr. Hooker, but if you will cross him,
Diatr. 185.
or my selft [who am not worthy to be named in the day with him] lay down this
proposition, viz. The Infants of England qua sic, considered as abstracted from
any where, ought to be baptized; if you will maintain this, then I confess
you may find faule.

For your second Answer, when any body practice as you say there, then let such
a one consider it: you might have spared those lines, for I know none such: I
do it before the child is brought.

Then you come to the second premise; [The child is baptized as considered in
relation to a parent one or: both; that is the summe] You say M. Hooker and I
mean the taxt parent; and this you have consured largely (that is your
meaning) in Diatr. p. 187. of that hereafter. Only now you adds,

First, your say, thin ineffect is the same with the former: one the Negative,
the other the Affirmative: true Sir, I know it before, only for clearenesse
suke, as we use to openitings first by showing what they are not [as says,
love, union with Christ's etc.] then what they are, so I did here, and I hope no
fault in so doing.

Secondly, you tell me of two other ways for children to come to Baptism
besides the next parent: Page 5.
of which hereafter.

Next, you say I take occasion to desine a Church. A society of visible Sains
joined togethers by way of covenant, etc. Here you observe two things 1. That I
own no Cathelique Church but a particular Congregation, nor any Members of a
Church, but of such a Church; then you clime of a man being a Member only of
the Catholic Church, and by virtue of that requires Baptism for his child:

(...) For a Catholic Church, yes I own it, neither do I know any
understanding man deny it, but I doubt you forget one word, you mean Catholic
visible Church: but if you had said so, yes in I own that also, but whether it
be one Organitall body, I saw some difficulties in that, and left in for
further time to discover: the Congregationall men for ought I can discern own
it so as nothing, but Nor. and Ex part you and them in the conclusion in point
of Discipline. I know for adminlstring the Seals in another Congregation, which
that notion brings in, there some Congregationall men differ, and so for one
Minister to excommunicate in another Congregation, that they will not own (nor
do you but upon a call) they will go along with other Officers and assist
them in clearing out things, and helping them what may be, only they will not
put forth such power against such to whom they are no Officers. I trouble not
these holy men, in that those who will differ with such men upon these points I
think do not well. The other part does not concern my question, neither am I
so clear in it as I wish I were, I shall humbly propound my thoughts.

1. If a man must first be a Member of a particular-visible-Church before he
can be of the Catholike-visible-Church, then your notion will not hold, but the
Antecedent is true Ergo, the Consequent is true.

Antec. I prove:

If a man must first be cast our of a particular-Church before he can out of
the Catholic, then a man must first be a Member of a Particular before he can
be of the Catholic Church: but the Antecedent is trues (...) Ergo.

Consequence is clear to me on this ground.

Else I cannot see how he who is cast out of a particular Church, can be cast
out of the Catholic Church: Though excommunicated unjustly, yet till case be
heard, Communion denied. Council. Sa^^ll. Can. 17.
if a man be first a Member of a particular Church, and by virtue of this comes
to have communion with all other Churches, this latter depending on the former,
then the reason is clear; cast him out of a particular Church you cut him off
from all Communion with others.

But if a man be first a Member of the Catholic Church, and his being a
Member of this particular Church, depends upon that, then I see no reasons for
though you have cast him out of your particular Church which is second, yet his
membership to the Catholic Church, which is first and independent upon this,
still remains; and you do in excommunication but cast him into, that state he
was in before he joined to you; so that still he is a Member of the Catholic
Church, and may demand ordinances elsewhere. Other Churches deny not communion
before the particular does of which he is a Member, then they follow: hence
their Act depefids on this: if depend, then not first.

2. This seems a little odd to me, a man is a Member of the Catholic Church
only: thence he will require Baptism of this Church, of another Church he
will require the Lords Supper, in another there he will bear, to he may go to
all Churches, in the world (if he could) and demand any Ordinances, yet Member
of no particular Church; so let this man walk as disorderly as he will (as the
latitude sometimes you give of a Churchmember will allow a man to be bad
enough) in this Town or another Town, he have owned no particular Church,
only the Catholic, what has this particular Church to do to meddle with him
more then any other? we must have Catholic Church Officers to cast him out,
who are such, not only actu primo but actu secundo, which you say no Minister
is to another that is not of his particular Congregation unless he be Called
to it, but to be sure this man will never call you to it, who then can give you
a Call, so that this man cannot come to be reformed, and yet he may go up and
down to any Church? I am a Christian, therefore give me the Ordinances,
excommunicated I am not, for none can excommunicate him unless all the
Officers of the Churches in the world should meet to cast him out.

If you say, Which you affirm, Diatr. 194.
Where he first came to be baptized, of that particular Church he is a Member,
and that Officer has power, etc.

No Sir, I cannot believe this doctrine, that my baptizing of another makes him
member to our particular Church. I have had three of my children baptized by
Ministers who never looked on me as member to their Church, though I dwelt in
the Town, I have done the same for others (being called to it) yet none of my
members. Your self acknowledge, Baptism does not make a member of a visible
Church, Revie. Mr. Hooker c. ^. then not of this particular visible Church.

If you say, So you express your mind. page 194. Diat.
But a Christian must not do thus, he must join to a particular Church: the
question is not what he must do, but what he will do: will not you baptize
his child or him unless he will join? If not, you have said enough.

3. To be a Churchmember seems to be more then a Christian, i. e. a Christian
member of such a Society and w^^king under such a policy; and that policy
suppose Officers. You say there is no essential Homogeneall Church existing
without Officers, mentioned in the Scripture, it is a fancy you say and repeat
it again, Review Master Hooker, page 75 77.
opposing Mr. Hooker, a Churchmember then must be under Officers, under such a
policy, as in the Catholic Church, but how that can be unless he be a member
of some particular Church (which is a member of the Catholic, as you say) I
know not: the Catholic Church has no policy, extra ecclesias particulares.

The hardest matter is the Apostles baptizing which is often abledged, this
makes me doubtful on the other side, only these thoughts I have bad.

1. They had such power as we have none, they could exercise their power any
where without any call. Paul was an Actual Officer to the Jaylour, and so
other Apostles where they came, hence they could reach them in case of
irregular walking without a second Call, but so much cannot we.

2. I do not remember they baptized any single persons but such as were
members of the Jewish Church, which was a Gospel Church under ceremonies. For
others they baptized so many at once for ought I can see that might lay the
foundation of a particular Church; the Jaylour Act. 16. 32. how many were in
his house I know not, He and all his house believed in God. So Cornelius, there
was company enough to begin a particular Church, for ought I can see, though
how many its uncertain: Paul and Puer Officers to these. In beginnings some
things may be extraordinary, as were they Officers extraordinary.

I easily see difficulties, In N. E.
if one or two Indians should seem to be converted, but because their language
cannot join to an English Church, should now the Minister delay to baptize
him? but then there is this also, if these two or one should prove vile and
scandalous, what shall that Minister do with him? other scruples about this I
could cast in; but it concerns not my question.

The next fault you find is, That requiring an explicit covenant to such a
Church, I seem not only to contradict my self, but also to unchurch most of
our English Churches.

Here I must stay a while, having occasion given to look back into your
Epistle. What do I hear of contradictions again? you have a strange Art in
finding out contradictions: but how come this about? it seems I require an
explicit Covenant: But Sir, are you sure the word explicit is in the
definition? nay, you are sure it is not: Can there be no Covenant in a Church but
explicit? I suppose yes, and I suppose you think so also, so do Appollonius,
we will hear him speak presently; is this fai^e dealing to force a word upon
me when I have clearly before expressed my selse another way? I am far
enough then from contradictions, or from unchurching the faithful
Congregations of England though they have not an expl^^^ Covenant: your self
p. 25. mention the external Covenant of the Church, but what you mean by it I
know not.

You are a passage in my Boistle which is this [Some Ministers scorn the
notion that an explic^ie Covenant is the form of a Church visible, and some
professors are so rigid for it that without it, they deny all Churches] of the
latter sort is Mr. Hooker, say you; Sir, you wrong him exceedingly, and I
wonder a man of your grace should do thus when he has so expressly declared
his mind to the concrary; to your knowledge the next words you mention show as
much, and in his Epistle p. 11. he speaks as plainesy. But of him anon.

That passage shall clear me from making no Churches but where there is an
explicit Covenant; I saw in some Congregations where there were both visible
and real Saints (as we may judge) when the Lords Supper was to be administered,
some professors would not join in the Ordinance for want of that (so far as
I could learn) supposing they were not in a right Church Way. Now this I could
not approve of since there were so many Christians to depart from the Ordinance
upon such a ground.

In my own Congregation I thus practice; Some of other Parishes have desired
to join with us at the Lords Supper, if we have not known them well, I have
desired them to bring a Testimony from their Minister, and they have done so:
Others whom we knew well I have not desired it, but admitted these to the Lords
Supper, yet they were under no explicit Covenant, but an implicit Covenant (I
knew they closed with their Pastors) in their Churches. If need had been I
would have baptized their children, had they brought them to me. I hope now you
are convinced.

Afterward you say again I recall it, because I said, [that this expliciteness
is almost essential to the government of the Church.]

Why do you not take notice of the word Almost, which implies there may be
some government without it? but it will not go on so strongly nor comfortably,
but cast what you have said into a Syllogism, and see how I recall it.

If expliciteness of covenant be requisite to the esse of Church Government,
^hen an explicit covenant is requisite to the esse formale of a Church.

But the Antecedent is true: Ergo, I see no reason for the Consequence.

But for Church Government, try you what you can do only by virtue of their
Christianity, and implicit Covenant, I have tried it and found it not
sufficient, but the other I have had good experience of. But for
Church-convenant a few words.

First set us hear Apollonius speak who is a Presbyterian. Page 17.


Concedimus foedus aliquod tacitum seu virtuale esse inter membra unius and,
^jusdem particularis Ecclesiae externae: quo obligantur ad mutua illa officia
praestanda, quae a membris Ecclesiae visibilis ad particularem suam
Ecclesiasticam Communicnem exiguntur: quod nempe suis pastoribus little Curae
and disciplinae subess^^ ^undum publicum divinum Cultum frequentare, cadem lege
and jurisdictione Ecc^^^^sticae gubernare velint: ex quo foedere etiam jus sibi
acquirunt, ad illa qua buic particulari Ecclesiae eju^qu: membris sint propria,
and altis Eccles^is particularibus nou Comp^tunt. This man speaks rationally,
and those words are worth the observation, ex quo foedere jus sibi acquirunt,
etc. so that all the right and power that Officers or particular Churches have
over their members arise from this Covenant: and this is certain, for suppose
one be a Christian, and suppose he own Church Discipline, yet how do I in
particular come to be bound to dispense Baptism or Lords Supper to him more
then any other Minister? or how do I and this Church in particular more then
another come to have power over another in respect of Discipline, but by his
covenanting, consenting (call it what you will) with me and this Church, and
not with another? for else he will say, though I do own Church. Discipline,
yet who gave you power over me more then another Officer or Church?

For me to say you dwell in my Barish, is a silly answer, unless it can be
proved that Parishes were by divine institution to such an end: there are those
in my parish that come not to hear me, nor ever chose me to be their Officer,
nor will own the Church in this time of reforming, but I should think it
absurd to tell them you dwell in this Parish, therefore you are bound to hear
me, etc.

One word more about Parishes: I would put this question, it is a practice in
England for a Patron to present, of late I know where a godly Minister was
chosen by the people, yet it being a Sequestration, the Incumbent dying, the
gift fell into the hand of the Patron; he being an idle companion turned out
the godly Minister, and put in another that is, etc. the people with one
consent did declare against him, and opposed him at his coming, yet it seems
because the Law of the Land will have it so, this man is he that has the
place; but is he therefore their Pastor because he pre^chech in their Parish?
I think it were strange for any man to affirm it, and this practice is very
common: I hope the mere parish does not make him their Pastor, nor the people
his Members. This is a woeful plague to godly people, and teach the way to
Separation, though it will not justify others where the case is not the same.

Doctor Ames tells us of a vinculum speciale which he calls Foedus, Medul.
Th^ol. cap. 32.
and so as no man is rightly admitted into the Church, but by confession of
Faith, and promise of Obedience. And this Apollonius ownes, page 13, 14.

The Belgic Churches saw something in it, Apol. c. 1. p. 9.
that it was concluded upon in six Synods, that those who came to the Lords
Supper, should promise expressly to be subject to Discipline: and had the
Chu^ches of England, the godly Officers (especially) made all those who came
into their Parishes, and would have either Baptism or Supper, to declare their
choice of them for their Officers, and subjection to all Christ's Ordinances,
they might have had more strength against the Separation: indeed they have
strength enough against most of them who have owned the Ministers, and
constantly attended, and received the Ordinances from them, of which I have
spoken elsewhere.

Further, I should much desire that those who oppose the Church Covenant, would
lay down a Churchmember in his estentiall causes, then they teach clearest: as
for profession, Christianity [or what you will call this is but the causa
materialis of a Church member, for it is not Man qua sio (for then all) but Man
qua professing, as Saint visible, that is the materialis causa, this then is
not the formalis causa, for to have the same thing to be Causa materialis and
formalis respectu ejusdem effecti is strange: therefore till I see a better I
must say, that this Christians consenting or covenanting with this particular
Church, and these Officers in it, to walk according to the Gospel, etc. is
the formal cause of this Churchmember.

In some sense we may say, the matter does distinguish things, a lump of Gold,
from a lump of Clay differs materially: but one Golden vessel differs not from
another, but per formam: Christians as visible Saints or Churches constituted
of such, differ materially from all other Societies of Men, but how one Church,
a Golden Candlestick differ from one another, but per formam, I know not, which
is this that our Congregationall men speak of.

Act. 5.13. Of the rest durst none join ((...)) what was that (...) that
glewed them to the Church? they were not scared from owning of Christ, or
loving of the Disciples, they might hear the Apostles preach, etc. there was
something expressed sure, much more now when so many Churches: the same word is
used of the prodigal, Luke 15.15. (...) the Covenant between. Master and
Servant, is the glue that joins each to other; so for ought I know it must be
here.

You tell me, Epistle.
that the relation of Christians one to another, is not free but after a sort
natural, as that of Father and Child.

I was there speaking of Church Government, how we came to have power, etc. now
it seems by you it is as natural for any Christian to be under my power in
particular, and this Church in particular, as for a child to be under his
Fathers government, and I may naturally claim this official power over him,
whether he will choose me or not, nay though he declare he will not own me for
an officer, this is strange Doctrine. Is his relation to me Natural (as I am
an officer) or free?

As for the explicitenesse of the Covenant, I have seen so much order and
comeliness in Churches by reason of it, that if I can ever attain it I will,
and so would M Gawdry, had he seen what I have seeen in N. England, yet I will
not null all Churches for want of an explicit Covenant. I can distinguish
between esse and melius esse.

M. Hudson shall wind up all: Vi^dici. Cath. page 19.
I deny not (says he) but mutual consent of persons within such a Vicinity, to
join together constantly in the Ordinances of God, under the Inspection of such
and such officers, is requisite to a particular Congregation.

Now give me leave to examine a little what you have writ against reverend M.
Hooker, since the providence of God has joined me with so holy and learned a
man (O that I had his Mantle) much of his discourse falls in with mine, and so
your answers to him serve against me, but that part I shall let alone.

His Question is this,

Whether persons non confederate, Survey part 3. page 11, 12.
and so (in our sense not Members of the Church) do entitle their children to
the seat of Baptism, being one of the privileges of the Church, their
Parents (though godly) being yet unwilling to come into Church Fellowship?

You make very great use of these words, that persons non. Confederate are in
his sense no Members of a Church: now Sir, let me move one question, Whether
only persons that are in explicit Consederacy, are to be esteemed in M Hookers
sense Members of a Church? if M. Hooker have expressed the contrary, as he has
most fully, page 47, 48. of his first part, and in Preface, page 11. where he
says expressly, The Faithful Congregations in England are true Churches, then
that cannot be M. Hokers sense. In page 47, 48. he shows how the Covenant is
acted after a double manner, Explicitly, and Implicitly, and there shows how
it is acted in the Churches of England. Then adds,

This Mr. R. cannot be ignorant of as our opinion and professed apprehension:
and I would entreat the Reader to observe once for all: that if he meet (with
such accusations [such an accuser is Mr. Cawdrey] that we nullify all Churches
besides our own; that upon our grounds received there must be no Churches in
the world, but in New England, or some few (observe this) set up lately in Old:
that we are rigid Separatists, etc. such bitter clamours, a wise meek spirit
passes by them, as an unworthy and ungrounded aspersion, etc. then shows that
Implicit and Explicit are but Adjuncts of the Covenant: and in some cases an
Implicit Covenant may be sully sufficient: could any man living speak more
clearly then Mr. Hooker? and could any man living speak more perversely then Mr.
Caw. Epistle to Sob. Answ.
that Mr Hooker deny all Churches where there is not an explicit Covvenant?

To return to his question: Two things I desire the Reader to observe in it:

1. By persons non-Confederate, he does not mean godly Parents that are not
confederate explicitly, but if they be members of true Churches, walking in
Church fellowship though there be not an explicit Covenant, but implicit, Mr.
Hooker does not look on these as falling under his question, so have nothing
to do with such now. This is most clear by what I have alleged out of him.

Hence there is not one syllable of the word explicit put into the question:
and afterward [the same page] when Mr. Hooker shows why he inclines to the
negative, being moved thereto from the nature of the Church-Govenant: he does
not say explicit Church Covenant. Yet see how Mr. Cawdrey interprets these
words, that is, Diatr. 185.
indeed the necessity of an explicit Covenant, and in page 184. he has stated
the question thus: [Whether the Infants of Believers not in Covenant explicit
with a particular visible Church, may be baptized?] This is none of Master
Hooker's question.

Hence first, those arguments which Mr. Cawdrey has drawn up in his Diatr.
with Mr. Hooker from the Infants of the godly Membe^s of our Churches here in
England, they all labor with the disease called, Ignoratio Elenthi, for he
has changed the question, and does not speak ad idem.

2. Hence secondly, all that pains Mr. Cawdrey spends to prove that Children
may be baptized by virtue of Grandfather, or Adoption, [if he can make it out
that they may be so] yet if such a Grandfather or person who Adopts, be
confederate, and walk in Church Fellowship (though not explicitly
Confederated) this does not trouble Mr. Hookers question: if that Grandfather,
or person who Adopts, be not Confederate, then the question falls upon them
indeed, not else.

Mr. Hookers question then concerns only such godly Parents as are Members of
no particular visible Church, and being no Members but coming to join with a
Church; now the question will be, what explicitenesse may be required.

2. The second thing I observe in his question is, That the godly Parents are
unwilling to come into Church-followship: and here lies the pinch of the
question. But this plainly implies That Church fellowship is to be had, and
this person is required by him to whom be offers his Child to be baptized, to
join in Church fellowship: Acts 5.13. There was a Church, and joining to it I
doubt not before the Apostles would baptize.
if Church fellowship be not to be had, then how shall his willingness or
unwil inguesse be known? let there be an object bonum or malum which the will
should choose or reject. Hence then if there could be no answer else given to
what Mr. Ca. urges from the Jaylour, who was baptized though not confederate;
this troubles not the question, if there were no Church which did require him
to join in fellowship; had there been a Church in Philippi, and Paul had
required him to join in fellowship with the Church, and the Jaylour would not,
then indeed Mr. Ca had brought something against Mr. Hooker, if Paul would have
baptized him.

But yet Mr. Ca. will force it upon Mr. Hooker that he must mean it of an
explicit Confederacy whether he will or no, Diatr. p. 200. Mr. Stone knew his
mind, vid. chapter 5.
yea though he has expressly spoken to the contrary: but what is his ground?
This.

In N. England (says he) They refuse to admit either our Members (though
godly) to the Lords Supper, or their Children to Baptism, unless they enter
their express Covenant: This is the ground.

One passage I observe, you call the godly Ones our Members, but do you look
on them as your Members, who are gone 3000. miles from you, never to see you
more, where you can never have any inspection over them, let them walk as they
will? I am sure they do not think you are their Officers, nor do call you
so, how then they should be still your Members I cannot tell: let therefore Mr.
Hooker speak for himself, and out of him I will give you an answer, and show
you the reason is not as you say: Mr. Hooker thus, The faithful Congregations
of England are true Churches; Members that come commended from such Churches to
ours here, so that it does appear to the judgment of the Church, P^eface, p.
11.
whence they come, that they are by t^em approved and not scandalous, they
ought to be received to Church. Communion with us, as Members of other Churches
with us in New England, in like case so commended and approved. Hence then Sir,
is the plain reason, the people that go from hence, do quite depart from
these Churches, so that they never come more under the Inspection of the
Officers and Church^s here: they never b^ing Letters testimonial from you, to
show they are Members still with you, and approved by you, and so commended, as
says Mr. Hooker to those Churches there, but thither they come free from all
Churches (even in their own account) and there let them walk as they will,
there are no Churches have power to reach them, unless they will join
themselves to one there, as they have disjoined themselves from your Churches
here. But now make this trial, let there go out of the faithful Congregations
of England, persons, whose intent is not to disjoyne themselves from you, only
they go as Merchants on some other errand, let the godly Officers of such
Congregations, give a certificate under their hands, such persons that now are
coming to you in New England, are godly persons, Members of our Churches, and
walk in Church Fellowship with us, and that orderly, though we have no
explicit Covenant; we desire such may for the time of their abode with you, be
admitted to the Lords Supper, if a Child he borne to them, let it be bapt^zed:
and those persons when they come there walk accordingly, I say try the
Ministers there, and I dare warrant you such persons shall not be denied
Communion though you have not an explicit Covenant.

And here Sir they require no more of you, then they will give; for if any who
are Members of their Churches should come over from them hither, and bring no
Letters of recommendation to the Churches here, showing that they are Members
with them there, and walk approvedly among them; if such should require the
Lords Supper or Baptism here, if you will refuse them [unlesse they will show
or make it out, that they are Members there, and walk orderly, (only their
occasions call them hither now for a time) or will join with you if they have
left those Churches] the Churches there will not be displeased with you:
therefore the Members that come from thence bring Letters of recommendation
with them, showing what I have said before, and desiring of Churches here their
care over them while here they abide. And now you have the plain reason.

But one word more: page 29. you speak against those who meddle with other
Ministers charges: those who go to New England you call your Members, should
then the Ministers of New England baptize, and excommunicate (out of what
Church I know not but yours, for of theirs they are no Members) your Members,
they should meddle with your charge, and do a strange act to excommunicate
your Members when your self do not, this is more then Classical or
Episcopal power.

But here you will charge Master Hooker with a Contradiction: because he
seems to be against this practice, that Members of one Congregation should
partake of the Sacraments in another Congregation.

Had Mr. Hooker lived to have filed over his work again, I do believe he would
have considered this place again; but the other places are most plain. Yet
something may be said for him.

That Master Hooker should be against the giving of the Sacrament to a Member
of another Congregation, who has occasion to be absent from his ow^e, and is
commended and approved by his own Church, this I cannot believe.

I will give you my reason. A near friend of mine in New England living diverse
miles from Mr. Hooker, had occasion to be in his Town on the Sabbath: my
friend being a Minister [I cannot tell whether at that time in Office or no to
the Church, in the Town where he lived] Mr. Hooker got him to preach in the
forenoone in his Church; at that time there was a Sacrament in the Church; my
friend when he had done preaching (b^ing sad and oppressed in his spirits) went
down out of the Deske, and would not have stayed the Sacrament, but Mr. Hoo:
steps after him, and claps hold on his shoulder, and pulled him back again,
and made him stay the Sacrament: my friend told me it was the best Sacrament
that ever he enjoyed.

This practice of his clears him from Contradiction, and therefore that cannot
be his meaning.

This then I presume is his true meaning: it was the practice of diverse of us
in N. E. at the first planting we did join our selves to this or that Church;
afterward when other Plantations were erected, for conveniencie of dwelling,
(the former Plantations being too full) we would remove and dwell there,
retaining still our membership in those churches to which we first joined, and
by virtue of it having letters of recommendation, did partake of the Sacraments
in those churches where we lived, and hence diverse members lived many miles,
twenty or sixty from their own churches, and from the inspection of those
officers who had power to call them to account, and observe their
Conversations, and yet would partake of the Sacraments six or eight years
together in another Congregation: this indeed he opposed, in so much that when
I came away the Elders would not suffer it any longer: this is but rational,
and this I conceive is his true meaning.

Here then as I said is all the question; whether or no if a godly man be
member of no particular Church, and comes to demand baptism; may not I require
him first, if you will have baptism, (being it is a church privilege, and
christians ought to walk orderly,) then join to some particular church.

If you require it of me, Or so if there be more Officers then one.
then may not the officer demand, do then you choose me as your officer, to
whom you will submit under Christ? do you look on this particular church as a
true church of Christ, and will you walk with the members of (...) according
to Christ's rule? will you subject to all Christ's ordinances? I pray why may I
not demand these? Consider what Apollonius, Ames, Mr Hudson have said, the
light of nature will carry as much; for if this man will not own me for his
officer, if he will not join with the Church, if not submit to Ordinances,
what reason have I in particular to baptize his Child, or I and the church in
particular to take more care of him then any other Church? if you say by his
requiting baptism of me he profess all this; no Sir, by no means, I have
answered this already: and he may do as some have done with me, that have
required baptism of me, and have confessed to me that Discipline was an
Ordinance of God, but to promise subjection to it, and to me with the Church
that we in particular should have power over them, they would not do it, and
could tell me that I had no power over them without that their consent; and
they speak truly, for they had not chosen me for their officer, though they
are in the parish, and by their Christianity I could claim no power over them
more then another Minister.

So that if you will yield me this we shall at last prove that explicit
consent will be necessary at the first admission.

Thus Sir I think you have a full answer to your Diatribe, with Mr. Hooker, as
to the point of Confederacy, with what I have said I think to wipe off all
your Arguments, as to that point, I do not tun over all, because my book will
swell into too big a volume; for the other things in the Diatrebe, they
concern me with him. Now then I, proceed.

In p. 5. you tell me our Arguments for Infants-Baptisme stand upon the notion
of an Explicit Covenant. How true this is, Page 5.
let the Reader judge.

Then you tell me I have mistaken Amesius his argument for Infants Baptism,
Page 6.
[ because Children are capable of the grace of Baptism, for all are Patients,
etc.] this is brought you say to answer the objection of the Anabaptists; what
you tell me of those is no news: but I pray see if Doctor Ames be answering an
objection; he makes is his fifth argument: see also Mr Marshall his Sermon
upon Infants Baptism. p. 41.43. I know it serves against an objection, and yet
consider the child with the parent, it may serve for a ground also for
Baptizing.

Then you tell me I speak not properly, because I put a Morality in that
Command to Abraham etc.] Sir you may well know by the next words I did but
borrow the word from the morality of the second commandment which I had used
for illustration: and is there only A^alogy in it, when we see the Command is
not repealed, but rather confirmed in the New Testament? Acts 2.38, 39.
but I perceive your scope is to spy out what faults you can, though they do
not concern the question, and sometimes when you can find none, yet you will
make some.

Then you bring me to the question about predecessors, Page 7.
which you have largely discussed in the Diatrebe, you say, for that promise in
the second Commandment you say you would not plead it.

Sir then you do not help my adversaries at home, who have pleaded only that
promise, and therefore I only mentioned that, not having seen your book.

Before I come to see what you have said, let me speak one word, as to the
question, whether if a godly grandfather being of the Church, and being
Orthodoxe [you put it in thus twice in one page, godly, living, Orthodoxe]
should bring a grandchild to me, to baptize it by virtue of him taking it to
himself, Diatr. 187. and so in this p. 7. godly.
as his own, and cugaging for the Education of it, whether now I should refuse
it? truly I cannot tell; it is a hard question, and because I see so many holy
learned men, and some also Congregationall men are of that Opinion, I am the
more shaken, thinking God will reveal more to them then to such a wretch as I
am, but I am not resolved what I should do, if I were put upon the practice.

But suppose I yield this, yet you trouble me not at all but save my question,
for if I baptize it not as it is the immediate Seed of these Scandalous
parents, but the mediate seed of a godly grand father or grandmother, who take
it as theirs and engage for Education, then I do not Baptize the children of
such as the question mentions by virtue of them. This will serve to take off
many of your Answers.

But then I come again, What shall I do with the Infants of such whose
parents are such as the Q. men^ions, and so are, and were their pro-parents? I
have diverse such, of whom I have enquired.

Thus then I could easily depart from this, but for discourse sake, to beat it
out more clearly, I will try what you have said.

The text you give me is Genesis 17.7. and in this p. and p. 11. you require of me
an expesse Scripture that shows, the promise reach but to the next generation.
What mean you by this? do you look on me as an Anabaptist? when I dispute
against them I take their own principles, but do you therefore require it of
me? I doubt you have not given express Scriptures for all you have said in
your books. Nay Sir, (which is strange) if you will prove the Grandfather might
circumcise the Grandchild, if the immediate parent had lost his right [which
come nearest to our Q.] you must draw it out by consequence: I pray call for no
more then you give.

Because you speak so of your full and large discussing of this question in
your Diatr. I made account you had bestowed much pains upon the text to prove
it out, and clear the text, but I see you only propound the text, and no
more. It is worth the pains sometimes to clear out a text, which you have not
done; that which looks most likely is, that you say, Jacob had power to
dispose of Joseph's Children; Diatr. 188. The issue which thou begettest after
them shall be thine.
you might have set down a Text: if you mean 48. Genesis 5. the 6. v. will help
to an answer, * and as for the 5. v. if you please to peruse famous Rivet on
the Text, who clearly opens it; I cannot see how any thing can be drawn from
thence to your purpose, to prove it by any thing else you have said, I can see
nothing.

But to the Text: I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy
seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting? Covenant, to be a God
unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.

1. Its true, God made his Covenant not only with Abraham, but his seed after
him. His Seed, either 1. Such as were Carnally and Spiritually. So Jacob,
David, etc. who were really within the Covenant of grace. 2. Or his Seed only
Carnally. So those ten Tribes when revolted, and the Jews when went whoring
after Gods, not cleaving to the God of Abraham: 3. Who only Spiritually not
Garnally: So the believing Pros^lites then, and believing Gentiles: which I
conceive may be sub-divided, into his Seed really so, or visibly so, that in
judgment of charity appear so, but not truly so. So some of the Jews also,
as well as Gentiles.
2. He says He will be a God to them, those who were really and spiritually
Abraham's Seed, had him for their God indeed: for others he was a God so to them
as he owned them only of all nations to be his Church, giving to them his
Statutes and Ordinances; they also His holy People, i. e. separated from other
people.

3. It is true, God did hold this Governant with them, he did not cast off his
Seed in the 6. or 10. generation, and take in another Seed to make his Church
of, so long as that Policy was to endure.

4. However the Covenant for the substance was given to Adam, yet I conceive
(under favor) it was not drawn formally into a Covenant before now: ( Noah's
Covenant was a Covenant with the Creature as well as with Man.) Hence God
appoints a Sign and Seal of this Covenant.

Covenants use to be fealed, not bare promises. This Seal is to be administered
to Abraham's seed who were taken into Covenant.

The Question is, whether this Seal of the Cou^^^^ was to be administered to
the seed of Abraham as such, i. e. only Carnally so, though they had changed
their God, who was Abraham's God, and worshipped such Gods as Abraham abhorred:
though they had plainly rejected the Covenant, 2 Kings 17. from 8. to 18. v.
though they were worse then the Heathen; 2 Kings 21.9.11. so that nothing of
the Covenant appeared in them, or was to be administered to such (as visible at
least) did walk as Abraham their Father did? If that be true which Maimony
quoted by Ainsw. say it should seem so. It is a general rule, that he only is
Abraham's Seed, that reteineth his Law, and his Right way: and these are they
that ought to be Circumcised: if none else, then they did ill in Circumcising
abundance; but for ought I can learn out of the chapter, Abraham's Seed, as
such, though only his seed according to the flesh were to be circumcised.

5. Out of this I cannot see, but that any Child whose^ Father was of Abraham's
seed, might as well be circumcised, by virtue of a Predecessor who was
Abraham's seed, though he were dead six hundred years before, yea by virtue of
Abraham himself (and that is most likely) as well as by virtue of a
Grandfather.

6. It seems a vain thing to talk of a Grandfather giving right to
Circumcision, Sir I pray prove this that ever any did so. It was my 9th
Argument, p. 12.
in case the immediate parent had forfeited his right (as our question would
intimate) for if we consider who were to administer this Circumcision, and the
immediate parent being of Abraham's seed, it should seem there is no room for
such a thought.

Those who did administer it were their Parents, Magistrates, or Masters, (if
Servants) yea themselves say Maimony, when wax^n great, Ainsw. Genesis 17.12.
Buxto. Synag. Jud. c. 2.
if the thing were hid from the Judges, yea learned Rivet agrees with Abulen.
who said women as well as men; so say others whom I could quote, there was none
designed of God to the work; and still among the Jews, he that can do it most
neatly he administers it, whom they call Mohel; and he practices first upon the
children of poorer sort of Jews, then others.

This speaks plainly to me that it is vain to talk who gave right there, it
appears plain enough.

But come to us: Believers only are Abraham's seeds the flesh has nothing to
do here, there must be flesh as a sustra^um that is true, or else there can be
no Believer, but not such flesh that comes from Abraham. Believing Gentiles,
such as visible, walk as Abraham did; these are esteemed his seed, and with
these God makes his Covenant, these have the Seal administered, and their
Children, God is a God to them also, takes them into his visible Church, and
appoints the Seal for them: but if these Children grow up and make it plainly
appear (that they reject the Covenant of their Fathers, and they prove
contumacious, these cease to be Abraham's seed, the flesh here will not help
them: whilst Infants they were esteemed his, but now they declare the contrary;
if then they declare openly they are not his seed, how can they give title to
the Seal of the Covenant which they have rejected?

Had this Covenant (the Seal I mean) been to be administered to Abraham's
spiritual seed only, so that if any of his carnal seed had manifested a
rejection of the Covenant made with Abraham, then they had forfeited their
right; had it been committed to the Priests or Levites to administer with a
care that it were not abused; and could it be made clear that the immediate
parent might forfeit his right, and then the Grandfather gave the Title; then
there were good arguing from hence; but those things are yet to prove. Does God
say to any believing Gentile, I will be the God of thee and thy seed, to many
Generations, though thy seed cast me off? But I will come to argument.

1. If the Grandfather by virtue of this promise can give the Title to
Baptism, then the Children of Carpocrates, Marcion, Valentinus [let us suppose
these men's parents to be godly and Church Members, and these Heretics to have
Children] ought to be baptized.

But the Consequent is false. Ergo, the Antecedent is false:

If you say, that if their Grandfathers were living, and would take those
Children and educate them, its true they might.

I pray Sir why do you tie up the Text to living Grandfathers, there is
nothing like it in the Text, let the Grandfathers be living or dead, that's
nothing in the Text: if they were ungodly or Heretical, there is nothing, they
were Abraham's seed according to the flesh.

There is nothing neither of a Grandfather taking the Grandchild to himself,
still they were Abraham's seed; neither can I discern how you can draw it out
by necessary consequence.

If you say they are Apostates and so have no right: Sir the Text speaks not
of Abraham's seed, if they do not Apostatize, you know they did so, and yet
were circumcised; and that by virtue of a grandfather is not proved. Such a
Christ as these Heretics phansied they did own: so for Arrians, Photinians,
they will own a Christ.

For the Baptizing of Heretics children, To. 494. loc. com. To. 4.648.
you have Walaeus against you, and Gerhard, the clause they put in, if the
Heretics say they will bring up their children in their Heresy is but
needless, as if Heretics would not do so; what they say for this I can turn
as well against scandalous living; but I shall not trouble my self.

2. You say this promise [I will be the God of thee and thy Seed] reached not
only to the next Children, but their posterity in a second or third
generation: then you make an etc. that is true as I have said before, and it
troubles not me: but now under the Gospel to how many generations will this
extend, that the Grandfather shall give title to Baptism? you name the third
and then add, etc. How many do you include in and coetera: thus you have
spoken in another place, and there another etc. Diatr. p. 188.212.
It is indeed usual to put an etc. when men's minds are clearly known, and
there is no matter of consequence attended upon it, so spare our writing, and
the Printer; but if any matter of consequence depends, then it is very poor to
put in and coetera, you know etc. in the Bishops Oath was an untoward thing,
and here it is a troublesome thing; if to the third, why not to the 103
generation? and coetera will go further. But say you p. 11. this is their
common Objection, [his head is very shallow that should not reach but you have
fully answered it elsewhere: Come on then Sir, since you say you have fully
answered it, I will turn to your Diatribae, and there look for it, supposing
that a man of your parts who does slight so extremely other men's arguments,
calling them very weak, etc. when you say you answer fully, you have done so
indeed; in p. 212. I see you have it there to answer. I perceive you sinde it a
troublesome objection, and there recite the opinions of some men, whom I honor
as much as your self, if there were nothing but an opinion of a man to be
desi^ed: you sum up their opinions, and it amounts to this; It scomes that
the Children of Christians known or presumed to be such, whether living or
dead, may be baptized. then you give us an allusion from those who could not
prove their Genealogy. Ezra 2.62: Whether you will stand to this as your answer
I know not: but then you add, But all the Children of known Believers,
Christians, Orthodox and yet living, whether next or remoter may seem to
challenge a right to Baptism: this is the full answer; but twice you use the
word seem, which shows you rather propound your opinion modestly, but I pray
Sir do not say this is so fully answered, it is no answer at all, (it is your
opinion indeed) for by all the discou^se I have met with as yet in that book,
you have not proved that living Grandfathers may give a title, only you
propound a text, which will prove the dead as well as the living may give a
title if a Grandfather at all may: if you mean no more then the living
Grandfather, your and caetera will soon be run out.

In p. 8. you meet with an argument of mine which is this, Page 8.
[If the wickedness of the immediate parent cut him off; from the Lords
Supper; though his parent be godly, why does not the same wickedness cut him
off from giving right to his child's Baptism? if the parent cannot claim one
Seal of the Covenant for himself, appearing plainly not to have the
condition of it, must not the child suffer who depends upon him for its title?
The parent suffers, therefore the child must needs.

You say no, not for Temporal punishment [Gehezi, Achan, Corah, etc. their
children did] nor spiritual. To this I answered [they cannot be abstracted
from their parents in this, and therefore may: as the child comes to have its
right by a parent, so the child may lose by a parent: it does not lose
salvation nor regeneration by it.

You answer 4. ways: 1. From the Jews; which does not avail with me, there
was something peculiar to them in administration of Circumcision, as is clear
before, and shall be made clear hereafter.

2. Your second is the distinguishing between a persons general state and
personal wickedness; his state is a christian, etc.

I answer; if you mean by personal wickedness, some particular falls (as you
bring in Noah and David strangely afterward) I think so indeed; but if you
mean a continued settled course in wickedness, wilful ignorance then I say;
such a person has lost his first right to his own or his child's baptism [you
may call him a Christian, but let his Christianity be such as you have said may
qualify him for a Churchmember, or else it is not worth a rush.] Such a one I
look at as one that ought to be excommunicated, for he deserves it, (we must
prove that persons ought to be excommunicated before they are.) Now since he
ought, the question is, why he is not? [if he be, the child suffers for his
state being a non-Member] in foro Dei he is, and ought to be in foro
Ecclesiastico: if the case stand so as through the multitude of such, it cannot
conveniently be so, Then yet let the Ministers go as far as they can. I pray
Sir let this satisfy to your answers which you give about Excommunication; for
you would gather from me, that till Excommunication, Ministers ought to baptize.

Thus far I yield it, till Excommunication, or that which does deserve
Excommunication, so that the persons ought to be excommunicated, though from
some other external impediments (as multitude, etc.) they cannot be
excommunicated; yet then a separation from such, or non-communion may help.

3. You say, you have largely confuted this notion of the immediate parent: I
think not so.

4. You say, I have destroyed it my self: the right he has is only by the
Churches toleration, let the Officers look to that: the first and maine right
he has none, and none at all according to your doctrine.

For p. 9. the distinction of the Physical and Moral right in Diatr. 188. if
you had strongly proved the Moral right of the Grandfather would clearly have
taken off that wrong meant. Sir I will receive an answer when I see I am
answered. But that there should be as little right of the Mother over the
Child when compared with her Husband, as is of the Grandfather compared with
the Father (which you would seem to intimate) is strange, I am sure the Mother
communicates as much and more to the being of the Child, then the Father does.

For Aquina^, he may enjoy his opinion, yet I think Ch^mier (of whom anon) is
not full for him. For my needless exception, you mention, it is well if
nothing needless have come from you.

Then you tell me I renew my plea, Page 10.
which is this [who shall educate this child? the Ignorant person cannot, the
Scandalous teach it how to break the Covenant, Predecessors are dead, etc.]
Here first you tell me of a Law of the Land, which bath taken care for the
education of Papists Children, and Orphans, providing Schools and Hospitalls.
Hence first I gather, you do not care whether the Grandfather be living or
dead, which in another place you express otherwise; here the immediate grossly
ignorant and scandalous persons give title: but for what you say, I pray pardon
my ignorance of the Laws that have been so many years out of England; I did
not know the State had made such a Law, That if an Ignorant or Scandalous
Parent have a child baptized, then those who are knowing and godly men (at
least sober men, conversation comely) should take the child, and bring it up,
and instruct it in the Covenant of grace, which must be the answer or nothing;
this were woeful trouble, if good People or visible Saints should be thus
charged with all the children of persons who are as the question mentions: As
for the other part, you say, The Church should take care, as in case both the
Parents dye whilst they are little Children: and then you give a nip to the
Congregationall Churches: you say right for the Churches care, but how shall we
do whilst these parents live and keep them at home, and teach them to break
Covenant, and though they are entreated to send their children to catechizing,
yet will not, as I have too bad experience? For the children of Church members,
the parents dying whilst they are young, I wish I could see as good examples of
your parochial Cnogregations taking care for the Christian education of such,
as I could give you in the Congregationall Churches in New England, but then
the title was not questioned, there was that ease, and we did not know but
those godly parents might live to educate them.

Then p. 11. you turn an argument upon me from my self, Page 11.
[because I could plead a promise by virtue of may Father, so may the
Grandchild by virtue of a godly Grandfather, and so bid me change Parent into
Progenitors.] Sir I am glad I could give you so good an argument, and I could
beteame to let it alone, for it will not hurt my question, as I said before.
Only a word, you bid me change Parent into Progenitors; so I will, let it be
the great Grandfather of the child's great Grandfather, and one that is forty
generations before him, for your and coetera will give me leave, (I know not
how to set bounds to and coetera) yet I may go so far for a title, and the
text you bring does not limit me.

You grant an Apostate loses his own baptism, p. 12. Yet you cannot see how
a parents Apostasy can justly cut off his child. Diatr. p. 190.
so his right is cut off; suppose the pro-parents be dead here is intercisio
Christianismi as you quoted Calvin before, then I know not how this Apostates
child can be Baptized, by any parentall right: yet if this child should come to
understanding, and there should be movings on the heart of it, and it should
plead the Covenant of a Grandfather [I should not question to baptize it
without respect to parents if it came to that.] Yet Sir, this will show there
is a great difference between the pro-parents right [if it can clearly be
proved at all,] giving a title to baptism, and the immediate parents, for that
may be cut off by the immediate parent justly, but the immediate parents title
cannot be cut off.

Now we are come to the last Argument. Page 12, 13.


If by virtue of the Grandfather, then the child of one Apostatized or
excommunicated person may be baptized: but not Ergo.

For an Apostate you tell me of the kindred taking care of it, or susceptores:
this notion will come in afterward.

For excommunicated persons there you bestow pains, and I perceive you care
not so much for a pro-parent here, but by virtue of the immediate parent
himself though excommunicated.

For my own part I should not here yield to a pro-parent, neither do I see
our New England Divines (that could beteame a Grandchild under the Grandfathers
tuition to be baptized by virtue of him) will allow, it if the immediate
parents be excommunicated, for this hinders the working of the Ordinance; it is
of greater force to work when a man shall see not only himself cut off, but
even his very children also, this has been a means to awaken some in N.
England, who were not excommunicated, but only not admitted, to see their
posterity also suffer for their sakes, it has so wrought as to make some truly
godly (so far as we may judge) and others it has brought into external
order in conversation.

But since you have here maintained it by virtue of the immediate parent
excommunicated, I shall desire to consider it.

It is granted there is a difference between an excommunicated person and a
Heathen. As

1. He may still hold his profession: Revie. M. Hoo. 119.
[but as you say, it is violated by his scandal, and it must be renewed before
he can be received again.] Though he holds his profession still, yet that now
violated is not sufficient to give himself a title to Baptism if he were not
now baptized, much less the child who depends wholly on his title.

If his profession be sufficient to give his child by virtue of him a title to
one Seal of the Covenant, why the same profession should not be sufficient to
give himself a title to the other Seal of the Covenant, [one faith being the
condition of it, and you say he has that,] I can see no reason.

That profession which is not sufficient to make a man a Church member, is not
sufficient to give title to a Church-priviledge, consequently not to baptism.

But the profession of a person excommunicated is not sufficient, etc. Ergo the
Minor is clear: his profession is vioalated, and must be renewed before he can
be received, say you. Then it is not sufficient.

This is further clear, for if it be sufficient to make him a Churchmember
when cast out, why was it not sufficient to keep him within whilst be was
within? so he should not have needed to be cast out.

This then is clear, that there is great difference between the profession of
a person who was never admitted, and another who is cast out: the first may
have less knowledge by far, weaker gifts and possibly more infirmities which
may yet be such, as a Church may admit, when the other who has violated his
profession, may not.

2. He is under cure, but his cure is non-membership, a member cut off from the
body: a Heathen is not under cure.

3. When he has renewed his profession by repentance, and so the Church
received him again, he is not re-baptised: but this does not prove that
therefore whilst he is extra Ecclesiam, that he can give title to a privilege
of the Church: it is not his being baptized that is the ground of his child's
baptism whilst he is in the Church, therefore that cannot give the title when
he is out of the Church.

But Heathens must be baptized when they are admitted: the other is received
again, not therefore baptized. That his baptism is not the ground of his
child's baptism, I shall prove afterward.

But I will come to Argument.

1. If a child may be baptize by virtue of an excommunicated parent, then that
parent is not excommunicated; and this is to make a contradiction.

But the parent is excommunicated. Ergo.

To baptize is to give Communion, baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12.13.
then there is Communion given with the body, by an excommu^icated person: is
not this a contradiction? Communion is most properly seen in Baptism and
Lords Supper.

What is excommunication, says M. Rutherf. but to deny all Communion with
those who were once in the Church? Peac: plea 222
but all Communion is not here denied.

You will object, as you answer, page 13. All Communion with himself, but not
with the child, for that is borne a Christian, and so bath right.

Ans. Has the child right to Communion any other way with the Church then by
the paren^? is it not he that brings him in as a branch of himself? is it not a
Christian borne by virtue of the parents Christianity? but his parents
Christianity can give himself no title to Church Priviledges, as I said before
of profession, which is all one. Does the child plead a title distinct from the
parent? if so, then your answer you give were something, but I know of no title
it has but the parents, who expresses his own title for himself and his seed.
Now it is very rational, that if the child have Communion given only by
virtue of the parents Communion, [for before the parent was admitted a
Churchmember the child could have none] then the parent having forf^ited
Communion for himself, must needs forfeit it for his depending child also.

What Tertullian says of Excommunication, Apol c. 39. and l. 2. ad uxorem you
know.

If Classian^s his wise were a Churchmember though her husband were cast out,
Aug ^p. 75.
we do not approve his practice who would not baptize his child by virtue of
her; but it seems they apprehended that there was some equity if both were
cast out. No wonder though Augustine were against it upon his principle.

2. If excommunication be the casting out of a member of a Church, 1 Cor. 5.
ult. and consequently rendering him a non-member, then an excommunicated person
cannot give title to his child's Baptism.

But excommunication is casting a man out etc.

The consequence is clear, how can one who is a non-member of a Church give
title to a Church-priviledge?

Excommunication renders him a non-member, cutting him off from Communion, and
admitting him to no other Ordinances then a non-member is.

The phrase, cast out, shows he is no Member.

So the phrase of cutting off, Aar. rod. l. 1. c. 5.
which learned Gillespy has excellently opened to be meant of Excommunication,
and there brings in Buxtorf. and Godwin, who report out of the Rabbius, that
their children were not circumcised. This you say, page 14. is not Orthodox,
and it was a corrupt Invention of the latter Jews having no ground for it in
the Scripture: you say elsewhere, I think in the Diatr. that the Scripture
does not speak for nor against it, so far as) ou can se^; but then Sir what
ever I make of it, it concerns you to prove it to be a corrupt invention,
though I could yield it from what I observed before of their Circumcision, and
yet not hurt my self.

But you answer to this Argument, p. 13. That he is a member still, though much
diseased; he was much diseased before, whilst under Church admonitions,
suspensions, and because those Medicines would not cure him he was cut off; a
member under cure, say you, his cure is non membership.

But this is pretty, a man shall be cut off the body, and yet be a member of
the body; a man shall be cast out of the Church, and yet shall'be within the
Church; a man shall be no member of a Church, as say you p. 24. and p. 14. and
yet be a member of a Church; how you who are so Eagle eyed to spy out
contradictions in other men will now clear your self, I cannot tell. Member,
no Member, are contradicentia I think, and to find a medium in
contradicentibus is new Logic to me, I though ens and non ens had admitted
none.

3. Excommunication is the putting of a man out of the visible Kingdom of
Christ, into the Kingdom of Satan. So the best Expositors I meet with, 1 Cor.
5.
Master Cartwright, etc. expounds that delivering up to Satan.

Hence I ague, To administer the Seal of the Covenant to a child by virtue of
one who is even Ecclesiastice in the Church repute under the Kingdom of Satan,
is very unwarrantable.

To make Christ a Political head to one under Satan's Kingdom, seems very
strange.

4. Excommunication is the rendering of a man as a Heathen to the Church, Mat.
18. we do not differ here, but agree that Excommunication is meant here what
ever the Erastians Here let me have leave to put in a word. The Erastians
expound this of civil injuries, or personal civil trespasses only, and will
prove it by comparing of Luke 17.3, 4. with this; his Argument being, Because
it is such a trespass as a brother may forgive: Mr. Gillespy bestows pains
here, and to good purpose; but let it be supposed the Texts run parallel, which
M Gillespy thinks not. 1. That Luke 17. says, that a brother may forgive such
a trespass, as it were better a millstone were ^angedi about his neck who
offers it. But 2, we find in 2 Cor. 27.10. that Paul forgave, and the Church
of Corinth forgave, what, a trespass done against them? No sure, the incestuous
persons act was no evil trespass against Paul nor the Church, yet they
forgive. If then they can forgive, why may not a private brother also forgive?
Thus it is supposed, that the scandal which is here given, and for which the
private brother deals with the offendour privately, is but a private
scandal, (for if it be public, this way of dealing cease) if then this
private brother dealing with the offendour finds the man to acknowledge his
sin, and repent, why may not he be said to forgive him also? [as in case it had
been a public fact and cast out, upon his repentance the Church forgive] so
that now he embraces him in his heart again, proceeds not to call any other
to deal with him, nor to tell it to the Church, but the scandal is buried,
forgiven, forgotten, Ecclesiastice: I know no absurdity in this, and so the
forgiveness does not prove it to be a civil trespass only.
say.

Had Christ said, let him be a Heathen (with reverence be it spoken) it should
seem not to have been so proper a speech, for he may not be a Heathen, for he
may hold his profession though cast out, and so is not properly a Heathen, but
as a Heathen he is to the Church; now what that is Mr. Gillespy tells us (and
not he alone, but others) plainly: Aaro. rod 382.
he is to be used no better then an Heathen or profane Publican, and is not to
be admitted to any Ordinance, except such as Heathens and profane Publicans
were admitted to. But were they admitted to the Circumcision of their children?
Page 392.
again he opens it, let him be esteemed as one that has no part in the
Communion of Saints, in Church Membership (observe that, no Member then) in the
holy things, in the Covenants, of promise, more then a heathen man. How then
such a one should give title to the scale of the Covenant I cannot tell.

For the text you bring in Diatr. 2 These. 3.14, 15. Page 218. Rhem. Test.
If you please to view Mr. Cartwright on the text, you will find he gives
reasons why that text most properly is meant of Suspension not Excommunication;
so in his Harmony upon Mat. 18.17. he expounds this of Suspension: the text
says you are to account him a Brother, but the excommunicated person (till
repentance) is no otherways to be esteemed then as a Heathen; says he, true,
that which is cause of Suspension is cause of Excommunication, if not repented
of. But I believe this text is the clearest you can have for Suspension.

That learned Mr. Cartwright is against the baptising of the Infants of
excommunicated parents, M. Rucherf: acknowledges. Pe^c. plea. Page 176.


If then I fall in this point, I shall fall with excellent men, M. Cartwright,
Hooker, Cotton and others of our N. E. Divines, and others (it is likely) whom
I know not.

General rules stand, when we have such a particular case (as you mention, p.
13.) falls our, we shall consider it, I give you no cases but such as have
really been.

Before I proceed further, I must have recourse to your Diatr. with Mr. Hocker
for another way of admitting children to Baptism, viz. by Adoption or
Suretiship: for this is one of my errors that I suppose the next parent only
can give the title to Baptism: and this was Mr. Hookers error as well as
mine; you tell us two other ways: 1. The remoter parents [which I have
dispatched, if it can be proved by better grounds then yet you have brought,
yet it hurts not me nor Mr. Hooker, the questions stand firm still as we
handle them:] The 2. is Adoption or Suretiship, so that you give three or
rather four ways how children may come to Baptism; for Adoption and
Sur^tiship, I conceive differ very much. Yet these shall not hinder me neither,
no more then Mr. Hocker, though you can prove them, if you will let them be
persons rightly qualified for Church members, who do Adops. etc. and by virtue
of whom the child is baptized, so that I could ease my self that way: I like
not this so well as the former. I will turn to Genesis 17.

Where we will observe who were to be circumcised, 1. Abraham, 2. his natural
seed, 3. his servants then in his family, whom he had taught the way of
Jehovah, Ai^sw. 17. Genesis 27.
Genesis 18.19. and who should seem by faith to obey so hard a precept, their
children also if they had any borne in the house. So afterward those who were
bought with money, which I conceive were only servants, these we find in this
chap. here then (under favor) I find no Adoption, which I conce^ive is, the
taking of a stranger, or one who is not of our natural seed, into the state of
filiation. But that Abraham, or the J^wes afterward, took the children of
Heathens into a state of filiation, I find no such thing: I question much
whether the Jews could do as we do in Adopting make such our Heirs; they
could not I doubt give any of the Land of Canaan away to a Heathen, though they
were Adopted, of which I find no footsteps. To say they Adopted other Jews
children, and so circumcised them, this is vain. Hence then I conceive if we
cleave to the chapter, baptising by Adoption cannot be proved, because there
was no circumcising by Adoption.

If it be objected; If those who were bought, if servants might be circumcised,
then those who are Adopted may be Baptized.

I pray let us make no Syllogismes for first institutions; had Adoption there
been mentioned, and by virtue of that Circumcision administered, then the
argument had been fairer to prove baptining by Adoption; but there appears no
such thing in the first Institution.

If you will take liberty to make Institutions by syllogismes, we shall open a
gap quickly.

2. This way of Adoption will seldom trouble us, for it is so rare a thing
that I never as yet knew one that was thus Adopted, I have heard of one, who
also had his name changed, and inherited Lands, but I knew him not; I know such
as have no children, and they have been offered children, but they would never
accept any.

3. Which is yet rarer, I never heard of any that did adopt children whilst
they were Infants, but when grown up, so as they took liking of their manners
and carriage; and sure it they came once to that, they should be instructed
before baptized.

But how (...) this troubles me not if you can prove it, if all those who are
children of such parents, as the question men ions, must come to be baptized by
Adoption, some persons shall have children enough.

But for servants there the text is clear, only whether it will hold under the
Gospel? that is a question.

Give me leave humbly to propound my thoughts, I conceive that might be
peculiar to that Church of the Jews, who were the only Church God had upon
the earth, all the world besides them being shut out as so many Dogs, not
allowed any means to enlighten them in the knowledge of God, but only the
Book of the Creature, Christ not allowing his Disciples so much as to go into
their way to preach unto them, Pareus tells us of a Jew that called him Ba^land
Gentile as he he was passing by him. Romans 11.29.
till the wall was broken down; yet in that time the poor Gentiles had this
privilege, if they would become servants to the Jews, they might be admitted
to the Seal of the Covenant.

But when as the partition wall was broken down, and Ministers sent out to
preach to the whole world; now the Covenant was as free for the G^ntiles as the
Jews, teach and baptize, you may go into Turkey, India, where you will, there
is no wall to binder you: so now that which was the ground of that
administration being taken away, that to me seems to cease. This also moves me
to think so, because in the New Testament, after the wall was broken down, we
find no mention of any such thing whence we should ground this practice; for
children of Believers we find ground enough: if I did not see more for that in
the New Testament then for servants, I should be very much shaken for Infant
baptism.

You ground is this: It was so then for Circumcision Ergo, now for Baptism.
Your Consequence you prove, because privileges are not straightened under the
Gospel.

I answer, 1. had God after Christ taken one Nation (suppose England, as then
Canaan) and tied up his Church to such a nation, so that no other people could
partake in the O dinances but by joining to England, then the argument had
been good, for still here had been a wall which shut out the other nations,
which was the ground of that Administration; but now the Church may be any
where.

2. God has recompensed that privilege with a wit^esse I think when he sends
his Gospel to all the world, which before was tied up to little Canaan.

2. If this still hold, then let the vilest monster in England [I have seen
such stand for sureties in former times when that custom was used, that the
Indians are honest men in comparison of them] bring a servant which he has
bought, and become surety for (so ignorant the man is that he had need be
carechised himself) let him bring such a one to godly M. Cawdrey (if such a
villain lived in his parish) and bid Mr. ^at baptize him, as he is his
servant, would you do it? you must do it according to that text, for when
they were Apostatized they did, no question, circumcise them if they took
them: (...) such a villain be excommunicated, (...) gives title also for ought
I can discern by you, for though (...) ^^^es were excommunicated, yet I see by
your doctrine they might circumcise such.

To say no, I would have such as are understanding and godly men only, (or not
scandalous) who do undertake for them, able to instruct them, etc. Sir, you
have nothing in the text for any such thing; besides if you can prove it, you
hurt not my question.

3. I observe a vast difference between their servants and ours, they had
strong power over their servants, Exodus 21.20, 21. I observed in New England,
the Indians whom we had taken in war, or others who lived with us sometimes
half or a whole year, yet if they could handsomely get away from us they
would, and did; we should have done finely to have baptized them; we buy no
servants who are English men, or Christians, as you call them, to be under our
power as they were. Hence learned Rives says, there bad ne^de be a great
caution lest the Ordinance be profaned, for our servants are not as theirs. In
Genesis 17. p. 443. last Ed. To. 4. l. 5. c. 11. s. 2.
And lea^ned Chamier speaks very warily upon the question: Servi si fim vere
servi quales olim, non diffitear^nam Abrahamo legimus imperatum ut
circumcideret suos omnes servos, sed quales hodia not serves babem^^ ut
plurimum quia vere liberi suns, non putem sic tractandus, non cor quidem qui
jure belli fiunt subditi principibus, nam hoc genus subditorum tamen liberum
manet: De natu ergo ex parentibus insidelibus liberis, si consentiant parents,
distinguendum putem: Consentiunt enim vel ip^i facti fideles, ac tune nulla
difficultas, etc. vel perseverates in infidelitate, ac tum non putem
baptizandor, etc. For those who are ^^re servi which it seems we have none,
but if we had such, should we baptize them being adulti before they be taught
the Covenant, and see if they will own it? Teach and Baptize; for Infants, I
think we never buy such servants.

4. For suretiship that comes not in this way by being bought as they were, I
have nothing to say to it, if you can prove it to be a divine Institutioon I
will attend to it, but I think it will prove but an humane Invention; for
sureties being joined with parents, Caranz p. 17. Pet. Mart. lo^. com. 822.
we know who was the parent of that invention.

Higin^^ was no Apostle: if you have a better parent for your suretiship I pray
bring him forth.

(...) if any man has a mind to be a surety for other folks children let
him, per me lices. I think those who have children of their own, and know
what is to educate them, will not be forward to be sureties for others: I doubt
many men if they examine how they have discharged their suretiship heretofore^,
have cause to be humbled, for I think most never regarded it; and how to
discharge^t when they have them not under their charge, and remove so commonly
as we do, I know not.

But you with tell me of the stream of Divines are for it; there is a little
Rivules that is not acknowledged by Gerhard, loc. co. To. 4. p. 583. he quotes
Galvin, Beza, Bucanus; and for Beza, Walaeus does acknowledge, tutius judicat
ut priuserudiantur. Hunnius also, Rivet, S^ith is against it. To. 1. p. 492. on
Genesis 17. p. 343. de bapt.


Let me add one more of no small note, Tertullian in those words, veniant dum
adolescunt, veniant dum discunt, which words you must either understand as some
do against Infant Baptism altogether, as diverse do, says Lauren. upon
Te^tul. and conclude from hence, and a place of Nazian. Orat. in San^. Lavac.
that these two Fathers were against Infant Baptism [though I think Nazianzen
speaks enough in that Ocation to clear his minde] or if you will not rake it
so, you must take it that Tertullian there speaks against baptising by
sureties, and he that reads two lines before shall easily perceive that is his
meaning; and so Mr. Marshall interpre^s him, and that clearly: Against Tombs
p. 36.
so then you have not all on your side. So much for your way of Adoption.

Now I return to your answer; Page 15.
p. 15. you tell me there I have started a new question: Sir, you know I said
at the first, I must move two questions, and for this had I not moved it, I had
said nothing, for what if I had proved that it is only the n^xt parent gives
right to Baptism? yet if such parents as these in the Q. were judged fit
Church members, and so fit to give title, I had said nothing, that therefore
was my scope to prove these were not fit, and consequently ought to be
reformed, or shut out of the Church; of which before.

You say not much to my first Argument to prove they are not, Page 16.
viz. because they are not visible Saints; you acknowledge they are not, nor
ought to be admitted, if now they were to be admitted: then reform such, or
cast them out: for that you say of Corinth, I say it is no wonder though Paul
call the whole Church Saints, making denomination from the melior, and it is
likely the Major part, as visible Saints: but had they been all such as you
say, grossly ignorant, or scandalous, whether the Apostle would then have called
them Saints or no I cannot tell.

What you say about profession of faith that is requisite to give a man
admission, I have elted it before p. 1. you say presently: Page 17.
This is sufficient for admission, but as there must he more to, continue such
in the Church, etc. you say p. 19. more is required to first admission, then to
continuance in the Church. I know not how to reconcile these.

For positive matter for Excommuncation, you say right, there must be so
indeed, and I think we are not to seek for that: but for Excommunication I gave
you my thoughts before.

For my second Argument that falls you say also: I do not know that my first
is fallen yet, for you have yielded the Argument. I pray what is the question?
I must set it down because of these two answers you give to my two next
Arguments, which you mightily contemn.

They do but say they believe in him, when whole conversation manifests the
contrary.
The Q. is, Whether is this bare profession of says in Christ [for thousands
in England do but barely say it, that they believe in him, they know nothing
of Faith, nor of Christ, only the Name, such a one their Father; or some body
told them of, I gave you some instances before] though parents be grossly
ignorant, scandulous, and refuse to subject to Church Discipline, sufficient to
make a man, and continue him a Member of the visible Church? The first Argument
stands as yet.

My second Argument was this, If this bare profession be sufficient, then nonen
can be cast out for the vilest sins, Heresy, etc. because he is the same now
as when he was admitted.

You answer, The consequence is unsound, and the proof like it [you are very
nimble methinks, but why so unsound?] for when he was first admitted upon his
profession, no such scandal appeared, but now it does, there he is not the
same that he was, when admitted.

To this I say, by profession you either mean such a profession, as you have
mentioned above in this page, as I think you do, and so you speak not ad
idem; or if you mean such a profession as the question stared mentions, then
Sir it is not so, for either gross ignorance, or scandal did appear, unless
you mean that just at that time when he came to you and told you he did
believe in Christ, be did not manifest any scand ^ll to you; was not drunk, or
did not swear, or show uncleanness, etc. just a^ that time: for so those who
come to require Baptism for their children, do not come drunk, or swear.
etc. in that very instant time, but before they cameth y would, and when the
child is baptized, can swear, etc. and its well if diverse be not drunk, if
they have boon companions to join with; some have been little better. So that
for all your have, the Argument is sound enought, but so is no^ your Answer.

The third Argument you say is like the former, very weak: I pray leave out
very, and let weak be ^nought, it is possible it will not prove weak. What is
the Argument?

A Rebel opposing Christ in his visible Kingdom is not fit to be a Member of
it, because no subject.

You answer, be is not fit to be admitted if no Member before: Sir, what is the
Q. whether is such a bare profession, etc. fit to make, etc. to make a Member?
then this is not sit your pen has affirmed: but then the Argument is not very
weak, but very strong to prove one part of the question, your self
acknowledge it in your first words, and so you have done before, p. 16. [but
say you, he is fit to be continued till trial of Reformation be past:] Sir you
said above in this page, that a bare profession with the mouth that he believes
in Jesus Christ, though visibly he lives like an Infidel, is not sufficient to
qualify a man to be made or continued a Member. The question speaks of such a
bare profession; if you will say a moral conversation, though grossly ignorant,
will sarve the turn, there has been as good, and now are among Infidels, and
those who do profess Christ, for drunkenness, swearing, etc. uncleanness,
lying, stealing, disobedience to parents, when grown up, etc. are as bad and
worse then Infidels, Indians will shame them, so that the sufficiency of his
professton is not that which does continue him a Church menber, but the
Churches continuance, or impotency if the Church went about to reform and
could not, as in the time of the Hierarchy; if it be the sufficiency of his
profession keeps him in, for ought I know you may let him alone when power is
in your hand to cast him out.

Most of this page is spoken to before, Page 18.
only to two propositions (as you call them) of mine.

You answer: That which constitutes a Church, continues a Church; if then a
bare profession be not sufficient to make a Member, nor is it enough to
continue a man a Member of a Church.

You answer, both Propositions are faulty: the Minor, for we have proved that a
profession of faith, nothing appearing to the contrary, will constitute a
Member, and so a Church of many Members though all Hypocrites.

But Sir, the profession of faith you speak of here, is not the profession of
faith the question speaks of, for the question speaks of such a profession as
has gross ignorance, or open scandal appeating, therefore you speak not ad
idem.

For all Hypocriter: there is (as M. Car^wright says) difference between Tares
and Acorns, Goats and Swine.

The Major is faulty, say you, because more is required to a first Admission,
Page 19.
then to a Continuance in the Church, as is evident in men of years converted
from Infidels; a personal profes^ion of faith is necessary to such, but their
children are admitted and continued without it.

Sir, you should have proved that more is required to the Admission then the
Continuance of the same person: speak ad idem, there should seem rather that
more is required to Continuance then Admission, for being longer under means he
should have attained more in that time, then he had when first admitted. You
say children are admitted and continu^d without personal profession: I grant
it, but admitted it seems they are, and surely that is, because they are
reputed in the parents for visible Saints, 1 Cor. 7. but now, Holy.
sit matter for a Church, let them continue such as they were reputed to be at
their admission and it is well enough, no more shall be required. Or it there
be any difference it is this, more is required to their continuance: for they
to their admission, were required to be but visible Saints by virtue of their
parents, reputed such for their sakes, but for their continuance they must when
grown up manifest actually they are such, or else be cast out: so more is
required for Continuance then Admission, and so your proposition is false.

For your last clause in that Paragraph, [there is another way to reform a
constituted Church but corrupted, then first to constitute a Church, viz.
Discipline] I know not what sense to make of it, I supposed there was some
^^our in the Printer, but I find no Errata printed, and so cannot tell what to
say to it: I said let Discipline be exercised, and so the Churches reduced to
their first constitution, viz. to be such as Churches ought to be. I^perceive
your next heads are to oppose this, you have no Government settled; you may
have it if you will, as I said before, parties refuse to submit to it, say you,
then I am the stronger; for if there be no Excommunication, I am not tied to
baptize till they be excommunicated, which you urge so much.

You ask me agains, would I have such suddenly ejected? why Sir is there no
Church Discipline but Excommunication? we use unless offenses he very notorius
(and we have enough such) first to admonish persons seriously to bring persons
to repentance; if that will not do, we suspend; if that will not do, So some
conceive non-Communion to be an Act of Church Discipline.
then excommunicate. I said before, the times we now are cast in are to be
considered, as the ^eyden Profossours speak in the same case, but because you
cannot excommunicate you will do nothing: and when you have excommunicated it
is all one with you, so that you do but delude us. I do not absolutely deny
any Baptism, but conditionally if they will not come to be instructed, and
give us some better testimony of their conversation: but before they will be
catchised by me, and give any better testimony they will fling away.

Now say you all his argumet (...) will be casily dissolved, Page 20.
its well. What you have spoken to in this page 20. I have answered before;
only whereas you say, I have often confessed that persons tolerated ought not
to bro excluded the Lords Supper. Sir, I will keep to the title of my Book,
it shall be A Sober Reply, and I say, I have not once said any such thing.

But then you call to Ministers to examine whether they have done well in
excluding half (it may be) of their Parish from the Supper by their owns
power alone. And page 26.28. you seem to condemn this practice; o brave
Reformation! in the Bishops time a Minister alone made no question to do this;
and now every Minister is a Bishop, as I am sure you will grant, that a Bishop
and Presbyter is all one; yet now Ministers must not do it, but let all come
to the Supper, till a Glassis be set up.

Here you tell us we cry out again, and call people to separate from you
because you want an Ordinance, Page 21.
then add, The Lord judge between us in this matter: this sentence you use
also in your other book, but I pray apply it to those who so call for
separation from you, my conscience cleares me from any such thing: therefore
Sir do you not use such a sentence vainly.

Then you come to answer the weak Argument:

Such as the question mentions, dejure ought, and de facto pre excluded from
the Lords supper, Ergo, ought also to be excluded from their Infants Baptism.

This you say you deny with all the proofs of is, the Proof is as weak as
the consequence, viz. Because Baptism seals to the same Govenan^, as the
Lords Supper does. Ergo, if excluded from one Seal, then from the other.

The proof again is like to the formar, viz. Because such persons appear
pear not to be those to whom the Seal of the Lords Supper does belong, having
no right in those privileges; therefore Baptism signifying and fealing as
great privileges as the Lords Supper, they cannot convey a title unto that
Seal for their children, but ought to be excluded.

All is weak that Mr. Cawdrey opposes; there are in Logic those ways of
answering, which Logicians call Solutiones apparcutes, one of them is, (...),
this you are well acquainted with, to slight the Arguments brought against you,
tell your Reader they are weak; and that's half and answer at least.

All are not of your mind concerning this Argument: His Vindication of free
Admiss. to L. Sup. p. 24.
Mr. Humphries says, those who have gone about to answer this, bad better
happily said nothing, for our free course of baptism, and a deny all of this
is such a Seam-rent as will never be hansomly drawns up, though stitchs
together. For his judgment in Admission of all to Lords Supper I leave it.

But let us see how weak you show it: your answer is this,

The Argument ought to procced of the same persons, viz. such as ought to be
excluded from the Lords Supper, ought (if now they were to be baptized) also to
be excluded from Baptism for themselves: but this does not reach the children,
for they being borne Christians, of Christians have right to Baptism.

What Sir, have you catched me in that fallacy, I have taken you so often in? I
hope not: I have spoken before to this, the title of the parents and the
children is but one and the same.

1. I doubt not but Master Cawdrey conceives there are thousands in England
that dejure ought to be excluded the Lords Supper, else be must condemn the
Assembly for injudicious men that should trouble the Parliament for an Act, etc.

2. These Mr. Caws yields, were they now to be baptized ought not to be
baptized, the argument proceeds clear against them.

3. Yet the children of such parents being bo^ne Christians, of such Christians
as ought not to be baptized themselves (if they were not baptized) these may:
which is strange to me, that children which have their title because borne of
such parents they may be baptized, but the parents themselves who give the
title, must not:

Therefore I reply, if the argument proceeds so strongly against the parents
themselves, then much more against the children, for If may self who must have
title first for my self, and then for my child, ought to be denied it, then
much more my child, whose title is mine, and depends wholly upon me for it: for
this I conceive to be a sound truth, if a person have ten or twenty children,
and these be baptized because Christians, born of such a parent, then I do
twenty times justify that the parent from whom these children proceed, have
right and title to Baptism. So that which you say is not a sound assertion, p.
24. (which how it came under the third argument I know not, for it belongs to
the first,) viz. If I can give the child one Seal of the Covenant by virtue of
the parent, I will give the parent the other, I think is a very sound
assertion, it never troubled me as yet. But what makes it so? say you, I may
see reason to deny the parent the Lords Supper, and yet baptize his child,
because more is required of the one then the other.

For the child I require nothing of it, but look to the parent from whom it
derives its tith, if you require any thing of me, says the child, go to my
parent from whom I descended: why then do you say, you require more of the
one, then the other? neither 2. do I see what more you are to require of a
person to admit him to the Lords Supper, then his child to baptism: If a
person do visibly appear to have the condition of the Covenant, he being a
Churchmember, how you can deny him the Lords Supper I know not: so for
baptism. If there were two conditions of the Covenant of grace, and that
Baptism respected one, and the Lords Supper the other, then there might be
some eason, why the Church should look to one more then another, but I know
but of one condition.

Page 21.
You say moreover: The young children of members are unfit to be admitted to
the Lords Supper, yet not to be excluded from Baptism, The reason is because
more is required to the Lords Supper, then to their Baptism.

To which I say: 1. If children did as much depend on their parents for the
Lords Supper, as they do for Baptism, then for ought I know, they may have
(as was the old custom) the Lords Supper, as Baptism.

2. You should have proved that less is to be required of those who do give
them title to their Baptism, then for themselves to the Lords Suppe^.

Page 22.
So that whereas you say, all my false consequences are grounded upon my first
(false) premised supposition, viz. [ That the child has no right but in
relation to the next parent] (the word next (by your favor) was not there put
in, I may consider the Parent and Child, as, argumentum primum and ortum in
Logic: primum babet arguendi vim in se, and a se: ortum in se sed non a se.
Its but derived.
,) so I say your answer to this argument, runs upon a false supposition, viz.
that children are baptized by virtue of a title distinct from their parents, If
you can prove that, viz. that the parent requires baptism for himself by one
title, and the child by another title distinct from his, then your answer will
be strong; else it is as weak and weaker then the argument, which you so much
slight: for the rest of your answer, I have spoken to it before, and therefore
repeace nothing for the examples of Scripture or History: will you do nothing
but what you have example for? is not argument drawn from Scripture-grounds
sufficient for me, though there be not examples set down? For the personal
default I have spoken to it before.

For my Dilemma which you would turn upon me, I see you take that for granted
which I have not yielded, therefore my Dilemma stands as it did before against
you.

Page 23.
For my Querie (Whether the child may not be suspended in case the parent he
suspended continuing obstinate) you would answer me out of principles which are
not mine: I pray prove, that juspension is an Ordinance instituted only with
respect to the Lords Supper. Secondly, Being it is called by Divines
Excommunicatio Minor.
prove that the case now standing with us as now it does, in beginning of
Reformation, we may not deny the signa gratiae as the Layden professors say,
though by reason of the multitude we cannot proceed to Excommunication. 3. Why
may we not proceed to non-communion?

My second Argument was this.

Such Parents if now they were to be Baptized, ought not to be Baptized, Ergo,
they cannot challenge it for their Children: Baptism belongs primatily to the
Parent.

You again deny the consequence and the proose of it.

First you say: It is a received maxim amongst the Lawyers, quod fieri non
debuit, factum valet: Suppose an unfit person Baptized, his Baptism is not
null, be is a Member till legally exeluded, and so has right for himself and
his to be consequent Privileges.

Hence first those Indians whom the Friars Baptized in the West Indies without
instruction, Heylen. Geog. P. 773.
have right and title for themselves and theirs to all Church privileges. The
persons were unfit who were Baptized I an^^^^ yet says Mr. Ca. unfitness does
not debar, till excluded. No nor then neither. Let others do as those Friars
did, yet this Argument holds.

Secondly, this answer earrieth it, That Baptism makes a Member of a visible
Church: observe his words, suppose an unfit person Baptized, If unfit to be
Baptized, then unfit to be a Member.
his Baptism is not null, be is a Member: which way came this man to be a
Member? not by his Christianity, (which you use to say) for he is a person
unfit you say: but his Baptism made him thus, which is

First, cross to your own proposition: Review of Mr. Hoo. P. 94. Baptism does
not make a man a Member of a Church

Secondly, if Baptism does make a Member, and consequently gives Constantine,
Valentinianes, etc. those who deferred their Baptism, were so long no Members
of the Church, nor could give title to their Childrens Baptism.

Thirdly, Primum in unoquoque genere est meusura aliorion: so take the first in
genere Baptizatorum, what was the cause of their Baptizing; because Taught,
Believed, and joined to the Church; it was not because any other was Baptized,
so the same holds now, a person being reputed a Believer and a Churchmember
[whether in the Parents or otherwise] this is the ground of its Baptism; then
it is not another being Baptized that is the ground of my Baptism.

Fourthly, the ground of the sealing of the Covenant, is because the I shmael
before Abraham was circumcised, if in the Covenant, then (say you) the child is
a Churchmember: then it is not the Parents being Baptized that gives the
title. Hence your Notion in the same Page 23. [If the Parents sin did annull
his own Baptism, it were a question whether it did not hinder his childs
Baptisme] which also implies it is the Parents Baptism that is the cause of
his childs Baptisme] comes to nothing.

Your second answer, is from none of my Principles.

Your third I have spoken to also. I did not express excommunication as a
qualification in the questions it is true, I have spoken to this also before.

What you have said to the third Argument, I have also spoken to before, my
fourth Argument ran thus: [To give the seal of the Covenant of grace to a
child by virtue of one who appears to be in covenant with the Devil, is a
profaning of the Ordinance.]

To this you answer four ways, the last I have spoken to, but not the other
three, which I will consider.

Page 25.
First, you deny that such persons as the Q. memions are visibly in Covenant
with Satan, especially if tolerated, for so long they are visibly in the
external covenant of the Church.

What you mean by this External Covenant of the Church I cannot imagine: not
Baptism I hope; nor the External Church covenant we speak of, and you so
much oppose; for the Covenant of grace, they are not visibly under that: there
needs no Covenant formally between the Devil and us, naturally he has us
strong enough though we make no formal Covenants with him. But when are men
said to be under the Covenant of Grace? is it not when they, 1. Seek to
understand it, 2. Choose it as their greatest joy and portion, 3. Rejoice in
nothing so as when under the power of it, 4. When will not endure to be drawn
from under the Dominion of it, but their hearts sink with sorrow when the old
man rebels against it, 5. When externally their Conversation answers it, 6.
When delight in those who are in Covenant with themselves also, etc.
Turn it now, when persons care not for understanding of that Covenant, but
they are wise in ways of sin, choose those ways, their joy is when they are
in the enjoyment of such ways, cannot endure to be pulled off from them, but
troubled when stopped in their course, visibly thus they walk in their course,
and choose such for their companions, what shall we judge of these? What ever
Covenant you mean, I am sure they are not under that Covenant visibly, of
which Baptism is a Seal.

suppose a Person be Excommunicate, and so delivered unto Satan (as the
incefluous Person was) yet it were hard to say he were visibly in Covenant with
Satan, though at the present under his Power.

To be under a Church-censure, which is appointed for cure of a Person, is far
different from the ease now we speak of.

That power of Satan the excommunicate person is under, is an afflicting power,
therefore not chosen by the person, as is the other.

Those who are not Excommunicated may be visibly in Covenant with Satan in that
sense the Argument speaks of, when one who is Excommucated may not be so, as
the incestuous person repenting, and sunk with sorrow.

Thirdly, you say, every gross sin (as in Noah and David, etc.) does not
conclude a man visibly in Covenant (with Satan you mean) much less ignorance,
as in children and youths Baptized.

To this I say 1. If I had not reverenced your grace and Parts, I would have
given you another answer, sir it is strange that when I in the proof of the
Minor said, [A person whose course and Trade of Life is to live in sin] that
yet you should answer from Noah and David, their particular acts, repented of,
etc. You would make me a silly fellow that could not distinguish between the
course of a man's life (when I expressed it) and a particular act.

2. In Baptizing of Infants, I do not consider them as ignorant persons, but
visible Saints with their Parents, and those must have knowledge.

3. How are we gone from the ignorance of the Parent, to the ignorance of the
Infant?

Then you come in with your Epiphonema, [see whither this new way leads its
followers.] Yes, I pray see by what you have answered, whither it leads: I
think you might have spared your triumphing here, unless your answer had been
stronger.

For my fifth Argument, the jumbling of the most profane and godly in the same
Ordinance and under the same Prayers: you tell me I may do it, so I do but
grieve, etc. of this before: but fir when conscience flies in a man's face for
giving away the seal of the Covenant to such a one, this will not quiet
conscience to tell it, Mr. Gawdrey says you may do it. You know what Dr. Ames
said before.

Page 26.
Then you come to the great Objection. The Jews circumcising of all. My first
answer to this Objection was, I would see a proof that the Priests did debar
many from the Passover, for moral uncleanenesse, many years, (as ours do
from the Supper) and yet had their children circumcised.

To this you answer: The Priests are blamed for admitting the Morally unclean
to some Ordinances, but it concerns him to prove where ever they were blamed
for circumcising the Children of such. 44. Ezekiel. 9.

To which I say, 1. That Text speaks of the times under the Gospel, and it
cannot be accomplished under the Old Testament, as our Annotations make it
clear, it speaks of a time when circumcision is out of date.

2. Circumcision was never committed to the Priests as now Baptism to the
Ministers, therefore there was no blame to them due for that point.

3. Since it respects the Gospel, it concerns those who practice so as if by
Sanctuary were meant only the Lords Supper, to prove that there, where the
Priests are blamed for bringing into the Sanctuary such persons, he means
only admission to the Lords Supper, those who interpret must prove. It should
seem very fair, that Sauctuary is more then Lords Supper, I suppose those who
were brought into the Sanctuary might come to the Passover in old time.

Your second answer is, you Question the Practice of our Ministers, whether it
can be justified. I see you are pinched, but no doubt their keeping of that
holy Ordinance is justifiable enough.

My second answer was, [I conceived some thing was peculiar to that Church in
that Ordinance, and so conceive still. I shall add something more.]

1. In that there was no Minister separated by God to the dispensing of it, as
is now of Baptism: but Parents, Masters, Judges, Men or Women, yea themselve;
might administer it.

2. It did not run to his seed only as Spiritual, [as does Baptism now,
for only Believers are Abraham's Seed] but to his Seed as such. The ground
indeed of Gods giving of the Seal of the Covenant at first was, because of
that Covenant God was in with Abraham, but this Covenant they (many of them)
did never regard but reject, taking Circumcision only to be the Covenant, so
being his Seed in whom they did so glory, Mat. 3.9. Joh. 8.39.44.
they would circumcise their Children, though the Devil was their Father.

3. From the nature of the Seal and Sign being an abiding Mark in the flesh
(which Baptism is not.) And by that they were distinguished from the Heathens
by an apparent mark, it made me think there was something God further aimed
at in it, in reference to them: which I perceive Justin Martyr will second me
in: when Trypho had been urging the necesity of Circumcision, Dialog. cum
Tryph. (...).
he answers him; God foreseeing you should be scattered, and beaten out of
Jerusalem, and not return thither again, left Circumcision a Mark in your
flesh, now by no other note can you be known but by your Circumcision. This is
part of his answer. And surely there seems to be something in it, for had it
not been for Circumcision, in these many years they have been scattered,
they might easily have lost their Distinction from the Gentiles, at least
abundance of them, but by this they are known to this day.

4. This much prevails with me to think something was peculiar, because 17.
Genesis 14. Those who were not Circumcised were to be Cut off Whether by the
Magistrate, or by Excommunication, as says learned Gillespy, take it how you
will, will you say the same of Infants not baptized? must the Magistrate cut
such off? or shall the Church excommunicate all such? I trow Mr. Marshall will
take up the Cudgels against you, In his Sermon before the L. Major on Easter
Monday. 1652. p. 28. 2. Ed.
for he is so far from thinking that Churches should excommunicate
Anabaptists, if godly, that he charge that Church with Schism, which shall
deny them Communion because such. Expound it how you will, (so it be true) that
will show some difference, and argue something was peculiar.

5. I said [when the Jews came to requite Baptism, it was not enough we are
Abraham's seed, Ergo, baptize us, [this was enough to Circumcision] but John
requires Repentance.

To this you answer, it was a new Ordinance, in which Repentance was required
in the first parents. 1. But what then? though new, it was but a Seal to the
same Covenant they were in before, and they being visibly under the same
Covenant, why should more be required of them, if there were not some
difference between the administrations of these Ordinances? 2. But was not
Repentance required in Circumcision? did not Circumcision note the cutting off
the Old Man? 2 Col. ix.
and is that done without Repentance? if repentance were not required there as
well as in Baptism, you will confirm me the more, and weaken the arguing from
Circumcision to Baptism, very much in my apprehension.


6. This made me to think so, because when they fell to their foul Apostle^,
yet they Circumcised: I pray Sir speak our plainly, if one of your Members
should sacrifice his children to Mole^b, worship those vile and unclean Gods,
which they did, would you baptize his child without any more ado?

If none but such as Maymony (before quoted) says, ought to be circumcised,
then their Circumcision was irregular, for they threw often Abraham's way, and his
God: but if all Abraham's seed, as such, merely according to the flesh, had a
title to Circumcision, then it was peculiar to them, and they were regularly
enough circumcised. But this helps not us.

7. That place Ezra 10.3. the children borne of the strange wives were to be
put away, (...) Ut proficiamus: vulg e^ici^mus; Vata.
as well as the strange wives; its very likely they would circumcise them, but
yet put away: if they ought not to be circumcised or were not, yet it will
imply some difference.

For all the rest to p. 29. I have spoken to before: there after you had
condemned my rigidnesse for non-admission of the children of some parents, then
you show your Judgment, that all ought to be Baptized.

1. You say if one Minister will not baptize, another will, [let others do as
they please, I must give account of my Stewardship^ not his] it will increase
divisions betwixt Ministers, by others intermedling with their charges. [I was
never yet offended with any man who did Baptize the children of such as dwell
in our parish: I thought intermedling with other folks charges had been no
offense to the Classical Government, which will excommunicate a person in
another man's charge.]

1. It will make the next generation, no better then Infidels being unbaptised.

This may prevent abundance of sin and ignorance, making parents look about
them, working (as experience has proved in N. England, to real conversion (as
in charity we may judge) at least to knowledge and outward conformity in diverse
here also in England, in your own shire: the proof is made, a godly minister
that lives there told me, he will not baptize without a good account given him,
and to this day (he told me at the Commencement) two in his parish were
unbaptised; the people observing this, he told me they bestirre themselves to
get knowledge, and give better account.

This is the fruit already tried, but what then if all Ministers did so?

Because unbaptised, Ergo Infidels, Constantine, Valentinianus and others, were
unbaptised a long time, therefore they were Infidels, and Valentinianus dyed an
Infidel, because he dyed unbaptised.

This will exasperate parents you say.

We must look for rubs at first, our life is not such as to have the good
word and will of every body; but this daintiness must come down.

1. Whilst we have the civil power to stand by, it may be done the more
casily. 2. If one of the parents give any comfortable account, it is
sufficient. 3. Women, their sex commands them more modesty, and their education
helps, if there be knowledge, they have advantage also of affections, and so
easier moved upon by preaching the Word. 4. For number, we shall find the most
opposition will be in the poorer sort, where horrible ignorance besides
profaneness abounds. 5. It is but visible Saintship that is required; you
have said enough, in my opinion, as for maintenance (which you mention)
thousands of Ministers in England have the advantage of me, N. England voyage
having broken and spoiled our Estates, but ordinarily Ministers have Lands of
their own, and some good Glebe-Lands, wherein they are before me.
I observe but two things,

1. For what you say; you would have the Magistrate settle aright Government
which all Congregatious should be bound to submit to.

Sir, you speak of a hard thing, the Magistrate must needs be troubled to
know which is that right Government, when there is so much difference among the
Ministers who call for it; one says it is Classical Government, another it is
Congregationall, and both sides very godly men: The Ark must needs shake when
the Oxen stumble.

2. Yet such is the neerenesse of the agreement between the Congregationall,
and Classical Government, that though one be not bound to submit to the other,
yet Church Government might go on well enough, (were it not for this
Separation, which will undermine both) if there were brotherly yiedling on both
sides but a little; if the peace of the Churches were as much valued as it has
been by other holy men before times, we would not, we dare not do as we do.

The Magistrate does give leave for these two, which in respect of Government
are so near, that they need not be called two; but this fearful blasting of
the Ordinances by the sore hand of God, and this horrible disunion between the
Congregationall and Classical men, and others who are godly, say in my heart,
there hangs a scourge over both Congregationall and Classical men, and other
professors.

For the rest, p. 30. there is little to answer:

2. For your bringing in the Authority of the civil Magistrate, to reform our
people as Church Members; this will be poor Reformation: I thought
Church Members had been formed and reformed, by the sword of the Spirit, not of
the Magistrate, they can scarce make better Laws then they have made, for
reforming of Moral vices, I think the fault lies not in them, they cannot be
Judges and Witnesses too.

For your last, p 31. that you would have us press the conditions of the
Covenant on those that we baptize, and that is sufficient now.

If I were only a Teacher this might suffice, but I think I am (or should be)
a Ruler, as well as a Teacher.

If this be enough, then admit all England to the Lords Supper without scruple.

Thus Sir I have replied to your Book, with as much brevity as I could; I know
such a man as you are will not be quiet thus, but will write again; (I foresee
some things (and possibly you may make use of my Book against the Separation
against me) which I could have prevented, but upon some reasons moving me I let
them alone:) and it will be hard (though I am but weak) if I should not spy out
some things in your writing which I might oppose again, but I see there will
be no end of writing, wherefore I am resolved to make an end; only if I find
you bring out more strength then yet I have seen, and that which gives me
satisfaction, I will return you very hearty thanks, and publish it to the
world that you have satisfied me; if not, I will be silent.

A POSTSCRIPT To Reverend Mr. Blake.
MY reply to Mr. Cawdrey was ready for the press within seven weeks after his
answer came out, but by the ill dealing of that Bookeseller who had my Copy
first in his hand, it comes to be thus long before it came forth: I heard not
of Mr. Blake a long time after he came forth, and have poss^ss^d his book no
longer then to have but one whole day to review him, and draw up my reply,
which I would have done (...), but that my Bookseller is unwilling to venture
the charges for the printing in these dai^s. I have not read ever any more (as
yet) then what concerns my self, and for his courteous handling of me without
scorn, I kindly thank him. I have liberty to mention but two or three
things, which I shall do with as much brevitie as I can.

1. He observes, Page 431.
I am diffident rather then consident of my opinion. Sir, I did write as a man
who was troubled about it, my Arguments at present casting the scale on the
negative side, though I had not such down weight as I desired: but truly Sir I
see nothing as yet to ma^e me recall my opinion, for all that is said
(excepting Mr. Cawdrey's notion of Adoption in which your self are not clear)
I knew before. 2. I observe sometimes you dress my Argument with such a
fashion that I cannot know it to be mine, but disclaim it, then you sinde
fault: p. 439. where have I mentioned the power of godliness as a requisite in
him who claims Baptism? but to bring up a child in it is a harder matter: I
have not liberty to enlarge. 3. Sometimes your answer is a bare laying down
your own Judgment, with a Similitude added for illustration. P. 441. We now
c^ll for Scripture and reason from thence; Similia at pompam non ad puguam. 4.
For my first Argument for the negative, p. 449.450. which you say was Mr.
Blackwoods. I never saw any thing of his, but I took it from our Brethrens
practice, and it was that (with one thing more) which led me into my practice:
for when I saw the Presbyteriall Brethren keep back half or three quarters of
their Churches from the Lords Supper, and that for diverse years together, yet
did so constantly baptize their children, I thought with my self, where have
these men a ground for this practice? in all the New Testament I could not
sinde one, nor reason for it, but rather against it for the Old Testament,
though I knew some were kept back for Ceremonial uncleanness from the
passover, yet for Moral uncleanness to be kept back many years, and still to
have their children circumcised, I found no text for that.
For Mr. Gille^py, I have not liberty to set down my thoughts.

You frame your answer by turning my argument another way, then requiring me to
give answer to your Syllogism: which Sir, is no clever way of disputation; And
for answer I need give you none, Against the Anabap. Argu 5.
Mr. Johnson before you, and you in his words (though it may be you saw him
not) have given a full answer, yet my Argument is not hurt at all, though the
parent may be suspended for a time, what is this to the suspension of three
parts of a Church, six or ten years together, and never proceed furtherr? Ame
Med. Th^el c. 37. th. 22.
I would have enlarged if I might.

I observed many other things, to which I would have replied, b^t I shall
single out only one thing which I will examine. Goular. in 38. Ep. Cypr.


Page 4.26. Infant of Parents that are nomine tenus, Christians have right to
Baptism. If they profess the worship of the true God, though nothing more of
a Christion be in them. Page 424.

If by a Christian nomine tenus your m^aning were, one who (...) but a nominall
Christian, as all are who are not real, I make no question but many such as
these nominall ones a Minister may B prise, and their children, though they
have not truth of grace in them: but I perceive you: scope is to sp^ead the
word very large: and that directly opposite to my qu^stion; If they will say
they are Christians, been the Name of Christ, own his worship (though it be but
from the custom of the Nation, others do so, and so do they) though their
course and frame of conversation be like the infidells, or worse yet they are
Christians nomine ^enus, hence we must Baptize, if they have but Fides, no
ma^ter for Observan^^a.

But sir, I pray what if they be heretical about the na^ures of Christ a^ some
of old deny the Humanity, some the Deity of Christ? what if they think Christ
was a Woman (as I have given instance) what if they know not whether he was God
or Man (as before) what if ten Gods (as before) and abundance of such stuff
(all which yet will call themselves Christians) must these be Baptized? These
are errors in their belief.

But let us suppose they understand God and Christ, for their Faith they are
right, but abominable in their conversation, are we now bound to Baptize
because of their Faith?

1. Sir I thought Christianity had taken in the heart, and outward convers^tion
as well as the bead, a ^eall Christian is one united to Christ, sound in the
Doctrine concerning Christ, and wal^ing as Christ did [we suppose an old Adam].
Let him who is a nominall Christian appear live one, though he be not real,
Mr. Ca will not allow him sit, if visib^y he lives like an infidel, though he
profess his says in Christ.

2. Let us view the Scriptu^c in the administration of Baptism.

The^ Mark 4. Bap^^sme of Repentance; this is more then Faith: they confessed
their sins. v. 5. the J^^^s had not idols now to confess that sin, Aug.
defid^ and^ 2 Acts op. c. 8,
Does not the ordinance note repentance also?

2 Acts 37.38. First, Mag leb. cen^ 1. li. 1. cap. 10.
Jews, so had knowledge, (...) so ignorant as ou^ (...) believe. Secondly,
having a legal work by the power of the Word. Thirdly, Receiving the Word.
Fourthly, Repenting, they are Baptized, this is more still.


3. Acts, Though there is not mention made of the Samaritans repentance, who
were Apostatized from the Jews, but laid claim to the Pania^ks, Jo. 4.20.
expected Christ, v. 25. worshipped God, Ezva. 4.2. Yet that Philip should know
them to be so abominable in conversation, and yet Baptize them, that is to be
proved, since that others required repentance. I believe there was a more then
ordinary presence at that time, to enlighten, so to aw their hearts, the same
answer we may give for these, that Augustine does for the Eunuch, Bapt^zavit cum
Philippus, intelligi voluis impleta omnia, quae licet tacean^^r in Scripturis
gratia brevitat^^ ^amen scrie traditionis sci^us implenda. Irenaeus and
Tertullian have said enough for the Eunuch, besides Augustine, Ubi prius c. 9.
and the Text is plain.

If this be not a giving Holy things to Dogs (which Tertullian and Augustine
give warning of even in Baptizing) I know not what is: Let a man be a notorious
Ranter, Sodomite, Scoffer at Godliness, Drunkard, no matter what this is known
and proved, yet a Christian nomine tenus, Therefore you must Baptize him.

That Repentance as well as Faith was looked to in Baptizing, it appears by
the ages following the Apostles, for those who would live in their lusts, they
deferred their ^aptisme, knowing what that required. So De toenit.
Tertullian, and Ora. 40.
Nazianzen intimate, who exhort them to confession of their sin from the
example of John. Just. Mart. Apol. 2. is clear for more then you mention.

For the Cate humeni they were strict we see, Council. Neocas. Can. 5. Council.
Ni^. Can. 13. Council Elib. Can. 42. a good conversation they required, thou^
for their long deferring I approve not that.

Believer and Saint you say are S^nonoma's. Dr. Ames gives the reason, which
will not help you sir, Medul. Theo. c. 32.(...).

For the ill Members in Gorinth and Sardi^. 1. Sir you must prove the Apostles
knew them to be such when they admitted them, and Baptized them, that they
wallowed in their filth. 2. That the Churches were not too blame in letting
them alone, 3. To have a Name to live, is more then you speak of.

For ignorance, you quote the Hebrews which I think hurts not me, that of 1
Cor. 15.34. Is the most likely, but sir do you think it was such gross
ignorance as I have given instance? was not Paul as true to his work as
Abraham or the Jews were to be in admitting to circumcision, which you mention
Page 445. I have found so much ignorance that the persons deserved shame, but
yet dared not keep from the Lords Supper, because I found such a work on the
heart, which showed they had the thing, though could not express the thing in
a definition.

For the Lord. min J^^ Div. [Page 115. (...) and others. Gilles. Aar. rod. Page
482, 154, 515, 544, 555. To. 4. disp. 4. q 3 p. 3.
Presbyterians they have delivered their mind otherwise: the Fathers,
Counsels, and Schoolmen are of another Opinion, as appears by Grug. de val.
but I quote no more then I have read, I hope then you will pardon me though I
differ. For your Answers to my Arguments.

Your distinction of the word Sains I accept, and doubt not but your eyes are
so good, that you can see a difference between a man who is but nomine ten^^ a
Christian and wallowes in his filth, and another, who walks outwardly like a
Saint, though he have not the real qualifications of a Saint.

The second Argument must cost you two lines more before it be answered.

If a man be but Nomine tenus a Christian, though never so abominable in his
conversation, yet must be admitted a Member, then he cannot be cast out of the
Church for any vile sin, so long as he is nomine tenus a Christian, he is now
as he was when you admitted him.

You say the Consequence is erroneous, because be did not make profession of
his sin, but of his Faith, As Simon Magus.

Then it seems the man must profess his sin with his own mouth, as his Faith,
though Mr. Blake knows he is a Ranter, etc. The Members of the Church witness
it, yet because the man's own mouth does not profess it, you admit him. Then
sir, though you know the same abominations afterward, and your Members testify
it, witnesses come in, you must not cast him out unless he will profess it.
If Knowledge and Witnesses will cast him out (whether his mouth will profess
it or no) why will not the same keep him out at first? We shall never find
such (...) think as you speak of, they will give you good words when they
come to require Baptism, though they will swear and be drunk before and after
in the same day.

For Simon Magus, I have spoken to him before, Aar. rod. 482.
and Mr. Gillespic answers for me.

What is that Censure you would have passed upon a manifest opposer of Christ
in his visible Kingdom? he was no subject I said, Therefore not sit for a
Churchmember.

But sir I have not liberty to go further: only this I must add, I follow
this dispute with much sadness in respect of mine own heart: for your else and
Mr. Ca. I honor you both, your graces, your abilities I ac^knowledge are
before mine, but in this point I must see more light before (...) yield: as for
the bond of Unity I hope (by my piece against the Separation) you will conceive
me to be one who will hold it firm with you, in this Point, I leave you to
your own light, and shall conclude with the words of Cyprian [though some may
say I am in an error as he was] Manente concordiae vin^ulo, and perseverante
Catholicae Ecclesiae individu^ Sacramento, Ep. 52.
actum suum disponit and dirigit unusquisque Episcopus, ra^i^nem prep^fiti sui
Domino redditurus.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
I Had but three hours liberty, and that in the night, to run over my book,
and correct it, I did not observe many faults which would trouble the sense,
those I leave to the Courteous Reader to correct, these (among others) I
observed: Page 10. l. 21. r. proprie. l. 22. r. Govenant for Council. p. 22.
^undem. p. 43. for Smith r. says.


