cartoon panel I

Mea Culpa --


Mea Culpa --


Mea Maxima Culpa.


From Popery to save this Nation
A Doctor ventures his Damnation



cartoon panel K

So help me God --


inset cartoon panel Their Witnesses did not agree. Mar. 4.



Commits Idolatry, for our sakes
And of false Oaths noe scruple makes.



cartoon panel L M

Taisborough hides Arms, in open Rooms
A Knight in his Fore Fathers Tombs.



cartoon panel N

Fough -- I Smell Gunpouder.


An other where noe man would think
Gunpowder hides, in filthy sink.



cartoon panel O

Something for a poor Scholar.


Get you gone and be hanged.


The Popes Chief Agent was so poor
He Begd an Alms at Pickerin's door.



cartoon panel P

How are we cros'd. My Flint was loose


And my Silver Bullet's lost.


Pickerin had Killed the King, noe doubt
But Bullets lost, and Flint dropped out



cartoon panel Johannes Paulus de Oliva

One and Twenty


And Powder too, was very scarce
For w.ch Old Whitebread Whips his Arse.



cartoon panel Q

How dare you --


Oh hold Turns another in my Coat.


Our Doctor he does cudgel basely
And dare you (says he) to my face lie.



cartoon panel Describe Don John.


A tall black man --


Since naught but blows is to be got
Wise Oats discovers Jesuits Plot.



cartoon panel R S

God forbid I shoud accuse him.


-- I know him not.


His Eyes are dim, by Candle light
And growing faint, does not swear right.



cartoon panel T

Which hand will you have


They life and money, Al refuse --
The fatal Rope, they freely choose.



cartoon panel We are Innocent


God bless ye King.


And forgive our Enemies


And to be cut into fowr Quarters --
Cause they would be Canonized for Martirs.



Some Notes on the Picture to prevent Popish Cavils.
I. Be not scandalized at a word or two of Latin; It Is only to show the folly
of the Papists, who pray in an unknown Tongue. K. This is not meant of any Oath
against the Papists, but of their wicked Oath of Secrecy; which though the
Doctor often took, yet we may charitably believe he never did intend to keep
it; since he positively assures us he did but counterfeit: He only seemed to be
a Papist, but was all the while a True-Protestant in his Heart. See L. Staf.
Trial p. 123. L. Arms for 5 or 600 Men were hid in his Parlour; yet by Art
Magic were invisible to the Gentlemen of the Country, who often dined with him
in the same Room. See his Trial. M. Sir H. T's. Vault was searched for Arms,
and Coffins opened; but all the Arms they had hidden there were turned to
Bones. N. Sir R. T's. Sink was searched for Arms and Gunpowder; yet nor so much
as one Black-Bill could ever be found there, nor in any other place. O. See
Wakeman's Trial, p. 73. P. Grove, that he might be sure to give an Incurable
Wound, did traitorously and maliciously champ a Silver Bullet with his
poisonous Teeth. See his Trial, p. 24, and 81. Q. Either another man in such a
Coat, or else (as some believe) the Devil in his likeness, went often to Court,
and occasioned this unlucky mistake, which was the cause of his being beaten.
See the Jesuits Trial p. 16, 17.

Many may perhaps wonder, that the crafty Jesuits would suffer him to be in
such a miserable beggarly Condition; and much more, that they would beat and
abuse one, whom they had trusted with Secrets of so high a nature. But we can
easily answer this, and an hundred other seeming Improbabilites, only by
saying, They were infatuated.

R. See Coleman's Trial, p. 30. S. Wakeman's Try. p. 55, and 82, T. Langhorn's
Memoirs, p. 6.
A True Narrative of the Horrid Hellish Popish-Plot.
To the Tune of PACKINGTON'S POUND.
The Second Part.
The Contents of the Second PART.
Of Arms underground for Horse and for Foot;
The KING almost Killed, but Gun wiill not shoot,
For which Pick'ring is whipped. All of them swear
To be true to the PLOT; yet Oats, not for Fear
Nor Revenge, (though turned away, and well hanged)
Discovers them all; The Jesuits are Hanged.
I.
THe PLOT being thus subtly contrived as you hear,
To God knows how many this (1) Secret th'impart,
Some famous for Cheats, yet their Faith they don't fear;
To tie a Knave fast they had found a new Art.
They (2) swore on a Book,
And (3) Sacrament took;
But you will find, if into their grave Authors you look,
Forswearing's no Sin, (as (4) Recorder well notes)
Nor Treason, Rebellion, nor Cutting of Throats.
The truth of my Story if any man doubt,
W' have Witnesses ready to Swear it all out.
II.
STill blinded with Zeal, and inveigl'd by Hope,
Store of Arms they provide for Fight and Defense,
Three Lords must command, as Viceroys of the Pope,
And all over England they raise (5) Peter Pence.
Their Letters they send
By (6) Bedlow their Friend,
Or else by the (7) Post, to show what the intend.
Some hundreds (8) Oats saw, which the Jesuits did write,
It Is a wonder not One of them e're came to light.
The Truth of my Story, etc.
III.
POunds Two hundred thousand to (9) Ireland they sent;
Fifteen thousand to (10) Wakeman sor Potions and Pills;
Forty thousand in Fireworks we guess that they spent;
And, Item, Ten thousand to pay for Black-Bills;
Fifteen hundred more
(11) Grove should have they swore;
Four Gentlemen Ruffians deserved (12) Fourscore;
Pious Pickering they knew was of Masses more fond,
And for (13) Thirty thousand they gave him a Bond.
The truth of my Story, etc.
IV.
THese two, to Kill the King by fair promises won,
Had watched now some (14) years in St. James*s Park;
And Pick'ring, who never yet (15) shot off a Gun,
Was about to take aim, for he had a fair Mark:
Just going to begin't,
He (16) missed his Flint,
And looking in Pa^, there was (17) no Powder in it;
For which he their Pardon does humbly bese^ch,
Yet had (18) thirty good lashes upon his bare Breech.
The truth of my Story, etc.
V.
BUt a sa^der mischance to their PLOT did befall,
For Oa, their main Engine, failed when it came to it;
No marval indeed if he cuzen'd 'em all,
Who turn'^ him a (19) begging, and (20) beat him to boot:
He wheeling about,
The whole Party did rout,
And from lurking holes did so ferret 'em out;
Till running himself blind, h^ none of them (21) knew,
And fainting at (22) Council, he could not swear true.
The truth of my Story, etc.
VI.
TO comfort our Doctor, brave Be^loe's brought in,
A m^re Credible Witness was not above ground;
He vows and protests, though a Rogue he had been,
He would now not swear false for Five hundred p^und:
And why should we fear
They falsely would swear,
To damn their own (23) Souls, and to lose by it here.
Poor Oat, who before had no Penny in Purse,
Discov'ri^g the PLOT, was Seven hundred pound (24) worse
The truth of my Story, etc.
VII.
TWo ^itnesses more were let loose from the Jayl,
Though (25) One it is confessed did run back from his word;
(In danger of Life a good man may be frail)
And the (26) Other they slander for Cheating his Lord.
TO every one of these men
The Jesuits brought (27) Ten,
To dispro^e 'em in Time and in Place; but what then?
One Circ^mstance lately was sworn most clear
By a (28) Man who in hopes has Five hundred a year.
The truth of my Story, etc.
VIII.
ANd then we are told, We must always suppose,
To murder the King a Great PLOT there has been;
And who to contrive it so likely as those
Who Murder and Treason do hold for no Sin.
Things being thus plain,
To plead was in vain;
The Jury (instructed again and again)
Did find them all Guilty, and to show 'twas well done,
The People gave a Shout for Victory won.
The Truth of my Story if any man doubt,
W' have Witnesses ready to Swear it all out.
IX.
It Is strange how th^se Jesuits, so subtle and wise,
Should all by the Pope be so basely trepan'd,
To Hang with much comfort when he shall advise,
And go to the Devil too at his command.
He may give them leave,
To Lie and Dece^ve;
But what when the Rope does of Life them bereave?
Can his Holiness, think you, dispense with that pain,
Or by his Indulgences raise them again?
The truth of my Story if any man doubt,
W' have Witnesses ready to Swear it all out.
X.
Yet (like Madmen) of Life a Contempt they express,
And of their own happiness careless appear.
For Life and for Money not one would confess;
The had rather be Damned, than be Rich and live here.
But surely they raved,
When God they out-brav'd,
And thought to renounce him the way to be saved;
With Lies in their mouths go to Heaven in a string;
So prosper all Traitors, and GOD save the KING.
The truth of my Story if any man doubt,
W' have Witnesses ready to Swear it all out.
Concordat cum Recordo. Cl. Par.

FINIS.
I do imagine some will say there never was such another strange Ballad, with
marginal Notes and Quotations. But I answer, there never was such another Plot,
and I am afraid, that if I did not cite very good Authors, and bring Witnesses
of untainted Reputation, the next Generation might be so far deluded by Popish
Shams, as not to believe it.

Authors Quoted.
(1) As it appears in the several Trials. (2) Ireland's Trial, p. 23. (3)
Hill's Trial, p. 32, (4) See his Speech in Ireland's Trial, p, 81. (5) The same
Trial, p. 30. (6) Jesuits Trial, p. 33. (7) The same, p. 29. (8) Oats's Narrat.
all along. (9) See Coleman's Try. p. 23. (10) The same, page 40. (11) The same
again, p. 21. (12) The same, p. 24. (13) The same again, p. 21. (14) Ireland's
Trial, p. 24. (15) The same, p. 25. (16) The same again, p. 24. (17) See
Jesuits Trial, p. 33. (18) Ireland's Trial, p. 24. (19) Wakeman's Trial, p. 73.
(20) Jesuits Trial, p. 91. (21) Wakeman's Trial, p. 30, and 55. As also
Coleman's Trial, p. 30. (22) The same again. (23) Wakeman's Trial, p. 40. (24)
Thus Oats and Bedloe affirm in Langhorn's Trial. (25) Mr. Prance. (25) Mr.
Dugdale. (26) Jesuits Trial all along. (27) viz. To prove that Ireland was not
in Town Aug. 19. See Wakeman's Trial, p. 22. (28) Mr. Jenison.
See the Authors I quote; there is Witnesses plenty,
Approved by a -- Nemine Contradicente.
Yet Juries (for tender Conscience so famous.)
To save a True-Protestant, write Ignoramus.

