SOME Remarkable Passages OUT OF THE EXCELLENT LETTER OF Mijn Here FAGAL, In
the Name of their HIGHNESSES The PRINCE and PRINCESS of ORANGE.
I Must then first of all assure you very positively, That their Highnesses
have often declared, as they did it more particularly to the Marquess
Abbev^lle, His Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary to the States, that it is their
Opinion, That No Christian ought to be persecuted for his conscience, or be ill
used, because he differs from the Public and Establishe^ Religion: and
therefore they can consent that the Papists in En^land, Scotland, and Ireland.
^^^e suffered to continue in their Religion, with as much liberty as is allowed
them by the States in these ^rovinces.

And their Highnesses are very ready, in case His Majesty shall think fit to
desire it, to declare their willingness to concur in the settling and
confirming this Liberty, and as far as it lies in them, they will protect and
defend it, and according to the Language of Treaties, They will confirm it with
their Guaranty, of which you made mention in yours.

And if His Majesty shall think fit further to desire their concurrence in the
repealing of the Penal Laws, they are ready to give it; provided always that
those Laws remain still in their full vigor, by which the R. Catholics are
shut out of both Houses of Parliament, and out of all Public Employments,
Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military.

You writ, That the Roman Catholics in these Provinces are not shut out from
Employments and Places of Trust; but in this you are much mistaken, for our
Laws are express, excluding them by name from all share in the Government, and
from all Employments either of the Policy or Justice of our Country. It is
true, I do not know of any express Law, that shuts them out of Military
Employments, that had indeed been hard, since in the first formation of our
State, they joined with us in defending our Public Liberty, and did as eminent
service during the Wars; therefore they were not shut out from those Military
Employments; for the Public Safety was no way endangered by this, both because
their numbers that served in our Troops were not great, and because the States
could easily prevent any inconveniency that might arise out of that; which
could not have been done so easily, if the R Catholics had been admitted to a
share in the Government, and in the Policy or Justice of our State.

I am very certain of this, of which I could give very good proof, that there
is nothing that their Highnesses desire so much, as That His Majesty may Reign
happily, and in an entire Confidence with his Subjects; and that his Subjects
being persuaded of His Majesty's fatherly affection to them, may be ready to
make him all the Returns of Duty that are in their power.

Their Highnesses have ever paid a most profound Duty to His Majesty, which
they will always continue to do; for they consider themselves bound to it,
both by the Laws of God and of Nature.

I do not think it necessary to demonstrate to you how much their Highnesses
are devoted to His Majesty, of which they have given such real Evidences as are
beyond all verbal ones; and they are resolved still to continue in the same
Duty and Affection: or rather to increase it, if that is possible.

Nov. 4. 1687. SIR, Yours, etc.

Memorandum, That these singular Expressions of Affection and Duty to the King
their Father, were sent after those irregular and offensive measures of Quo
Warranting Charters, the Dispensing Power, Clossetting, the Ecclesiastical
Commission, and Magdalen College, were practiced; and comparing this with
several Expressions in his Highness his Declaration, and both with His
Majesty's Reasons why he withdrew himself from Rochester, may it not become us
as Members of the Church of England, and Subjects of the King of England, to
desire him to return to us upon the Terms of the Ancient Constitution of our
Government; and if those be too large, upon such Terms, as will make us safe;
and may not our neglecting to do it, upon a supposition of a Demise, because he
withdrew himself, which he charges upon a Constraint, become a lasting
Reproach upon these Kingdoms, and through our means, a like dishonor to the
Prince and Princess.


