I Have perused this ensuing Dialogue, and find it tending to Peace and
Holiness; the Author endeavoring to reconcile and heal those unhappy
Differences which have lately broken out a fresh amongst us, about the Points
therein handled, and cleared: For which cause I allow it to be Printed, and
recommend it to the Reader, as a Discourse stored with many necessary and
seasonable truths, confirmed by Scripture, and avowed by many approved Wtiters:
All composed in a familiar, plain, moderate style, without bitterness against,
or uncomely reflections upon others; which Flies have lately corrupted many
bo^es of (otherwise) precious Ointment.

May 10, 1645. Joseph Caryl.

THE MARROW OF Modern Divinity: Touching both the Covenant of Works, and the
Covenant of Grace: with their use and end, both in the time of the Old
Testament, and in the time of the New.

Wherein every one may clearly see how far forth he brings the Law into the
case of justification, and so deserves the name of Legalist; And how far forth
he rejects the Law* in the case of Sanctification, and so deserves the name
of Antinomist.

With the middle path between them both, which by Jesus Christ leads to
eternal life.

In a Dialogue, betwixt EVANGELISTA, a Minister of the Gospel. NOMISTA, a
Legalist. ANTINOMISTA, an Antinomian. And NEOPHYTUS, a young Christian.


The second Edition, corrected, amended, and much enlarged By the Author, E.
Fisher

Before the which there is prefixed the commenda^^^^ Epistles of diverse Divines
of great esteem in the City of LONDON.

Whereunto is also added, the substance of a most spiritual, and Evangelicall
Treatise, called, long since, by the name of Patricks Places.

London, Printed by R. Leybourn, for Giles (...), at the Black Spread-Eagle, at
the West end of Paris, 16^6.

TO THE HONORABLE, Colonel John Downs ESQUIRE, One of the Members of the
Honorable House of Commons in Parliament, Justice of Peace, and one of the
Deputy Lievtenants of the County of Sussex, and Auditor to the Prince his
Highness of the Duchy of Cornwall. E. F. wishes the true knowledge of God
in JESUS CHRIST.
Most Honored, SIR:
ALthough I do observe that new Editions, accompanied with new additions, are
sometimes published with new dedications, yet so long as he who formerly owned
the subject, does yet (...), and has the same affectiou^ toward it, I
conceive there is no need of a new Patron, but of a new Epistle.

Be pleased then, most honored Sir, to give me leave to tell you, that your
eminency of place did somewhat induce me, both now and before, to make choice
of you for its Patron, but your endowments with grace did invite me to it, God
having bestowed upon you special spiritual blessings in heavenly things in
Christ: for it has been declared unto me by them that knew you, when you were
but a youth, how Christ met with you then, and by sending his spirit into your
heart, first convinced you of sin, as was manifest by those conflicts which
your soul then had, both with Satan and it self, whilst you did not believe
in Christ. Secondly, of righteousness, as was manifest by the peace and
comfort which you afterward had, by believing that Christ was gone to the
Father and appeared in his presence as your Advocate and surety that had
undertaken for you. Thirdly, of judgment, as has been manifest ever since, in
that you have been careful with the true godly man, Psalm. 112.5. to guide your
affairs with judgment, in walking according to the mind of Christ.

I have not forgotten what desires you have expressed to know the true
difference betwixt the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace, and
experimentally to be acquainted with the Doctrine of free grace, the mysteries
of Christ, and the life of faith. Witness not only your highly approving of
some heads of a Sermon which I once heard a godly Minister preach, and repeated
in your hearing, of the life of Faith, but also your earnest request to me to
write them out fair, and send them to you into the Country: Yea, witness,
your highly approving of this Dialogue, when I first acquainted you with the
Contents thereof, encouraging me to expedite it to the Press, and you^ kind
acceptance, together with your cordial thanks for my love manifested in
dedicating it to your honored name.

Since then, worthy Sir, it has pleased the Lord to enable me, both to amend
it, and to enlarge it, I hope your affections will also be enlarged toward the
matter therein contained, considering that it tends to the clearing of those
forenamed truths, and through the blessing of God may be a means to root them
more deeply in your heart. And truly, Sir, I am confident, the more they grow
and flourish in any man's heart, the more will all heart corruptions wither and
decay. Oh! Sir, If the truth contained in this Dialogue, were but as much in my
heart, as they are in my head; I were a happy man, for then should I be more
free from pride, vain glory, wrath, anger, self-love, and love of the world
then I am, and then should I have more humility, meekness, and love both to
God and man then I have, oh! then should I be content with Christ alone, and
live above all the things in the world, then should I experimentally know, both
how to abound and how to want, and then shall I be fit for any condition,
nothing could come amiss unto me, oh! that the Lord would be pleased to write
it in our hearts by his blessed Spirit.

And so most humbly beseeching you still to pardon my boldness, and to
vouchsafe to take it into your patronage and protection, I humbly take my leave
of you, and remain

Your obliged Servant to be commanded, E. F.

To all such humble hearted Readers, as see any need to learn, either to know
themselves or GOD in CHRIST.
Loving Christians:
COnsider, I pray you, that as the first Adam did as a common person, enter
into covenant with God for all mankind; and brake it, whereby they became
sinful and guilty of everlasting death and damnation: Even so Jesus Christ,
the second Adam, did as a common person enter into covenant with God his Father
for all the elect (that is to say, all those that have or shall believe on his
name) and for them kept it, whereby they become righteous, and heirs of
everlasting life and salvation. And therefore it is our greatest wisdom, and
ought to be our greatest care and endeavor to come out, and from the first
Adam, unto and into the second Adam, that so we may have life through his
Name. John 20.31.

And yet, alas, there is no point in all practical Divinity, that we are
naturally so much averse and backward unto as unto this; neither does Satan
strive to hinder us so much from doing any thing else as this: And hence it is,
that we are all of us naturally apt to abide and continue, in that sinful and
miserable estate, that the first Adam plunged us into without either taking any
notice of it, or being at all affected with it, so far are we from coming out
of it. And if the Lord be pleased by any means to open our eyes, to see our
misery, and we do thereupon begin to step out of it, yet, alas, we are prone
rather to go backwards toward the first Adams pure estate, in striving and
struggling to leave sin, and perform duties, and do good works, hoping
thereby to make our selves so righteous and holy, that God will let us into
Paradise again to eat of the tree of life and live for ever, and this we do
until we see the flaming sword at Edens gate, Genesis 3.24.
turning every way to keep the way of the tree of life. Is it not ordinary
when the Lord convinces a man of his sin (either by means of his Word or his
Rod) to cry after this manner: O, I am a sinful man! for I have lived a very
wicked life, and therefore surely the Lord is angry with me, and will damn me
in hell: o! what shall I do to save my soul? And is there not at hand some
ignorant, miserable comforter ready to say, yet do not despair man, but
repent of your sins, and ask God forgiveness, and reform your life, and
doubt not, but he will be merciful unto you, for he has promised (you know)
that at what time soever a sinner repents of his sins he will forgive him.

And does he not hereupon comfort himself, and say in his heart at least, o,
if the Lord will but spare my life, and lengthen out my days, I will become a
new man! I am very sorry that I have lived such a sinful life, but I will
never do as I have done for all the world: o, you shall see a great change in
me! believe it.

And hereupon he betakes himself to a new course of life, and it may be becomes
a zealous professor of Religion, performing all Christian exercises both
public and private, and leaves off his old companions, and keeps company with
religious men, (and so it may be goes on till his dying day, and thinks
himself sure of Heaven and eternal happiness) and yet it maybe all this while
is ignorant of Christ and his Righteousness, and therefore establishes his own.

Where is the man, or where is the woman that is truly come to Christ, that
has not had some experience in themselves of such a disposition as this, if
there be any that have reformed their lives, and are become Professors of
Religion, and have not taken notice of this in themselves more or less: I wish
they have gone beyond a legal Professor, or one still under the covenant of
works.

Nay, where is the man or woman that is truly in Christ, that finds not in
themselves an aptnes to withdraw their hearts from Christ, and to put some
confidence in their own works and doings; if there be any that do not find it:
I wish their hearts deceive them not.

Let me confess ingeniously, I was a professor of Religion, at least a dozen
years, before I knew any other way to eternal life, then to be sorry for my
sins, and ask forgiveness, and strive and endeavor to fulfill the Law, and
keep the Commandments, according as Master Dod and other godly men had
expounded them: and truly I remember I was in hope I should at last attain to
the perfect fulfilling of them, and in the mean-time, I conceived, that God
would accept the will for the deed, or what I could not do Christ had done for
me.

And though at last by means of conferring with Master Thomas Hooker in
private, the Lord was pleased to convince me, that I was yet but a proud
Pharisee, and to show me the way of faith and salvation by Christ alone, and
to give me (as I hope) a heart in some measure to embrace it; yet, alas,
through the weakness of my faith, I have been and am still apt to turn aside
to the covenant of works, and therefore have not attained to that joy and peace
in believing, nor that measure of love to Christ and man for Christ's sake, as I
am confident, many of Gods Saints do attain unto in the time of this life, the
Lord be merciful unto me, and increase my faith.

And are there not other (though I hope) but few who being enlightened to see
their misery, by reason of the guilt of sin, though not by reason of the filth
of sin: And hearing of justification freely by grace through the redemption
which is in Jesus Christ, do applaud and magnify that doctrine, following them
that do most preach and press the same, seeming to be (as it were) ravished
with the hearing thereof, out of a conceit that they are by Christ freely
justified from the guilt of sin, though still they retain the filth of sin,
these are they that content themselves (with a Gospel knowledge, with mere
notions in the head but not in the heart, glorying and rejoicing in free grace,
and justification by faith alone, professing faith in Christ, and yet are not
possessed of Christ, these are they that can talk like believers, and yet do
not walk like believers; these are they that have language like Saints, and
yet have conversations like Devils: these are they that are not obedient to the
Law of Christ, and therefore are justly called Antinomians.

Now both these paths leading from Christ, have been justly judged as
erroneous, and to my knowledge, not only a matter of 18 or 20 years ago, but
also within these three or four years, there has been much a do, both by
preaching, writing, and disputing, both to reduce men out of them, and to keep
them from them, and hot contentious have been on both sides, and all, I fear
me, to little purpose, for has not the strict professor according to the Law,
whilst he has striven to reduce the loose professor, according to the Gospel,
out of the Antinomian path, entangled both himself and others, the faster in
the yoke of bondage, Gal. 5.1.
and has not the loose professor according to the Gospel, whilst he has
striven to reduce the strict professor according to the Law, out of the legal
path, by promising liberty from the Law, 2 Pet. 2.19.
taught others, and been himself the servant of corruption.

For this cause I, though I be nothing, have, by the grace of God, endeavored
in this Dialogue, to walk, as a middle-man betwixt them both, in showing to
each of them his erroneous path, with the middle path (which is Jesus Christ
received truly, and walked in answerably, as a means to bring them both unto
him, and make them both one in him: And oh! that the Lord would be pleased so
to bless it to them, that it might be a means to produce that effect.

I have (as you may see) gathered much of it, out of known and approved
Authors, and yet have therein wronged no man, for I have restored it to the
right owner again in the margent, some part of it my manuscripts have afforded
me, and of the rest I hope I may say as Jacob did of his venison, Genesis 27.20.
Burton Me^a^ page 8.
The Lord has brought it unto me, (let me speak it without vain glory) I have
endeavored herein to imitate the laborious Be, who out of diverse flowers
gathers honey and wax, and thereof makes one comb: if any soul feels any
sweetness in it, let them praise God, and pray for me who am weak in faith,
and cold in love.

E. F.

TO THE READER.
IF thou will please to peruse this little Book, thou shall find great worth
in it: There is a line of a gracious Spirit drawn through it, which has
fastened many precious truths together, and presented them to thy view,
according to the variety of men's spirits, the various ways of presenting known
truths are profitable. The grace of God has helped this Author in his work,
if it, in like manner, helps thee in reading, thou shall have cause to bless
God for these truths thus brought to thee, and for the labors of this good
man, whose ends, I believe, are very sincere for God and thy good.

Jer. Burroughes.

OCcasionally lighting upon this Dialogue, under the Approbation of a learned
and judicious Divine, I was thereby induced to read it, and afterward upon
serious consideration of the usefulness of it, to commend it to the people in
my public Ministry.

Two things in it especially took with me: first the matter, the main
substance being distinctly to discover the nature of the two Covenants, upon
which all the mysteries both of Law and Gospel depend. To see the first Adam to
be primus foederatus, in the one, and the second Adam in the other, to
distinguish rightly betwixt the law standing alone as a Covenant, and standing
in subordination to the Gospel, as a servant, this I assure my self to be the
key which opens the hiden treasures of the Gospel.

Portis apertis paradisum intrasse, Tom. 1.
As soon as God had given Luther but a glimpse hereof, he professes that he
seemed to be brought into Paradise again; and the whole face of the Scripture
to be changed to him: and he looked upon every truth with another eye.

Secondly, the manner, because it is an Irenicum, and tends to an accommodation
and a right understanding. Times of Reformation have always been times of
division, Satan will cast out a flood after the woman, as knowing that more die
by the disagreement of the humors of their own bodies, than by the sword, and
that if men be once engaged, they will contend; if not for truth, yet for
victory.

Now if the difference be in things of lesser consequence, the best way to
quench it were silence, this was Luthers counsel given in an Epistle written
to the Divines assembled in a Synod at Norimberge, Meum consilium fuerit (cum
nullum sit Ecclesiae periculum) ut hanc causam sinatis, vel ad tempus sopitam,
(utinam extinctam) jacere donec tutiore and meliore tempore, animis in pace
firmatis; and charitate aduatis, eam disputetis. I think it were good counsel
concerning many of the Disputes of our times.

But if the difference be of greater concernment as this is, then the way to
decide it, is to bring in more light which this Author has done, with much
evidence of Scripture, backed with the authority of most modern Divines: so
that whosoever desires to have his judgment cleared in the maine controversy,
between us and the Antinomians, with a small expense either of money or time,
he may here receive ample satisfaction; this I testify upon request,
professing my self a friend both to truth and peace.

Novem. 12. W. Strong.

THis book at first well accommodated with so valuable a testimony as M.
Caryls, besides its better-approving it self to the choicer spirits every
where, to the speedy distribution of the whole impression, it might seem a
needless or superfluous thing to add any more to the praise thereof, yet
meeting with detracting language, from some few (by reason of some phrases by
them either not duly pondered, or not rightly understood) it is thought meet
this second impression, to relieve that worthy testimony which still stands to
it, with fresh supplies, not for any need, the truth therein contained has
thereof, but because either the prejudice or darkness of some men's judgments
does require it: I therefore having thoroughly perused it, cannot but testify,
that if I have any the least judgment or relish of truth, he that finds this
book, finds a good thing, and not unworthy of its title, and may account the
Saints to have obtained favor with the Lord, in the ministration of it, as
that which with great plainness and evidence of truth comprises the chief
(if not all) the differences that have been lately engendered about the Law, it
has, I must confess, not only fortified my judgment, but also warmed my
heart in the reading of it, as indeed inculcating throughout the whole
Dialogue, the clear and familiar notion of those things by which we live (as
Hezekias speaks in another case) and it appears to me to be written from much
experimental knowledge of Christ, and teaching of the Spirit. Let all men that
taste the fruit of it, confess to the glory of God, he is no respecter of
persons, and endeavor to know no man henceforth after the flesh, nor envy the
compiler thereof, the honor to be accounted as God has made him in this
point, a healer of breaches, and a restorer of the overgrown paths of the
Gospel: as for mine own part, I am so satisfied in this testimony I lend, that
I reckon, what ever credit is thus pawned, will be a glory to the name that
stands by and avows this truth, so long as the book shall endure to record it.

Ihshua Sprigge.

Grace and peace to you in Christ Jesus.
My loving friend in Christ,
I Have, according to your desire, read over your Book, and find it full of
Evangelicall light and life, and I doubt not, but the oftener I read it, the
more true comfort I shall find in the knowledge of Christ thereby, the matter
^s pure, the method is Apostolical, wherein the works of love in the right
place, after the life of faith be effectually required. God has endewed his
Fisher with the Net of a trying understanding and discerning judgment and
discretion, whereby out of the Christaline streams of the well of life, you
have taken a mess of the sweetest and wholsomest fish that the whole world can
afford, which if I could daily have enough of, I should no more care for the
flesh, or the works thereof.

Samuel Prittie.

A CATALOGUE of those Writers names out of whom I have collected much of the
matter contained in this ensuing Dialogue.
A
Doctor Ames M. Aynsworth
B
M. Beza M. Bulenger M. Bradford M. Bastingius Bishop Babington M. Ball M.
Robert Boulton M. Samuel Boulton
C
M. Calvin M. Culverwell M. Careless M. Cornwall
D
Du Please B. D^wname Doctor Di^da^e M. Dixon M. Dyke
E
M. Elton
F
M. Fox M. Frith M. Forbs
G
M. Greenham M. Gibbens M. Thomas Goodwin M. Gray junior
H
Bishop Hall M. Thomas Hooker.
L
Doctor Luther M. Lightfoot
M
Wolfangius Musculus Peter Martyr Doctor Mayor M. Marshall
O
Barnardine Ochine
P
M. Perkins Doctor Preston
R
M. Rollock M. Reynolds M. Rouse.
S
Doctor Smith Doctor Sibbs M. Slater
T
M. Tyndall M. Robert Town
V
Doctor Urban Regius Doctor Vrsinus M. Vaughan
W
Doctor Willet Doctor Williams M. Wilson M. Ward.
THE MARROW OF Modern Divinity.
Interlocutors:
EVANGELISTA, a Minister of the Gospel. NOMISTA, a Legalist. ANTINOMISTA, an
Antinomian. NEOPHYTUS, a young Christian.
Nomista. SIR, My neighbor Neophytus and I, having lately had some conference
with this our friend and acquaintance Antinomista, about some points of
Religi^n, wherein he differing from us both, at last ^id he would be contented
to be judged by ^ou our Minister: therefore have we made bold to come unto you,
all three of us, to pray you to hear us, and judge of our differences.


Evan. You are all of you very welcome to me, and if you please to let me hear
what your differences are, I will tell you what I think.


Nom. The truth is, Sir, he and I differ in very many things, but more
especially about the Law: for I say the Law ought to be a rule of life to a
believer, and he says it ought not.


Neo. And surely, Sir, the greatest difference betwixt him and I, is this: He
would persuade me to believe in Christ, and bids me rejoice in the Lord, and
live merrily, though I feel never so many corruptions in my heart, yea though I
be never so sinful in my life; the which I cannot do, nor I think ought not to
do, but rather to fear, and sorrow, and lament for my sins.


Anti. The truth is, Sir, the greatest difference is betwixt my feiend Nomista
and I, about the Law, and therefore that is the greatest matter we come unto
you about.


Evan. Tit. 3.9
I remember, the Apostle Paul wills Titus to avoid contentions and strivings
about the Law, because they are unprofitable and vain: and so I fear me yours
have been.


Nom. Sir, for mine own part I hold it very meet, that every true Christian
should be very zealous for the holy Law of God, especially now when a company
of these Antinomians do set themselves against it, and do what they can quite
to abolish it, and utterly to root it out of the Church: surely, Sir, I think
it not meet they should ^ive in a Christian Commonwealth.


Evan. I pray you, neighbor Nomista, be not so hot, neither let us have such
unchristianlike expressions amongst us, and let us reason together in love, 1
Cor. 4.21.
and with the spirit of meekness, as Christians ought to do. I confess with
the Apostle, Gal. 4.18.
it is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing: But yet as the
same Apostle said of the Jews, so I fear me I may say of some Christians, that
they are zealous of the Law, Act. 21.20
yea some would be Doctors of the Law, and yet neither understand what they
say, 1 Timothy 1.17.
nor whereof they affirm.


Nom. Sir, I make no doubt but that I both know what I say, and whereof I
affirm, when I say and affirm, that the holy Law of God ought to be a rule of
life to a believer; For I dare pawn my soul of the truth of it.


Evan. But what Law do you mean?


Nom. Why Sir, what Law do you think I mean? Is there any more Laws then one*


Evan. Yea, in the New Testament the^ is mention made of a threefold Law,
(...) wit, Romans 3.27 Gal. 6.2.
the law of works, the law of faith, an^ the law of Christ: and therefore I
pray yo^ tell me, when you say the Law ought to b^ a rule of life to a
believer, which of their three Laws you mean?


Nom. Sir, I know not the difference betwixt them; but this I know, that the
Law of the Ten Commandments, commonly called the Moral Law, ought to be a
rule of life to a believer.


Evan. But the Law of the Ten Commandments, or Moral Law, may be either said
to be the matter of the law of works or the matter of the law of Christ; and
therefore I pray you tell me in whether o^ these senses you conceive it ought
to be ^ rule of life to a believer?


Nom. Sir, I must confess I do not know what you mean by this distinction; but
thi^ I know, that God requires that every Christian should frame and lead his
life according to the rule of the Ten Commandments, the which if he do, then
may he expect the blessing of God both upon his soul and body, and if he do
not, then can he expect nothing else but his wrath and curse upon them both.


Evan. The truth is, neighbor Nomista, ^he Law of the Ten Commandments, as it
(...) the matter of the Law of Works, ought not to be a rule of life to a
believer: but in thus saying, you have affirmed that it ought, and therefore
therein you have erred from the truth. And now friend Antinomista, that I may
also know your judgment, when you say the Law ought not to be a rule of life
to a believer, I pray you tell me what Law you mean?


Ant. Why, I mean the Law of the Ten Commandments.


Evan. But whether do you mean that Law, as it is the matter of the law of
works, or as it is the matter of the Law of Christ?


Ant. Surely, Sir, I do conceive that the Ten Commandments are no way to be a
rule of life to a believer, for Christ has delivered him from them.


Evan. But the truth is, the law of the Ten Commandments, as it is the matter
of the law of Christ, ought to be a rule of life to a believer; and therefore
you having affirmed the contrary, have therein also er^ed from the truth.


Nom. The truth is, Sir, I must confess, (...) never took any notice of this
threefold ^aw, which it seems is mentioned in the New Testament.


Ant. And I must confess, if I took any notice of them, I never understood
them.


Evan. Well, give me leave to tell you, that so far forth as any man comes
short of the true knowledge of this threefold Law, so far forth he comes short
both of the true knowledge of God, and of himself; And therefore I wish you
both to consider of it.


Nom. Sir, if it be so, you may do well to be a means to inform us, and help us
to the true knowledge of this threefold Law; and therefore I pray you first
tell us what is meant by the law of works?


Evan. The law of works, opposed to the law of faith, Bal on the Cov. of grace,
p. 9. Com. pla. eng. p. 118.
Romans 3.27. holds forth as much as the covenant of works: for it is manifest,
says Musculus, that the word which signifies covenant or bargain, is put for
law; so that you see the Law of works, is as much to say as the Covenant of
works, the which Covenant the Lord made with all mankind in Adam before his
fall, the sum whereof was, Lev. 18.5. Genesis 2.17. Ames. med. Eng. p. 48.
Do this, and thou shall live; And, If thou do it not, thou shall die the
death. In which Covenant there was first contained (...) precept, Do this;
Secondly, a promise joined unto it, If thou do it, thou shall live* Thirdly, a
like threatening, If thou do it not, thou shall die the death. Imagine, says
Musculus, that God had said to Adam, Lo, to the intent that thou may live,
Com. pla. p. 31.
I have given thee liberty to eat, and have given thee abundantly to eat: let
all the fruits of Paradise be in thy power, one tree except, which see thou
touch not, for that I keep it to mine own authority: the same is the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, If thou touch it, the meat thereof shall not be
life, but death.


Nom. But Sir, you said that the Law of the Ten Commandments, or Moral Law,
may be said to be the matter of the Law of works: and you have also said, that
the Law of works is as much to say as the Covenant of works: whereby it seems
to me you hold that the Law of the Ten Commandments was the matter of the
Covenant of works which God made with all mankind in Adam before his fall.


Evan. That Is a truth agreed upon by all Authors and Interpreters that I know:
Downham* on Just. p. 443.465.
And indeed, the Law of works (as a learned Author says) signifies the Moral
law; and the Moral law strictly and properly taken, signifies the Covenant of
works.


Nom. But Sir, what is the reason you call it but the matter of the covenant of
works?


Evan. The reason why I rather choose to call the Law of the Ten Commandments
the matter of the Covenant of works, then the Covenant it self, is because I
conceive that the matter of it cannot properly be called the covenant of works,
except the form be put upon it, that is to say, except the Lord require, and
man undertake to yield perfect obedience thereunto, upon condition of eternal
life and death: And therefore till then it was not a covenant of works betwixt
God and all mankind in


Adam. As for example, you know, that although a servant have an ability to do
a masters work, and though a master have wages to bestow upon him for it, yet
is there not a covenant betwixt them till they have thereupon agreed. Even so,
though man at the first had power to yield perfect and perpetual obedience to
all the Ten Commandments, and God had an eternal life to bestow upon him, yet
was there not a covenant betwixt them till they were thereupon agreed.


Nom. But Sir, you know there is no mention made in the book of Genesis, of
this covenant of works, which you say was made with man at first.


Evan. Bal on the Covenant p. 6.
Though we read not the word Covenant betwixt God and man, yet have we there
recorded what may amount to as much; for God provided and promised to Adam
eternal happiness, and called for perfect obedience, which appears from Gods
threatening, Genesis 2.17. For if man must die if he disobeyed, it implies
strongly, that Gods covenant was with him for life, if he obeyed.


Nom. But Sir, you know the word Covenant signifies a mutual promise, Walker
on the Covenant, p. 39.
bargain, and obligation betwixt two parties. Now though it is implied, that
God promised man to give him life if he obeyed, yet we read not that man
promised to be obedient.


Evan. I pray take notice, that God does not always tie man to verbal
expressions, Bal on the Covenant p. 5.
but does often contract the Covenant in real impressions in the heart and
frame of the creature: And this was the manner of covenanting with man at the
first, for God had furnished his soul with an understanding mind, Calv instit.
fol. eng. p. 8. Eccl. 7.27
whereby he might discern good from evil, and right from wrong, and not only
so, but also in his will was most great uprightness, and his isntrumental
parts were orderly framed to obedience: the truth is, God did ingrave in man's
soul, wisdom, and knowledge of his will, and works, and integrity in the whole
soul, and such a fitness in all the powers thereof, that neither the mind did
conceive, nor the heart desire, Basting, cat. p. 9.
nor the body put in execution any thing but that which was acceptable to God:
so that man endowed with these qualities, was able to serve God perfectly.


Nom. But Sir, how could the Law of the Ten Commandments be the matter of this
Covenant of works, when they were not written, as you know, till the time of
Moses.


Evan. Though they were not written in tables of stone until the time of
Moses, yet were they written in the tables of man's heart in the time of Adam;
for we read, that man was created in the image or likeness of God, Vrsin. cat.
p. 517. Calv inst. p. 190. Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.34.
Genesis 1.27. And the ten Commandments are a doctrine agreeing with the eternal
wisdom and justice that is in God, wherein he has so painted out his own
nature, that it does in a manner express the very image of God. And does not
the Apostle say, that the image of God consists in knowledge, righteousness,
and true holiness, and is not knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness the
perfections of both the tables of the law. Treat. of effectual Call. p. 20. or
thereabouts.
And indeed, says M. Rollock, it could not well stand with the justice of God
to make a Covenant with man under the condition of holy and good works, and
perfect obedience to his Law, except he had first created man holy and pure,
and engraven his law in his heart whence those good works should proceed.


Nom. But yet I cannot but marvel that God, in making the covenant with man,
did make mention of no other commandment then that of the forbidden fruit.


Evan. Do not marvel at it, Hugo Gr^^. defens. fid. p. 71.
for by that one species of sin, the whole genus or kind is shown, as the same
Law being more clearly unfolded, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10. does express: And
indeed, in that one Commandment the whole worship of God did consist, as,
obedience, honor, love, confidence, and religious fear, together with the
outward abstinence from sin, and reverent respect to the voice of God. Yea,
herein also consisted his love, and so his whole duty to his neighbor:
Lightfoot miscela. p. 282.
so that as a learned writer says, Adam heard as much in the garden, as Israel
did at Sinai, but only in fewer words, and without thunder.


Nom. But sir, ought not man to have yielded perfect obedience to God, though
this Covenant had not been made betwixt them?


Evan. Yea indeed, perfect and perpetual obedience was due from man unto God,
though God had made no promise to man; for when God created man at first, he
put forth an excellency from himself into him, and therefore it was the bond
and tie that lay upon man to return that again unto God, so that man being Gods
creature by the law of creation, Reynolds on Ps. ^^ p. 403.
he owed all obedience and subjection to God his creator.


Nom. Why then was it needful that the Lord should make a covenant with him,
by promising him life, and threatening him with death.


Evan. Reynolds on Psalm. 110. p. 405
For answer hereunto, in the first place I pray you understand, that man was a
reasonable creature, and so out of judgment, discretion and election, able to
make choice of his way, and therefore it was meet there should be such a
covenant made with him, that he might according to Gods appointment serve him
after a reasonable manner. Secondly, it was meet there should be such a
covenant made with him, ^ibbens on Genesis p. 77.
to show that he was not such a Prince on earth, but that he had a Sovereign
Lord; therefore God set a punishment upon the breach of his commandment, Bal
on the Cov. p. 11.
that man might know his inferiority, and that things betwixt him and God, were
not as betwixt equals. Thirdly, it was meet there should be such a covenant
made with him, to show that he had nothing by personal, Reyn. on Psalm. 110. ^.
406.
immediate, and underived right, but all by gift and gentleness: so that you
see it was an equal covenant, which God out of his prerogative royal made
with mankind in Adam before his fall.


Nom. Well, Sir, I do perceive that Adam and all mankind in him were created
most holy.


Evan. Yea, and most happy too, for God placed him in paradise in the midst
of all delightful pleasures and contents, wherein he did enjoy most near and
sweet communion with his Creator, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at
whose right hand is pleasures for evermore. Ps. 16.11.
So that if Adam had received of the tree of life, Walker on the Covenant, p.
89.
by taking and eating of it while he stood in the state of Innonencie before
his fall, he had certainly been established in a happy estate for ever, and
could not have been seduced and supplanted by Satan, as some learned men do
think, and as Gods own words seem to imply, Genesis 3.22.


Nom. But it seems that Adam did not continue in that holy and happy estate.


Evan. No indeed, M. Slat. on the 2^ Cov.
for he disobeyed Gods express command, in eating the forbidden fruit, and so
became guilty of the breach of the Covenant.


Nom. But Sir, how could Adam, who had his understanding so sound, and his will
so free to choose good, be so disobedient to Gods express command?


Evan: Though he and his will were both good, yet were they mutably good, Deuteronomy,
Pathw. p. 304.
so that he might either stand or fall at his own election or choice.


Nom. But why then did not the Lord create him immutable? or why did he not so
overruled him in that action, that he might not have eaten the forbidden fruit?


Evan. Reynolds on Psalm. 110. page 406.
The reason why the Lord did not create him immutable, was because he would be
obeyed out of judgment, and free choice, and not by fatal necessity, and
absolute determination; and withal let me tell you, it was not reasonable to
restrain God to this point, to make man such a one as would not, C^l. Instit.
p. 81.
or could not sin at all, for it was at his choice to create him how he
pleased, but why he did not uphold him with strength of steadfast continuance,
that rests hidden in Gods secret Counsel: howbeit this we may certainly
conclude, that Adams state was such, as served to take away from him all
excuse, for he received so much, that of his own will he wrought his own
destruction, because that act of his was a wilful transgression of a Law,
Reynolds on Ps. 110 p. 406.
under the precepts whereof he was most justly created, and unto the
malediction whereof he was as necessarily and righteously subject if he
transgressed; for as by being Gods creature he was to be subject to his will,
so by being Gods prisoner, he was as justly subject to his wrath, and that so
much the more, by how much the precept was most just, the obedience more easy,
the transgression more unreasonable, and the punishment more certain.


Nom. And was Adams sin and punishment imputed unto his whole offspring?


Evan. Yea indeed, for says the Apostle, Death passed upon all men, Romans 5.12
for that all have sinned, or, in whom all have sinned, that is, in Adam; the
very truth is, Call. Iustit. p. 106, 107
Adam by his fall threw down our whole nature headlong into the same
destruction, and drowned his whole offspring in the same gulf of misery: and
the reason is, because by Gods appointment he was not to stand or fall, as a
single person only, Goodwin Trium. Faith. p. 85
but as a common public person, representing all mankind to come of him,
therefore as all that happiness, all those gifts and endowments which were
bestowed upon him, were not bestowed upon him alone, but also upon the whole
nature of man, and as that Covenant which was made with him, was made with
whole mankind; even so he by breaking Covenant lost all, Pemble vind fid. p.
99.
as well for us, as for himself, as he received all for himself and us, so he
lost all both for himself and us.


Nom. Then Sir it seems that by Adams breach of Covenant, all mankind was
brought into a miserable condition.


Evan. All mankind by the fall of Adam received a twofold damage; first a
deprivation of all original goodness: Secondly an habitual natural
pronenesse to all kind of wickedness; Seven gold. cand. p. 3.
for the image of God, after which they were created, Basting Cat. p. 10.
was forthwith blotted out, and in place of wisdom, righteousness and true
holiness, came blindness, uncleanesse, falsehood and injustice: the very truth
is, our whole nature was thereby corrupted, defiled, deformed, depraved, Urban.
Reg. in chapter ser. to Ema^s. p. 12.
infected, made infirm, frail, malignant, full of venom, contrary to God,
yea enemies and rebels unto him; so that, says Luther, this is the title we
have received from Adam, Chos. Ser. p. 9.
in this one thing we may glory, and in nothing else at all, namely, that every
Infant that is born into this world, is wholly in the power of sin, death,
Satan, hell, and everlasting damnation: nay, says Musculus, the whirlpoole of
man's sin in paradise, Com. pla. p. 14.
is bottomless and unsearchable.


Nom. But Sir, me thinks it is a strange thing, that so small an offense as the
eating of the forbidden fruit seems to be, should plunge whole mankind into
such a gulf of misery.


Evan. Though at the first glance it seem to be a small offense; yet if you
look more wishly upon the matter, Reynolds on Ps. 110 p. 407.
it will appear to be an exceeding great offense, for thereby intolerable
injury was done unto God: as first, his dominion and authority in his holy
command was violated; Secondly, his justice, truth and power, in his most
righteous threatenings, were despised; Thirdly, his most pure and perfect image,
wherein man was created in righteousness and true holiness, was utterly
defaced; Fourthly, his glory, which by an active service the creature should
have brought to him, was lost and despoiled: nay, Lightfoot miscela. p. 183.
how could there be a greater sin committed, then that, when Adam at that one
clap brake all the ten Commandments.


Nom. Did he break all the ten Comman^ements, say you, Sir, I beseech you show
^e wherein?


Evan. 1. He chose himself another God, Ibid.
when he followed the Devil.

2. He idolized and defiled his own belly, ^s the Apostles phrase is, He made
his belly ^is god.

3. He took the name of God in vain, when ^e believed him not.

4. He kept not the rest and estate where^^ God had set him.

5. He dishonored his Father which was heaven, and therefore his days were
not prolonged in that land which the Lord his God had given him.

6. He massacred himself, and all his posterity.

7. From Eve he was a virgin, but in eyes and mind he committed spiritual
fornication.

8. He stole (like Achan) that which God had set aside not to be meddled with,
and this his stealth is that which troubles all Israel, the whole world.

9. He bare witness against God, when he believed the witness of the Devil
above him.

10. He coveted an evil covetousness like Amnon, which cost him his life, and
al^ his progeny. Now whosoever consider^ what a nest of evils here were
committed a^ one blow, Com. pla. p. 13.
must needs, with Musculus, se^ our case to be such, that we be compelled every
way to commend the justice of God and to condemn the sin of our first parents
saying concerning all mankind, as the Prophet Hosea does concerning Israel, O
Israel thou have destroyed thy self. Hos. 13.9.



Nom. But Sir, had it not been possibl^ for Adam both to have helped himself
and his posterity out of this misery, by renewing the same covenant with God,
and keeping it for afterward?


Eva. O no, Bolton, true boun* p. 135.
he covenant of works was a covenant no way capable of renovation, when he had
once broke it he was gone for ever, because it was a covenant between two
friends, bu^ f^llen man was become an enemy: And besides, it was an impossible
thing for Adam to have performed the conditions which now the justice of God
did necessarily require at his hands, for he was now become liable to the
payment of a double debt, to wit, the debt of satisfaction for his sin
committed in time past, and the debt of perfect and perpetual obedience for
the time to come: and he was utterly unable to pay either of them.


Nom. Why was he unable to pay the debt of satisfaction for his sin committed
in time past?


Evan. Because his sin in eating the forbidden fruit, (for that is the sin I
mean) was committed against an infinite and eternal good, Vrsin. cat. p. 112.
and therefore merited an infinite satisfaction, which was to be either some
temporal punishment equivalent to eternal damnation, or eternal damnation it
self. Now Adam was a finite creature, therefore between finite and infinite
there could be no proportion, so that it was impossible for Adam to have made
satisfaction by any temporal punishment, and if he had undertaken to have
satisfied by an eternal punishment, he should always have been satisfying,
and never have satisfied, as is the (...) of the damned in hell.


Nom. And why was he unable to pay the debt of perfect and perpetual obedience
for the time to come?


Evan. Vrsin. cat. p. 112.
Because his precedent power (...) obey, was by his fall utterly impaired, for
thereby his understanding was both feeble^ and drowned in darkness, and his
will was made perverse, and utterly deprived of all power to will well, and his
affections were quite set out of order, Call. Instit. p. 117.
and all things belonging to the blessed life of the soul were extinguished
both in him and us, so that he wa^ become impotent, Bolton, true boun. p. 133.
yea dead, and therefore not able to stand in the lowest terms to per^form the
meanest condition: the very truth is, our father Adam falling from God, di^ by
his fall so dash himself and us in pieces that there was no whole part left
either (...) him, or us, fit to ground such a Covenan^ upon. And this the
Apostle witnesses, both when he says, Romans 5.6. Romans 8.2.
We are of no strength; And, The Law was made weak, because of the flesh.


Nom. But Sir, might not the Lord have pardoned Adams sin, without
satisfaction?


Evan. O no, for Justice is essential in (...), and it is a righteous thing
with God, (...) every transgression receive a just recom^^nce, and if
recompense be just, it is un^^st to pardon sin, without satisfaction; and
^^ough the Lord had pardoned and forgiven (...) former transgression, and so
set him in (...) former condition of amity and friend^^ip, yet having no power
to keep the Law ^erfectly, he could not have continued ^^erein.


Nomista. And is it also impossible for (...) of his posterity to keep the Law
per^^ctly?


Evan. Yea indeed, it is impossible for any ^eer man, in the time of this life,
to keep it ^erfectly, yea though he be a regenerate ^an; for the Law requires
of man, that he ^^ve the Lord with all his heart, soul and ^^ight; and there
is not the holiest man that (...), but he is flesh as well as spirit, in all
parts and faculties of his soul, and therefore cannot love the Lord perfectly:
yea, and the ^aw forbids all habitual concupiscence, ^ot only saying, thou
shall not consent to lust, ^ut thou shall not lust. It does not only ^ommand
the binding of lust, but forbids ^^so the being of lust: And who in this case
^an say, my heart is clean?


Antin. Then friend Nomista, take notice I pray, that as it was altogether
impossible for Adam to return unto that holy and happy estate wherein he was
created, by the same way he went from it, so is it for any of his posterity;
and therefore I remember one says very wittily, Lightfoot miscela. p. 282.
the Law was Adams lease when God made him tenant of Eden, the conditions of
which bond when he kept not, he forfeited himself and all us. God read a
lecture of the Law to him before he fell, to be a hedge to him to keep him in
Paradise: but when Adam would not keep within compass, this Law is now become
as the flaming sword at Eden gate, to keep him and his posterity out.


Nom. But Sir, you know that when a Covenant is broken, the parties that were
bound, are freed and released from their engagements, and therefore me thinks
both Adam and his posterity should have been released from the covenant of
works, when it was broken, especially considering they have no strength to
perform the condition of it.


Evan. Indeed it is true in every Covenant, if either party fail in his duty,
and perform not his condition, the other party i^ thereby freed from his part,
but the party failing is not freed ti^l the other release him* and therefore
though the Lord be freed from performing his condition, that is, from giving to
man eternal life; yet so is not man from his part: no, though strength to obey
be lost, yet man having lost it by his own default, the obligation to obedience
remains still, so that Adam and his offspring are no more discharged of their
duties, because they have no strength to do them, than a debtor is quitted of
his bond, because he wants money to pay it. And thus, neighbor Nomista, I have
according to your desire, endeavored to help you to the true knowledge of the
Law of Works.


Ant. I beseech you, Sir, proceed to help us to the true knowledge of the Law
of Faith.


Evan. The Law of faith is as much to say as the Covenant of grace, or the
Gospel, which signifies good, merry, glad, Tindal, path. to holy scrip. p.
378. 2 Timothy 1.9* Ephesians. 3 11. Romans 1.2. Gal. 4.4.
and joyful tidings, that is to say, that God, to whose eternal knowledge all
things are present, and nothing past, or to come, foreseeing man's fall before
all time purposed, and in time promised, and in the fullness of time performed,
the sending of his son Jesus Christ into the world, to help and deliver
fallen mankind.


Ant. I beseech you, Sir, let us hear more of these things, and first of all
show how we are to conceive of Gods eternal purpose in sending of Jesus Christ.


Evan. Reynolds on Ps. 110. p. 407, 408
Why here the Learned frame a kind of conflict in Gods holy attributes, and by a
liberty which the Holy Ghost from the language of holy Scripture allows them,
they speak of God after the manner of men, as if he were reduced to some
straits and difficulties, by the cross demands of his several Attributes:
Williams, 7 gold. can. p. 319.
for Truth and Justice stood up and said, that man had sinned, and therefore
man must die; and so called for the condemnation of a sinful, and therefore
worthily accursed creature: or else they must be violated: for thou said (say
they to God) in what day that thou eatest of the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil, thou shall die the death. Mercy on the other side pleaded for
favor, and appeals to the great Court in Heaven, and there it pleads, saying,
Wisdom, Hooker, ^ouls just. p. 177.
and power, and goodness, have been all manifest in the Creation; and Anger
and Justice, they have been magnified in man's misery that he is now plunged
into by his fall; but I have not yet been manifested: O, let favor and
compassion be showed toward man, woefully seduced and overthrown by Satan. O,
said they unto God, it is a royal thing to relieve the distressed; and the
greater any one is, the more placable and gentle he ought to be. But Justice
replied, If I be offended, I must be satisfied and have my right, And therefore
I require, that man who has lost himself by his disobedience, Call. Instit. p.
117.
should for remedy set obedience against it, and so satisfy the judgment of
God. Therefore the wisdom of God became an umpire, and devised a way to
reconcile them, concluding, that before there could be reconciliation made,
there must be two things effected; first, Reynolds, Psalm. 110. p. 408.
a satisfaction of Gods justice; secondly, a reparation of man's nature: which
two things must needs be effected by such a middle and common person, that had
both zeal toward God, that he might be satisfied, and compassion toward man
that he might be repaired. Such a person, as having man's guilt and punishment
translated on him, might satisfy the justice of God, and as having a fullness
of Gods spirit and holiness in him, might sanctify and repair the nature of
man: And this could be none other but Jesus Christ, Ibid.
one of the three persons of the blessed Trinity; And therefore he, by his
Fathers ordinacion, his own voluntary susception, and the holy Spirits
sanctification, was fitted for the business: whereupon there was a special
covenant, or mutual agreement made between God and Christ, Ames. med. p. 74.
as is expressed, Isa. 53. verse. 10. That if Christ would make himself a
sacrifice sacrifice for him, then he should see his seed, he should prolong his
days, and the pleasure of the Lord should prosper by him. Th. Goodw. Christ
set forth, p. 75
So, in Psalm. 89.19. the mercy of this Covenant between God and Christ, under
the type of Gods covenant with David, are set forth: Thou spakest in vision to
thy Holy one, and said, I have laid help upon one that is mighty, or as the
Chaldee expounds, one mighty in the Law. Ainsworth on the text. Goodw. Christ
set forth, p. 75
As if God had said concerning his elect, I know that these will break, and
never be able to satisfy me, but you are a mighty and substantial person,
able to pay me, therefore I will look for my debt of you, (as Paraeus well
observes) God did as it were say to Christ, What they owe me, I require it all
at your hands. Then said Christ, Lo, I come to do thy will* In the volume of
thy book it is written of me, Ps. 40.7, 8
I delight to do thy will O my God, yea, thy Law is in my heart. Thus Christ
assented, and from everlasting stroke hands with God, Call. Instit. p. 117.
to put upon him man's person, and to take upon him his name, and to enter in
his stead in obeying his father, and to do all for man that he should require,
and to yield in man's flesh the price of the satisfaction of the just judgment
of God, and in the same flesh to suffer the punishment that man had deserved;
And this he undertook under the penalty that lay upon man to have undergone:
and thus was Justice satisfied, and Mercy magnified by the Lord Jesus Christ,
and so God took Christ's single bond, whence Christ is not only called the
Surety of the Covenant for us Heb. 7 22. but the Covenant it self* Isa. 49 8.
And God laid all upon him, that he might be sure of satisfaction, protesting
that he would not deal with us, nor so much as expect any payment from us,
such was his grace. And thus did our Lord Jesus Christ enter into the same
covenant of works that Adam did, to deliver believers from it; Hookers souls
just. p. 174 Goodwin, Christ set forth, p. 83, 84.
he was contented to be under all that commanding, revenging authority which
that Covenant had over them, to free them from the penalty of it; and in that
respect Adam is said to be a type of Christ, as you have it Romans 5.14. Who was
the type of him that was to come. Unto which purpose the (...) which the
Apostle gives these two, Christ and Adam, are exceeding observable: he calls
Adam the first man, 1 Cor. 15, 47.
and Christ our Lord the second man, speaking of them as if there never had
been any more men in the world besides these two, thereby making them the head
and root of all mankind, they having as it were the rest of the sons of men
included in them: 1 Cor. 15.58.
the first man is called the earthly man, the second man Christ is called the
Lord from heaven. The earthly man had all the sons of men born into the world,
included in him, and is so called in conformity unto them. The second man
Christ is called the Lord from heaven, who had all the elect included in him,
who are said to be the firstborn, and to have their names written in heaven,
Heb. 12.13. and therefore are oppositely called heavenly men: so that these
two, in Gods account, stood for all the rest. And thus you see, that the Lord
willing to show mercy to the creature fallen, Bal of the cov. p. 289
and withal to maintain the authority of his Law, took such a course as might
best manifest his clemency and severity; Ibid. p. 287 208.
Christ entered into covenant, and became surety for man, and so became liable
to many engagements; for he that answers as a surety, must pay the same sum of
money that the debtor owes.

And thus have I endeavored to show you how we are to conceive of Gods
eternal purpose in sending of Jesus Christ to help and deliver fallen mankind.


Ant. I beseech you, Sir, proceed also to the second thing, and first tell us,
when the Lord began to make a promise to help and de^ver fallen mankind?


Evan. Even the same day that he sinned, w^hich was the very same day he was
created; for Adam by his sin being become the child of wrath, and both in body
and in soul subject to the curse, and seeing nothing due to him but the wrath
and vengeance of God, he was afraid, Genesis 3.1^*
and sought to hide himself from the presence of God; whereupon the Lord
promised Christ unto him, saying to the serpent, verse. 15.
I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed; He, that is to say the seed of the woman (for so is the Hebrew text)
shall break thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. This promise of Christ
the woman's seed, Urban Reg. on Christ's sermon to Ema^^.
was the Gospel, and the only comfort of Adam, Abel, Enoch, Noah, and the rest
of the godly Fathers, until the time of Abraham.


Nom. I pray you, Sir, what ground have you to think that Adam fell the same
day he was created?


Evan. My ground for this opinion, is Psalm. 94.12. which text in the Hebrew is
thus read: Adam being in honor, Ainsworth.
did not lodge a night in it.


Ant. But Sir, do you think that Adam and those others did understand that
promised seed to be meant of Christ?


Evan. Who can make any doubt but that the Lord had acquainted Adam with
Christ, betwixt the time of his sinning and the time of his sacrificing, though
both on a day.


Ant. But did Adam offer sacrifice?


Evan. Lightfoot miscela. p. 186. V^ug meth on Bib p. 15 Walker on Cov. p. 59.
Can you make any question, but that the bodies of those beasts, whose skins
went for a covering for his body, were immediately before offered in sacrifice
for his soul^? Surely those skins could be none other but of beasts slain and
offered in sacrifice; for before Adam fell, beasts were not subject to
mortality, nor slaying; And Gods clothing of Adam and his wife with skins,
signified that their sin and shame was covered with Christ's righteousness. And
questionless the Lord had taught him, that his sacrifice did signify his
acknowledgment of his sin, Gibben^ on Genesis
and that he looked for the seed of the woman promised to be slain in the
evening of the world, thereby to appease the wrath of God for his offense, the
which undoubtedly he acquainted his sons, Cain and Abel with, when he taught
them also to offer sacrifice.


Ant. But how does it appear, that this his sacrificing was the very same day
that he sinned?


Evan. It is said, Ioh. 7.13. concerning Christ, that they sought to take him,
yet no man laid hands on him, Mar. 14.42.
because his hour was not yet come But after that, when the time of his
sufferings was at hand, he himself said, The hour is come: Mar. 15.34, 32.
which day is expressly set down by the Evangelist Mark to be the sixth day, and
ninth hour of that day, when Christ, through the eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14.
offered up himself without spot to God. Now if you compare this with Exodus
12.6. you shall find, that the Paschall Lamb, a most lively type of Christ, was
offered the very same day and hour, even the 6. day, Ainsworth on the text.
and 9. hour of the day, which was at 3 of the clock in the afternoon: and the
Scripture testifies that Adam was created the very same sixth day, and gives
us ground to think that he sinned the same day. And do not the fore-alleaged
Scriptures afford us warrant to believe that it was the very same hour of that
day when Christ entered mystically and typically upon the work of redemption,
Genesis 1.26
in being offered as a sacrifice for Adams sin? And surely we may suppose that
the covenant (as you heard) being broken between God and Adam, Justice would
not have admitted of one hours respite before it had proceeded to execution,
to the destruction both of Adam and the whole Creation, had not Christ in the
very nick of time stood as the Ram (or rather the Lamb) in the bush, and
stepped in to perform the work of the covenant. And hence I conceive it is,
that St. John calls him the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world; Rev.
13.8. Walker on the Cov. p. 42.
For as the first state of creation was confirmed by the covenant which God
made with man, and all creatures were to be upheld by means of observing the
law and condition of that Covenant, so that Covenant being broken by man, the
world should have come to ruin, had it not been as it were created anew and
upheld by the covenant of grace in Christ.


Ant. Then, Sir, you think that Adam was saved.


Evan. Ainsworth on Genesis Gibbens on Genesis
The Hebrew Doctors hold, that Adam was a repentant sinner, and say, that he was
by wisdom (that is to say by faith in Christ) brought out of his fall, yea and
the Church of God does hold, and that for necessary causes, that he was saved
by the death of Christ: yea, says Mr. Vaughan, it is certain he believed the
promise concerning Christ, in whose commemoration he offered continual
sacrifice, and in the assurance thereof he named his wife Heva, that is to say,
life; and he called his son Seth, settled, or persuaded in Christ.


Ant. Well, now I am persuaded that Adam did understand this seed of the woman
to be meant of Christ.


Evan. Assure your self, that not only Adam, V^b. Reg. on Christ's sermon. to
Emaus.
but all the rest of the godly fathers did so understand it, as is manifest, in
that the Thargum or Chalde bible, which is the ancient translation of
Jerusalem, has it thus: Between thy son, and her son. Duples. trunesse of Chr.
relig. p. 226.
Adding fur^her by way of comment, So long, O serpent, ^s the woman's children
keep the Law, they ^ill thee; and when they cease to do so, thou ^tingest them
in the heel, and have power to ^urt them much: but whereas for their harm
^here is a sure remedy, for thee there is none, for in the last days they
shall crush thee all to ^eeces by means of Christ their king. And ^his was it
which did support and uphold their faith until the time of Abraham.


Ant. What followed then?


Evan. Why then the promise was turned into a covenant with Abraham and his
seed, and oftentimes repeated, Genesis 12.13. Genesis 18.18. Genesis 20.12.
that in his seed all nations should be blessed. Which promise and covenant was
the very voice it self of the Gospel, it being a true testimony of Jesus
Christ, Gal. 3.^.
as the Apostle Paul bears witness, saying, The Scripture foreseeing that
God would justify the Gentiles through faith, preached before the Gospel unto
Abraham, saying, In thee shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. And the
better to confirm Abraham's faith in this promise of Christ, it is said Genesis
14.19. that Melchisedec came forth and met him, and blessed him. Now, says the
Apostle, this Melchisedec was a Priest of the most high God, Heb. 7.12.
and king of righteousness, and king of peace, without father, Heb. 6.20. Jer.
23 6. Isa. 9 6.
and without mother, and so like unto the son of God, who is a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedec, and both king of righteousness, and king of
peace, yea and without father as touching his manhood, and without mother as
touching his Godhead. Whereby we are given to understand, that it was the
purpose of God that Melchisedec should in these particulars resemble the person
and office of Jesus Christ the son of God, Dixon on the H^b.
and so by Gods own appointment be a type of him to Abraham, to ratify and
confirm the promise made to him and his seed, in respect of the eternal
covenant, to wit, That he and his believing seed should be so blessed in
Christ, as Melchisedec had blessed him. Nay, let me tell you more, some have
thought it most probable, yea and have said, If we search out this truth
without partiality, Williams, 7 gold. can. p. 330, 331
we shall find that this Melchisedec which appeared unto Abraham, was none
other then the son of God, manifest by a special dispensation and privilege
unto Abraham, in the flesh, who is therefore said to have seen his day, and
rejoiced, Joh. 8.56. Moreover in Genesis 15. we read, that the Lord did again
confirm this covenant with Abraham; for when Abraham had divided the beasts,
God came between the parts like a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp, Bal on
the cov. p. 49.
which as some have thought, did primarily typifie the torment and rending of
Christ, and the furnace and fiery lamp did typifie the wrath of God running
between, and yet did not consume the rent and torn nature; and the blood of
circumcision did typifie the blood of Christ, And the resolved sacrificing of
Isaac on mount Moria by Gods appointment, Walker on the cov. p. 63.
did prefigure and foreshew, that by the offering up of Christ the promised
seed, in the very same place, all Nations should be saved. Now this Covenant
thus made and confirmed with Abraham, was renewed with Isaac, Genesis 26.4. and
made known unto Jacob by Jesus Christ himself; Genesis 32.28.30. Seven gold. cand.
p. 322
for that man which wrestled with Jacob, was none other but the man Christ
Jesus; for himself said, that Jacob should be called Israel, a wrestler and
prevailer with God; and Jacob called the name of the place Peniel, because he
had seen God face to face; And Jacob left it by his last will unto his
children, in these words, The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a law
giver from between his feet, Genesis 49.10. B. Babing. on the text.
till Shilo come. That is to say* Of Judah shall Kings come one after another,
and many in number, till at last the Lord Jesus come, who is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords. Or as the Thargum of Jerusalem, and the Onkelos do translate it,
until Christ the ano^nted come.


Nom. But Sir, are you sure that this promised seed was meant of Christ?


Evan. The Apostle puts that out of doubt, Gal. 3.16. saying, Now unto Abraham
and to his seed were the promises made. He says not, and to seeds, as of many,
but as of one; and to thy seed, which is Christ: and so no doubt but these
godly Patriarks did understand it.


Ant. But Sir, the great promise that was made unto them, as I conceive, and
which they seemed to have most regard unto, was the land of Canaan.


Evan. There is no doubt but that these godly Patriarks did see their heavenly
inheritance (by Christ) through the promise of the land of Canaan, as the
Apostle testifies of Abraham, Heb. 11. saying, He sojourned in a strange
country, and looked for a city having a foundation, whose builder and maker is
God. Whereby it is evident, says Calvin, Institut. p. 204.
that the height and eminency of Abraham's faith, was, the looking for an
everlasting life in heaven. The like testimony he gives of Sarah, Heb. 11.10.
Isaac, and Jacob, saying, All these dyed in the faith. Implying, that they did
not expect to receive the fruit of the promise till after death: And therefore
in all their travels they had before their eyes the blessedness of the life to
come; which caused old Jacob to say at his death, Lord, Genesis 49.18.
I have waited for thy salvation. The which speech the Chaldee paraphrases
expound thus: Our father Jacob said not, Ainsworth on the text.
I expect the salvation of Gideon son of Joash, which is a temporal salvation,
nor the salvation of Sampson son of Manoah, which is a transitory salvation,
but the salvation of Christ the son of David, who shall come and bring unto
himself the sons of Israel, whose salvation my soul desires. And so you see
that this Covenant made with Abraham in Christ, was the comfort and support of
these and the rest of the godly fathers, until their departure out of Egypt.


Ant. And what followed then?


Evan. Why then Christ Jesus was most clearly manifested unto them in the
Passover lamb; for as that lamb was to be without spot or blemish, Exodus 12.5.
even so was Christ, 1 Pet. 1.19. And as that lamb was taken up the tenth day of
the first new moon, in March; even so on the very same day of the same month
came Christ to Jerusalem to suffer his passion. Tindal in his works, p. 430.
Ainsw. on Exodus
And as that lamb was killed on the fourteenth day at even, just then on the
same day, and at the same hour, did Christ give up the ghost. Mar. 15.33, 34,
35.
And as the blood of that lamb was to be sprinkled on the Israelites doors,
Exodus 12.7. Even so is the blood of Christ sprinkled on believers hearts by
faith, 1 Pet. 1.2. And their deliverance out of Egypt was a figure of their
redemption by Christ: their passing through the Red sea, 1 Cor. 10.2, 3, 4.
was a type of Baptism, when Christ should come in the flesh; And their manna
in the wilderness, and water out of the rock, did resemble the sacrament of
the Lords supper; and hence it is that the Apostle says, they did all eat the
same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink, for they
drank of that spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ. And
when they were come to mount Sinai, the Lord delivered the Ten Commandments
unto them.


Ant. And were the Ten Commandments, as they were delivered to them on mount
Sinai, the Covenant of works?


Evan. Yea indeed were they.


Nom But by your favor, Sir, you know that these people were the posterity of
Abraham, and therefore under that covenant of grace which God made with their
father: And therefore I do not think that they were delivered to them as the
covenant of works, For (Sir) you know the Lord never delivers the covenant of
works to any that are under the covenant of grace.


Evan. Indeed it is true, Bal on the cov. p. 110
the Lord did manifest so much love to the body of this nation, that all the
natural seed of Abraham were externally, and by profession, under the covenant
of grace made with their father Abraham, though it is to be feared many of them
were still under the covenant of works made with their father Adam.


Nom. But Sir, you know, in the preface to the Commandments, the Lord calls
himself by the name of their God in general, and therefore it should seem that
they were all of them the people of God.


Evan. That is nothing to the purpose, Bal on the cov. p. 213
for many wicked and ungodly men being in the visible Church, and under the
external Covenant, are called the chosen of God, and the people of God. But
though they had been all of them believers, yet as the Lord delivered it to
them, it would have done them no more hurt than it did them that were.


Nom. But Sir, was the same covenant of works made with them, that was made
with Adam?


Evan. For the general substance of the duty, the Law delivered on mount
Sinai, Ibid. p. 113 Lightfoot miscela. p. 186.
and formerly engraven in man's heart, was one and the same, so that at mount
Sinai the Lord delivered no new thing, only it came more gently to Adam before
his fall, but after his fall came thunder with it.


Nom. I, but Sir, as your self said, the ten Commandments, as they were
written in Adams heart, were but the matter of the covenant of works, and not
the covenant it self, till the form was annexed to them, that is to say, till
God and man were thereupon agreed: now we do not find that God, and these
people did agree upon any such terms at mount Sinai.


Evan. No, say you so, do you not remember that the people consented, Exodus
19.8. saying, All that the Lord has spoken we will do. And do you not remember
that the Lord consented, Levit. 18.5. saying, Ye shall therefore keep my
statutes and my judgments, which if a man do he shall live in them. And in
Deuteronomy. 27.26. saying, Cursed is he that confirms not all the words of this law
to do them. And does not the Apostle Paul give evidenee than these words were
the form of the covenant of works, when he says Romans 10.5. Moses describes
the righteousness which is of the law, that the man that does these things
shall live in them: and when he says, Gal. 3.10. For it is written, Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things which are written in the book of
the law, to do them. And in Deuteronomy. 4.13. Moses does in express terms call it
a Covenant, saying, And he declared unto you his Covenant, which he commanded
you to perform, even ten Commandamennts, and he wrote them upon tables of
stone. Now this was not the Covenant of grace; for Moses afterward, Deuteronomy. 5.3.
speaking of this Covenant, says, God made not this Covenant with your Fathers,
but with you: And by Fathers, all the Patriarchs unto Adam may be meant, says
Mr. Aynsworth, who had the promise of the Covenant of Christ: therefore if it
had been the Covenant of grace, he would have said, God did make this covenant
with them, rather then that he did not.


Nom. And do any of our godly and modern witers, agree with you in this point?


Evan. Yea indeed, Polanus says, Subst. of Relig. octav. eng. p. 184, 185
the Covenant of works, is that in which God promises everlasting life unto a
man, that in all respects performs perfect obedience to the Law of works,
adding thereunto threatenings of eternal death, if he shall not perform
perfect obedience thereunto. God made this Covenant in the beginning with the
first man Adam, whilst he was in the first estate of integrity; the same
Covenant God did repeat and make again by Moses, with the people of Israel.
And Dr. Preston says, New Cov. p. 317.
the Covenant of works runs in these terms, Do this and thou shall live, and
I will be thy God. This was the Covenant which was made with Adam, and the
Covenant that is expressed by M^ses in the Moral law. And Mr. Walker says,
that the first part of the covenant which God made with Israel at Horeb, O^
cov. p. 128.
was nothing else but a renewing of the old covenant of works which God made
with Adam in paradise. Bolton, true boun. p. 23.
And it is generally laid down by our Divines, that we are by Christ delivered
from the Law, as it is a Covenant.


Nom. But Sir, were the children of Israel at this time better able to perform
the condition of the covenant of works, than either Adam, or any of the old
Patriarks, that God renewed it now with them, rather then before?


Evan. No indeed, God did not renew it with them now, and not before, because
they were better able to keep it, but because they had more need to be made
acquainted what the covenant of works is, then those before: for though it is
true, the Ten Commandments which were at first perfectly written in Adams
heart, were much obliterated by his fall, yet some impressions and relics
thereof still remained, and Adam himself was very sensible of his fall, Romans
2.15
and the rest of the fathers were helped by traditions, In M. Bolton, p. 371.
And (says Cameron) God did speak to the Patriarchs from heaven, yea and he
spoke unto them by his Angels. But now by this time sin had almost obliterated
and defaced the impressions of the Law written in their hearts, Bullinger, com.
plac.
and by their being so long in Egypt, they were so corrupted, that the
instructions and ordinances of their fathers were almost all worn out of mind,
and their fall in Adam was almost forgotten, as the Apostle testifies, saying,
Romans 5.1^
Before the time of the Law sin was in the world, yet did they not impute it to
themselves, because there was no Law. Nay in that long course of time betwixt
Adam and Moses, men had forgotten what was sin; so that although God had made a
promise of blessing to Abraham, and to all his seed that would plead interest
in it, yet these people at this time were proud, and secure, and heedlesse of
their estate; and though sin was in them, and death reigned over them, yet they
being without a law to evidence this sin and death unto their consciences, they
did not impute it unto themselves, they would not own it nor charge themselves
with it, and so by consequence found no need of pleading the promise made to
Abraham; Therefore the Law entered, that Adams offense, Romans 5.2^
and their own actual transgression might abound. So that now the Lord saw it
needful that there should be a new edition and publication of the covenant of
works, the sooner to compel the elect unbeleevers to come to Christ the
promised seed, that the grace of God in Christ to the elect believers might
appear the more exceeding gracious; so that you see the Lords intention
therein was, that they by looking upon this Covenant, might be put in mind what
was their duty of old, when they were in Adams loins, Pembl. ^ind. fid. p.
155.
yea, and what was their duty still, if they would stand to that covenant, and
so go the old and natural way to work: yea, and hereby they were also to see
what was their present infirmity in not doing their duty, that so they seeing
an impossibility of obtaining life by that way of works, first appointed in
Paradise, they might be humbled, and more heedfully mind the promise made to
their father Abraham, and hasten to lay hold on the Messiah or promised seed.


Nom. Then, Sir, it seems that the Lord did not renew the Covenant of works
with them, to the intent that they should obtain eternal life by their
yielding obedience to it.


Evan. Bolton, (...) bound. ^.132, 158.
No indeed, God never made the Covenant of works with any man since the fall,
Reinolds on the use of the Law,
either with expectation that he should fulfill it, or to give him life by it,
for God never appoints any thing to an end, to the which it is utterly
unsuitable and improper. Now the Law, as it is the covenant of works, is become
weak and unprofitable to the purpose of salvation, and therefore God never
appointed it to man since the fall to that end. And besides, it is manifest
that the purpose of God in the covenant made with Abraham, was, to give life
and salvation by grace and promise; and therefore his purpose in renewing the
covenant of works, was not, neither could be to give life and salvation by
working, for then there would have been contradictions in the covenants, and
instability in him that made them. D. Willet on Exo. 10
Wherefore let no man imagine that God published the covenant of works on mount
Sinai, as though he had been mutable, and so changed his determination in that
covenant made with Abraham, neither yet let any man suppose that God now in
process of time had found out a better way for man's salvation, then he knew
before; for as the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, had been needless, if
the Covenant of Works made with Adam would have given him and his believing
seed life; Pembl. vind. fid. p. 154.
so after the covenant of grace was once made, it was needless to renew the
covenant of works, to the end that righteousness and life should be had by the
observation of it; the which will yet more evidently appear, if we consider
that the Apostle speaking of the covenant of works, as it was given on mount
Sinai, says, It was added because of transgression. It was not set up as a
solid rule of righteousness, as it was given to Adam in paradise, Gal. 3.19.
Reynolds on the use of the law
but was added or put to: It was not set up as a thing in gross by it self.


Nom. Then, Sir, it should seem that the covenant of works was added to the
covenant of grace, to make it more complete.


Evan. Ibid.
O no, you are not so to understand the Apostle, as though it were added by way
of ingrediency, Marshal, Infants-baptisme.
as a part of the covenant of grace, as if that covenant had been incomplete
without the covenant of works, for then the same covenant should have consisted
of contradictory materials, and so it should have overthrown it self; for,
says the Apostle, If it be by grace, then is it no more of works, Romans 11.6
otherwise grace is no more grace; But if it be of works, then is it no more of
grace, otherwise work is no more work. But it was added by way of subserviencie
and attendance, the better so advance and make effectual the covenant of
grace; so that although the same covenant that was made with Adam, was renewed
on mount Sinai, yet I say still it was not for the same purpose; for this was
it God aimed in making the covenant of works with man in innocence, Bolton,
true boun. p. 157.
to have that which was his due from man. But God made it with the Israelites
for no other end, than that man being thereby convinced of his weakness, might
fly to Christ; so that it was renewed only to help forward and introduce
another, and a better covenant, and so to be a manuduction unto Christ, viz. to
discover sin, to waken the conscience, and convince them of their own
impotencie, and so to drive them out of themselves to Christ. Know it then, I
beseech you, that all this while there was no other way of life given either in
whole, or in part, then the covenant of grace: all this while God did but
pursue the design of his own grace, And therefore was there no inconstancy
either in Gods will, or acts; only such was his mercy, that he subordinated the
covenant of works, Reynolds on the use of the law.
and made it subservient to the covenant of grace and so to tend to
evangelicall purposes.


Nom. But yet, Sir, me thinks it is somewhat strange, that the Lord should put
them upon doing the Law, and also promise them life for doing, and yet never
intend it.


Evan. Though he did so, yet did he neither require of them that which was
unjust, nor yet dissemble with them in the promise; for the Lord may justly
require perfect obedience at all men's hands, by virtue of that Covenant which
was made with them in Adam, and if any man could yield perfect obedience to the
law, both in doing and suffering, he should have eternal life; for we may not
deny, Instit. p. 157.
says Calvin, but that the reward of eternal salvation belongs to the
upright obedience of the law, but God knew well enough that the Israelites were
never able to yield such an obedience, Pembl. vind. fid. p. 164.
and yet he saw it meet to propound eternal life to them upon those terms,
Instit. p. 159.
that so he might speak to them in their own humor, as indeed it was meet,
for they swelled with mad affiance in themselves, Exodus 19.8
saying, All that the Lord commands we will do, and be obedient. Well said
the Lord, If you will needs be doing, Pembl. ibid.
why, here is a law to be kept, and if you can fully observe the righteousness
of it, you shall be saved, sending them of purpose to the law, to awaken and
convince them, to sentence and humble them, and to make them see their own
folly in seeking for life by that way; in short, Bolton, true bounds, p. 22.
to make them see the terms under which they stood, that so they might be
brought out of themselves, and expect nothing from the Law, in relation to
life, but all from Christ; for how should a man see his need of life by Christ,
Call Instit.
if he do not first see that he is fallen from the way of life? And how should
he understand how far he has strayed from the way of life, unless he do
first find what is that way of life? Therefore it was needful that the Lord
should deal with them after such a manner, to drive them out of themselves,
and from all confidence in the work of the Law; that so by faith in Christ
they might obtain righteousness and life. And just so did our Savior also
deal with that young expounder of the Law, Matthew. 19.16. who as it seems was
sick of the same disease, Good Master (says he) What shall I do that I may
inherit eternal life? He does not (says Calvin) simply ask, which way,
Institut. page 402.
or by what means he should come to eternal life, but what good he should
do to get it; whereby it appsares, that he was a proud Iustitiarie, one that
swelled in fleshly opinion that he could keep the Law and be saved by it,
therefore he is worthily sent to the Law to work himself weary, and so see
need to come to Christ for rest. And thus you see that the Lord to the former
promises made to the Fathers, Walker on the Covenant, page 155.
added a fiery Law which he gave from mount Sinai in thunder and lightning,
and with a terrible voice to the stubborn and stiff-necked Israel, whereby to
break and tame them, and to make them sigh and long for the promised Redeemer.


Ant. And, Sir, did the Law produce this effect in them?


Evan. Yea indeed did it, as it will appear. If you consider that although
before the publishing of this Covenant, they were exceeding proud and confident
of their own strength to do all that the Lord would have them do; yet when
the Lord came to deal with them, as men under the Covenant of works, Dixon. on
the Hebr.
in showing himself a terrible Judge, sitting on the throne of Justice, like a
mountain burning with fire, summoning them to come before him by the sound of
a trumpet, yet not to touch the mountain without a mediator; Heb. 12.19, 20.
they were not able to endure the voice of words, nor yet to abide that which
was commanded, B. Babing. on Genesis 20.
insomuch as Moses himself did fear and quake, and they did all of them so
fear and fright, shake and shiver, that their peacock feathers were now pulled
down. This terrible show, wherein God gave his Law on mount Sinai, did
represent the use of the Law; there was in the people of Israel that came out
of Egypt a singular holinsse, Luther O^ Gal. p. 153.
they gloried and said, We are the people of God, we will do all that the
Lord commands. Moreover Moses sanctified them, and bad them wash their
garments, refrain from their wives, and prepare themselves against the third
day, there was not one of them but he was full of holiness; The third day
Moses brings the people out of their tents to the mountain, in the sight of
the Lord, that they might hear his voice: what followed then? Why, when they
beheld the horrible sight of the Mount, smoking and burning, the black clouds
and the lightnings flashing up and down in this horrible darkness, and heard
the sound of the trumpet blowing long, and waxing louder and louder, they were
afraid, and standing afar off, they said not to Moses as before, All that the
Lord commands we will do; but talk thou with us, and we will hear, but
let not God talk with us lest we die: so that now they saw they were sinners,
and had offended God, and therefore stood in need of a Mediator to negotiate
peace, and entreat for reconciliation between God and them, and the Lord
highly approved of their words, as you may see, Deuteronomy. 5. where Moses repeating
what they had said, adds further; The Lord heard the voice of your words when
ye spoke to me, and the Lord said unto me, I have heard the voice of the
words of this people, which they have spoken unto thee, they have well said all
that they have spoken, Walker on the Covenant, p. 70
to wit, in desiring a Mediator: Where I pray you take notice, that they were
not commended for saying, All that the Lord commands we will do, (No says a
godly Writer) they were not praised for any other thing, The Author of the
benefit of Christ's death. Aynsworth, on Deuteronomy
then for desiring a Mediator: Whereupon, the Lord promised Christ unto them,
even as Moses testifies, saying, The Lord thy God shall raise up unto thee a
Prophet like unto me from among you, even of your brethren, Deuteronomy. 18.15, 16, 17
18.
unto him shall you hearken, according to all that thou desiredst of the Lord
thy God in Horeb in the day of the Assembly, when thou saidest, Let me hear
the voice of the Lord my God no more, nor see this great fire any more that I
die not: and the Lord said unto me, They have well spoken, I will raise them
up a Prophet from among their brethren like unto thee, and I will put my words
in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I command him. And to
assure us that Christ was the Prophet here spoken of, he himself says unto
the Jews, If ye had believed Moses, Ioh. 3.25.
ye would have believed me; for he wrote of me. And that this was it which he
wrote of him, the Apostle Peter witnesses, Acts 3.22. and so does the Martyr
Stephen, Acts 7.37. Thus you see, when the Lord had by means of the covenant
of works made with Adam, humbled them, and made them sigh for Christ the
promised seed, he renewed the promise with them, yea, and the covenant of grace
made with Abraham.


Ant. I pray, Sir, how does it appear that the Lord renewed that Covenant with
them?


Evan. It does plainly appear, in that the Lord gave them by Moses the
Leviticall Laws, and ordained the Tabernacle, the Ark, and the Mercy-Seat,
which were all Types of Christ: Moreover, The Lord called unto Moses, Levit.
1.1.
and spoke unto him out of the Tabernacle, and commanded him to write the
Leviticall Laws, and the Tabernacle Ordinances, telling him withal, That after
the tenor of those words he had made a Covenant with him, and with Israel:
Exodus 34.27. Exo. 24.4.
so Moses wrote these Laws, not in Tables of stone, but in an authentical
book, says Ainsworth, called the book of the Covenant, On the text.
which book Moses read in the audience of the people, Exodus 24.7. And the
people consented unto it: then Moses having before sent young men of the
children of Israel, who were first born, and therefore Priests until the time
of the Levites, Ainsworth.
to offer sacrifice of burnt-offerings, and peace offerings unto the Lord; He
took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, behold the blood of
the Covenant, which the Lord has made with you concerning these things;
whereby they were taught, that by virtue of blood, this Covenant betwixt God
and them was confirmed, Dixon on the Heb.
and that Christ by his bloodshed should satisfy for their sins, for indeed
the Covenant of grace was before the coming of Christ, Walker on the Cov. page
13.
sealed by his blood in Types and Figures.


Ant. But Sir, was this every way the same Covenant that was made with Abraham?


Evan. Surely I do believe that Reverend Bullinger spoke very truly, when he
said, Com. places English
that God gave unto these people no other Religion, in nature, substance, and
matter it self, differing from the Laws of their Fathers, though for some
respects he added thereunto many Ceremonies, and certain Ordinances, the which
he did to keep their minds in expectation of the coming of Christ, whom he
had promised unto them; and to confirm them in looking for him, Calvin's
Institut. lib. 2.
lest they should wax faint; And as the Lord did thus by the Ceremonies, as it
were lead them by the hand to Christ, so did he make them a promise of the Land
of Canaan, Call. Inst. p. 157.
and outward prosperity in it, as a type of heaven, and eternal happiness, so
that the Lord dealt with them as children in their infancy, and under age,
leading them on by the help of earthly things, to heavenly and spiritual,
Bolton, true bounds, p. 2^9.
because they were but young and tender, and had not that measure and abundance
of spirit which he has bestowed upon his people now under the Gospel.


Ant. And Sir, do you think that these Israelites at this time did see Christ,
and salvation by him, in these types and shadows?


Evan. Yea, there is no doubt but Moses and the rest of the believers amongst
the Jews did see Christ in them, for faith godly Tindall, In his preface to
Levit.
though all the Sacrifices and Ceremonies had a Starlight of Christ, yet some
of them had the light of the broad day a little before the Sun rising, and did
express him with the circumstances and virtue of his death, so plainly, as if
his passion had been acted upon a Scaffold, in so much, says he, that I am
fully persuaded, and cannot but believe, that God had showed Moses the secrets
of Christ, and the very manner of his death aforehand, and therefore no doubt
but that they offered their sacrifices by faith in the Messiah (as the Apostle
testifies of Abel) I say there is no question but every spiritual believing
Jew, Heb. 11.4.
when he brought his Sacrifice to be offeroffered, and according to the Lords
command laid his hands upon it: Levit. 1.4.
whilst it was yet alive, B Babing. on the text.
he did from his heart acknowledge, that he himself had deserved to ^ie, but
by the mercy of God he was saved, and his desert laid upon the beast, and as
that beast was to die, and be off red in sacrifice for him, so did he believe
that the Messiah should come and die for him, upon whom he put his hands, that
is, laid all his iniquities by the hand of faith. So that as Beza says, the
Sacrifices were to them holy mysteries, On Job 1.
in which, as in certain^ glasses, they did both see themselves to their own
condemnation before God, and also beheld the mercy of God in the promised
Messiah, in time to be exhibited; And therefore, says Calvin, the sacrifices,
and satisfactory offerings were called Ashemoth, Institut. p. 239.
which word properly signifies sin it self, to show, that Jesus Christ was
to come and perform a perfect expiation, by giving his own soul to be an
Asham, that is, a satisfactory oblation.

Ibid. 152.
Wherefore you may assure your self, that as Christ was always set before the
fathers in the Old Testament, to whom they might direct their faith, and as God
never put them in hope of any grace or mercy, nor never showed himself good
unto them without Christ; even so the godly, in the Old Testament, knew Christ,
by whom they did enjoy these promises of God, and were joined to him. And
indeed, the promise of salvation never stood firm till it came to Christ: and
there was their comfort in all their troubles and distresses, Heb. 11.26, 27.
according as it is said of Moses, He endured, as seeing him who is invisible,
esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt,
for he had respect to the recompense of reward.

And so (as Ignatius says) the Prophets were Christ's servants, Alleged by
Dr. V^b. Reg.
who foreseeing him in spirit, both waited for him as their Master, and looked
for him as their Lord and Savior, saying, He shall come and save us.

And so, says Calvin, so often as the Prophets speak of the blessedness of the
faithful, Call. Inst. p. 207.
the perfect image that they have painted thereof, was such, as might ravish
men's minds out of the earth, and of necessity raise them up to the
consideration of the felicity of the life to come, so that we may assuredly
conclude with Luther, that all the Fathers, On Gal. I am sure.
Prophets, and holy Kings were righteous, and saved by faith in Christ to come;
and so indeed, Inst. p. 198.
as Calvin says, were partakers of all one salvation with us.


Ant. But Sir, the Scripture seems to hold forth, as though they were saved
one way, and we another way, for you know the Prophet Jeremie mak^s mention of
a twofold Covenant, therefore it is somewhat strange to me, that they should be
partakers of one way of salvation with us


Evan. Indeed it is true, the Lord did bequeath unto the Fathers
Righteousness, Life, and eternal Salvation in and through Christ the
Mediator, being not yet come in the flesh, but promised: And unto us in the New
Testament, Walker on the Cov.
he gives and bequeaths them to us in and through Christ, being already come,
and having actually purchased them for us; and the Covenant of grace was before
the coming of Christ, sealed by his blood, in types h^d figures, and at his
death in his flesh it was fully sealed and ratified, by his very blood,
actually and in very deed shed for our sins: And the old Covenant in respect of
the outward form, and manner of sealing, was temporary, and changeable, and
therefore the types ceased, and only the substance remains firm, but the
seals of the new are unchangeable, being commemorative, and shall show the
Lords death until his coming again: And their Covenant did first and chiefly
promise earthly blessings, and in and under these it did signify and promise
all spiritual blessings and salvation, but our Covenant promises Christ and
his blessings in the first place, and after them earhly blessings.

These and some other circumstantiall differences in regard of administration,
there was betwixt their way of salvation, or covenant of grace, and ours, which
moved the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. 8.8.
to call theirs old, and ours new; but in regard of substance they were all
one, and the very same, for in all Covenants, this is a certain rule, Vrsin.
cat. p. 129.
if the subject matter, the fruit, and the conditions be the same, then is the
Covenant the same: but in these Covenants Jesus Christ is the subject matter of
both, salvation the fruit of both, and faith the condition of both, therefore I
say, though they be called two, yet are they but one; the which is confirmed by
two faithful witnesses: The one is the Apostle Peter, who says, Acts 15.11.
We believe through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that we shall be saved,
even as they did, meaning the Fathers in the old Testament, as is evident in
the verse next before. The other is the Apostle Paul, Gal. 3.6, 7
who says, Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness, know ye therefore that they which are of the faith, the same
are the children of Abraham; by which testimony says Luther, On Gal page 116.
we may see that the faith of our Fathers in the old Testament, and ours in
the new ^s all one in substance.


Ant. But could they that lived so long before Christ, apprehend his
righteousness by faith for their Justification, and salvation?


Evan. On Iusti. page 90.
Yea indeed, for as Master Forbes truly says, It is as e^sie for faith to
apprehend righteousness to come, as it is to apprehend righteousness that is
past: wherefore as Christ's birth, obedience, and death were in the old
Testament as effectual to save sinners, Walker on the Conant, page 122.
as now they are; so all the faithful forefathers from the beginning did
partake of the same grace with us, by believing in the same Jesus Christ, and
so were justified by his righteousness, and saved eternally by faith in him:
it was by virtue of the death of Christ, that Enoch was translated that he
should not see death, Page 29.
and Elias was taken up into heaven, by virtue of Christ's Resurrection and
Ascension: so that from the worlds beginning, to the end thereof, the salvation
of sinners is only by Jesus Christ, as it is written, Jesus Christ yesterday
and to day, Heb. 13.^.
and the same for ever.


Anti. Why then, Sir, it seems that those who were saved amongst the Jews,
were not saved by the works of the Law.


Evan. No indeed, they were neither justified nor saved, either by the works
of the Moral Law, or the Ceremonial Law; for as you heard before, the Moral
Law being delivered unto them, with great terror, and under most dreadful
penalties, they did find in themselves an impossibility of keeping it, and so
were driven to seek help of a Mediator, even Jesus Christ, Marshall of
infants Baptism.
of whom Moses was to them a Typical Mediator; so that the Moral Law did
drive them to the Cerimoniall Law, which was their Gospel, and their Christ in
a figure, for that the Ceremonies did prefigure Christ, Ball on the covenant*
page 119.
direct unto him, and require faith in him, is a thing acknowledged and
confessed by all men.


Nom. But, Sir, I suppose, though believers amongst the Jews were not
justified and saved by the works of the Law, yet was it a rule for their
obedience.


Evan. It is very true indeed, the law of the ten Commandments was a rule
for their obedience, yet not as it was the Law of works or Covenant of works,
but as it was the Law of Christ, as it will appear if you consider, that after
the Lord had the second time written them in tables of stone, with his own
finger, he delivered them to Moses, Deuteronomy. 9.10. Deu. ^0.5.
commanding him to provide an Arc to put them into, which was not only for
the safe ke^ping of them, but also to cover the form of the Covenant of works
that was formerly upon them, that believers might not perceive it; Reinolds on
Psalm. 110. p. 35.
for the Arc was a notable type of Christ, and therefore the p^tting of them
therein did show, that they were perfectly fulfilled in him, Christ being the
end of the Law, for righteousness, to every one that believes, Romans 10.4
the which was yet more clearly manifest, in that the book of the Law was
placed between the Cherubims, Bolton, true bound. p. 52.
and upon the Mercy-seat, to assure believers, that the Law now came to them
from the Mercy-seat, for there the Lord promised to meet Moses, and to commune
with him of all things which he would give him in commandment to them. Exodus
25.22.



Ant. But, Sir, was the form quite taken away, so as the ten Commadements were
no more the Covenant of works?


Evan. Oh no, you are not so to understand it: for the form of the Covenant of
works as well as the matter, (on Gods part) came immediately from God himself,
and so consequently is eternal like himself, whence it is that our Savior
says, Mat. 5.18. Till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one title shall in
no wise pass from the law till all be fulfilled: so that either man himself,
or some other for him must perform or fulfill the condition of the Law, as it
is the Covenant of works, or else he remains still under it in a damnable
condition: but now Christ has fulfilled it for all believers, and therefore I
said the form of the Covenant of works was covered or taken away as touching
the believing Jews, but yet was it neither taken away in it self, nor yet as
touching the unbelieving Jews.


Nom. Was the Law then still of use to them, as it was the Covenant of works.


Evan. Yea indeed.


Ant. I pray you, Sir, show of what use it was to them?


Evan. I remember Luther says there be two sorts of unrighteous persons, On
Gala. pa. 171.
or unbeleevers, the one to be justified, and the other not to be justified;
even so was there amongst the Jews. Now to them that were to be justified, as
you have heard, it was still of use to bring them to Christ, as the Apostle
says, Gal. 3.24. The Law was our Schoolmaster until Christ, that we might be
made righteous by faith, that is to say, the Moral Law did teach and show them
what they should do, and so what they did not, and this made them go to the
Ceremonial Law, and by that they were taught that Christ had done it for them,
the which they believing were made righteous by faith in him. And to the second
sort it was of use, to show them what was good, and what was evil, and to be
as a bridle to them to restrain them from evil, and as a motive to move them
to good, for fear of punishment, or hope of reward in this life; which though
it was but a forced and constrained obedience, Calv. just. p. 167.
yet was it necessary for the public commonwealth, the quiet thereof being
thereby the better maintained; and though thereby they could neither escape
death, nor yet obtain eternal life, for want of perfect obedience; yet the
more obedience they yielded thereunto, the more they were freed from temporal
calamities, and possessed with temporal blessings according as the Lord
promised and threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.


Ant. But, Sir, in that place the Lord seems to speak to his own people, and
yet to speak according to the tenor of the covenant of works, which has made
me think, that believers, in the Old Testament, were partly under the covenant
of works.


Evan. Do you not remember how I told you before, that the Lord did manifest so
much love to the body of that nation, that the whole posterity of Abraham were
brought under a State-Covenant, or National Church, so that for the believers
sakes he infolded the unbelievers in the compact, whereupon the Lord was
pleased to call them all by the name of his people, as well unbelievers as
believers, and to be called their God. And though the Lord did there speak
according to the tenor of the covenant of works, yet I see no reason why he
might not direct and intend his speech to believers also, and yet they remain
only under the covenant of grace.


Ant. Why, Sir, you said that the Lord did speak to them out of the tabernacle,
and from the mercy-seat; and that doubtless was according to the tenor of the
covenant of grace, and not according to the tenor of the covenant of works.


Evan. I pray you take notice, that after the Lord had pronounced all those
blessings and curses, Deuteronomy. 28. in the beginning of the 29. chap. it is said,
These are the words of the covenant which the Lord commanded Moses to make with
the children of Israel in the land of Moab, beside the covenant which he made
with them in Horeb. Whereby it does appear to me, that this was not the
covenant of works which was delivered to them on mount Sinai; for the form of
that Covenant was eternal blessings and curses, but the form of this Covenant
was temporal blessings and curses, so that this rather seems to be the
pedagogie of the Law, than the Covenant of works, for at that time these people
seemed to be carried by temporal promises in the ways of obedience, and
deterred by temporal threatenings from the ways of disobedience: God dealing
with them as in their infancy and under-age, and so leads them on and allures
them, and fears them by such respects as these, because they had but a small
measure of the spirit.


Nom. But, Sir, was not the matter of that Covenant, and this, all one?


Evan. Yea indeed, the Ten Commandments were the matter of both Covenants,
only they differed in the forms.


Ant. T^^n Sir, it seems that the promises and threatenings contained in the old
Testament, were but temporary and terrestiall, only concerning the good and
evil things of this life.


Evan. This we are to know, that like as the Lord by his Prophets gave the
people in the old Testament many exhortations to be obedient to his
Commandments, and many dehortations from disobedience thereunto, even so did
he back them with many promises and threatenings concerning things temporal, as
these and the like Scrip^u^^s do witness. Isa. 1.10. Hear the word of the
Lord ye Rulers of Sodom, give ear unto the law of our God, ye people of
Gomorrah: Verse 19.20.
I^ ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good things of the land; Verse
9.
but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword, for the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it. And Jer. 7 3 Amend your ways and your
doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place: But ye steal* murder,
commit adultery, and swear falsely by my name; therefore thus says the Lord
God, behold mine anger and my fury shall be powered out upon this place. Verse
20.
And surely there be two reasons why the Lord did so: First, because as all men
are born under the covenant of work^, they are naturally prone to conceive,
that the favor of God, and all good things, do depend and follow upon their
obedience to the Law; and that the wrath of God, and all evil things, do
depend upon, and follow their disobedience to it, And that man's chief
happiness is to be had and found in terrestrial paradise, even in the good
things of this life. So the people of the Old Testament being nearest to Adams
Covenant and Paradise, were most prone to such conceits. And secondly, because
the Covenant of Grace, and Celestial paradise, were but little mentioned in
the Old Testament, they, for the most part, had but a glimmering knowledge of
them, and so could not yield obedience freely, as sons: therefore the Lord
saw it meet to move them to yield obedience to his laws, by their own motives,
and as servants or children under age.


Ant. And were both believers and unbelievers, that is, such as were under the
Covenant of Grace, and such as were under the Covenant of Works, equally and
alike subject, as well to have the calamities of this life inflicted upon them
for their disobedience, as the blessings of this life conferred upon them for
their obedience?


Evan. Surely the words of the Preacher do take place here, when he says,
Eccles. 9.2
All things come alike to all, there is one event to the righteous, and to the
wicked. Number. ^0.12.
Were not Moses and Aaron, for their disobedience, hindered from entering into
the land of Canaan, as well as others? 2 Chronicles. 35.21, 22.
And was not Josiah, for his disobedience to Gods command, sl^in in the valley
of Megiddo? Therefore assure your self, Number. 16.46.
that when believers, in the Old Testament, did transgress Gods commandments,
Gods temporal wrath went out against them, and was manifest in temporal
calamities that befell them as well as others, only here was the difference,
The believers temporal calamities had no eternal calamities included in them,
nor following of them, and their temporal blessings had eternal blessings
included in them, and following of them; And the unbelievers temporal
blessings had no eternal blessings included in them, nor following of them,
and their temporal calamities had eternal calamities included in them, and
following of them.


Ant. Then, Sir, it seems that all obedience that any of the Jews did yield
to Gods commandments, was for fear of tempo^^ll punishment, and in hope of
temporal reward.


Evan. Surely the Sc^ip^ure seems to hol^ forth, that there were three several
sorts of people who endeavored to keep the law of God, and they did all of
them differ in their ends.

The first sort of them were true believers, who according to the measure of
their faith, did believe the resurrection of their bodies after death, and
eternal life in glory, and that it was to be obtained, not by the ^orkes of
the Law, but by faith in the M^ssi^h o^ promised seed: And answerably as they
believed this, answerably they yielded obedience to the Law freely, without
fear of punishment, or hope of reward; but alas, the spirit of faith was very
weak in the most of them, and the spirit of bondage very strong, and therefore
they stood in need to be induced and constrained to obedience, for fear of
punishment, and hope of reward.

The second sort of them were the Sadduces and their Sect, and these did not
believe that there was any Resurrection, nor any life but the life of this
world, Matthew. 22 23.
and yet they endeavored to keep the Law, that God might bless them here,
Boltons true bounds. page 259.
and that it might go well with them in this present life.

The third sort, and indeed the greatest number of them in the future ages
after Moses, were the Scribes and Pharisees, and their Sects, and they held and
maintained that there was a Resurrection to be looked for, and an eternal life
after death, and therefore they endeavored to keep the Law, not only to
obtain temporal happiness, but eternal also; for though it had pleased the
Lord to make known unto his people by the ministry of Moses, Ball on the
Cov^n. page 114.
that the Law was given not to retain men in the confidence of their own
works, but to drive them out of themselves, and lead them to Christ the
promised seed, yet after that time the Priests and the Levites, who were the
expounders of the Law, and whom the Scribes and Pharisees did succeed, Perkins
on Christ's Ser. on the mount.
did so conceive and teach of Gods intention in giving the Law, as though it
had been, that they by their obedience to it, should obtain righteousness and
eternal life, and this opinion was so confidently maintained, and so generally
embraced amongst them, that in their book Mechilta, they say and affirm that
there is no other Covenant but the Law, Musculus* Com. pla. page 118.
and so in very deed they conceived that there was no other way to Eternal
life then the Covenant of works.


Ant. Surely then it seems they did not understand and consider, that the Law
as it is the Covenant of works, does not only bind the outward man, but also
the inward man, even the soul and spirit, and requires all holy thoughts,
motions, and dispositions of the heart and soul.


Evan. Oh no, they neither taught it, nor understood it, so spiritually,
neither could they be persuaded, that the Law does require so much at man's
hands; for they first laid this down for a certain truth, that God gave the
Law for man to be Justified and saved by his obedience to it, and that
therefore there must needs be a power in man to do all that it requires, or
else God would never have required it, and therefore whereas they should first
have considered, what a straight rule the Law of God is, and then have brought
man's heart, and have laid it to it, they contrariwise first considered what a
crooked rule man's heart is, and then sought to make the Law like unto it, and
so indeed they expounded the Law literally, teaching and holding, that the
righteousness which the Law required, was but an external righteousness,
consisting in the outward observation of the Law, as you may see by the
testimony of our Savior, Matthew. 5. Gray, in his Sermon. of the perfect. of a
Christ.
So that according to their exposition, it was possible for a man to fulfill
the Law perfectly, and so to be justified and saved by his obedience to it.


Ant. But, sir, do you think the Scribes and Pharisees, and their seed, did
yield perfect obedience to the Law, according to their own exposition?


Evan. No indeed, I think very few of them, if any at all.


Ant. Why, what hopes could they then have to be justified and saved, when they
transgressed any of the Commandments?


Evan. Peter Martyr tells us, that when they chanced to transgress any of the
Ten Commandments, In his preface to the Romans exp.
they had their sacrifices to make satisfaction (as they conceived) for they
looked upon their sacrifices without their significations, Tindal on Man.
and so had a false faith in them, thinking that the bare work was a sacrifice
acceptable to God: in a word, they conceived that the blood of Bulls and Goats
would take away sin, And so what they wanted of fulfilling the Moral law,
Bolton, true bounds. page 161.
they thought to make make up in the Ceremonial law: And thus they separated
Christ from their sacrifices, thinking they had discharged their duty very well
when they had sacrificed and offered their offerings* not considering that the
imperfection of the Typical law, which (as the Apostle says) made nothing
perfect, Heb. 7 9.
should have led them to find perfection in Christ: but they generally rested
in the work done, in the Ceremonial law, even as they had done in the Moral
law, though they themselves were unable to do the one, and the other was as
unsufficient to help them. And thus, Israel which followed the law of
righteousness, did not attain to the law of righteousness, because they
sought it not by faith, Romans 9.31.32.
but as it were by the works of the Law, for they being ignorant of the
righteousness of God, and going about to stablish their own righteousness,
Romans 10.3
did not submit themselves to the righteousness of God.


Ant. Then Sir, it seems that their ignorance was the cause of their error.


Evan. Yea indeed was it, for this veil of ignorance that was over their
hearts, 2 Cor. 3.14.
or this veil of blindness which was over their minds, made their sight so
weak and dim, that they were no more able to behold the glorious beauty of the
Lords holy and pure nature manifested in the Law, as it was the covenant of
works, than the weak eye of man is able to behold the bright sun when it
shines in full strength: And therefore we read, that when Moses came down from
the mount, with the two tables, Exodus 34.28, 29.
wherein were wri^ten the words of the covenant of works, the Ten
Commandments, his face did sh^ne so bright, that the children of Israel could
not steadfastly behold it, 2 Cor. 3.7.
for the glory of his countenance: and therefore Moses was glad to put the
cloudy veil of shadowing Ceremonies over it, Exodus 34.35.
that so they might be the better able to behold it.


Ant. But yet, Si^, it seems that the veil of Ceremonies did not help their
veil of Ignorance.


Evan. No indeed; for the generality of them were so addicted to the letter of
the Law, that they used it not as a pedagogie to Christ, but (...)
justification by it, and opposed Christ: they terminated their eyesight in the
shadow and did not see through it to the subst^nce, to wit, to the end of the
Law, which is Christ. Some indeed there were which did otherwise, but alas, the
number of them were very few, especially in the future ages after Moses, for
their blind guides had so levened the people with their corrupt doctrine, that
at the time of our Saviors coming in the flesh, we re^d^ but of two, to wit,
Simeon and Anna, that desired him or looked for him: for although all of them
had in their mouths the Messiah, Calvin's Harm. p. 87.
and the blessed estate of the kingdom of David, yet they dreamed that this
Messiah should be some great Monarch, that should come in outward pomp and
power, and save and deliver them from the Romans, of whose bondage they were
very sensible and weary: but as for their spiritual bondage under the law and
sin, they were not sensible of it, and so indeed saw no need of deliverance
from it, and all because their false teachers had turned the whole Law into a
Covenant of Works, to be done for Justification and Salvation, yea, such a
Covenant as they were able to keep and fulfill, if no^ by doing, yet by making
satisfaction with their sacrifices. And though Jesus Christ himself, for the
removing of this veil, did (in the fifth of Matthew) take occasion truly to
expound the Law, as it is the Covenant of Works, showing, that it did not only
require external righteousness, but internal also, of them that would be
justified by the works thereof; and so removing that false gloss which the
Scribes and Pharisees had put upon it. Yea, and though both he himself, and
his Apostles, by their preaching and teaching did endeavor to let them
understand, that all the Sacrifices and Ceremonies did but point at him, and so
were of no further use.

Yea, and though at the death of Christ, the veil of the Temple was rent in
twain from the top to the bottom, Matthew. 27.51. Tindal, alleged by Marbeck
in com. pla. p. 112.
to show, that the shadows of Moses Law should vanish away at the flourishing
light of the Gospel, and that the mysteries of Christ which were formerly hid,
were now laid open. Yet notwithstanding, after that, when the Apostle wrote to
the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 3.5
he says concerning the Jews, Even to this day, when Moses is read, the veil
is over their hearts.

And though for the removing of this veil, the same Apostle (as it is
probobably thought) did write to them that Divine and Spiritual Epistle,
called the Epistle to the Hebrews, wherein he plainly and fully declares,
that all the Sacrifices, Ceremonies, and Tabernacle ordinances in the old
Testament were but types of Christ, and given to them that they might see
Christ through them, who being now exhibited, and come in the flesh* all types
and shadows were to va^^sh away and give place, yet notwithstanding, we may say
of them at this day as the Apostle did to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 3.14.
until this ^ay remains the same vail untaken away in the reading of the old
Testament, the Lord be merciful unto them, and remove it in his due time.


Nom. Sir, as I conceive you have now spoken sufficiently, both of Gods purpose
and promise, concerning the helping and delivering fallen mankind, wherefore I
beseech you let us now hear of his performance of it.,


Evan. Touching this point the Scripture testifies, that God according to his
purpose before time, and his promise in time, Did in the fullness of time, send
forth his Son, made of a woman, Gal. 4.4. Hooker Souls Justifica page 173.
made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, etc. That is to
say, look how mankind by nature are under the Law, as it is the Covenant of
works; so was Christ as man's surety contented to be so, that now according to
that Eternal and mutual agreement that was betwixt God the Father and him, he
put himself in the room and place of all the Faithful, and the Lord has laid
on him the iniquities of us all. Isai. 53.6.


Then came the Law as it is the Covenant of Works, and said, Luther on Gal.
page 137.
I find him a sinner, yea such a one as has taken upon him the sins of all
men, therefore, let him die upon the Cross. Then said Christ, Sacrifice and
Offering thou would not, Heb. 10.5, 6, 7.
but a body have thou prepared me. In burnt offerings and sacrifice for sin
thou have no pleasure. Then said I, lo I come, to do thy will O God. And so
the law proceeding in full scope, against him, set upon him, and killed him:
and by this means was the justice of God fully satisfied, his wrath appeased,
and all true believers acquitted from all their sins both past, present, and
to come, so that the Law as it is the Covenant of works, has not any thing to
say to any true believer: for indeed they are dead to it, and it is dead to
them.


Nom. But Sir, How could the sufferings of Christ; which in respect of time
were but finite, make full satisfaction to the Justice of God which is infinite,


Eva. Though the sufferings of Christ in respect of time were but finite, yet
in respect of the person that suffered, his sufferings came to be of infinite
value; for Christ was God and Man in one person, and therefore his sufferings
were a sufficient and full ransom for man's soul, being of more value then the
death and destruction of all creatures.


Nom. But Sir, you know that the Covenant of works requires man's own
obedience, or punishment, when it says, He that does these things shall live
in them, and cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the Law to do them, how then could believers be
acquitted from their sins by the death of Christ?


Evan. For answer hereunto, I pray you consider, that though the covenant of
works requires man's own obedience or punishment, yet it no where disalloweth
or excludes that which is done or suffered by another in his behalf, Visin.
cat.
neither is it repugnant to the Justice of God; for so there be a satisfaction
performed by man through a sufficient punishment, for the disobedience of man,
the Law is satisfied, and the justice of God permits that the offending
party be received into favor, Pemble vindict. fid.
and acknowledge God after such satisfaction made as a just man and no
transgressor, of the Law, and though the satisfaction be made by a surety, yet
when it is done, the principal is by the Law acquitted, But yet for the
further proof and confirmation of this point, we are to consider that as
JESUS CHRIST the second Adam, entered into the same Covenant that the first
Adam did, so by him was done whatsoever the first Adam had undone: so then, the
case stands thus, that like as whatsoever the first Adam did or befell him, was
reckoned as done by all mankind, and to have befallen them, even so,
whatsoever CHRIST did or befell him, is to be reckoned as to have been done by
all believers, and to have befallen them, so that as sin comes from Adam
alone to all mankind as he in whom all have sinned, so from Jesus Christ alone
comes righteousness, unto all that are in him, Forles on justification, p.
89.
as he in whom they all have satisfied the justice of God, for as by being in
Adam and one with him, all did in him and with him, transgress the
Commandment of God, even so in respect of faith, whereby believers are
ingrafted into Christ, and spiritually made one with him, they did all in him
and with him, satisfy the justice of God in his death and sufferings, and
whosoever reckons thus, reckons according to Scripture, for in Romans 5.12. all
are said to have sinned in Adams sin, In whom all have sinned, says the
Text, namely in Adam, as in a public person, all men's acts were included in
his, because their persons were included in his, so likewise in the same
Chapter it is said that death passed upon all men, Goodwins Christ set forth,
page 87. Romans 6.10, 11.
namely for this, that Adams sin was reckoned as theirs, even so, Romans 6. the
Apostle speaking of Christ, says, In that he dyed, he dyed unto sin once,
but in that he lives, he lives unto God, so likewise says he in the next
verse, Reckon ye your selves to be dead unto sin, but alive unto God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. And so as touching the resurrection of Christ, the
Apostle argues, that all believers must and shall arise, because Christ is
risen, 1 Cor. 15.20.
and is become the first fruit^ of them that sleep. CHRIST, as the first
fruits arises, and that in the name and stead of all believers, and so they
rise in him and with him, Smith on the Creed.
for CHRIST did not rise as a private person, but he arose as the public head
of his Church, so that in his arising all believers did virtually arise and as
CHRIST at his resurrection was justified and acquitted from all the sins of
all believers by God his Father, as having now fully satisfied for them,
wherefore the obedience of Christ, being imputed unto believers, by God for
their righteousness it does put them into the same estate and case touching
righteousness unto life before God, wherein they should have been, if they had
perfectly performed the perfect obedience of the covenant of works, Do this,
and thou shall live.


Nom. But, Sir, are all believers dead to the Law, and the Law dead to them.


Evan. Believe it man, as the Law is the Covenant of works, all true believers
are dead unto it, and it is dead to them, for they being incorporated into
Christ, what the Law or Covenant of works did to him, it did the same to them,
so that when CHRIST hanged on the Cross believers, after a sort, hanged there
with him, and therefore the Apostle Paul having said, I through the Law, am
dead to the Law, adds in the next verse, I am crucified with CHRIST, which
words the Apostle brings as an argument to prove that he was dead to the Law,
for the Law had crucified him with CHRIST, upon which Text Luther says, On
Gal. p. 81.
I likewise am crucified and dead to the Law: Forasmuch as I am crucified and
dead with CHRIST: and, again, I believing in CHRIST, am also crucified with
CHRIST. In like manner the Apostle says, to the believing Romans, So ye my
brethren are dead also to the Law by the body of CHRIST, Romans 7.4.
Now by the body of CHRIST is meant the passion of CHRIST upon the Cross,
Doctor Willet on the Text. Elton on the Text.

On the Text.


or, which is all one, the suffering of CHRIST in his humane nature, and
therefore, certainly we may conclude, with godly Tindall, that all such are
dead concerning the Law, as are by faith crucified with Christ.


Nom. But I pray you, Sir, how do you prove that the Law is dead to a believer?


Evan. Why, as I conceive the Apostle affirms it, Romams 7.1, 6.


Nom. Surely, Sir, you do mistake, for I remember the words of the first
verse, are, how that tbe Law has dominion over a man as long as he lives,
and the words of the sixth verse are, But now we are delivered from the Law,
that being dead wherein we were holden, etc.


Evan. I know right well that in our last Translation the words are so rendered,
but godly and learned Tindall renders it thus, Remember ye not brethren, that
the Law has dominion over a man as long as it endures, and B. Hall,
paraphraseth upon it thus, Know ye not brethren that the Mosaicall Law has
dominion over a man that is subject unto it, so long as the said Law is in
force: So likewise, Origin, Ambrose, and Erasmus do all agree, Alleged by
Doctor Willet on Romans
that by these words, while (He) or it lives, we are to understand, as long
as the Law remains: And Peter Martyr is of opinion, that these words, while
(He) or it lives, or indifferently referred either to the law are to the man,
for says he* The man is said to be dead, Verse the fourth, and the law is
said to be dead Verse the sixth, even so because the word ( He) or (it)
mentioned, See Doctor Willet again.
Verse the first, does signify both sexes in the Greek, Chrysostom thinks
that the death both of the law and the man is insinuated: And Theophylact,
Erasmus, Bucer, and Calvin, do all understand the sixth Verse of the law being
dead: And as the death of a believer to the law was accomplished by the death
of Christ, even so also was the laws death to him. Even as M. Fox in his Sermon
of Christ crucified, testifies, saying; Here have we upon one Cross two
Crucifixes, two the most excellent Potentates that ever were, Fox that wrote
the Book of Martyrs.
the Son of God, and the Law of God, wrestling together about man's salvation,
both cast down, and both slain upon one Cross, howbeit not after a like
sort: first, the Son of God was cast down and took the fall, not for any
weakness in himself but was content to take it for our victory, by this fall
the law of God in casting him down was caught in his one trip, and so was fast
nailed hand and foot to the Cross, according as we read in S. Paul's words, 1
Col. 2.14. And so Luther speaking to the same point says, On Gal. p. 184.
this was a wonderful combat, where the law being a creature, gives such an
assault to his Creator, in practizing his whole tyranny upon the Son of God:
now therefore, because the law did so horribly and cursedly sin against his
God, it is cursed and arraigned, and as a thief and cursed murderer of the Son
of God, loses all his right and deserves to be condemned, the law therefore
is bound, dead and crucified to me, Page 185.
it is not only overcome, condemned and slain unto Christ, but also to me
believing in him, unto whom he has freely given this victory, now then,
although, according to the Apostles intimation, Romans the seventh at the
beginning, though the Covenant of works, and man by nature be mutually
engaged each to other, so long as they both live: yet if when the wife be
dead, the husband be free, then much more when he is dead also.


Nom. But, I pray, Sir, what are we to understand by this double death, or
wherein does this freedom from the law consist?


Evan. Death is nothing else but a dissolution, or an untying of a compound, or
a separation between matter and form; and therefore, when the soul and body
of man is separated, we say he is dead, so that by this double death, we are
to understand nothing else, but that the bargain or covenant which was made
between GOD and man at first is dissolved, or untyed, or that the matter and
form of the Covenant of works is separated to a believer, so that the Law of
the ten Commandments, does neither promise eternal life, nor threaten
eternal death to a believer, upon condition of his obedience, or disobedience
to it: neither does a believer as he is a believer, either hope for eternal
life., or fear eternal death upon any such terms, no, we may assure our
selves, Romans 3.19.
that whatsoever the Law says on any such terms, it says, to them who are
under the Law: Romans 6.14.
But believers are not under the Law, but under Grace: and so have escaped
eternal death, and obtained eternal life., only by faith in Jesus Christ;
Acts 13.39.
For by him all that believe are justified from all things from which they
could not be justified by the Law of Moses. For God so loved the World that he
gave his only begotten Son, John 3.16.
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
And this is that Covenant of Grace, which as I told you, was made with the
Fathers by way of promise, and so but darkly, but now the fullness of time
being come, it was more fully opened and promulgated.


Ant. Well, Sir, now I do perceive, there was little difference betwixt the
Jews Covenant of Grace and ours.


Evan. Truly the opposition betwixt the Jews Covenant of Grace and ours, was
chiefly of their own making, they should have been driven to Christ by the
Law, Boultons true bounds, p. 160.
but they expected life in obedience to it, and this was their great error and
mistake.


Ant. And truly, Sir, it is no great marvel, though they in this point did so
much err and mistake, who had the Covenant of Grace made known to them so
darkly, when many amongst us who have it more clearly manifest, do the like.


Evan. And truly, it is no marvel, though all men naturally do so for man
naturally does apprehend God to be the great master of heaven, and himself to
be his servant, and that therefore he must do his work before he can have his
wages, and the more work he does, the better wages he shall have. And hence it
it was, that when Aristotle came to speak of blessedness, and to pitch upon the
next means to that end* he said it was operation and working, with whom also
agrees Pythagoras, Trunesse of Christian Religion.
when he says, It is man's felicity to be like unto God, (as how) by becoming
righteous and holy, and let us not marvel that these men did so err who never
heard of Christ, nor of the Covenant of grace, when those to whom it was made
known by the Apostles of Christ did the like, witness those to whom the
Apostle Paul wrote his Epistles, and especially the Galathians, for although
he had by his preaching when he was present with them, made known unto them
the doctrine of the Covenant of grace, yet after his departure, through the
seducement of false teachers, they were soon turned to the Covenant of works,
and sought to be justified either in whole or in part by it, as you may see if
you do seriously consider that Epistle, (nay, what says Luther) it is, says
he, the general opinion of man's reason throughout the whole world, That
righteousness is gotten by the works of the Law, and the reason is, because
the Covenant of works was engendered in the minds of men in the very creation,
so that man, naturally can judge no otherwise of the law then as of a Covenant
of works, which was given to make righteous, and to give life and salvation,
this pernicious opinion of the Law, that it justifies and makes righteous
before God (says Luther again) is so deeply rooted in man's reason, On Gal. p.
133.
and all mankind are so wrapped in it, that they can hardly get out, yea, I my
self, says he, have now preached the Gospel almost twenty years, Chos.
Sermon, page 108.
and have been exercised in the same daily, by reading and writing, so that I
may well seem to be rid of this wicked opinion, yet notwithstanding I now and
then feel this old filth cleave to my heart, whereby it comes to pass, that
I would willingly so have to do with God, that I would bring something with my
self, because of which he should give me his grace, nay, it is to be feared
that (as you said) many amongst us, who have more means of light ordinarily
then ever Luther or any before him had, who yet notwithstanding do either
wholly or partly expect justification, and acceptance by the works of the Law.


Ant. Sir, I am verily persuaded that there be very many in this City of
London, that are carried with a blind preposterous zeal after their own good
works and well doings, secretly seeking to become holy, just, and righteous
before God, by their diligent keeping, and careful walking in all Gods
Commandments, and yet no man can persuade them that they do so, and truly,
Sir, I am verily persuaded that this our neighbor and friend Nomista is one of
them?


Evan. Alas! there is a thousand in the world that make a Christ of their
works, and here is their undoing, Boultons true bounds, p. 97.
etc. They look for righteousness and acceptance more in the precept then in
the promise, in the law then in the Gospel, in working then in believing and
miscarry many poor ignorant souls amongst us, when we bid them obey and do
duties, they can think of nothing but working themselves to life, Page 162.
when they are troubled they must lick themselves whole, when wounded they must
run to the salve of duties, and stream of performances, and neglect Christ.
Nay, it is to be feared, that there be diverse who in words are able to
distinguish between the Law and the Gospel, and in their judgments hold and
maintain that man is justified by faith, without the works of the Law, and yet
in effect and practice, that is to say, in heart and conscience do otherwise,
and rhere is some touch of this in us all, otherwise we should not be so up and
down in our comforts, Boultons true bounds, p. 97, 98.
and believing as we are still, and cast down with every weakness as we are.
But what say you neighbor Nomista, are you guilty of these things think you?


Nom. Truly, Sir, I must needs confess I begin to be somewhat jealous of my
self that I am so, and because I desire your judgment touching my condition,
I would entreat you to give me leave to relate it unto you.


Evan. With a very good will.


Nom. Sir, I having bin born and brought up in a Country where there was very
little preaching, the Lord he knows, I lived a great while in ignorance and
blindness, and yet because I did often repeat the Lords Prayer, the Apostles
Creed, and the ten Commandments, and in that I came sometimes to Divine
Service (as they call it) and at Easter receive the Communion, I thought my
condition to be good, but, at last, by means of hearing a zealous and godly
Minister in this City, not long after my coming hither, I was convinced that
my present condition was not good, and therefore I went to the same Minister
and told him what I thought of my self, So he told me that I must frequent
the hearing of Sermons, and keep the Sabbath very strictly, and leave off
swearing by my faith and troth, and such like oaths, and beware of lying and
all idle words and communication, yea, and said he, you must get good books to
read on, as Master Dod on the Commandments, M. Boultons directions for
comfortable walking with God, Mast^^ Brinsleys true Watch, and such like, and
many such like exhortations and directions he gave me, the which I liked very
well of, and therefore endeavored my self to follow them, so I fell to the
hearing of the most godly, zealous, and powerful Preachers that were in this
City, and wrote their Sermons after them, and when God gave me a Family I did
pray with them, and instructed them; and repeated Sermons to them, and spent
the Lords day in public and private exercises: and left off my swearing and
lying, and idle talking, according to his exhortation in few words: I did so
reform my self and my life, that whereas before I had been only careful to
perform the duties of the second Table of the Law, and that to the end I might
gain favor and respect from civil honest men, and to avoid the penalty of
man's law, or temporal punishment, now I was also careful to perform the
duties required in the first Table of the Law, and that to gain favor and
respect from religious honest men, and to avoid the penalty of Gods Law, even
eternal torments in hell. Now when professors of Religion observe this change
in me, they ca^^ to my house and gave unto me the right hand of fellowship,
and counted me one of that number. And then I invited godly Ministers to my
table, and made much of them, and then with that same Mica mentioned in the
book of Judges, Judge. 9.18, 19.
I was persuaded the Lord would be merciful unto me because I had gotten a
Levite to be my Priest, in a word, I did now yield such an outward obedience
and conformity to both Tables of the Law, that all godly Ministers, and
religious honest men that knew me, did think very well of me, counting me to
be a very honest man, and a good Christian, and indeed I thought so of my
self, especially because I had their approbation, and thus I went on bravely a
great while, even until I read in Master Boultons works, that the outward
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees was famous in those times,
Discourse of true happiness, page 64.
for besides their forbearing and protesting against gross sins, as murder,
theft, adultery, idolatry, and the like, they were frequent and constant in
prayer, fasting and alms deeds, so that without question, many of them were
persuaded, that their doings would purchase heaven and happiness, whereupon I
concluded, that I had as yet done no more then they, and withal I considered
that our Savior says, Matthew. 5.20.
Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, yea, and I also
considered, that the Apostle says, He is not a Jew, that is one outward, but
he that is one within, whose praise is not of men but of God, Then did I
conclude that I was not yet a true Christian, for said I in my heart, I have
contented my self with the praise of men, and so have lost all my labor and
pains in performing duties, for they have been no better then outside
performances, and therefore they must all fall down in a moment. I have not
served God with all my heart, and therefore I see I must either go farther, or
else I shall never be happy, whereupon I set about the keeping of the Law in
good earnest, and labored to perform duties, not only outwardly, but also
inwardly from my heart, I heard, and read, and praid, and labored to bring my
heart, and force my soul to every duty, I called upon the Lord in good
earnest, and told him that whatsoever he would have me to do, I would do it
with all my heart, if he would but save my soul, and then I also took notice
of the inward corruptions of my heart, the which I had not formerly done, and
was careful to govern my thoughts, to modeate my passions, and to suppress
the motions and risings of lusts, to banish privy pride and speculative,
wantonness, and all vain and sinful desires of my heart, and then I thought
my self not only an outside Christian, but also an inside Christian, and
therefore a true Christian indeed, and so I went on comfortably a good while,
till I considered that the Law of God requires passive obedience as well as
active, and therefore I must be a sufferer as well as a doer, or else I could
not be a Christian indeed, whereupon I began to be troubled at my impatience
under Gods correcting hand, and at those inward murmurings and discontents
which I found in my spirit in time of any outward calamity that befell me, and
then I labored to bridle my passions and to submit my self quietly to the
will of God in every condition, and then did I also, as it were, begin to take
penance upon my self, by abstinence, fasting, and afflicting my soul, and
made pitiful lamentations in my prayers, which were sometimes also accompanied
with tears, the which I was persuaded the Lord did take notice of and would
reward me for it, and then I was persuaded that I did keep the Law in yielding
obedience both actively and passively, and then was I confident I was a true
Christian, until I considered tha^ those Jews of whom the LORD complaynes,
Esaias 58. did as much as I, and that caused me to fear that all was not right
with me as yet: whereupon I went to another Minister, and told him, that
though I had done thus and thus, and suffered thus and thus; yet I was
persuaded that I was in no better a condition then those Jews: o yes, said
he! you are in a better condition then they* for they were Hypocrites, and
served not GOD with all their hearts as you do. Then I went home contentedly,
and so went on in my wonted course of doing and suffering, and thought all was
well with me until I bethought my self that before the time of my
conversion, I had been a transgressour from the womb, yea, in the womb in
that I was guilty of Adams transgression: so then I considered, that although I
kept even with GOD for the time present and to come yet that would not free m^
from the guiltiness of that which wa^ done before, whereupon I was much
troubled and disquieted in my mind, then I went to a third Minister of Gods
holy word, and told him how the case stood with me: and what I thought of my
state and condition, he cheered me up, bidding me be of good comfort, for
howsoever my obedience since my Conversion, would not satisfy for my former
sins, yet in as much as at my Conversion I had confessed* lamented, deplored,
bewailed and forsaken them: God according to his rich mercy and gracious
promise had mercifully pardoned and forgiving them. Then I returned home to my
house again, and went to God by earnest Prayer and supplication, and besought
him to give me assurance of the pardon and forgiveness of my guiltiness of
Adams sin, and all my actual transgressions before my Conversion: and as I
had endeavored my self to be a good servant before, so I would still continue
in doing my duty most exactly: and so being assured that the Lord had granted
this my request, I fell to my business, according to my promise; I heard, I
read, I prayed, I fasted, I mourned, I sighed and groned, and watched over my
heart, my tongue, and ways, in all my doings, actions, and dealings both with
God and man: But after a while I growing better acquainted with the
spiritualnesse of the Law, and with inward corruptions of mine own heart, I
perceived that I had deceived my self in thinking that I had kept the Law
perfectly, for do what I could I found many imperfections in my obedience; for
I had been and was still subject to sleepiness, drowsiness, and heaviness in
prayer and hearing, and so in other duties, I failed in the manner of
performance of them, and in the end why I performed them, seeking my self in
every thing I did, and my conscience told me I failed in my duty to God in
this, and in my duty to my neighbor in that, and then I was much troubled
again, for I considered that the Law of God requires, and is not satisfied
without an exact and perfect obedience, and then I went to the same Minister
again, and told him how I had purposed, promised, striven and endeavored, as
much as possibly I could to keep the Law of Ged perfectly, and yet by woeful
experience I had found, that I had and did still transgress it many ways, and
therefore I feared hell and damation.

O! but said he, do not fear, for the best Christians have their failings,
and no man keeps the Law of God perfectly, and therefore go on and do as
you have done in striving to keep the Law perfectly, in what you cannot do
God will accept the will for the deed, and wherein you come short, Christ will
help you out, and this satisfied and contented me very much, so I returned
home again and fell to prayer, and told the Lord that now I saw I could not
yield a perfect obedience to his Law, and yet I would not despair, because I
did believe, that what I could not do Christ would do for me, and then I did
certainly conclude, that I was a Christian indeed, and not before, and so have
I been persuaded ever since, And thus, Sir, you see I have dcclared unto you,
both how it has been wieh me formerly, and how it is with me for the present,
wherefore I would entreat you to tell me plainly and truly what you think of my
condition.


Evan. Why truly I must tell you it appears to me by your relation* that you
have gone as far in the way of the Covenant of works as the Apostle Paul did
before his conversion, but yet for ought I see you have not gone the right way
to the truth of the Gospel, and therefore I question whether you be as yet
come truly to Christ.


Neo. Good, Sir, give me leave to speak a few words. By the hearing of your
discourse concerning the Covenant of works and the Covenant of grace, I was
moved to fear that I was out of the right way, but now having heard my
neighbor Nomista make such an excellent relation, and yet you to question
whether he be come truly to CHRIST or no, makes me to conclude absolutely
that I am far from Christ, surely if he upon whom the Lord has bestowed such
excellent gifts and graces, and who has lived such a godly life, as I am sure
he has done, be not right, then woe be unto me.


Evan. Truly for ought I know, you may be in Christ before him.


Nom. But I pray you, Sir, consider, that though I am now thoroughly convinced,
that till of late I went on in the way of the Covenant of works, yet seeing
that at last I came to see my need of Christ, and have verily believed that in
what I come short of fulfilling the Law, he will help me out, me thinks, I
should be come truly to Christ.


Evan. Verily I do conceive that this gives you no sure evidence of your being
come truly to Christ, then some of your strict Papists have, for it is the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, that if a man exercise all his power, and do
his best to fulfill the Law, then God for Christ's sake, will pardon all his
infirmities, and save his soul, and therefore you shall see many of your
Papists very strict and zealous in the performance of duties morning and
evening, so many Avie-Maries, and so many Paternosters, yea, and many of them
do great deeds of charity, and great works of hospitality, and all upon such
grounds and to such ends as these, the Papists (says Calvin) cannot abide this
saying, by faith alone, Proposition, on Gal. second, in octa. page 45.
for they think that their own works are in part a cause of their salvation,
and so they make a hotch potch and mingle mangle, that is, neither fish nor
flesh as men use to say.


Nom. But stay, Sir, I pray, you are mistaken in me, for though I hold that God
does accept of my doing my best to fulfill the Law, yet do I not hold with the
Papists that my doings are meritorious, for I believe that God accepts not of
what I do, either for the work or workers sake, but only for Christ's sake.


Evan. Yet do you but still go hand in hand with the Papists, Doctor Downham
of Justification, p. 149.
for though they do hold that their works are meritorious, yet they say it is
by the merit of Christ that they become meritorious, or as some of the moderate
sort of them say, our works sprinkled with the blood of Christ become
meritorious, but this you are to know, that as the justice of GOD requires a
perfect obedience, so does it require that this perfect obedience be a
personal obedience, viz. it must be the obedience of one person only, the
obedience of two must not be put together, to make up a perfect obedience: So
that if you desire to be justified before God* you must either bring to him a
perfect righteousness of your own, and wholly renounce Christ, or else you must
bring the perfect righteousness of Christ and wholly renounce your own.


Ant. But believe me, Sir, I would advise him to bring Christ's and wholly
renounce his own, as, I thank the Lord, I have done.


Evan. You say very well, for indeed the Covenant of Grace terminates it self
only on Christ and his righteousness, God will have none to have a hand in
the justification and salvation of a sinner but Christ only, and to say as the
thing is, neighbor Nomista, Christ Jesus will either be a whole Savior, or no
Savior; he will either save you alone, or not save you at all, Acts 4.12.
for among men there is given no other name under heaven, whereby we must be
saved, says the Apostle Peter: and Jesus Christ himself says, I am the way,
John 14.6.
the truth, and the life, and no man comes to the father but by me, On Gal.
p. 17. Doctor Urban Regis, in his exposition of Christ's Sermon going to Emaus.
so that as Luther truly says, besides this way Christ, there is no way but
wandering, no verity but hypocrisy, no life but eternal death, and verily
says another godly writer, We can neither come to God the Father, be
reconciled unto him, nor have any thing to do with him, by any other way or
means, but only by Jesus Christ, for we shall not any where find the favor
of God, true innocence, righteousness, satisfaction for sin, help, comfort,
life or salvation, any where but only in Jesus Christ, he is the sum and
center of all divine and evangelicall truths, and therefore as there is no
knowledge or wisdom so excellent, necessary or heavenly as the knowledge of
Christ; (which made the Apostle tell the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 2.2.
that he determined to know nothing amongst them, but only Jesus Christ and
him crucified) so is there nothing to be preached unto men as an object of
their faith, or necessary element of their salvation, Reynolds on Psalm. 110. p.
1.
which does not some way or other either meet in Christ or refer unto Christ.


Ant. O, Sir, you do please me wondrous well in thus attributing all to
Christ, and surely, Sir, though of late you have not been so evangelical in
your teaching as some others in this City (which has caused me to leave off
hearing you to hear them) yet have I formerly perceived, and do now also
perceive, that you have more knowledge of the doctrine of free grace then many
other Ministers in this City have, and to tell you the truth, Sir, it was by
your means that I was first brought to renounce mine own righteousness, and
to cleave only to the righteoasnesse of JESUS CHRIST, and thus it was. After
that I had been a good. while a legal professor, just like my friend Nomista,
and heard none but your legal Preachers, who built me up in works and doings,
as they did him, and as their manner is: At last a familiar acquaintance of
mine who had some knowledge of the doctrine of free grace, did commend you for
an excellent Preacher, and at last prevailed with me to go with him to hear
you, and your text that day, I well remember was, Tit. 3.5. Not by the works of
righteousness that we had done, but according to his own mercy he saved us,
whence you observed and plainly proved, that man's own righteousness had no
hand in his justification and salvation, whereupon you dehorted us from putting
any confidence in our own works and doings, and exhorted us, by faith to lay
hold upon the righteousness of Jesus Christ only, at the hearing whereof, it
pleased the Lord so to work upon me, that I plainly perceived that there was
no need at all of my works and doings, nor nothing else, but only to believe in
Jesus Christ, and indeed my heart did assent unto it immediately, so that I
went home with abundance of peace and joy in believing, and gave thanks to the
Lord, for that he had set my soul at liberty, from such a sore bondage as I
had been under, and I told all my acquaintance what a slavish life I had lived
in being under the Law, for if I did commit any sin, I was presently troubled
and disquieted in my conscience, and could have no peace til I had made humble
confession thereof unto God, craved pardon and forgivenes, and promised
amendment but now I told them that whatsoever sins I did commit, I was no whit
troubled at them, nor indeed am not to this day, for I do verily believe, that
God for Christ's sake has freely and fully pardoned all my sins, both past,
present, and to come; so that I am confident that what sin or sins soever I
commit, they shall never be laid to my charge, being very well assured that I
am so perfectly clothed with the robes of Christ's righteousness, that God can
see no sin in me at all: And therefore, now I can rejoice evermore in Christ,
as the Apostle exhorts me, and live merrily though I be never so vile or
sinful a creature, and indeed, I pity them, that are in the same slavish
condition that I was in, and would have them to believe, as I have done, that
so they may rejoice with me in Christ: And thus, Sir, you see I have declared
unto you my condition; and therefore I would entreat you to tell me what you
think of me.


Evan. There is in this City, at this day, much talk about Antinomiaus; and
though I hope there be but few that do justly deserve that title, (yet I pray)
give me leave to tell you, that I fear me I may say unto you in this case, as
it was once said unto Peter in another case; Matthew. 26.73.
Surely thou art one of them, for thy speech bewrays thee. And therefore to
tell you truly, I make some question whether you have truly believed in Christ,
for all your confidence: And indeed I am the rather moved to question it, by
calling to mind that as I have heard your conversation is not such as
becomes the Gospel of Christ: Phil. 1.27.



Ant. Why, Sir, do you think it is possible for a man to have such peace and
joy in Christ as I have had, and I thank the Lord have still, and not to have
truly believed in Christ?


Evan. Yea, indeed, I think it is possible, for does not our Savior tell us,
that those hearers whom he resembles to the stony ground, Mark 4.15.
immediately received the word with joy, and yet had no root in themselves, and
so indeed were not true believers. And does not the Apostle give us to
understand, that as there is a form of godliness without the power of
godliness: 2 Timothy 3.5.
so there is a form of faith without the power of faith. And therefore he
prays that God would grant unto the Thessalonians the work of faith with
power. 2 Thessalonians: 1.11.
And as the same Apostle gives us to understand, there is a faith that is not
fained, 1 Timothy 1.5.
so doubtless, there is a faith that is fained: And surely, when our Savior
says; Mark 4.26, 27, 28. The kingdom of God is as if a man should cast seed
into the ground, and sheuld sleep and rise night and day, and the seed should
spring up and grow he knows not how, first the blade, then the ear, after
that the full corn in the ear, he gives us to understand that true faith is
produced by the secret power of God by little and little, Diodat on the Text.
so that sometimes a true believer himself, neither knows the time when, nor
the manner how it was wrought, so that we may perceive that true faith is not
ordinarily begun, increased and finished all in a moment, as, it seems, yours
was, but grows by degrees according to that of the Apostle Romans 1.17. The
righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, Wilson on the Romans, p.
17.
that is, from one degree of faith to another, from a weak faith to a strong
faith, from faith beginning to faith increasing toward perfection, or from
faith of adherence, to faith of assurance, but so was not yours, and again,
true faith according to the measure of it, produces holiness of life, but it
seems yours does not so, and therefore though, you have had, and have still
much peace and joy, yet that is no infallible sign that your faith is true,
Doctor Preston of Faith, page 86.
for a man may have great raptures, yea, he may have great joy, as if he were
lift up into the third heaven, and have a great and strong persuasion that his
estate is good, and yet be but an hypocrite for all that, and therefore I
beseech you in the words of the Apostle, Examine your self whether you be in
the faith, 2 Cor. 13.5.
prove your own self, know you not your own self how that Jesus Christ is in
you, except you be a reprobate: And if Christ be in you, the body is dead
because of sin, Romans 8.10.
but the Spirit is life because of righteousness.


Ant. But, Sir, if my friend Nomista went wrong in seeking to be justified by
the works of the Law, then, me thinks, I should have gone right in seeking to
be justified by faith, and yet you speak as if we had both gone wrong.


Evan. I remember Luther says, that in his time, if they taught in a Sermon
that salvation consisted not in our works or life, Chos. Sermon, Page 65.
but in the gift of God, some men took occasion thence to be slow to good
works, and to live a dishonest life, and if they preached of a godly and honest
life, others did by and by furiously attempt to build ladders to heaven: And
moreover, he says, that in the year, 1525, there were some fantastical
spirits that stirred up the rusticall people to sedition, saying, that the
freedom of the Gospel gives liberty to all men from all manner of Laws,
Luther on Gal. page 170.
and there were others that did attribute the force of justification to the
Law. Now, says he, both these sorts offend against the Law, the one on the
right hand, who would be justified by the Law, and the other on the left hand,
who would be clean delivered from the Law: Now I suppose this saying of
Luthers, may be fitly applied to you two, for it appears to me, friend
Antinomista that you have offended on the left hand, in not walking according
to the matter of the Law, and it is evident to me neighbor Nomista, that you
have offended on the right hand, in seeking to be justified by your obedience
to it.


Nom. But, Sir, if seeking of justification by the works of the Law be an
error* yet it seems, that by Luthers own confession, it is but an error on
the right hand.


Evan. But yet I tell you it is such an error, that by the Apostle Paul's own
confession, so far forth as any man is guilty of it, He makes his services his
Saviors, and rejects the grace of God, and makes the death of Christ of none
effect, Gal. 5.4. Gal. 3.19. Gal. 1.7. Gal. 3.10. Gal. 4.25. Gal. 5.7. Gal.
3.11.
and perverteth the Lords intention, both in giving the Law, and in giving the
Gospel, and keeps himself under the curse of the Law, and makes himself the
son of a bondwoman, a servant, yea, and a slave, and hinders himself in the
course of well doing, and in short, he goes about an impossible thing, and so
loses all his labor.


Nom. Why then, Sir, it should seem, that all my seeking to please God by my
good works, all my strict walking according to the Law, and all my honest
course of life, has rather done me hurt then good.


Evan. The Apostle says; that without faith it is impossible to please God,
that is, says Calvin, Whatsoever a man, thinks, Heb. 11.6. Instit. page 370.
purposes, or does, before he be reconciled to God by faith in Christ is
accursed, and not only of no value to righteousness, but of certain deserving
to damnation; so that says Luther, On Gal. (...).
Whosoever goes about to please God with works, going before faith, goes
about to please God with sin, which is nothing else but to heap sin upon sin,
to mock God and to provoke him to wrath: nay, says the same Luther, in another
place, If thou be without Christ thy wisdom is double foolishness, On Gal.
p. ^5.
thy righteousness is double sin and iniquity, and therefore though you have
walked very strictly according to the Law, and led an honest life, yet if you
have rested and put confidence therein, and so come short of Christ, then has
it indeed rather done you hurt then good. Ball on the Covenant, page 338.
For says a godly writer, virtuous life, according to the light of nature,
turns a man farther off from God, if he add not thereto the effectual
working of his Spirit, and says Luther, they which have respect only to an
honest life, Chos. Sermon, Page 65.
it were better for them to be adulterers, and adulteresses, and to wallow in
the mire: And surely for this cause it is that our Savior tells the strict
Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 21.31.
who sought justification by works, and rejected Christ, that Publicans and
harlots should enter into the Kingdom of God before them. And for this cause
it was that I said, for ought I know my neighbor Neophytus might be in Christ
before you.


Nom. But how can that be? when as you know he has confessed that he is
ignorant and full of corruption, and comes far short of me in gifts and graces.


Evan. Because as the Pharisee had more to do before he could come at Christ
then the Publican had; so, I conceive, you have more to do then he has.


Nom. Why, Sir, I pray you, what have I to do, or what would you advise me to
do, for truly I would be contented to be ruled by you?


Evan. Why that which you have to do before you can come at Christ, is to
undo all that ever you have done already, that is to say, whereas you have
endeavored to travail toward heaven by the way of the Covenant of works, and
so have gone a wrong way, you must go quite back again all the way you have
gone, before you can tread one step in the right way. And whereas you have
attempted to build up the ruins of old Adam, and that upon your self, and so
like a foolish builder to build a tottering house upon the sands, you must
throw down and utterly demolish all that building, and not leave a stone upon a
stone, before you can begin to build anew, and whereas you have conceived that
there is a sufficiency in your self to justify and save your self, you must
conclude that in that case, there is not only in you an insufficiency, but
also a non-sufficiencie, yea, and that sufficiency that seemed to be in you,
to be your loss, in plain terms, you must deny your self, as our Savior
says, Matthew 16.24. That is, You must utterly renounce all that ever you are,
and all that ever you have done, All your knowledge and gifts, all your
hearing, reading, praying, fasting, weeping and mourning, all your wandering in
the way of works, and strict walking must fall to the ground in a moment,
briefly, whatsoever you have counted gain to you in the case of Justification,
you must now with the Apostle Paul, count loss for CHRIST, Philip. 3.7, 8, 9.
and judge it to be dung, that you may win CHRIST, and be found in Him, not
having your own righteousness which is of the Law. but that which is through
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith.


Neo. O, but, Sir, What would you advise me to do?


Evan. Why man? what ayleth you?


Neo. Why, Sir, as you have been pleased to hear them two to declare their
condition unto you, so I beseech you, to give me leave to do the same, and
then you will perceive how it is with me. Sir, not long since, it pleased the
Lord to visit me with a great fit of sickness, so that indeed, both in mine
own judgment, and in the judgment of all that came to visit me, I was sick
unto death, whereupon I began to consider, whither my soul was to go, after
its departure out of my body, and I thought with my self that there was but
two places, heaven and hell, and therefore it must needs go to one of them,
then my wicked and sinful life, which indeed, I had lived came into my mind,
which caused me to conclude, that hell was the place provided for it, which
caused me to be very fearful, and to be very sorry that I had so lived, and
desired of the Lord to let me live a little longer, and I would not fail to
reform my life, and amend my ways, and the Lord was pleased to grant me my
desire; since which time, though indeed it is true, I have not lived so wickedly
as formerly I had done, yet alas, I have come far short of that godly and
religious life which I see other men live, and especially this my neighbor
Nomista, and yet you seem to conceive that he is not in a good condition, and
therefore surely I must needs be in a miserable condition, alas, Sir, what do
you think will become of me?


Evan. I do perceive that although we have by the Lords assistance our
coming together, opened and cleared the new and living way to eternal life,
yet the Lord has not been pleased to open your eyes to see it, so that you
would still be going thither the old and natural way, and therefore as a
further means to discover it to you, I pray you consider that although in the
making of the covenant of works at the first, God was one party and man
another, yet in making it the second time, God was on both sides. God simply
considered in his essence, is the party opposite to man, and GOD the second
Person having taken upon him to be incarnate and to work man's redemption, was
on man's side, and takes part, with man that he may reconcile him to God by
bearing man's sins, and satisfying Gods justice for them, and Christ paid God
till he said, Matthew. 3.17.
He had enough, He was fully satisfied, fully contented.

Whereupon all Christ's people were given to him in their election. Ephesians. 1.4.
Thine they were (faith Christ) and thou gave them me. John 17.6. He, says
the Father, loves the Son, and has given all things into his hands, John
8.35. that is, he has entrusted him with the oeconomie and actual
administration of that power in the Church, Reynolds on Psalm. 110. p. 7.
which originally belonged to himself, and hence it is that Christ also says,
the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to his Son, John
5.22. so that the Covenant for life and salvation, since the fall, is not that
Covenant of works, that was betwixt God and Christ, for none of Christ's are to
have to do with that but Christ only, but the Covenant of life and salvation
is that Covenant of grace* that is betwixt Christ and his, and in tha^ Covenant
there is not any condition or law to be performed on man's part, by himself,
no, there is no more for him to do, but only to know and believe, that Christ
has done all for him, wherefore my dear neighbor Neophytus, I beseech you be
persuaded, that here you are to work nothing, here you are to do nothing,
here you are to render nothing unto God, but only receive the treasure which
is Jesus Christ, and apprehend him in your heart by faith, Luther on Gal. p.
69, 194.
although you be never so great a sinner, and so shall you obtain forgiveness
of sins, righteousness and eternal happiness, not as an agent, but as a
patient, not by doing but by receiving, nothing here comes betwixt but faith
only, apprehending Christ in the promise; this then is perfect righteousness,
to hear nothing, to know nothing, to do nothing of the Law or works but only
to know and believe that Jesus Christ is now gone to the Father, and sits at
his right hand, not as a Judge, But is made unto you of God, wisdom,
righteousness, Acts 16.31.
sanctification and redemption, wherefore, says the Apostle, Believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved.


Neo. But, Sir, has such a one as I any warrant to believe in Christ?


Evan. I beseech you consider, that God the Father as he is in his Son Jesus
Christ, Culverwell of Faith, page 15.
moved with nothing but with his free love, to mankind lost, has made a deed
of gift and grant unto them all, that whosoever of them all shall believe in
this his Son, shall not perish, John 3.16.
but have eternal life, and hence, it was that Jesus Christ himself said unto
his Disciples, Mat. 16.15. Go and preach the Gospel to every creature under
heaven, that is, Doctor Preston of Faith, page 8.
go and tell every man, without exception, that here is good news for him,
Christ is dead for him, and if he will take him and accept of his
righteousness he shall have him. In a little book called the benefit of
Christ's death.
Therefore says a godly writer, for as much as the holy Scripture speaks to
all in general, none of us ought to distrust himself, but believe that it
does belong particularly to himself, and to the end that this point wherein
lies and consists the whole mystery of our holy faith, may be understood the
better, let us pur the case, that some good and holy King should cause a
proclamation to be made through his whole Kingdom by the sound of a Trumpet,
that all rebels and banished men, shall safely return home to their houses,
because that at the suit and desert of some dear friend of theirs, it has
pleased the King to pardon them, certainly none of these rebels ought to doubt
but that he shall obtain true pardon for his rebellion, and so return home and
live under the shadow of that gracious King: even so our good King the Lord of
Heaven and Earth has for the obedience and desert of our good brother Jesus
Christ, pardoned us all our sins, and made a Proclamation throughout the
whole world, that every one of us may safely return to God in Jesus Christ,
wherefore, I beseech you, Heb. 10.22.
make no doubt of it, but draw near with a true heart in full assurance of
faith.


Neo. O! but, Sir, in this similitude the case is not alike, for when an
earthly King sends forth such a Proclamation, it may be thought that he does
indeed intend to pardon all, but it cannot be thought that the King of heaven
does so, for does not the Scripture say, Jude verse 4.
that some men are ordained before to condemnation, and does not Christ
himself say, that many are called, Matthew. 22.14.
but few are chosen, and therefore it may be I am one of them that are ordained
to condemnation, and therefore, though I be called, I shall never be chosen,
and so shall not be saved.


Evan. I beseech you to consider that although some men be ordained to
condemnation, yet so long as the Lord has concealed their names, and not set a
mark of reprobation upon any man in particular; but offers the pardon
generally to all without having any respect either to election or reprobation:
surely it is great folly in any man to say it may be I am not elected, and
therefore shall not have benefit by it, and therefore I will not accept of it
nor come in, for it should rather move every man to give diligence to make his
calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.
by believing it, for fear we come short of it, according to that of the
Apostle, Heb. 4.1.
Let us therefore fear, least a promise being left us of entering into his
rest, any of us should seem to come short of it: Wherefore, I beseech you, do
not you say it may be I am not elected, and therefore I will not believe in
Christ, but rather say I do believe in Christ, Poor doubting Christian, page
69.
and therefore, I am sure I am elected, and check your own heart, for meddling
with Gods secrets, and prying into his hidden counsel, and go no more beyond
your bounds, as you have done in this point, for election and reprobation is a
secret, and the Scriptures tells us, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
That secret things belong unto God, but those things that are revealed belong
unto us: Now, this is Gods revealed will, for indeed it is his express
command, 1 John 3.23.
That you should believe on the name of his Son, and it is his promise, that if
you believe you shall not perish, but have everlasting life: Wherefore, Doctor
Sibs Souls conflict, Page 621.
you having so good a warrant as GODS command, and so good an encouragement as
his promise, do your duty, and by the doing thereof you may put it out of
question, and be sure that you are one of Gods Elect: Say then, I beseech you,
with a firm faith, the righteousness of Jesus Christ belongs to all that
believe; but I believe and therefore it belongs to me, yea, and say with PAUL,
Gal. 2.20.
I live by faith in the Son of God who loved me, and gave himself for me. He
saw in me (says Luther, on the Text) nothing but wickedness going astray,
and flying from him, yet this good Lord had mercy on me, and of his mere
mercy he loved me; yea, so loved me, that he gave himself for me, (who is
this me) even I wretched and damnable sinner was so deerly beloved of the Son
of God, that he gave himself for me, o print this word me in your heart, and
apply it to your own self, not doubting but that you are one of those to whom
this me belongs.


Neo. But may such a vile and sinful wretch as I am be persuaded that God
commands me to believe, and that he has made a promise to me?


Evan. Why do you make a question where there is none to be made, Go, says
Christ, and preach the Gospel to every creature under Heaven, that is, go tell
every man, without exception, whatsoever his sins be, Doctor Preston of love,
page 146.
whatsoever his rebellions be, go and tell him these glad tidings, that if he
will come in, I will accept of him, his sins shall be forgiven him, and he
shall be saved, if he will come in and take me, and receive me, I will be
his loving husband, and he shall be mine own dear Spouse: let me therefore
say unto you in the words of the Apostle, Now then, I as an Ambassador for
Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20, 21.
as though GOD did beseech you by me, I pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled unto God, for he has made him to be sin for you, who knew no sin,
that you might be made the righteousness of God in him.


Neo. But do you say, Sir, that if I believe, I shall be espoused unto Christ?


Evan. Yea, indeed, shall you, for faith coupleth the soul with Christ, even as
the Spouse with her husband, Rouse mystica^ Marriage, p. 1^ Christian Liberty,
p. 21.
by which means Christ and the soul are made one: for as in corporal marriage
man and wife are made one flesh, even so in this spiritual and mystical
marrriage Christ and his Spouse are made one spirit, and this marriage of all
others is most perfect and absolutely accomplished between them for the
marriage between man and wife, is but a slender figure of this union,
wherefore, I beseech you, to believe it, and then you shall be sure to enjoy it.


Neo. Surely, Sir, if David said, seems it to you a light thing to be an
earthly Kings son-in-law* 1 Samuel 1^.25.
seeing that I am a poor man, and lightly esteemed: then surely I have much
more cause to say, seems it to you a light thing to be a heavenly Kings
daughter-in-law, seeing that I am such a poor sinful wretch: surely, Sir, I
cannot be persuaded to believe it.


Evan. Alas, man, how much are you mistaken, for you look upon God and upon
your self, with the eye of reason, and so standing in relation to each other,
according to the tenor of the Covenant of Works, whereas you being now in the
case of Justification and Reconciliation, you are to look both upon God and
upon your self with the eye of faith, and so standing in relation to each
other, according to the tenor of the Covenant of grace: for says the Apostle,
God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.19.
not imputing their sins unto them, as if he had said, because as God stands
in relation to man according to the tenor of the Covenant of works, and so out
of Christ, he could not without prejudice to his justice be reconciled unto
them, nor have any thing to do with them, otherwise then in wrath and
indignation; therefore, to the intent, that justice and mercy might meet
together, and righteousness and peace might embrace each other, and so God
stand in relation to man, according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, he
put himself into his Son Jesus Christ, and shrouded himself there, that so he
might speak peace to his people. Chos. Sermon, page 299.
Sweetly says Luther, because the nature of God was otherwise higher then that
we are able to attain unto it; therefore has he humbled himself to us and
taken our nature upon him, and so put himself into Christ, here he looks
for us, here he will receive us, and he that seeks him here shall find him:
This, says God the Father, is my well beloved Son in whom I am well pleased,
Mat. 3.17. whereupon the same Luther says in another place, We must not think
and persuade our selves that this voice came from heaven for Christ's own sake,
but for our sakes, Chos. Sermon, page 31, 32, 33.
even as Christ himself says, John 12.30. This voice came not because of me,
but for your sakes, the truth is, Christ had no need that it should be said
unto him, this is my well beloved son, he knew that from all eternity, and
that he should still so remain though these words had not been spoken from
heaven, therefore by these words, God the Father in Christ his Son, cheereth
the hearts of poor sinners, and greatly delights them with singular comfort
and heavenly sweetness, assuring them, that whosoever is married unto Christ,
and so in him by faith, he is as acceptable to God the Father, as Christ
himself, according to that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.6.
He has made us acceptable in his beloved, wherefore, if you would be
acceptable to God, and be made his dear child, then by faith cleave unto his
beloved Son Christ, and hang about his neck, yea, and creep into his bosom,
and so shall the love and favor of God be as deeply insinuated into you, as it
is into Christ himself, and so shall God the Father, together with his beloved
Son, wholly possess you, and be possessed of you, and so God, and Christ, and
you shall become one entire thing, according to Christ's prayer, John 11.21.
That they may be one in us, as thou and I are one, and by this means may you
have sufficient ground and warrant to say (in the matter of reconciliation with
God at any time, whenever you are disputing with your self, how God is to be
found that justifies and saves sinners) I know no other God, Luther on Gal.
page 17.
neither will I know any other God besides this God that came dow from heaven,
and clothed himself with my flesh, unto whom all power is given, both in
heaven and in earth, Who is my Judge, John 5.22.
For the father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son,
so that Christ may do with me whatsoever him likes, and determine of me
aecording to his own mind, and I am sure he has said, John 12.17.
He came not to judge the World, but to save the World, and therefore I do
believe that he will save me.


Neo. Indeed, Sir, if I were so holy and so righteous as some men are, and had
such power over my sins and corruptions as some men have, then I could easily
believe it, but (alas) I am so sinful, and so unworthy a wretch, that I dare
not presume to believe that Christ will accept of me, so as to justify and
save me.


Evan. Alas, man, in thus saying* you do seem to contradict and gainsay, both
the Apostle Paul, and our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and that against your own
soul. For, whereas the Apostle Paul says, 1 Timothy 1.15. Romans 4.5.
That Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, and does justify the
ungodly: Why, you seem to hold, and do in effect say, that Christ Jesus, came
into the world to save the righteous, and to justify the godly: and whereas our
Savior says, The whole need not the Physician, but the sick, Matthew. 9.12.
and that he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Why
you seem to hold, and do in effect say, That the sick need not the Physician
but the whole, and that he came not to call sinners, but the righteous to
repentance. And, indeed, in so saying, you seem to conceive that Christ's Spouse
must be purified, washed and cleansed from all her filthiness, and adorned with a
rich robe of righteousness before he will accept of her, whereas he himself
says unto her, As for thy nativity in the day that thou wast born, Ezekiel. 16.4,
5, 8.
thy navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed with water to supple thee,
thou wast not swadled at all, nor salted at all, no eye pitied thee to do any
of these things unto thee: but when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee,
behold, thy time was a time of love, and I spread my skirt over thee, and
covered thy nakedness: yea, and I swear unto thee, and entered into covenant
with thee, and thou becamest mine. And I will marry thee unto me for ever, yea,
I will marry thee unto me in righteousness and in judgment, Hos. 2.19.
and in mercy and compassion: Wherefore, I beseech you, revoke this your
erroneous opinion, and contradict the word of truth no longer, but conclude for
a certainty, that it is not the righteous and godly man, but the sinful and
ungodly man that Christ came to call, justify and save, so that if you were a
righteous and godly man, you were neither capable of Calling, Justification, or
Salvation by Christ, but being a sinful and ungodly man, I will say unto you,
as the people said unto blind Bartime, Be of good comfort, Mark 10.49.
arise, he calls you, and will justify and save you; go then unto him, I
beseech you, and if he come and meet you by the way (as his manner is) then do
not you unadvisedly say with Peter, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man;
Luke 5.8.
O Lord! but say in plain terms, O come unto me, for I am a sinful man, O
Lord! yea, go on further with your speech, and say as Luther bids you, Most
gracious Jesu, and sweet Christ, Chos. Ser. p. ^^.
I am a miserable poor sinner, and therefore do judge my self unworthy of thy
grace; but yet I having learned from thy word, that thy salvation belongs to
such a one, therefore do I come unto thee to claim that right which through
thy gracious promise belongs unto me, assure your self that Jesus Christ
requires no portion with his spouse, no verily he requires nothing with her but
mere poverty, the rich he sends empty away: Luke 1.57.
but the poor are by him enriched, and indeed, says Luther, The more
miserable, sinful and distressed a man does feel himself, and judge himself
to be, the more willing will Christ be to receive him, and relieve him, so
that, Chos. Ser. p. 85
says he, In judging thy self unworthy, thou do theredy become truly
worthy: and so indeed have gotten a greater occasion of coming unto him:
Wherefore in the words of the Apostle, I do exhort you and beseech you to come
boldly unto the throne of grace, Heb. 4.6.
that you may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need.


Neo. But truly Sir, my heart does as it were even tremble within me to think
of coming unto Christ after such a manner, and surely, Sir, if I should come
so boldly to Christ, and speak after such a manner it, would be but pride and
presumption in me.


Evan. Indeed, if you should be encouraged to come to Christ, and speak thus
unto him, because of any godliness, righteousness, or worthiness that you
conceive to be in you, that were proud presumption indeed; but for you to come
to Christ by believing that he will accept of you, justify and save you
freely by his grace, according to his own gracious promise: this is no proud
presumption at all, for Christ having tendered it and offered it unto you
freely, believe it man, Hookers poor doubt. Christ. page 108.
it is neither pride nor presumption, but true humility of heart to take what
Christ offers you.


Nom. But by your favor, Sir, I pray you give me leave to speak a word by
the way, I know my Neighbor Neophytus, it may be better then you do, yet do I
not intend to charge him with any sin, otherways then by way of supposition as
thus: Suppose he has been guilty of the committing of gross and grievous
sins, will Christ accept of him, and justify and save him for all that?


Evan. Yea, indeed, for there is no limitation of Gods grace in Jesus Christ,
except the sin against the holy Ghost; Christ stands at the door and knocks,
Revel. 3.20.
and if any cruel murdering Manasses, or any persecuting and blaspheming Saul,
1 Timothy, 1.13.
or any adulterous Magdalen will open unto him, he will come in and bring
comfort with him, and will sup with him, seek from one end of the Heavens to
the other (says Evangelicall Hooker) turn all the Bible over, Poor doubt.
Christ. p. 132.
and see if the words of Christ be not true, John 6.37.
him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out.


Nom. Why then, Sir, it seems you hold that the vilest sinner in the world
ought not to be discouraged from believing in Christ, because of his sins.


Evan. Surely if Christ came into the world to seek, and call, and save
sinners, and to justify the ungodly, as you have heard, and if the more
sinful, miserable and distressed a man does judge himself to be, the more
willing Christ is to receive him, and relieve him: then I see no reason why the
vilest sinner should be discouraged from believing on the name of Christ
because of his sins, nay, let me say more, the greater any man's sins are either
in number or nature: the more have he should make to come unto Christ, and to
say with David, for thy name sake, Psalm. 25.11.
o Lord! pardon mine iniquity for it is great.


Ant. Surely, Sir, if my friend Neophytus did rightly consider these things,
and were assuredly persuaded of the truth of them, me thinks, he should not be
so backward from coming unto Christ by believing on his name, as he is, for if
the greatness of his sins should be so far from hindering his coming to Christ,
that they should further it, then I know not what should hinder him.


Evan. You speak very truly indeed, and therefore, I beseech you, Neighbor
Neophytus, consider seriously of it, and let neither Satan the accuser of the
brethren, nor your own accusing conscience joining with him, hinder you any
longer from Christ: for, what though they should accuse you of pride,
infidelity, coveteousnesse, lust, anger, envy and hypocrisy; yea, what though
they should accuse you of whoredom, theft and drunkenness, and many the like,
yet do what they can, they can make no worse a man of you then a sinner, or
the chief of sinners, or an ungodly person, and so consequently such a one as
Christ came to justify and save, so that in very deed, if you rightly consider
it, they do you more good then hurt hereby, and therefore I beseech you, in
all such cases, or conflicts, take the counsel of Luther, who says, when thy
conscience is thoroughly afraid with the remembrance of thy sins past, and the
Devil assayleth thee with great violence, going about to overwhelme thee, with
heaps, floods, and whole seas of sins, to terrify thee and to draw thee from
Christ, then arm thy self with such sentences as these, On Gal. p. 20, 21.
Christ the Son of God was given, not for the holy, righteous, worthy, and
such as were his friends, but for the wicked sinners, for the unworthy, and for
his enemies, wherefore if the Devil say thou art a sinner, and therefore must
be damned, then answer you and say, because thou say I am a sinner, therefore
will I be righteous and saved, and if he say, nay, sinners must be damned, then
answer you and say, no, for I fly to Christ, who has given himself for my
sins, and therefore in that thou say I am a sinner, thou give me armor and
weapon against thy self, that with thy own sword I may cut thy throat, and
tread thee under my feet, and thus you see it is the judgment of Luther, that
your sins should rather drive you to Christ then keep you from him,


Nom. But, Sir, suppose he has not as yet either humbled himself, or repented
for his great and many sins, has he any warrant to come to Christ till he has
done so.


Eva. I see you have not yet quite thrown down your tottering building, you
still conceive that man himself must do something in the case of
justification, you think he must bring some money in his hand to buy his
salvation, but I beseech you consider, that as I have often told you, Gods
Covenant in Christ is a Covenant of Grace, and so every way a free Covenant,
and therefore he makes a general proclamation saying, Ho, every one that
thirsts, Isai. 55.1.
come ye to the waters, and he that has no money: come ye buy, and eat, yea,
come buy wine and milk without money, and without price. This you see is the
condition, (buy wine and milk) that is grace and salvation, Hookers poor
doubting Christian. page 151.

Cornw^ll, on Gospel repentance. p. 6.


(without money) that is, without any sufficiency of your own, and the Lord
says, in his Word in diverse places, that he justifies his children before
they repent or truly humble themselves, or do any work of righteousness, the
truth is, it is only required that a man come with the hand of faith, and
receive Christ without any thing else at all.


Nom. But, Sir, Though I conceive that we are to bring this money of
humiliation and repentance to Christ, yet do I not conceive it is to tender
unto him for a price, but only for him to look upon, as that with which he
has appointed those to be qualified withal that come unto him.


Eva. I, but yet so long as Christ has said you must come without it, and
only incline your ear, Isai. 55.3.
and hear, and your souls shall live: and that by hearing that, he will make
an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David, me thinks,
you should perceive that Christ does thereby call you from the ways of
repentance and humiliation and works of righteousness in the case of
justification, Cornwell, on Gospel repentance. p. 21.
and to pitch directly and immediately upon the free Covenant of Grace.


Nom. But Sir, as I conceive, the Scripture holds forth that the Lord has
appointed repentance to go before faith, for is it not said, Mark 1.15.
Repent ye, and believe the Gospel.


Evan. Indeed, sometimes the name of repentance is given to those preparatory
beginnings and introductories thereof, Dike, of repentance. p. 11.
which are those legal fits of fear and terror, which are both in nature and
time before faith, and truly all that repentance that goes before faith in
Christ can be no other, for evangelicall repentance being a fruit of faith in
Christ, cannot be before faith in Christ.


Nom. Then Sir, it seems you hold that he that believes in Christ does also
truly repent.


Evan. Yea, indeed, though I hold not that evangelical repentance is an
antecedent of faith in Christ, yet I hold it is a consequent, though I hold not
that it goes before faith, yet I hold that it follows after.


Nom. But yet, Sir, it seems you hold that those preparatory beginnings of
repentance, which you call legal fits of fear and terror do go before faith
in Christ.


Evan. Yea, indeed, I do conceive that ordinarily, and in some measure they do.


Nom. Ordinarily say you Sir, why, are they not in all?


Evan. No, indeed, for some doubtless are like unto Zachous and Lydia, who
received Christ, Luke 19.6. Acts 16.14.
and were received of him (as it is verily thought) without any measure of them.


Nom. And have not all those that have them, a like measure of them?


Evan. O no, there is a great difference in the measure, for some do but as it
were sip of the cup, and others do as it were drink the very dregs; whereby
we may perceive, that though it be necessary that these Legal fits of fear
and terror be in some before their coming to Christ: yet is there no absolute
necessity of them on Christ's part, wherefore I pray take notice that those who
have them, have them not because Christ would not bid them welcome, and receive
them without them, but because they will not come to Christ, except they be by
this means driven unto him.


Nom. But, Sir, that which you call Evangelicall repentance, and follows after
faith, is in all that do believe: is it not?


Evan. Yea, indeed, it is more or less in every believing soul, according to
the measure of his faith, and so of his receiving the spirit of Christ, as all
other true fruits of Christ's spirit are.


Nom. Well Sir, I am answered.


Neo. And truly Sir, you have so declared and set forth Christ's disposition
toward poor sinners, and so answered all my doubts and objections, that I am
now verily persuaded that Christ is willing to entertain me, and surely I am
willing to come unto him and receive him; but alas, I want power to do it, that
is, Sir, I want faith.


Evan. But tell me on thing truly, are you resolved to put forth all your power
to believe, and so to take Christ.


Neo. Truly Sir, me thinks, my resolution is much like the resolution of the
four Lepers which sat at the gate of Samaria, for as they said, If we enter
into the City, 2 Kings 7.4.
the famine is in the City, and we shall die there, and if we sit still here,
we die also; n^w therefore come and let us fall into the hands of the
Assyrians, if they save us we shall live, and if they kill us we shall but die:
even so say I, in mine heart; if I go back to the covenant of works to seek
justification thereby, I shall die there; and if I sit still and seek it no way
I shall die also: now therefore, though I be somewhat fearful, yet am I
resolved to go unto Christ, and if I perish I perish.


Evan. Why, now I tell you truly the match is made, Doct. Preston of Faith. p.
23.
Christ is yours and you are his; this day is salvation come to your house,
(your soul I mean) for what though you have not that power to come so fast unto
Christ, and to lay such firm hold on him as you desire; yet coming with such
a resolution to Christ to take him, you need take no care for doing it, you may
be sure that Christ will enable you to do it, for is it not said, John 1.12.
But as many as received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of
God, even to them that believe on his name: O then, I beseech you, stand no
longer disputing, but be peremptory and resolute in your faith and in casting
your self upon God in Christ for mercy, Goodwins child of light. page 196.
and let the issue be what it will: yet let me tell you to your comfort that
such a resolution shall never go to hell: nay. I will say more, if any soul
have a room in Heaven, such a soul shall? Page 199.
for God cannot find in his heart to damn such a one, I might then with as
much true confidence say unto you, as John Careless said unto John Bradford,
Hearken o ye Heavens, In a Letter to him.
and thou o earth give ear and bear me witness at the great day, that I do
here faithfully and truly the Lords message unto his dear servant, and
singularly beloved, John Bradford (saying) John Bradford, thou man so specially
beloved of God* I do pronounce and testify unto thee, in the word and name of
the Lord Jehovah, that all thy sins whatsoever they be, though never so many
grievous or great, be fully and freely pardoned, released and forgiven thee, by
the mercy of God in Jesus Christ, thy only Lord and sweet Savior, in whom
thou do undoubtedly believe: as truly as the Lord lives he will not have
thee die the death, but has verily purposed, determined and decreed, that thou
shall live with him for ever.


Neo. O, Sir, If I have as good warrant to apply this saying to my self, as Mr.
Bradford had to apply it to himself, I am a happy man.


Evan. I tell you from Christ, and under the hand of his spirit, that your
person is accepted, your sins are done away, and you shall be saved: Hookers
poor doubt. Christ. page 52.
and if an Angel from Heaven should tell you otherwise, let him be accursed:
therefore you may (without doubt) conclude, that you are a happy man: For by
means of this your matching with Christ, John 17.21.
you are become one with him, and one in him, you dwell in him, and he in you:
He is your welbeloved, and you are his: 1 John 4.13. Cant. 2.16.
so that the marriage union betwixt Christ and you, is more then a bare notion,
or apprehension of your mind; for it is a spiritual, real union, it is an
union betwixt the nature of Christ, Hookers Souls union, page 6, 7, 9, 10.
God and man, and you, it is a knitting and closing not only of your
apprehension with a Savior, but also of your soul with a Savior, Tindall
Parab. wicked Mam. page 75.
whence it must needs follow, that you cannot be damned, except Christ be
damned with you; neither can Christ be saved, except you be saved with him. And
as by means of corporal marriage all things become common betwixt man and
wife, Doubting Christian, page 154.
even so, by means of this spiritual marriage, all things become common
betwixt Christ and you, for when Christ has married his spouse unto himself,
he passes over all his estate unto her, so that whatsoever Christ is or has
you may boldly challenge as your own, 1 Cor. 1.30.
He is made unto you of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption, and surely by virtue of this near union it is, that as Christ is
called the Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23.6. so is the Church called the Lord
our righteousness, Jer. 35.16. You may by virtue of this union confidently
take unto your self as your own Christ, Barnardine Ochine in his Sermon. how a
Christian should make his last Will. 1 Cor. 3.22.
watching, abstinence, travails prayers, persecution, slanders, his tears, his
sweat, his blood, and all that ever he did and suffered in three and thirty
years, with his Passion, Death, Resurrection and Ascension, for they are all
yours, and as Christ passes over all his estate unto his spouse, so does he
require, that she should pass over all unto him, wherefore you being now
married unto Christ, you must give all that you have of your own unto him, and
truly you have nothing of your own but sin, and therefore you must give him
that, Barnardine Ochine in his Sermon, how a Christian should make his last
Will.
say thou unto Christ without fear, I give to thee my dear husband, my
unbelief, my mistrust, my pride, my arrogancy, my ambition, my wrath, my
anger, my envy, my covetousness, my evil thoughts, affections and desires, I
make a bundle of these and all my other offenses, and give them unto thee, thus
was Christ made sin for us which knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21.
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him: now then, says
Luther, let us compare these things together, and we shall find inestimable
treasure, Christ is full of all grace, life and saving health, and the soul is
fraught full of all sin, death and damnation, but let faith come betwixt these
two, Christian Liberty, p. 21.2^.
and it shall come to pass that Christ shall be laden with sin, death and
hell, and unto the soul shall be imputed, grace, life and salvation, who then,
says he is able to value the royalty of this marriage accordingly, Page 24.
who is able to comprehend the glorious riches of this grace, where this rich
and righteous husband Christ, does take unto wife this poor and wicked harlot,
redeeming her from all evils, and garnishing her with all his own jewels, Page
25.
so that you (as the same Luther says) through the assuredness of your faith
in Christ your husband, are delivered from all sins made safe from death,
guarded from hell, and endowed with the everlasting righteousness* life and
saving health of your husband Christ, and therefore you are now under the
covenant of grace, and freed from the Law, as it is the covenant of works for
as M. ball truly says, On the new Covenant. page 15.
at one and the same time, a man cannot be under the covenant of works and the
covenant of grace.


Neo. Sir, I do not yet well know how to conceive of this freedom from the
Law, as it is the covenant of works, and therefore I pray you make it as plain
to me as you can.


Evan. For the true and clear understanding of this point, you are to consider
that when Jesus Christ the second Adam, had in the behalf of all his chosen
perfectly fulfilled the Law, as it is the covenant of works, divine justice
delivered that bond in to Christ, Col. 2.14.
who utterly cancelled that handwriting, so that none of his chosen were to
have any more to do with it, nor it with them and now you by your believing in
Christ having manifested, Ephesians. 1.4.
that you are one that was chosen in him before the foundation of the world:
his fulfilling of that covenant and cancelling of it, is imputed to you, and so
you are acquitted and absolved from all your transgressions against that
covenant, either past, present, or to come, and so you are justified as the
Apostle says, Romans 3.24.
Freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ.


Ant. I pray you Sir, give me leave to speak a word by the way, was not he
justified before this time?


Evan. If he did not believe in Christ before this time, as I conceive he did
not, then certainly he was not justified before this time.


Ant. But, Sir, you know, as the Apostle says, It is God that justifies, and
God is eternal, and as you have showed, Christ may be said to have fulfilled
the covenant of works from all eternity, and if he be Christ's now, then was he
Christ's from all eternity, and therefore, as I conceive, he was justified from
all eternity.


Evan. Indeed God is from all eternity, and in respect of Gods accepting of
Christ's undertaking to fulfill the covenant of works, he fulfilled it from all
eternity, and in respect of Gods electing of him, he was Christ's from all
eternity, Boultons true bounds, p. 2^^.
and therefore it is true in respect of Gods decree: he was justified from all
eternity, and he was justified meritoriously in the death and resurrection of
Christ, but yet he was not justified actually till he did actually believe in
Christ, for says the Apostle, Acts 13.39.
By him, all that believe are justified, so that in the act of justifying,
faith and Christ, must have a mutual relation, and must always concur and meet
together, faith as the action which apprehends, and Christ as the object
which is apprehended, M. John Fox upon election.
for neither does Christ justify without faith, neither does faith except it
be in Christ.


Ant. Truly, Sir, you have indifferently well satisfied me in this point, and
surely I like it mavelous well that you conclude no faith justifies, but
that whose object is Christ.


Eva. The very truth is, thuogh a man believe that God is merciful and true of
his promise, and that he has his elect number from the beginning, and that he
himself is one of that number, yet if this faith do not eye Christ, if it be
not in God as he is in Christ it will not serve turn, for God cannot be
comfortably thought upon out of Christ our mediator, Doctor Sibs Souls
conflict, page 55. Instit. page 155.
for if we find not God in Christ says, Calvin, salvation cannot be known:
wherefore, neighbor Neophytus, I will say unto you as sweet Master Bradford
said unto a gentlewoman in your case, Thus then if you would be quiet and
certain in conscience, then let your faith burst forth through all things, not
only that you have within you, but also whatsoever is in heaven, earth, and
hell, and never rest until it come to Christ crucified, and the eternal
sweet mercy and goodness of God in christ.


Neo. But, Sir, I am not yet satisfied concerning the point you touched before,
and therefore I pray you proceed to show me how far forth I am delivered from
the Law as it is the covenant of works.


Evan. Truly as it is the covenant of works, you are wholly and altogether
delivered and set free from it, you are dead to it, and it is dead to you, and
if it be dead to you, then it can do you neither good nor hurt, and if you be
dead to it, you can expect neither good nor hurt from it: consider man, I pray
you, that, as I said before, you are now under another covenant, to wit, the
covenant of grace, and you cannot be under two covenants at once, neither
wholly nor partly; and therefore, as before you believed you were wholly under
the covenant of works, as Adam left both you and all his posterity after his
fall, so now since you have believed you are wholly under the covenant of grace:
Assure your self then, that no Minister or Preacher of Gods Word has any
warrant to say unto you hereafter, either do this and this duty contained in
the law, and avoid this, and this sin forbidden in the Law, and God will
justify thee and save thy soul, or do it not and He will condemn thee and
damn thee, no, no, you are now set free, both from the commanding and
condemning power of the covenant of works, so that I will say unto you, as the
Apostle says unto the believing Hebrews, Heb. 12.18, 22, 24.
You are not come to Mount Sinai, that might not be touched, and that burned
with fire, nor unto blackness and darkness, and tempests, but you are come
unto Mount Sion, the City of the living God, and to Jesus the Mediator of the
new Covenant, so that (to speak with holy reverence) God cannot by virtue of
the covenant of wotks, either require of you any obedience, or punish you for
any disobedience, no he cannot by virtue of that covenant so much as threaten
you, or give you an angry word, or show you an angry look, for indeed, he can
see no sin in you as a transgression of that covenant, for says the Apostle,
Where there is no Law, there is no transgression. Romans 4.15.
And therefore though hereafter you do through frailty transgress any or all
the ten Commandments, yet do you not thereby transgress the covenant of
works, there is no such covenant now betwixt God and you, and therefore though
you shall hereafter hear such a voice as this if thou will be saved keep the
commandments, or cursed is every one that continues not in all things which
are written in the book of the Law to do them, nay, though you hear the voice
of thunder, and a fearful noise, nay, though you see blackness and darkness,
and feel a great tempest, that is to say, though you hear us that are
Preachers, according to our commission, Isa. 58.1.
Lift up our voice like a trumpet, in threatening hell and damnation to sinners,
and transgressors of the Law, though these be the words of God, yet are you not
to think that they are spoken to you, no, no, the Apostle assures you, that
there is no condemnation to them that ^^re in Christ Jesus: believe it man,
Romans 8.1.
God never threatens eternal death, after he has once given to a man eternal
life: nay, the truth is, God never speaks to a believer out of Christ, and in
Christ he speaks not a word in the terms of the covenant of works, and if the
Law of it self should presume to ^ome into your conscience, and say herein,
and herein thou have transgressed and broken ^^e, and therefore thou owe so
much, and ^o much to divine Justice which must be satisfied, or else I will
take hold on thee: ^hen answer you and say, O Law, be it known unto thee that
I am now married unto Christ, Greenhams afflicted conscience, p. 70.
and so I am under cover^, and therefore if thou charge me with any debt, thou
must enter thine action against my husband Christ, for the wife is not suable
at the Law but the husband: Barnardine Ochine in his Sermon, how to answer
before the judgment seat.
But the truth is, I through him am dead to thee, o Law, and thou art dead to
me, and therefore justice has nothing to do with me, for it judges according
to the Law: And if it yet reply and say, I but good works must be done, and the
commandments must be kept if thou will obtain salvation: Then answer you and
say, Luthers. Chos. Sermon, p. 99.100.101.
I am already saved before thou came, therefore I have no need of thy
presence, for in Christ I have all things at once, neither need I any thing
more that is necessary to salvation, he is my righteousness, my treasure, and
my work, I confess, O Law that I am neither godly nor righteous, but yet,
Chos. Sermon, page 42.99.
this am I sure of, that he is godly and righteous for me, and to tell thee the
truth, O Law I am now with him in the bridechamber, where it makes no matter
what I am, or what I have done, but what Christ my sweet husband is, has done,
and does for me, and therefore leave off Law to dispute with me, for by faith I
apprehend him who has apprehended me, and put me into his bosom, wherefore I
will be bold to bid Moses with his Tables, and all Lawyers with their books,
and all men with their works hold their peace and give place, so that I say
unto thee, O Law, be gone, and if it will not be gone, then thrust it out by
force.

And if sin offer to take hold of you, as David said his did on him, Psalm.
40.14. then say you unto it, thy strength O sin is the Law, 1 Cor. 15.56. and
the Law is dead to me, and therefore O sin thy strength is gone, and therefore
be sure thou shall never be able to prevail against me, nor do me any hurt at
all.

And if Satan take you by the throat, and by violence draw you before Gods
judgment seat, then call to your husband Christ and say, Lord, I suffer
violence, make answer for me and help me, and by his help you shall be enabled
to plead for your self after this manner: O God the Father, I am thy Son
Christ's, thou gave me unto him, and thou have given unto him, all power both
in heaven and in earth, and have committed all judgment to him, and therefore
I will-stand to his judgment who says, He came not to judge the World but to
save it, and therefore he will save me according to his office, and if the
jury should bring in their verdict that they have found you guilty, then speak
to the Judge, and say, in case any must be condemned for my transgressions, it
must needs be Christ and not I, for albeit I have committed them, Barnardine
Ochine in his Sermon of Predestination.
yet he has undertaken and bound himself to answer for them, and that by his
consent and good will, and indeed he has fully satisfied for them, and if all
this will not serve the turn to acquit you then: Add moreover and say, As a
woman that is conceived with child, must not suffer death because of the
child that is within her: no more must I because I have conceived Christ in
mine heart; though I had committed all the sins in the world. And if death
creep upon you, and attempt to devour you, then say, thy sting o death is sin,
and Christ my husband has fully vanquished sin, and so deprived thee of thy
sting, and therefore do I not fear any hurt that thou, o death, can do unto
me! And thus you may triumph, with the Apostle, saying, Thanks be to God, 1
Cor. 15.56, 57.
who has given me victory through my Lord Jesus Christ. And thus have I also
declared unto you how Christ in the fullness of time* performed that which God
before all time purposed, and in time promised, touching the helping and
delivering of fallen mankind: and so have I also done with the law of faith.


Nom. Then, Sir, I pray you proceed to speak of the law of Christ, and first
let us hear what the law of Christ is?

The law of Christ in regard of substance and matter is all one with the law of
works, or covenant of works, which matter is scattered through the whole
Bible, and summed up in the Decalogue, or ten commandments, Boultons true
bounds, p. 7^.
commonly called the Moral Law; containing such things as are agreeable to the
mind and will of God, to wit, piety toward God, Page 74.
charity toward our Neighbor, and sobriety toward our selves, and therefore
was it given of God to be a true and eternal rule of righteousness, for all men
of all Nations and at all times; Basting Cat. page 9.
so that Evangelicall grace directs a man to no other obedience then that
whereof the law of the ten commandments is to be the rule. Reynolds use of the
Law, page 388.



Nom. But yet, Sir, I conceive, that though (as you say) the law of Christ in
regard of substance and matter be all one with the law of works, yet their
forms do differ.


Evan. True indeed, for (as you have heard) the law of works speaks on this
wise, do this and thou shall live, and if thou do it not, thou shall die the
death: but the law of Christ speaks on this wise, And when I passed by thee,
Ezekiel. 16.6.
and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said unto thee when thou wast in
thy blood live, And whosoever lives and believes in me shall never die: John
6.26.
Be ye therefore followers of God as dear children, Ephesians. 5.1.
and walk in love, as Christ has loved us: And if ye love me, keep my
commandments: John 14.15. Psalm. 89.31, 32, 33.
And if they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments, then will I
visit their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes:
Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take away from him, nor
suffer my faithfulness to fail. Thus you see that both these laws agree, in
saying, (do this) but here is the difference, The one says, do this and
live, and the other says, (live and do this) the one says, do this for
life; the other says, do this from life: the one says, If thou do it not,
thou shall die, the other says, If thou do it not, I will chastise thee with
the rod; the one is to be delivered by God as he is a creator out of Christ,
only to such as are out of Christ; the other is to be delivered by God as* he
is a Redeemer in Christ, only to such as are in Christ: Wherefore, Neighbor
Neophytus, sees that you are now in Christ, beware you receive not the ten
commandments at the hands of God out of Christ, nor yet at the hands of Moses,
but only at the hands of Christ, and so shall you be sure to receive them as
the law of Christ.


Nom. But, Sir, may not God out of Christ deliver the ten commandments as the
law of Christ.


Evan. O no! for God out of Christ stands in relation to man according to the
tenor of the law as it is the covenant of works, and therefore can speak to
man upon no other terms then the terms of that covenant.


Nom. But, Sir, why may not believers amongst the Gentiles receive the ten
commandments as a rule of life, at the hands of Moses, as well as the
believers amongst the Jews did.


Evan. For answer hereunto I pray you consider, that the ten commandments,
were the substance of the law of nature, engraven in the heart of man in
innocence; Boultons true bounds, page 77
and the express Idaea, or representation of Gods own Image; even a beam of
his own holiness: and so they were to have bin a rule of life to him and his
posterity (not being then the covenant of works) and then after they were
become the covenant of works, Perkius on Gal. 4.5. allea^ged by Docto^ Tailor,
Regu^ vitae. page 21
and broken by the first Adam, and kept by the second Adam, then as they were
not the covenant of works; and were made known to Adam and the rest of the
believing Fathers by Visions and Revelations; they became a rule of life to
them until the time of Moses, and as they were delivered by Moses, unto the
believing Jews from the Arc, and so as from Christ, they were a rule of life
to them until the time of Christ's coming in the flesh, and since Christ's
coming in the flesh they have been, and are to be a rule of life both to
believing Jews and believing Gentiles, not as they are delivered by Moses, but
as they are delivered by Christ, for when Christ the Son comes and speaks
himself, then Moses the serva^t must keep silence, according as Moses himself
foretold, (saying) A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, Acts
3.22.
of your brethren like unto me, him shall you hear in all things which he
shall say unto you: and therefore when the Disciples seemed to desire to hear
Moses and Elias to speak on the Mountain Tabor, they were presently taken away,
and a voice came out of the cloud saying, This is my beloved Soune in whom I am
well pleased, Matthew. 17.4, 5.
hear him, as if the Lord had said, you are not now to hear either Moses or
Elias, but my well beloved Son, and therefore I say unto you, hear him: Col.
3.16, 17.
And is it not said, Heb. 1.1. That in these last days God has spoken to us
by his Son, And does not the Apostle say, Let the Word of Christ dwell in you
richly, and whatsoever you do, in word or deed, do all in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the wife must be subject unto the husband as unto CHRIST,
Verse 18.
the child must yield obedience to his parents as unto Christ, Verse 20.
and the believing servant must do his Masters business as Christ's business:
for says the Apostle, ye serve the Lord Christ, yea, says he to the
Galathians, Ephesians. 5.6. Gal. 6.2.
bear ye one another burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.


Ant. Sir, I like it very well, that you say Christ should be a Christians
teacher, and not Moses, but yet I question whether the ten commandments may be
called the Law of Christ, for where can you find them repeated either by our
Savior or his Apostles in the whole New Testament.


Evan. Though we find not that they are repeated in such a method as they are
set down in Exodus and Deuteronomie, yet so long as we find that Christ and
his Apostles did require and command those things that are therein commanded,
and reprove and condemn those things that are therein forbidden, and that both
by their lives and doctrines, it is sufficient to prove them to be the Law of
Christ.


Ant. I think, indeed, they have done so touching some of the commandments,
but not touching all.


Evan. Because you say so, I entreat you to consider.

John 3.19. and the want of it condemned 2 These. 1.8. and the true love of God
required, Matthew. 22.37. and the want of it reproved, John 5.42. and the true
fear of God required, 1 Pet. 2.17. Heb. 12.28. and the want of it condemned,
Romans 3.18. And the true trusting in God required, and the trusting in the
creature forbidden; 2 Cor. 1.9. 1 Timothy 6.17. be not the substance of the first
commandment.

the hearing and reading of Gods word commended, John 5.47. Revel. 1.3. and
prayer required, Romans 12.12. 1 These. 5.17. and singing of Psalms required,
Col. 3.16. James 5.13. and whether Idolatry forbidden, 1 Cor. 10.14, 1 John
5.21. be not the substance of the second commandment.

And consider, thirdly, whether worshipping 15.9. and using vain repetitions in
prayer forbidden, Matthew. 6.7. and hearing of the word only, and not doing
forbidden, James 1.22. and whether worshipping God in spirit and truth
commanded, John 4.24. and praying with the spirit, and with understanding also,
and singing with the spirit, and with understanding also commended, 1 Cor.
14.15. and taking heed what we hear, commanded, Mark 4, 24. be not the
substance of the third commandment.

Consider, fourthly, whether Christ's rising 6.2.9. the Disciples assembling,
and Christ's ^ppearing unto them two several first days of ^he week, John
20.19, 26. And the Disciples ^omming together, and breaking bread, and
^reaching afterward on that day, Acts 20.7. ^ Cor. 16.2. and John's being in
the spirit on ^he Lords day: I say, consider, whether these things do not prove
that the first day of the week is to be kept as the Christians Sab^ath.

Consider, fifthly, whether the Apostles saying, Children obey your parents in
the 6.12. And ^ll those other exhortations given by him, and the Apostle Peter,
both to inferiors and ^uperiours to do their duties either to other, Ephesians.
5.22, 25. Ephesians. 6.4, 5, 9. Col. 3.18.19, ^0, 21, 22, Titus 3.1. 1 Pet. 3.1. 1
Pet. 2.18. ^ say, consider, whether all these places do not prove that the
duties of the fifth commandment, are required in the new Testament.

Here you see are five of the ten commandments, and as for the other five, the
Apostle reckons them up all together, saying; Thou shall not commit adultery,
thou shall not kill, Romans 14.9.
thou shall not steal, thou shall not bear false witness, thou shall not
covet: now judge you whether the ten commandments be not repeated in the new
Testamenr, and so consequently whether they be not the law of Christ, and
whether a believer be not under the law to Christ, or in the law through
Christ, as the Apostles phrase is, 1 Cor. 9.21.


Ant. But yet, Sir, as I remember both Luther and Calvin do speak; as though
a believer were so quite freed from the law by Christ, as that he need not
make any conscience at all of yielding obedience to it.


Evan. I know right well that Luther says, the conscience has nothing to do
with the law or works; On Gal. p. 59.
and that Calvin says, the consciences of the faithful, when the affiance of
their justification before God is to be sought, must raise and advance
themselves above the Law; Institut. p. 403.
and forget the whole righteousness of the Law, and lay aside all thinking upon
works. Now for the true understanding of these two worthy servants of Christ,
two things are to be concluded: First, that when they speak thus of the law, it
is evident they mean only in the case of justification; secondly, that when the
conscience has to do with the law in the case of justification it has to do
with it only as it is the covenant of works, for as the law is the Law of
Christ, it neither justifies nor condemns, and so if you understand it of the
Law, as it is the Covenant of works, according to their meaning, then it is
most true that they say, for why should a man let the Law come into his
conscience, that is, why should a man make any conscience of doing the Law, to
be justified thereby, considering it is a thing impossible, nay, what need has
a man to make conscience of doing the law to be justified thereby, when he
knows he is already justified another way, nay, what need has a man to make
conscience of doing that law that is dead to him, and he to it: has a woman
any need to make any conscience of doing her duty to her husband when he is
dead, nay, when she her self is dead also, or has a debtor any need to make
any conscience of paying that debt which is already fully discharged by his
surety, will any man be afraid of that obligation which is made void, the seal
torn off, Boultons true bounds, page 31
the writing defaced, nay, not only cancelled and crossed, but torn in pieces;
I remember the Apostle says, That if the sacrifices which were offered in the
Old Testament, Heb. 10.1, 2.
could have made the comers thereunto perfect, and have purged the
worshippers, then should they have had no more conscience of sins, that is,
their conscience would not have accused them of being guilty of sins, now the
blond of Christ has purged the conscience of a believer from all his sins,
Chap. 9.14.
as they are transgressions against the covenant of works, and therefore what
needs his conscience be troubled about that covenant, but now I pray you
observe and take notice, that although Luther and Calvin do thus exempt a
believer from the Law in the case of justification, and as it is the law or
covenant of works, yet do they not so out of the case of justification, and as
it is the Law of Christ.

For thus says Luther, out of the matter of justification, On Gal. p. 182.
we ought with Paul, to think reverently of the Law, to commend it highly,
Romans 7.12, 14.
to call it holy, righteous, just, good, spiritual and divine; yea, out of the
case of justification we ought to make a God of it: And in another place, says
he, there is a civil righteousness and a ceremonial righteousness, On Gal.
p. 5.
yea, and besides these, there is another righteousness, which is the
righteousness of the Law, or of the ten commrndements, which Moses teaches,
this also we teach after the doctrine of faith. And in a third place, he having
showed that believers through Christ are far above the Law (adds) howbeit,
Chos. Sermon, page 103.
I will not deny but that Moses shows to them their duties, in which respect
they are to be admonished and urged, wherefore such doctrines and admonitions,
ought to be among Christians, as it is certain there was among the Apostles,
whereby every man may be admonished of his estate and office.

And Calvin having said (as I told you before) that Christians in the case of
justification, must raise and advance themselves above the law, (adds) neither
can any man thereby gather, that the law is superfluous to the faithful, whom
notwithstanding it does not cease to teach, exhort, and prick forward to
goodness, although before Gods Judgment seat it has no place in their
conscience.


Ant. But, Sir, if I forget not, Musculus says, that the law is utterly
abrogated.


Evan. Indeed, Musculus speaking of the ten commandments says, if they be
weak, if they be the letter, if they do work transgression, anger, curse, and
death; Com. Places fol. English, 119, 120.
and if Christ by the law of the spirit of life delivered them that believed in
him, from the law of the letter which was weak to justify, and strong to
condemn, and from curse being made a curse for us, surely they be abrogated.
Now this is most certain, that the ten commandments do no way work
transgression, anger, curse and death; but only as they are the covenant of
works, neither has Christ delivered believers, any otherwise from them then as
they are the covenant of works, and therefore we may assuredly conclude, that
they are no otherwise abrogated then as they are the covenant of works: Neither
did Musculus intend any otherwise, for, says he, in the words following it
must not be understood, that the points of the substance of Moses covenant, are
utterly brought to nothing, God forbid, for a Christian man is not at liberty
to do those things that are ungodly and wicked, and if the doing of those
things which the law forbids do not displease Christ, if they be not much
different yea, contrary, if they be not repugnant to the righteousness which we
received of him: let it be lawful for a christian man to do them, or else not,
but a Christian man doing against those things which be commanded in the
Decalogue, does sin more outragiously, then he that should so do being under
the law, so far off is he from being free from those things that be there
commanded: Wherefore friend Antinomista, if either you or any man else, shall
under a pretense of your being in Christ, exempt yourselves from being under
the law of the ten commandments, as they are the law of Christ, I tell you
truly, it is a shrewd sign you are not yet in Christ, for if you were, then
Christ were in you, and if Christ were in you then would he govern you, and
you would be subject unto him; I am sure, the Prophet Isaiah tells us, Isai.
33.22.
that the same Lord who is our Savior, is also our King and Lawgiver: and
truly he will not be Jesus, a Savior to any but only to those unto whom he is
Christ a Lord; for the very truth is whersoever he is Jesus a Savior, he is
also Christ a Lord: and therefore, I beseech you, examine your self, whether he
be so to you or no?


Ant. Why then, Sir, it seems that you stand upon marks and signs?


Evan. Yea, indeed, I stand so much upon marks and signs, that I say unto you
in the words of the Apostle John, 1 John 3.10.
in this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil:
whosoever does not righteousness is not of God; for, says Luther, he that is
truly baptized, is become a new man, and has a new nature, Chos. Sermon, page
142.
and is endued with new dispositions, and loves, lives, speaks and does far
otherwise then he was wont or could do before: For says godly Tindall, God
works with his word, Tindall Parab. wicked Mam. page 65.66.
and in his word, and brings faith into the hearts of his elect, and loses
the heart from sin, and knitteth it to God, and gives him power to do that
which was before impossible for him to do, and turns him into a new nature.
And therefore, says Luther, in another place, here in works are to be extolled
and commended in that they are fruits and signs of faith, Chos. Sermon, page
197.
and therefore he that has not regard how he leads his life, that he may
stop the mouths of all blamers and accusers, and clear himself before all,
and testify that he has, lived, spoken, and done well, is not yet a
Christian, how then says Tindall, again, dare any man think that Gods favor
is on him, Parab. wicked Mam. page 68.
and Gods Spirit within him, when he feels not the working of his spirit, nor
himself disposed to any good thing.


Ant. But by your favor, Sir, I am persuaded that many a man deceives his own
soul by these marks and signs.


Evan. Indeed, I must confess, with Master Boulton, Discourse of true
happiness, page 35.
and Master Dyke, that in these times of Christianity, a reprobate may make a
glorious profession of the Gospel, and perform all duties and exercises of
Religion, On the heart, page 111.
and that in outward appearance, with as great spirit and zeal as a true
believer, yea, he may be made partaker of some measure of inward
illumination, and have a shadow of true regeneration, there being no grace
effectually wrought in the faithful, a resemblance whereof may not be found in
the unregenerate, and therefore I say if any man pitch upon the sign without
the thing signified by the sign, that is, if he pitch upon his graces (or
gifts rather) and duties, and conclude assurance from them, as they are in him
and come from him without having reference to Jesus Christ as the root and
fountain of them, then are they deceitful marks and signs, but if he look
upon them with reference to Jesus Christ, then are they not deceitful, but
true evidences and demonstrations of faith in Christ, and this a man does when
he looks upon his outward actions, as flowing from the inward actions of his
mind, and upon the inward actions of his mind, as flowing from the habits of
grace within him, and upon the habits of grace within him, as flowing from his
justification, and upon his justification, as flowing from his faith, and upon
his faith, as given by, and embracing Jesus Christ, thus I say, if he rests
not till he come to Christ, his marks and signs are not deceitful but true.


Ant. But, Sir, if an unbeliever may have a resemblance of every grace that is
wrought in a believer, then it must needs be a hard matter to find out the
difference, and therefore, I conceive, it is best for a man not to trouble
himself at all about marks and signs.


Evan. Give me leave to deal plainly with you, in telling you, that although
we cannot say every one that has a form of godliness has also the power of
godliness, yet we may truly say, that he who has not the form of godliness
has not the power of godliness, for though all be not gold that glistereth;
yet all gold does glister: and therefore I tell you truly, if you have no
regard to make the Law of Christ your rule, by endeavoring to do what is
required in the ten Commandments, and to avoid what is there forbidden, it is
a very evil sign, and therefore I pray you consider of it.


Ant. But, Sir, You know the Lord has promised to write his Law in a believers
heart, and to give him his Spirit to lead him into all truth, and therefore he
has no need of the Law written with paper and ink, to be a rule of life to
him, neither has he any need to endeavor to be obedient thereunto as you say.


Evan. Indeed, says Luther, the matter would even so fare as you say, if we
were perfectly and altogether the inward and spiritual men, Christian Liberty,
p. 39.
which cannot be in any wise before the last day, at the rising again of the
dead, so long as we be clothed with this mortal flesh, we do but begin and
proceed onwards in our course toward perfection, which will be consummated in
the life to come, and for this cause, the Apostle Romans 8. dorh call this the
first fruits of the spirit which we do enjoy in this life, the truth and
fullness of which we shall receive in the life to come, and therefore says he
(in another place) it is necessary so to preach to them, Chos. Sermon, page 246.
that have received the doctrine of faith that they might be stirred up to go
on in good life which they have embraced, Page 297.
and that they suffer not themselves to be overcome, by the assaults of the
raging flesh; for we will not so presume of the doctrine of faith, as if that
being had, every man might do what he listed, no, we must earnestly endeavor
our selves that we may be without blame, and when we cannot attain thereunto we
must fly to prayer, and say before God and man, forgive us our trespasses: And
says Calvin, Instit. page 162.
one proper use and end of the Law concerning the faithful, in whose hearts
lives and reigns the Spirit of God. for although, they have the Law written
and engraven in their hearts by the finger of God, yet is the Law to them a
very good means whereby they may daily better and more assuredly learn what is
the will of the Lord, and let none of us exempt himself from rhis need, for no
man has hitherto atteined to so great wisdom, but that he has need to be
daily instructed by the Law, and herein Christ differs from us, that the
Father has poured out upon him the infinite abundance of his Spirit; Calvin
on John 3.34.
but whatsoever we do receive it is so by measure that we have need one of
another: now mind it I pray you, if believers have the Spirit but in measure,
and know but in part, then have they the Law written in theit hearts but in
measure and in part, 1 Cor. 13 9.
and if they have the law written in their hearts, but in measure and in part,
then have they not a perfect rule within them, and if they have not a perfect
rule within them, then have they need to have a rule without them, and
therefore doubtless the strongest believer of us all had need to harken to the
advice of godly Tindall, who says, seek the Word of God in all things, In his
works, page 86.
and without the Word of God do nothing: and says another godly and
Evangelicall Writer, my brethren, let us do our whole endeavor to do the
will of God, as it becomes good children, and beware that we sin not as near
as we can.


Ant. Well, Sir, I cannot tell what to say, Benefit of Christ's death, page 85.
but (me thinks) when a man is perfectly justified by faith, it is a very
needless thing for him to endeavor to keep the law, and to do good works.


Evan. I remember Luther says, that in his time there were some that did
reason after the like manner, if faith say, they do accomplish all things, and
if faith be only and alone sufficient unto righteousness, Christian Liberty,
p. 39.
to what end then are we commanded to do good deeds; we may go play us then,
and work no working at all: to whom he makes an answer, saying, (not so ye
ungodly not so) And there were others that said, If the law do not justify,
then is it in vain and of none effect; On Gal. p. 150.
yet is it not therefore true (says he) for like as this consequence is
nothing worth, money does not justify, or make a man righteous, therefore it
is unprofitable: the eyes do not justify, therefore they must be plucked out,
the hands make not a man righteous, therefore they must be cut off, so is this
naught also; the law does not justify, therefore it is unprofitable, we do not
therefore destroy and condemn the law, because we say it does not justify,
but we say with Paul, the law is good, if a man do rightly use it, 1 Timothy 1.8.
and that this is a faithful saying: That they which have believed in God
might be careful to mayntaine good works, Titus 3.8.
these things are good and profitable unto men.


Neo. Truly, Sir, for mine own part I do much marvel, that this my friend
Antinomista, should be so confident of his faith in Christ, and yet so little
regard holiness of life and keeping of Christ's commandments, as it seems he
does: for I give the Lord thanks, I do now in some small measure believe that
I am by Christ freely and fully justified, and acquitted from all my sins: and
therefore have no need either to eschew evil or do good for fear of
punishment, or hope of reward, and yet (me thinks) I find my heart more
willing and desirous to do what the Lord commands, and to avoid what he
forbids then ever it was before I did thus believe, surely, Sir, I do perceive
that faith in Christ is no hinderance to holiness of life, as I once thought
it was.


Evan. Neighbor Neophytus, if our friend Antinomista, do content himself with
a mere Gospel knowledge, in a notionary way, and have run out to fetch in
notions from Christ, and yet is not fetched in by the power of Christ, let us
pity him and pray for him, and in the mean time, I pray you know that true
faith in Christ is so far from being a hinderance from holiness of life and
good works, that it is the only furtherance, for only by faith in Christ, a
man is enabled to exercise all Christian graces a-right, and to perform all
Christian duties a-right, which before he could not. As for example, before a
man believe Gods love to him in Christ, though he may have a kind of love to
God, as he is his creator and preserver; and gives him many good things for
this present life: yet if God do but open his eyes to see what condition his
soul is in; that is, if he do but let him see that relation that is betwixt God
and him, according to the tenor of the conant of works, then he conceives of
him as an angry Judge, armed with justice against him, and must be pacified by
the works of the law, whereunto he finds his nature opposite and contrary; and
therefore he hates both God and his law, and does secretly wish and desire
there were neither God nor law, and though God should now give unto him never
so many temporal blessings, yet could he not love him: for what malefactor
could love that Judge or his law from whom he expects the sentence of
condemnation? though he should feast him at his table, with never so many
dainties; But after that the kindness and love of God his Savior has
appeared, not by works of righteousness that he has done, Titus 3 4, 5.
but according to his mercy he saved him, that is, when as by the eye of faith
he sees himself to stand in relation to God, according to the tenor of the
covenant of grace, then he conceives of God, as a most merciful and loving
Father to him in Christ, that has freely pardoned and forgiven him all his
sins, and quite released him from the covenant of works; and by this means, the
love of God is shed abroad in his heart through the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.5.
which is given to him, and then he loves God, 1 John 4.19.
because he first loved him: for as a man sees and feels by faith the love
and favor of God toward him in Christ his Son, so does he love again both God
and his law: and indeed it is impossible for any man to love God, Dyke on
Repentance. p. 9.
till by faith he know himself loved of God.

Secondly, though a man before he believe Gods love to him in Christ, may have
a great measure of legal humiliation, compunction, sorrow and grief, and be
brought down (as it were) to the very gate of hell, and feel the very
flashings of hell fire in his conscience for his sins; yet is it not because
he has thereby offended God, but rather because he has thereby offended
himself, that is, because he has thereby brought himself into the danger of
eternal death and condemnation: but when once he believes the love of God to
him in Christ, in pardoning his iniquity, and passing by his transgression,
then he sorrows and grieves for the offense of God by the sin, reasoning thus
with himself, and is it so indeed, has the Lord given his own Son to death
for me, who has been such a vile, sinful wretch, and has Christ borne all my
sins? Dyke of Repentance, p. 21
and was he wounded for my transgressions? o then the working of his bowels!
the stirring of his affections, the melting and relenting of his repenting
heart, then he remembers his own evil ways, Ezekiel. 36.31.
and his doings that were not good, and loathes himself in his own eyes, Zach.
12.1^.
for all his abominations, and looking upon Christ whom he has pierced, he
mournes bitterly for him, as one mourns for his only son, thus when faith
has bathed a man's heart in the blood of Christ, it is so mollified that it
quickly dissolues into the tears of godly sorrow, so that if Christ do but
turn and look upon him, o then with Peter, he goes out and weeps bitterly! and
this is true gospel mourning, and this is right evangelicall repenting

Thirdly, Though before a man do truly believe in Christ, he may so reform
his life and amend his ways, that as touching the righteousness which is of
the Law, he may be with the Apostle blameless, Phil. 3.6.
yet being under the covenant of works, all the obedience that he yields to the
Law, all his leaving of sin and performance of duties, all his avoiding of what
the law forbids, and all his doing of what the law commands, is begotten by the
law of works, of Hagar the bondwoman, by the force of self-love, and so indeed
they are the fruit and works of a bond-servant that is moved and constrained to
do all that he^ does for fear of punishment and hope of reward: For, says
Luther, The Law given on mount Sinai, On Gal. p. 218.
which the Arabians call Agar, begeteth none but servants, and so indeed, all
that such a man does is but hypocrisy, for he pretends the serving of God,
whereas indeed he intends the serving of himself, and how can he do
otherwise? for whilst he wants faith he wants all things He is an empty vine,
Hosea 10:1.
and therefore must needs, bring forth fruit unto himself, till a man be
served himself, he will not serve the Lord Christ; nay, whilst he wants faith,
he wants the love of Christ, and therefore, he lives not to Christ but to
himself, because he loved himself: And hence surely we may conceive it is
that Doctor Preston says, all that a man does, Of Love, p. 19
and not out of love is out of hypocrisy, wheresoever love is not, there is
nothing but hypocrisy in such a man's heart.

But when a man through the hearing of faith receives the Spirit of Christ,
Gal. 3.2.
that spirit, according to the measure of faith, writes the lively law of love
in his heart, (as Tindall sweetly says) whereby he is enabled to work freely
and of his own accord without the coaction or compulsion of the Law, for that
love, wherewith Christ, or God in Christ, has loved him, and which by faith is
apprehended of him, will constrain him to do so according to that of the
Apostle, the love of Christ constrains us, that is, 2 Cor. 5.14. Doctor
Preston of Love, page 29.
it will make him to do so whether he will or no, he cannot choose but do
it, I tell you truly, answerably as the love of Christ is shed abroad in the
heart of any man, it is such a strong impulsion, that it carries him on to
serve and please the Lord in all things, according to the saying of an
evangelicall man: The will and affection of a believer, according to the
measure of faith, Towns Assertion of Grace, page 131.
and the spirit received sweetly quickens and bends to choose, affect and
delight in what ever was good and acceptable to God or man, the Spirit freely
and cheerfully moving and inclining him to keep the law without fear of hell,
or hope of heaven, Page 138.
for a christian man, says sweet Tindall, works only because it is the will
of his Father, for after that he is overcome with love and kindness, he seeks
to do the will of God, Pathway to holy Scripture, page 383.
which indeed is a christian man's nature, and what he does, he does it freely,
after the example of Christ as a natural son, ask him why he does such a
thing, why, says he, It is the will of my Father* and I do it that I may
please him, for indeed love desires no wages, it is wages enough to it self,
it has sweetness enough in it self, it desires no addition, Doctor Preston
of Love, page 28.
it pays his own wages, and therefore it is the true child like, obedience
being begoten by faith of Saraah the freewoman, by the force of Gods love, and
so it is indeed the only true, and sincere obedience, for, says Doctor
Preston, to do a thing in love, is to do it in syncerity, and indeed there is
no other def^inition of syncerity, that is the best way to know it by.


Evan. But stay, Sir, I pray you, would you not have believers to eschew evil
and do good for fear of hell, or hope of heaven.


Evan. No indeed, I would not have any believer to do either the one or the
other, for so far forth as they do so, their obedience is but slavish, and
therefore, though when they were first awaked and convinced of their misery and
set foot forward to go on in the way of life, they with the prodigal would be
hired servants yet when by the eye of faith, they see the mercy and indulgence
of their heavenly Father in Christ running to meet them and embrace them, I
would have them with him to talk no more of being hired servants, I would have
them so to wrestle against doubting, and so to exercise their faith, as to
believe, that they are by Christ delivered from the hands of all their ^nemies,
both the Law, sin, wrath, death, ^he devil and hell; Luke 1.74, 75^
that they may serve the Lord without fear, in holiness and righte^usnesse
all the days of their lives, I would ^ave them so to believe Gods love to them
^ Christ; as that thereby they may be con^trained to obedience.


Nom. But, Sir, you know that our Sa^iour says, Fear him that is able to
destroy ^oth soul and body in hell: Matthew. 10.28.
And the Apostle ^yth, We shall receive of the Lord, Col. 3.24.
the reward (...) the inheritance, and is it not said, that Moses ^ad respect
unto the recompense of reward. Heb. 11.26.



Evan. Surely, the intent of our blessed ^aviour in that first Scripture, is to
teach all ^elievers, that when God commands one (...), and man another; they
should obey ^od, and not man: rather then to exhort ^^em to eschew evil for
fear of Hell. And as for those other Scriptures by you al^^aged, if you mean
reward, and the means (...) obtayn that reward in the Scripture sense, (...) it
is another matter, but I had thought, (...) had meant in our common sense, and
not (...) the Scripture sense.


Nom. Why, Sir, I pray you what diffe^^nce is there, betwixt reward and the
means to obteyn the reward in our common sense, and in the Scripture sense.


Evan. Why, reward in our common sense, is that which is conceived to come from
God, or to be given by God, which is, a fancying of Heaven under carnal
notions, beholding it as a place where there is freedom from all misery and
fullness of all pleasures and happiness, and to be obtained by our own works
and doings. But reward in the Scripture sense, is not so much, that which comes
from God, or is given by God; as that which lies in God: even the full fruition
of God himself in Christ. Genesis 15.1.
I am, says God to Abraham, thy shield and thy exceeding great reward: Psalm.
73.25.
And whom have I in heaven but thee, says David, And there is none upon earth
that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 17.15.
and I shall be satisfied, when I awake with thy likeness. And the means to
obtain this reward is not by doing, but by believing: even by drawing near
with a true heart in the full assurance of faith, Heb. 10.22.
and so, indeed, it is given freely: And therefore, you are not to conceive of
that reward which the Scripture speaks of, as if it were the wages of a
servant, but as it is the inheritance of sons, and when the Scripture seems
to induce believers to obedience, by promising this reward; you are to
conceive, that the Lord speaks to believers, as a father does to his young
son, do this or that, and then I will love thee, whereas we know, Tindall
Parab. wicked Mam. page 89. 1 John 4.19.
that the father loves the son first, and so does God; and therefore this is
the voice of believers, We love him, because he first loved us, the Lord does
pay them, or at least gives them a sure earnest of their wages before he bid
them work, and therefore the contest of a believer, (according to the measure
of his faith) is not what will God give me, but what shall I give God; What
shall I render unto the Lord, Psalm. 16.12.
for all his goodness, for thy loving kindness is before mine eyes, Psalm.
26.3.
and I have walked in thy truth.


Nom. Then, Sir, it seems, that holiness of life and good works, are not the
cause of eternal happiness, but only the way thither.


Evan. Do you not remember that our Lord Jesus himself says, I am the way,
John 14.6.
the truth, and the life: And does not the Apostle say to the believing
Colossians, Col. 2.6. Elton on the Text.
As ye have received Jesus Christ the Lord, so walk in him, that is: As you
have received him by faith, so go on in your faith, and by his power walk in
his Commandments; so that good works (as I conceive) may rather be called a
believers walking in the way to eternal happiness, then the way it self, but
however this we may assuredly conclude; that the sum and substance both of
the way, and walking in the way consist in the receiving of Jesus Christ by
faith, and in yielding obedience to his law, according to the measure of that
receiving.


Neo. Sir, I am persuaded, that through my neighbor Nomistas asking you these
questions, you have been interrupted in your discourse, in showing how faith
does enable a man to exercise his christian graces, and perform his christian
duties aright: And therefore I pray you go on.


Evan. What should I say more? for the time would fail me to tell, how that
according to the measure of any man's faith, is his true peace of conscience,
for says the Apostle, Romans 5.1.
being justified by faith we have peace with God: yea, says the Prophet
Isaiah, Thou will keep him in perfect peace, Isai. 26.3.
whose mind is stayed on thee; because he trusts in thee, here there is a
sure and true grounded peace: therefore it is of faith, says the Apostle, that
it might be by grace, Romans 4.16.
and that the promise might be sure to all the seed: and answerably to a man's
believing, that he is justified fully by Gods grace through that redemption
that is in Jesus Christ, Romans 3.24.
is his true humility of spirit, so that although he be endued with excellent
gifts and graces, and though he perform never so many duties, he denies
himself in all, he does not make them as ladders for him to ascend up into
Heaven by: But desires to be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness
which is of the law, Phil. 3.9.
but that which is through the faith of Christ, he does not think himself to
be one step nearer to Heaven for all his works and performances; and if he
hear any man praise him for his gifts and graces, he will not conceit that he
has obtained the same by his own industry and pains taking, as some men have
proudly thought, neither will he speak it out as some have done, saying, these
gifts and graces have cost me something, I have taken much pains to obtain
them, but he says, Not I, but by the grace of God, 1 Cor. 15.10.
I am that I am, and not I, but the grace of God that was with me: And if he
behold an ignorant man, or a wicked liver, he will not call him carnal wretch,
or profane fellow; nor say, stand by thy self, come not near to me, Isai.
65.6.
for I am holier then thou (as some have said) but he pitieth such a man, and
prays for him, and in his heart he says, concerning himself, who makes thee
to differ: 1 Cor. 4.7.
And what have thou, that thou have not received?

And thus I might go on and show you how according to any man's faith is his
true joy in God, and his true thankfulness to God, and his patience in all
troubles and afflictions, and his contentedness in any condition, and his
willingness to suffer, and his cheerfulness in suffering, and his
contentedness to part with any earthly thing, yea, according to any man's faith
is his ability to pray aright, Romans 11.14.
to hear or read the Word of God aright, to receive the Sacrament with profit
and comfort, and to do any duty either to God or man after a right manner, Heb.
4.2.
and to a right end, yea, according to the measure of any man's faith is his
love to Christ, and so to man for Christ's sake, and so consequently, his
readiness and willingness to forgive an injury, yea, to forgive an enemy, and
to do good to them that hate him, and the more faith any man has, the less
love he has to the world, or the things that are in the world, to conclude,
the greater any man's faith is, the more fitter he is to die, and the more
willing he is to die.


Neo. Well, Sir, now I do perceive that faith is a most excellent grace, and
happy is that man that has a great measure of it.


Evan. The truth is, faith is the chief grace that Christians are to be
exhorted to get and exercise, and therefore when the people asked our Lord
Christ what they should do to work the work of God, he answered and said,
this is the work of God, That ye believe on him, John 6.29.
whom he has sent speaking, as if there were no other duty at all required but
only believing, for indeed, to say as the thing is, believing includes all
other duties in it, and they spring all from it, and therefore, says one,
Preach Faith, and preach all: Whilst I bid man believe says learned Rollock, I
bid him do all good things: for, says Doctor Preston, Rollock on John.
truth of belief will bring forth truth of holiness: if a man believe, works
of sanctification will follow, for faith draws after it, inherent
righteousness and sanctification, wherefore (says he) if a man will go about
this great work to change his life to get victory over any sin* that it may
not have dominion over him, I cannot certainly direct you in what page to find
all this, because the several Impressions do alter the pages, but in that Book
where I had it, is in p. 330.340, 344, 346.
to have his conscience purged from dead works, and to be made partaker of the
divine nature, let him not go about it as a moral man, that is, let him not
consider what Commandments there are, what the rectitude is which the Law
requires, and how to bring his heart to it, but let him go about it as a
Christian, that is, let him believe the promise of pardon in the blood of
Christ, and the very believing the promise, will be able to cleanse his heart
from dead works.


Neo. But I pray you, Sir, whence has faith its power and virtue to do all
this?


Evan. Even from our Lord Jesus Christ for faith does ingraft a man, who is by
nature a wild olive branch, into Christ as into the natural olive, and
fetches sap from the root Christ, Wards life of Faith, p. 6, 7, 8 74, 75.
and thereby makes the tree bring forth fruit in its kind, yea, faith fetches
a supernatural efficacy from the death and life of Christ, by virtue whereof
it metamorphoseth the heart of a believer, and creates and infuseth into him
new principles of actions, so that what a treasure of all graces Christ has
stored up in him, faith dreyneth and draws them out to the use of a believer,
being as a conduite cock, that waters all the herbs in the garden, yea,
faith does apply the blood of Christ to a believers heart, and the blood of
Christ has in it, not only a power to wash from the guilt of sin, but to
cleanse and purge likewise from the power and stain of sin, and therefore says,
godly Hooker, if you would have grace, you must first of all get faith, and
that will bring all the rest, Poor doubting Christian, Page 159.
let faith go to Christ and there is meekness, patience, humility and
wisdom, and faith will fetch all them to the soul, therefore says he, you
must not look for sanctification, Page 154.
till you come to Christ in vocation.


Nom. Truly, Sir, I do now plainly see that I have been deceived, and have
gone a wrong way to work, for I verily thought that holiness of life must go
before faith, and so be the ground of it, and produce and bring it forth,
whereas I do now plainly see that faith must go before, and so produce and
bring forth holiness of life.


Evan. I remember a man who was much enlightened in the knowledge of the
Gospel, says, there be many that think that as a man chooses to serve a
Prince, so men choose to serve God, so likewise they think, that as those who
do best service, Barnardine Ochine in his Sermon of Predestination.
do obtain most favor of their Lord, and as those that have lost it, the more
they humble themselves, the sooner they recover it, even so they think the case
stands betwixt God and them, whereas, says he, it is not so but clean
contrary, for he himself says, Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen
you, John 15.16.
and not for that we repent and humble our selves, and do good works, he
gives us his grace, therefore we repent, humble our selves, do good works,
and become holy: the good thief on the cross was not illuminated because* he
did confess Christ, but he did confess Christ because he was illuminated;
for, says Luther, the tree must first be, and then the fruit, for the apples
make not the tree, but the tree makes the apples, so faith first makes the
person, On Gal. p. 124.
which afterward brings forth works, therefore to do the Law without faith
is to make the apples of wood, and earth without the tree, which is not to make
apples but mere fantacies, wherefore neighbor Nomista, let me entreat you, that
whereas before you have reformed your life that you might believe, why now
believe that you may reform your life, and do not any longer work to get an
interest in Christ, but believe your interest in Christ, that so you may work,
and then you will not make the change of your life the ground of your faith, as
you have done, and as Master Culverwell says, many do, In his Treatise of
Faith, page 20.
who being asked what caused them to believe, they answer, because they have
truly repented, and changed their course of life.


Ant: Sir, What think you of a Preacher, that in my hearing said, he durst not
exhort nor persuade sinners to believe their sins were pardoned, before he
saw their lives reformed, for fear they should take more liberty to sin.


Evan. Why, what should I say, but that I think, that Preacher was ignorant of
the mystery of faith, for it is of the nature of sovereign waters which so wash
off the corruption of the ulcer, Wards life of Faith, page 59.
that they cool the heat and stay the spreading of the infection, and so by
degrees heal the same: neither did he know that it is of the nature of
cordials, which so comfort the heart and ease it, that they also expel the
noxious humors, and strengthen nature against them.


Ant. And I am acquainted with a professor, though, God knows, a very weak one,
that says, if he should believe before his life be reformed* then he might
believe and yet walk on in his sins, I pray you, Sir, what would you say to
such a man?


Evan. Why, I would say with Doctor Preston, let him if he can, believe truly,
New covenant page 361.
and do this, but it is impossible, let him believe, and the other will
follow, truth of belief will bring forth truth of holiness, for who, if he
ponder it well, can fear a fleshly licentiousness, where the believing soul
is united and married to Christ, the law as it is the covenant of works, and
Christ are set in opposition as two husbands to one wife successively, Towns
Assertion of grace, page 142.
whilst the Law was alive in the conscience, all the fruits were deadly, Romans
7, 5. but Christ taking the same spouse to himself, the law being dead, by his
quickening spirit does make her fruitful to God, and so raises up seed to the
former husband, for materially these are the works of the Law, though produced
by the Spirit of Christ in the Gospel.


Ant. And yet, Sir, I am verily persuaded that there be many both Preachers and
professors in this City of the very same opinion that these two are of.


Evan. The truth is, many Preachers stand upon the praise of some moral
virtue, and do invaigh against some vice of the times, Wards life of Faith,
page 19.
more then upon pressing men to believe, but, says a learned writer, it will
be our condemnation, Williams seven golden Candlesticks, p. 394
if we love darkness rather then light, and desire still to be groping in the
twy-light of morality, the precepts of moral men, then to walk in the true
light of divinity, which is the doctrine of Jesus Christ, Wards life of Faith,
p. 6, 7.
and I pity the prepostrous care and unhappy travail of many well affected,
who study the practice of this and that virtue, neglecting this cardinal and
radical virtue, as if a man should water all the tree and not the root, feign
would they shine in patience, meekness, and zeal, and yet are not careful to
stablish and root themselves in faith which should maintain all the rest, and
therefore all their labor has been in vain, and to no purpose.


Nom. Indeed, Sir, this which you have now said, I have found true by mine own
experience, for I have labored and endeavored to get victory over some
corruptions, as to overcome my dullness, and to perform duties with
cheerfulness, and all in vain.


Evan. And, no marvel, for to pray to meditate, to keep a Sabbath cheerfully,
to have your conversation in Heaven, Wards life of Faith, p. 68, 69, 70.
is as possible for you your self to do as for Iron to swim, or for stones to
ascend upwards; but yet nothing is impossible to faith, it can naturalize these
things unto you, it can make a mole of the earth a soul of Heaven: wherefore,
though you have tried all moral conclusions of proposing, promising,
resolving, vowing, fasting, watching, and self-revenge; yet get you to Christ,
and with the finger of faith, touch but the hem of his garment, and you shall
feel virtue come from him for the curing of all your diseases: Wherefore, I
beseech you, come out of your self unto Jesus Christ, and apprehend him by
faith, as (blessed be God) you see our Neighbor Neophytus has done, and then
shall you find the like loathing of sin, and love to the law of Christ as he
now does: yea, then shall you find your corruptions dying and decaying daily
more and more, as I am confident, he shall.


Neo. I but, Sir, shall I not have power quite to overcome all my corruptions,
and to yield perfect obedience to the law of Christ, as the (Lord knows) I much
desire?


Evan. If you could believe perfectly, then should it be even according to to
your desire, according to that of Luther, On Gal. p. 173.
If we can perfectly apprehend Christ, then should we be free from sin: But
(alas) whilst we are here, 1 Cor. 13.9.
we know but in part, and so believe but in part; and so receive Christ but in
part: and so consequently are holy but in part, witness James the just,
including himself when he says, In many things we sin all, James 3.2.
and John the faithful and loving Disciple when he says, If we say we have no
sin, 1 John 1.4.
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; yea, and witness Luther,
when he says a Christian man has a body, in whose members, as Paul says, sin
dwells and warreth, Romans 7.15. On Gal. p. 144.
and albeit, he fall not into outward and gross sins, as murder, adultery,
theft, and such like, yet is he not free from impatience, and murmuring
against God, yea, says he, I feel in my self, coveteousnesse, lust, anger,
pride and arrogancy, Wards Life of Faith. p. 149.
also the fear of death, heaviness, hatred, murmuring, impenitencie, so that
you must not look to be quite without sin whilst thou remain in this life,
yet this I dare promise you, that as you grow from faith to faith, Souls
effectual calling. p. 610.
so shall you grow from strength to strength in all other graces, wherefore
says godly Hooker, strengthen this grace of faith, and strengthen all; nourish
this, and nourish all, so that if you can attain to a great measure of faith,
you shall be sure to attain to a great measure of holiness, according to the
saying of Doctor Preston, he that has the strongest faith, New covenant page
144.
he that believes in the greatest degree, the promise of pardon and remission
of sins; I dare boldly say, he has the holiest heart, and the holiest life,
And therefore I beseech you labor to grow strong in the faith of the Gospel.
Phil. 1.27.



Neo. O, Sir, I desire it with all my heart and therefore I pray you tell me
what you would have me to do that I may grow more strong.


Evan. Why surely the best advice and counsel that I can give you, is to
exercise that faith which you have, and wrestle against doubtings, and be
earnest with God in prayer for the increase of it: forasmuch, says Luther,
Chos. Sermon, page 72.
as this gift is in the hands of God only, who bestows it when, and on whom
he pleases, thou must resort unto him by prayer and say with the Apostles,
Lord increase our faith, and you must also be diligent in hearing the word
preached, Luke 17.5.
for as faith comes by hearing, so is it also increased by hearing, Romans
19.17.
and you must also read the word, and meditate upon the free and gracious
promises of God, for the promise is the immortal seed, Poor doubting
Christian, Page 148.
whereby the spirit of Christ, begets and increases faith in the hearts of all
his, and lastly, you must frequent the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and
receive it as often as conveniently you can.


Ant. But by your favor, Sir, if faith be the gift of God, and he give it,
when, and to whom he pleases, then I conceive that man's using such means will
not procure any greater measure of it then God is pleased to give.


Evan. I confess it is not the means that will either beget or increase faith,
but it is the Spirit of God in the use of the means that does it, so that as
the means will not do it without the Spirit, neither will the Spirit do it
without the means, where the means may be had, wherefore I pray you do not you
hinder him from using the means.


Neo. Sir, for mine own part, let him say what he will, I am resolved by the
assistance of God, to be careful and diligent in the use of these means which
you have now prescribed, that so by the increasing of my faith, I may be the
better enabled to subject to the will of the Lord, and so walk as that I may
please him, but yet I do perceive, that in regard of the imperfection of my
faith, I shall not be able perfectly to apprehend Christ, and so consequently
shall not be able to live without sin: therefore I pray you, Sir, tell me how
you would have me to be affected, when I shall hereafter through frailty
commit any sin.


Evan. Before I can give you a true and full satisfactory answer to this your
necessary question, I must entreat you to consider with me.

First, that in Romans 6.14. it is said concerning Ye are not under the Law, but
under grace: And in like manner, Romans 1.6. it is said, But now we are delivered
from the Law: And yet it is said concerning a believer, 1 Cor. 9.21. Being not
without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ: And in like manner, Romans 3.31.
it is said, Do we then make void the Law through faith? God for bid, yea, by
faith we establish the Law.

Secondly, That in 1 John 3.6. It is said, That whosoever abides in Christ
sins not: and in like manner, ver. 9. Whosoever is born of God does not
commit sin. And yet it is said concerning such, 1 John 1.8. If we say we have
no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, and in like manner,
Jam. 3.2. In many things we offend all.

Thirdly, That in Numb. 23.21. It is said concerning believers, He (that is to
say God) has not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen perverseness
in Israel, and in like manner, Cant. 4.7. It is said, behold, thou art all
fair my love, and there is no spot in thee, And yet it is said, Prove. 5.21. as
well concerning believers as others, that the ways of man are before the eyes
of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings, and in like manner, Heb. 4.13.
All things are naked and open unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do.

Isai. 27.4. the Lord says concerning believers, Anger is not in me, and in
like manner, Isai. 54.9. it is said, As I have sworn that the waters of Noah
shall no more go over the earth, so have I sworn, that I would no more be
wrath with thee, nor rebuke thee: and yet it is said, Psalm. 10.40. That because
the people went a whoring after their own inventions, therefore was the wrath
of the Lord kindled against this people, insomuch that he abhorred his own
inheritance: And in Deuteronomy. 13.1. Moses a true believer says, The Lord was angry
with him.

Isai. 40.2. The Lord says concerning believers, Speak ye comfortably to
Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her
iniquity is pardoned, for indeed, Christ paid God, till he said he had
enough, Boultons true bounds, page 1*
he was fully satisfied, fully contented, and therefore in Jer. 50.20. it is
said, that in those days, and at that time, the iniquity of Israel shall be
sought for, and there shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall
not be found: for by Christ's death Satan, sin, and Death were conquered and
taken captive, and whatsoever might be brought against us was taken away as
the least bill or scroule, Ball on* the covenant. page 41.
and yet it is said concerning the seed and children of Jesus Christ, Psalm.
89.30. If they forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgments, then will I
visit your transgressions with the rod, and their iniquities with stripes: and
in like manner, 1 Cor. 11.30, it is said, concerning believers, For this cause
many are weak and sickly amongst you, and many sleep.

Now though all these Scriptures speak contrary one to another, yet they all
speak truth, for they be all of them the words of truth, and that it may
appear to you that they do so, I pray you take notice that where believers
are said not to be under the Law, and freed from the Law, it is to be
understood of the Law, as it is the covenant of works, and where it is said
that believers are under the Law, and that faith establishes the Law; it is to
be understood of the Law, as it is the law of Christ, now if believers be not
under, but are freed from the law of works, or covenant of works, then though
they do transgress the law, yet they do not transgress the Covenant of
works, and if they transgress not the covenant of works, then cannot God see
any transgression of theirs, as a transgression against that Covenant. And if
he see it not, then can ye neither be angry with them, nor yet chastise them
for it: But if believers be under the Law, and faith do establish the Law as
it is the Law of Christ, then if they transgress any of the ten Commandments,
they transgress the Law of Christ, and if they transgress the Law of Christ,
then does Christ see it, and if Christ see it, he will be both angry with them,
and chastise them for it.

Now then neighbor Neophytus, to apply these things to you, and so to give you
a particular answer to your question, you are to know that you are not now
under the Law, but are by Christ freed from it, as it is the Law of works, and
therefore whenever you shall hereafter through frailty transgress, any of
the ten Commandments, you are not to think you have thereby transgressed the
Covenant of works, neither are you to conceive, that God either sees your
transgressions, or is angry with you, or does chastise you for them, as they
are any way a transgression of that Covenant, for you being freed from that
Covenant, and so consequently from sinning against it, must needs likewise be
freed from all wrath, anger, miseries, calamities and afflictions, as fruits,
and effects of any transgression, against that Covenant.

But yet whilst you live, you are to conceive that you are under the Law of
Christ, and therefore whenever you do swerve or go away, from the rule of
any of the ten Commandments, you must persuade your self that you have
thereby transgressed the Law of Christ, and that he sees it, and is displeased
with you for it, and if you be not grieved for it, and do not reform it,
Christ will chastise you for it, either by hiding his face, and withdrawing the
light of his countenance from you, and so by depriving you of peace and comfort
in him for a time, or else by some outward loss or cross in this World, for
that is the penalty of the Law of Christ, so that if you, or any believer else,
do transgress the Law of Christ, if need be, 1 Pet. 1.6.
you shall be as sure of temporal corrections, as an unbeliever that
transgresses the covenant of works, shall be of eternal damnation in hell,
wherefore, I beseech you, according to my exhortation, and your resolution,
first, be careful to exercise your faith, and use all means to increase it,
that so it may become effectual working by love, 1 These. 1.3.
for according to the measure of your faith, Gal. 5.6.
will be your true love to Christ, and to his will and commandments, and
according to the measure of your love to them, will be your delight in them,
and your aptness and readiness to do them, and hence it is that Christ
says, John 14.15.
If ye love me keep my commandments, and hence it is, that the believing
soul, according to the measure of its faith, Psalm 40.8.
says with the Psalmist, I delight to do thy will o my God, yea, thy law is
within my heart! for this is the love of God (says that loving Disciple) that
we keep his commandments, 1 John 5 3.
and his commandments are not grievous, nay, the very truth is, nothing will
be more grievous to your soul, then that you cannot keep them as you would; o
this love of God being truly rooted in your heart, will make you say with godly
Joseph, in case you be tempted, as he was, Genesis 39.9.
How can I do this great wickedness. and so sin against God? how can I do
that which I know will displease so gracious a Father, and so merciful a
Savior? no, I will not do it, no, I cannot do it. Secondly, If in case you
be at any time by reason of the weakness of your faith, and strength of your
tentation drawn aside, and prevailed with to transgress any of Christ's
Comandements, then beware that you do not thereupon take occasion to call
Christ's love to you into question, but believe as firmly that he loves you as
dearly as he did before, you thus transgressed, for this is a certain truth, as
no good in you; or done by you, did move, or can move Christ to love you the
more, so no evil in you or done by you, can move him to love you the less, no
assure your self that as he first loved you freely, so will he hereafter heal
your backsliding, and still love you freely, Hosea 14.4. ye, he will love you
unto the end, John 13.1. And therefore as you must be nothing in your self, in
case of your most exact obedience, so must you be all in Christ in case of your
most imperfect and defective obedience, the which if you be, why then the love
of Christ will constrain you to mourn with an evangelicall or Gospel mourning;
reasoning with your self after this manner, and is it so indeed, though I have
thus sinned, yet will the Lord love me never the less for all that, and am I
as much in his favor now, and as sure of erernall happiness with Christ as I
was before I thus sinned, o what a loving Father is this! o what a gracious
Savior is this! o what a wretched man am I to sin against such a God as this!
such a Christ as this! o this will melt your heart, and cause your eyes to drop
down the tears of godly sorrow! yea, this will constrain in you to go unto
your Father, and humbly to confess your sins with the prodigal, and beseech
him to show mercy for the Lords sake, Luke 15.21. Dan. 9.27.
with Daniel, and yet not out of a conceit, that till your sin be pardoned, you
are liable to be condemned for it, for that is the penalty of the law of works,
which you are not now under, but rather out of a true persuasion, that till it
be pardoned, your Father is displeased with you for it, yea, and will whip and
scourge you for it, for that is the penalty of the Law of Christ, which you are
now under; yea, and this will also constrain you to loath your self in your
own sight, for your iniquities: Ezekiel. 36.31.
yea, not only to loath your self for them, but also to leave them, saying
with Ephraim, Hosea 14.8. Isaiah 30.22.
what have I to do any more with Idols? and to cast them away as a menstrous
cloth, saying unto them, get ye hence, and thus will the goodness of God
(being apprehended by faith) lead you to repentance. Romans 2.4.
Thirdly, If after you have thus sinned, either through weakness of faith, or
want of exercising it, ye either do not thus at all, or not so effectually as
you should, and so your loving and wise Father see cause to give you some
unpleasant potion, to bring your sins to remembrance, as he did Joseph's
brethrens, Gen* 42.21. and as was the saying of the widow of Zarephath, 1 King.
17.18. and to purge it. and take it away, as is the phrase of the Holy Ghost,
Isai. 27.9. and to make you partaker of his holiness, as the Apostles phrase
is, Heb. 12.10. Then I beseech you, beware you conceit not, that your
afflictions are penal, proceeding from hatred or vindictive justice, and so as
payments and satisfaction for sins, for that is the penalty of the Covenant of
works, the which you are now delivered from: But rather be persuaded, as the
truth is, that they proceed from Gods fatherly love, and so as medicinal to
heal and cure you of your sins, Revel. 3.19.
and so to make you more obedient and subject to the Law of Christ under which
you now are, for afflictions through Gods blessing, are made special means to
purge out that sinful corruption which is still in the nature of believers,
Culverwell of Faith. p. 30, 31.
and therefore are they in Scripture most aptly compared to medicines, for so
they are indeed to all Gods children, most sovereign medicines to cure all
their spiritual diseases, and indeed we have all of us great need hereof, for
says Luther, we are not yet perfectly righteous, On Gal. p. 66.
for whilst we remain in this life, sin dwells still in the flesh, and this
remnant of sin God purges, wherefore, when GOD has remitted sins, and
received a man into the bosom of grace, Chos. Sermon, page 156.
then does he lay on him all kind of afflictions, and does scour and renew
him from day to day, and to this purpose Tindall truly says, If we look on
the flesh, Obedient Christ man, page 120.
and into the law, there is no man so perfect, that is not found a sinner, nor
no man so pure, that has not need to be purged. Now if you thus conceive of
your afflictions, you will accept of them, and you will with Ephraim, say unto
the Lord, Thou have chastised me, Levit. 26.43.
and I was chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, turn thou me and
I shall be turned, Ier. 31.18.
thou art the Lord my God: surely after that I was turned I repented, and after
that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh, I was ashamed: yea, even
confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth: Verse 19.
yea, and then will you also say with David, Blessed is the man whom thou
chastisest, Psalm. 94.12.
o Lord, and teach him out of the Law! and thus you see, I have endeavored
to give you a satisfying answer to your question.


Neo. And truly, Sir, you have done it very fully, the Lord enable me to
practice according to your direction.


Nom. Sir, in this your answer to his question, you have also answered me, and
given me full satisfaction in diverse points, about which my friend Antinomista
and I have had many a wrangling fit: for if I used to affirm with tooth and
nail (as men use to say) that believers are under the Law, and not delivered
from it, and that they do sin, and that God sees it, and is angry with them,
and does afflict them for it, and that therefore they ought to humble
themselves and mourn for their sins, and confess them, and crave pardon for
them, and yet truly, I must confess, I did not understand what I said, nor
whereof I affirmed; and the reason was because I did not know the difference
betwixt the law, as it is the law of works, and as it is the law of Christ.


Ant. And believe me, Sir, I used to affirm, as earnestly as he, that
believers are delivered from the law, and therefore do not sin, and therefore
God can see no sin in them, and therefore is neither angry with them, nor does
afflict them for sin, and therefore they have no need either to humble
themselves, or mourn, or confess their sins, or beg pardon for them, the which
I believing to be true, could not conceive how the contrary could be true also,
but now I plainly see, that by means of your distinguishing betwixt the law as
it is the law of works, and as it is the law of Christ; there is a truth in
both, and therefore friend Nomista, whenever either you or any man else,
shall hereafter affirm that believers are under the law and do sin, and God
sees it, and is angry with them, and does chastise them for it, and that they
ought to humble themselves, mourn, weep and confess their sins, and beg pardon
for them, if you mean only as they are under the law of Christ, I will agree
with you, and never contradict you again.


Nom. And truly friend Antinomista, if either you or any man else shall
hereafter affirm, that believers are delivered from the law, and do not sin,
and God sees no sin in them, nor is angry with them, nor afflicts them for
their sins, and that they have no need either to humble themselves, mourn,
confess, or crave pardon for their sins, if you mean it only as they are not
under the law of works, I will agree with you and never contradict you again.


Evan. I rejoice to hear you speak these words each to other, and truly now I
am in hope, that you two will come back from both your extremes, and meet my
neighbor Neophytus in the golden Mean, having as the Apostle says, the same
love, being of one accord, and of own mind.


Nom. Sir, For my part, I thank the Lord, I do now plainly see that I have
erred exceedingly, in seeking to be justified, as it were, by the works of the
law, and yet could I never be persuaded to it before this day, nor indeed
should not have been persuaded to it: now had not you so plainly and fully
handled this threefold law, and truly, Sir, I do now unfainedly desire to
renounce my self, and all that ever I have done, and by faith to adhere only
to Jesus Christ, for now I see that he is all in all, o that the Lord would
enable me so to do! and I beseech you, Sir, pray for me.


Ant. And truly, Sir, I must needs confess, that I have erred as much on the
other hand, for I have been so far from seeking to be justified by the works of
the law, that I have neither regarded law nor works, but now I see mine error,
I purpose (God willing) to reform it


Evan. The Lord grant that you may, but how do you neighbor Neophytus, for (me
thinks) you look very heavily.


Neo. Truly, Sir, I was thinking of that place of Scripture where the Apostle
exhorts us to examine our selves, 2 Cor. 13.5.
whether we be in the faith or no: whereby it seems to me, that a man may
think he is in the faith, when he is not, therefore, Sir, I would gladly hear
how I may be sure that I am in the faith,


Evan I would not have you to make any question of it, since you have grounded
your faith upon such a firm foundation as will never fail you, for the promise
of God in Christ is of a tried truth, and never yet failed any man, nor never
will, therefore I would have you to close with Christ in the promise without
making any question, whether you are in the faith or no, for there is an
assurance which arises from the exercise of faith, by a direct act, and that
is when a man by faith directly lays hold upon Christ, and concludes assurance
from thence.


Neo. Sir, I know that the foundation whereon I am to ground my faith remains
sure, and I think I have already built thereon: but yet because, I conceive, a
man may think he has done so when he has not: therefore would I fain know
how I may be assured that I have done so.


Eva. Well, now I understand you what you mean, it seems you do not want a
ground for your believing; but for your believing that you have believed.


Neo. Yea, indeed, that is the thing I want.


Evan. Why, the next way to find out and know this, is to look back and
reflect upon your own heart, and consider what actions have passed through
there; for, indeed, this is the benefit that a reasonable soul has, Doctor
Preston of Faith, page 84.
that it is able to return upon it self, to see what it has done, which the
soul of a beast cannot do: Consider then, I pray you, whether the free and full
promise of God in Christ has not been so cleared unto you, that you had
nothing to object why it did not belong particularly to you: and whether you
have not seen a readiness and willingness in Christ to receive and embrace
you as his beloved Spouse. And whether you have not thereupon consented, and
resolved to take Christ, and to give up yourselfe to him: and whether you have
not since that found in your heart a love to Christ and his law, and a
readiness and willingness to do your duty to God as a child to his father,
freely without fear of hell, or hope of Heaven: now tell me (I pray you truly)
whether you have not found these things in you.


Neo. Yea, indeed, I hope I have in some measure.


Evan. Why, then I may say with the Apostle John, You are of the truth, and may
assure or persuade your heart before God: 1 John 3.19.
Wherefore, says Christ to you, I say unto thee, that thy many sins are
forgiven thee, Luke 7.47.
for thou love much.


Ant. But, Sir, shall he not in so doing turn back from the Covenant of grace,
to the covenant of works, and from Christ, to himself.


Evan. Indeed if he should look upon these things in himself, and thereupon
conclude, that because he has done thus, God has accepted of him and
justified him, and will save him, and so make them the ground of his believing,
this were to turn back from the Covenant of grace to the Covenant of works, and
from Christ to himself, But if he look upon these things in himself, and
thereupon conclude, that because these things are in his heart, Christ dwells
there by faith, and therefore he is accepted of God, and justified, and shall
certainly be saved, and so make them an evidence of his believing, or the
ground of his believing that he has believed, this is neither to turn back
from the Covenant of grace, to the Covenant of works, nor from Christ to
himself, so that these things in his heart being the daughters of faith, and
the offspring of Christ, though they cannot at first produce or bring forth
their mother, Goodwin Christ set ^orth, page 23.
yet may they in time of need nourish her.


Nom. But I pray you, Sir, are there not other things besides these that he
says, he finds in himself that a man may look upon as evidences of his
believing (or as you call them) as grounds of his believing, that he has
believed.


Evan. Yea, indeed, besides these inward qualifications that are in the heart,
there are outward qualifications in the life, as having respect unto all
Christ's Commandments, which a man may look upon as an evidence, provided, that
he be sure it flow from those within.


Nom. But, Sir, how should a man know that?


Evan. The sure and best way to know this is, for a man to examine himself
whether he did first believe in Christ, and then reform his life, and so made
his faith the cause of the change of his life, or whether he did first reform
his life, and then believe, and so made his reformation of life the cause of
his faith, if he be sure he did the former, then may he be sure that his
outward qualifications proceeded from his inward, and so are right and true,
but if he did the latter, then may he be sure that they are wrong and false
evidences.


Nom. Then truly, Sir, I have not as yet any right and true evidences of faith.


Evan. If you have not then as I tell you, it is time to believe, that so you
may have them that are right and true.


Neo. But, Sir, I pray you let me ask you one question more touching this
point, and that is, suppose, that hereafter I should see no outward evidences,
and question whether I had ever any true inward evidences, and so whether I did
ever truly believe or no: What must I do then?


Evan. Indeed, it is possible you may come to such a condition, and therefore
you do well to provide aforehand for it. Now then if ever it shall please the
Lord to give you over to such a condition, first, let me warn you to take heed
of forcing, and constraining your self to yield obedience to Gods
Commandments, to the end you may so get an evidence of faith again, or a
ground to lay your believing that you have believed upon, and so forcibly to
hasten your assurance before the time, for though this be not to turn quite
back to the covenant of works (for that you shall never do) yet is it to turn
aside toward that covenant, as Abraham did, M. Cotton of New England, in his
thirteenth quest.
who after that he had long waited for the promised seed, (though he was before
justified by believing the free promise) yet for the more speedy satisfying of
his faith, he turned aside to go in unto Hagar, who was (as you have heard) a
type of the covenant of works, so that you see this is not the right way: Poor
doubting Christian, Page 37.
but the right way for you in this case, to get your assurance again is, when
all other things fail to look to Christ; That is, go to the word and promise
and leave off and cease a while to reason about the truth of your faith,
Goodwins child of light, p. 194.
and set your heart on work to believe, as if you had never yet done it,
saying, in your heart, well Satan, suppose my faith has not been true
hitherto, yet now will I begin to endeavor after true faith: and therefore, o
Lord! here I cast my self upon thy mercy afresh, For in thee the fatherless
find mercy, Hosea 14.3.
thus I say, hold to the word, go not away, but keep you here, Luke 8.15.
and you shall bring forth fruit with patience.


Neo. Well, Sir, you have fully satisfied the concerning that point, but as I
remember it follows in the same Verse, 2 Cor. 3.5.
Know ye not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
repoobates: wherefore I desire to hear how a man may know that Jesus Christ is
in him.


Evan. Why, if Christ be in a man? he lives in him, as says the Apostle, I
live not, but Christ lives in me.


Neo. But how then shall a man know that Christ lives in him.


Evan. Why, in what man soever Christ lives according to the measure of his
faith he executes his threefold office in him, viz. his Prophetical, Priestly,
and Kingly Office.


Neo. I desire to hear more of this threefold office of Christ, and therefore
(I pray you Sir) tell me, first, how a man may know that Christ executes his
Prophetical office in him.


Evan. Why, so far forth as any man hears and knows that there was a covenant
made, betwixt God, and all mankind in Adam, Job 5.27.
and that it was an equal covenant, and that Gods justice must needs enter
upon the breach of it, and that all mankind for that cause were liable to
eternal death and damnation, so that if God had condemned all mankind, yet
had it been but the sentence of an equal and just Judge, seeking rather the
execution of his justice then man's ruin and destruction, and thereupon takes
it home, and applies it particularly to himself, and so is convinced that he
is a miserable lost and helpless man; I say so far forth as a man does this,
CHRIST executes his Prophetical office in him, in teaching him, and revealing
unto him the covenant of works. And so far forth as any man hears and knows
that God made a covenant with Abraham, and all his believing seed, in Jesus
Christ, offering him freely to all, to whom the sound of the Gospel comes, and
giving him freely to all; that receive him by faith, and so justifies them, and
saves them eternally, and thereupon has his heart opened to receive this
truth, not as a man takes an object, or a theological point into his head,
whereby he is only made able to discourse, but as an habitual, and
practical point, receiving it into his heart, Philip. 1.27.
by the faith of the Gospel, and applying it to himself, and laying his
eternal state upon it, and so setting to his seal that God is true, I say so
far forth as a man does this, CHRIST executes his prophetical office, in him,
in teaching him, and revealing to him the Covenant of grace, and so far forth
as any man hears and knows that This is the will of GOD, even his
sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.
etc. And thereupon concludes that it is his duty to endeavor after it, I say
so far forth as a man does this, Christ executes his prophetical office in
him, in teaching and revealing his law to him, and this I hope, is sufficient
for answer to your first question.


Neo. I pray you, Sir, in the second place tell me how a man may know that
Christ executes his priestly office in him.


Evan. Why so far forth as any man hears and knows that Christ has given
himself as that only absolute and perfect sacrifice, Heb. 9.26.
for the sins of believers, and joined them unto himself by faith, and himself
unto them by his spirit, and so made them one with him, and is now entered into
Heaven it self to appear, Heb. 9.24.
in the presence of God for them: and hereupon is emboldned to go immediately to
God in prayer, as to a father., and meet him in Christ, and present him with
Christ himself, as with a Sacrifice without spot or blemish, I say, so far
forth as any man does this, Christ executes his priestly office in him.


Neo. But, Sir, would you have a believer to go immediately unto God, how then
does Christ make intercession for us at Gods right hand? as the Apostle says
he does, Romans 8.34.


Evan. It is true, indeed, Christ as a public person, representing all
believers. appears before God his Father, Perkins on the Creed, page 356
and wills according to both his natures, and desires as he is man, that God
would for his satisfaction sake, grant unto them whatsoever they ask according
to his will. But yet you must go immediately to God in prayer, for all that,
you must not pitch your prayers upon Christ, and terminate them there, as if he
were to take them and present them to his Father, but the very presenting place
of your prayers must be God himself in Christ, neither must you conceive as
though Christ the Son, were more willing to grant your request then God the
Father, for whatsoever Christ wills, the same also the Father, (being well
pleased with him wills) in Christ, then, I say, and nowhere else, must you
expect to have your petitions granted, and as in Christ and no place else, so
for Christ's sake and nothing else; and therefore I beseech you to beware you
forget not Christ when you go unto the Father to beg any thing which you
desire, either for your self or others, especially when you desire co have any
pardon for sin, you are not to think that when you join with your prayers,
fasting, weeping, and afflicting of your self, that for so doing you shall
prevail with God to hear you and grant your petitions, no, no, you must meet
God in Christ, and present him with his sufferings, your eye, your mind, and
all your confidence, must be therein, and in that be as confident as possibly
you can, yea, expostulate the matter, as it were, with God the Father, and say,
lo, here is the person that has well deserved it, here (...) the person that
wills and desires it, in whom thou have said thou art well pleased; yea, here is
the person that has paid the debt, and discharged the bond for all my sins,
and therefore, o Lord! now it stands with thy justice to forgive me, and thus
if you do, why then you may be assured that Christ executes his Priestly
office in you.


Neo. I pray you, Sir, in the third place show me how a man may know that
Christ executes his kingly office in him.


Evan. Why so far forth as any man hears and knows, That all prwer is given
unto Christ, Matthew. 28.18.
both in heaven and in earth, both to vanquish and overcome all the lusts and
corruptions of believers, and to write his law in their hearts, and hereupon
takes occasion to go unto Christ for the doing of both in him, I say, so far
forth as he does this, why Christ executes his kingly office in him.


Neo. Why then, Sir it seems that the place where Christ executes his kingly
office, is in the hearts of believers.


Evan. It is true indeed, for Christ's Kingdom is not temporal or secular,
Reynolds on Psalm. 110. p. 9.
over the natural lives or civil negotiations of men, but his Kingdom is
spiritual and heavenly over the souls of men, to awe and overruled the hearts,
to captivate the affections, to bring into obedience the thoughts, and to
subdue and pull down strong holds, for when our father Adam transgressed, he,
and we all of us forsook God, and chose the devil for ou^ lord and king, so
that every mothers child of (...) are by nature under the government of Satan,
and he rules over us, till Christ come into our hearts and disposseseth him,
according to the saying of Christ himself, Luke 11.21, 22. When a strong man
armed keeps the Palace, his goods are in peace, that is, says Calvin, Harmony,
page 329.
Satan holds them that are in subjection to him in such bonds and quiet
possession, that he rules over them without resistance: But when Christ comes
to dwell in any man's heart by faith, according to the measure nf faith* he
dispossesseth him, and seats himself in the heart, and roots out and pulls down
all that withstands his government there, and as a valiant Captain he stands
upon his guard, and enables the soul to gather together all its forces and
powers to resist and withstand all its and his enemies, and to set it self in
good earnest against them, when they at any time offer to return again, and he
does especially enable the soul to resist, and set it self against the
principal enemy, even that which does most oppose Christ in his government so
that whatsoever lust or corruption is in a believers heart or soul as most
predominant, CHRIST does enable him to take that into his mind, and to have
most revengefull thoughts against it, and to make complaints to him against it,
and to desire power and strength from him against it, and all because it most
withstands the government of Christ, and is the rankest traitor to Christ, so
that he uses all the means he can to bring it before the judgment seat of
Christ, and there he calls for justice against it; saying, O Lord Jesus
Christ, here is a rebel and a traitor that does withstand thy government in
me, wherefore I pray thee come and execute thy Kingly office in me, and subdue
it, yea, vanquish and overcome it, whereupon Christ gives the same answer that
he did to the Centurion, Matthew. 8.13.
go thy way, and as thou have believed, so be it done unto thee.

And as Christ does thus suppress all other governors but himself in the
heart of a believer, so does he race out, and deface all other laws, and writes
his own there according to his promise, Jer. 31.33. and makes them pliable and
willing to do and suffer his will, and that because it is his will, so that
the mind and will of Christ, laid down in his Word, and manifested in his
Works, is not only the rule of a believers obedience, but also the reason of
it: As I once heard a godly Minister say in the Pulpit, So that he does not
only do that which is Christ's will, M. Caryl at Blackfriers.
but he does it because it is his will.

O that man which has the law of Christ written in his heart, according to the
measure of it, he reads, he hears, he prays, and receives the Sacrament, and
does all the duties required in the first table of the Law, and that because he
knows it is the mind and will of Christ he should do so, yea, he does not
only do the duty of the first table, but of the second also, by virtue of
Christ's command, o that husband, parent, master, or Magistrate, that has the
Law of Christ written in his heart, he does his duty to his wife, child,
servant, and subject, and that because Christ commands it, and so, that wife,
child, servant, or subject that has the law of Christ written in their
hearts, do their duties to their husband, parent, master or governor, and
that because Christ requires it.

And now when you find these things in your heart, why answerably you may
conclude, that Christ executes his kingly office in you.


Neo. Well, Sir, now I do plainly see, that it is no marvail though my heart
has been hitherto restless, since I have sought rest for it, where it is not
to be found.


Evan. My occasions do now begin to call me away from you, nevertheless, you
having begun to speak of the hearts rest, I shall by the Lords assistance, now
at our parting, as a conclusion of this our discourse, speak somewhat of the
souls rest, if you will be pleased to hear me.


Neo. Withal my heart, Sir, but first, I would entreat you to tell me, why you
call the hearts rest, the souls rest.


Evan. Because heart and soul are put oftentimes the one for the other, for
indeed, the heart is the souls chare of state wherein it keeps it residencie.
Wilsons Dictionary, p. 259.
But to come to the point, I would entreat you to consider with me, that when
God at first gave man an elementish body, he did also infuse into him an
immortal soul of a spiritual substance, and though he gave his soul a
local being in his body, yet he gave it a spiritual wel-being in himself, so
that the soul was in the body by location, and at rest in God by union and
communication, and this being of the soul in God at first, was man's true
being, and his true happiness, now man falling from God, God in his justice
left man, so that the actual union and communion that the soul of man had
with God at first is broken off, God and man's soul are parted, and it is in a
restless condition, howbeit, the Lord having seated in man's soul, a certain
character of himself, the soul is thereby made to re-aspire toward that
summum bonum, that chief good, even God himself, and can find no rest no
where, till it come to him.


Nom. But stay, Sir, I pray you, how can it be said that man's soul does
re-aspire toward God the Creator, when as it is evident that every man's soul
naturally is bent toward the creature, to seek a rest there.


Evan. For answer hereunto, I pray you consider, that naturally man's
understanding is dark and blind, and therefore is ignorant what his own soul
does desire, and strongly aspire unto, it knows, indeed, that there is a want
in the soul, but till it be enlightened, it knows not what it is which the
soul wants: for, indeed, the case stands with the soul, as with a child
new born, which child by natural instinct, does gape and cry for nutriment,
yea, for such nutriment as may agree with it tender condition, and if the nurse
through negligence, or ignorance, either give it no meat at all; or else such
as it is not capable of receiving, the child refuses it, and still cries in
strength of desire after the dug: yet does not the child in this estate know by
any intellectual power and understanding, what it self desires: even so man's
poor soul does cry to God as for its proper nourishment, but his
understanding like a blind ignorant nurse, not knowing what it cries for; does
offer to the heart a creature instead of a Creator: thus by reason of the
understanding, together with the corruption of the will, and disorder of the
affections, man's soul is kept by violence from its proper center, even God
himself, o how many souls are there in the world! that are hindered, if not
quite kept from rest in God, by reason that their blind understanding, does
present unto their sensual appetites, varieties of sensual objects.

Is there not many a luxurious persons soul hindered, if not quite kept from
true rest in God, by that beauty which nature has placed in feminine faces;
especially when Satan does secretly suggest into such feminine hearts a desire
of an artificial dressing from the head to the foot: yea, and sometimes
painting the face like their mother Jezabel?

And is there not many a voluptuous Epicures soul hindered, if not quite kept
from rest in God, by beholding the color, and tasting the sweetness of dainty
delicate dishes, his wine red in the cup, and his beer of amber color in the
glass: in the Scripture we read of a certain man that fared deliciously very
day, as if there had been no more but one so ill disposed: but in our times
there are certain hundreds, both of men and women, that do not only fare
deliciously, but voluptuously twice every day, if no more?

And is there not many a proud persons soul hindered, if not quite kept from
rest in God, by the harmonious sound of popular praise; which like a lodestone
draws the vainglorious heart to hunt so much the more eagerly, to augment
the echo of such vain windy reputation?

And is there not many a covetous persons soul hindered, if not quite kept from
rest in God, by the cry of great abundance; the words of wealth, and the glory
of gain?

And is there not many a musical mind hindered, if not quite kept from sweet
comfort in God, by the harmony of artificial concord upon musical instruments?

And how many perfumed fools are there in the world? who by smelling their
sweet apparel, and their sweet nose-gayes, are kept from souls sweetness in
Christ. And thus does Satan like a cunning fisher, beat his, hook with a
sensual object, to catch men with, and having gotten it into their jaws; he
draws them up and down in their sensual contentments, till he has so
drowned them therein, that the peace and rest of their souls in God be almost
forgotten: and hence it is that the greatest part of man's life, and in many
their whole life is spent, in seeking satisfaction to the sensual appetite.


Nom. Indeed, Sir, this which you have said, we may see truly verified in many
men, who spend their days about these vanities, and will afford no time for
religious exercises, no, not upon the Lords day by their good will.


Neo. You say the truth, and yet let me tell you withal, that a man by the
power of natural conscience may be forced to confess that his hopes of
happiness are in God alone, and not in these things, yea, and to forsake
profits and pleasures, and all sensual objects, as unable to give his soul
any true contentment, and fall to the performance of religious exercises, and
yet rest there, and never come to God for rest, and if we consider it either in
the rude multitude of sensual livers, or in the more seemingly religious, we
shall perceive that the religious exercises of men, do strongly deceive, and
strangely delude many men, of their hearts happiness in God.

For the first sort, though they be such as make their belly their best God,
and do no Sacrifice but to Bacchus, Apollo, or Venus, though their conscience
do accuse them, that these things are naught, yet in that they have the name
of Christians put upon them in their baptism, and for as much as they do
often repeat the Lords Prayer, the Apostles Creed, and the ten Commandments,
and in that it may be they have lately accustomed themselves to go to Church,
to hear divine service, and a preaching now and then, and in that they have
diverse times received the Sacrament, they will not be persuaded but that God is
well pleased with them, and a man may as well persuade them that they are not
men and women, as that they are not in a good condition.

And for the second sort, that ordinarily have more humane wisdom and humane
learning then the former sort, and seem to be more holy and devout then the
former sort of sensual, ignorant people, yet how many are there of this sort,
that never pass farther then the outward court of bodily performances, feeding
and feasting themselves as men in a dream, supposing themselves to have all
things, and yet indeed have nothing but only a bladder full, or rather a
brainfull of wind and worldly conceptions.

Are there not some who give themselves to a more special searching and
seeking out for knowledge in Scripture, learnednesse, and Clerklike skill, in
this Art, and that Language, till they come to be able to repeat all the
historical places in the Bible, yea^, and all those texts of Scripture, that
they conceive do make for some private opinion of theirs concerning
Ceremonies, Church Government, or other such circumstantiall points of
Religion, touching which points they are very able to reason and dispute, and
to put forth such curious questions as are not easily answered.

Are not some of these men called Sect-makers, and begetters or devisers of new
opinions in Religion, especially in the matter of worshipping God, as they use
to call it, wherein they find a beginning, but hardly any end, for this
religious knowledge is so variable through the multiplicity of curious wits and
contentious Spirits, that the life of man way seem too short to take a full
view of this variety; for though all Sects say, they will be guided by the
word of truth, and all seem to bring Scripture, which indeed is but one as God
is but one, yet by reason of their several constructions and interpretations
of Scripture, and conceits of their own humane wisdom, they are many.

And are there not others of this sort of men, that are ready to embrace any
new way of worship, especially if it come under the cloak of Scripture
learning, and have a show of truth founded upon the letter of the Bible, and
seem to be more zealous and devout then their former way, specially if the
teacher of that new way can but frame a sad and demure countenance, and with a
grace lift up his head and his eyes toward heaven, with some strong groan in
declaring of his newly conceived opinion, and that he frequently use this
phrase of the glory of GOD! o then these men are by and by of another opinion,
supposing to themselves that God has made known some farther truth to them,
for by reason of the blindness of their understanding, they are not able to
reach any supernatural truth, although they do by literal Learning, and
Clerklike cunning dive never so deep into the Scriptures, and therefore they
are ready to entertain any form of Religious Exercise, as shall be suggested
unto them.

And are there not a third sort much like to these men that are excessive and
mutable in the performance of Religious Exercises. Surely Saint PAUL did
perceive that this was the very GOD of some men in his time, and therefore he
wills TIMOTHY to instruct others, that bodily exercise profits little, 1 Timothy 4.8.
or as some read it, nothing at all, and does oppose thereunto godliness as
being another thing, then bodily exercise, and says, that it is profitable,
etc. And do not you think there are some men at this day that know none other
good then bodily exercise, and can hardly distinguish betwixt it and
godliness. Now these bodily exercises are mutable and variable, according to
their conceits and opinions, for all Sects have their several services (as
they call them) yet all bodily* and for the most part only bodily, the which
they perform to establish a rest to their souls, because they want rest in
God, and hence it is that their peace and rest is up and down according to
their working better or worse, so many Chapters must be read, and so many
Sermons must be heard, and so many times must pray in one day, and so many
days in the week, or in the year, they must fast, etc. or else their souls
can have no rest, but mistake me not I pray, in imagining that I speak
against the doing of these things, for I do them all my self, but against
resting in the doing of them, the which I desire not to do.

And thus you see that man's blind understanding does not only present unto
the sensual appetite, sensual objects, but also to the rational appetites,
rational objects, so that man's poor soul is not only kept from rest in God
by means of sensuality, but also by means of formality: if Satan cannot keep us
from seeking rest in God, by feedeing our senses with our mother Evahs apple,
then he sets us to seek him in away where we shall never find him, if he
cannot do it more grosely, then he attempts to do it more closely.


Nom. But, Sir, I am persuaded that many men that are so religiously exercised,
and do perform such duties as you have mentioned, do find true rest for
their souls in God.


Evan. Ineeed I am persuaded there are some men that are careful to perform
such duties in obedience to the will of God in Christ, as conceiving them to be
the way, wherein he is accustomed to meet his people, and give them an
extraordinary visit, as also conceiving them to be the means whereby he does
ordinarily beget and increase faith, whereby they are enabled to draw near to
God in Christ, and so to have peace and rest in him, and therefore if they do
omit any of these duties, when they conceive that God calls them thereunto,
they are troubled in their minds, and vexed at themselves for being
disobedient to the will of God, and for missing his kind visit, and omitting
the means of increasing their faith, now such men as these may, and doubtless
do find true rest to their souls in God, in the performance of Religious
Exercises.

But alas, I fear me, that the most part of such men as are so religiously
exercised, and are of such dispositions as I have showed, do rather conceive,
that as they have offended and displeased God by their former disobedience, so
they must pacify and please him by their future obedience, and therefore they
are careful to exercise themselves in this way of duty, and that way of
worship, and all to that end, yea, and they conceiving that they have
corrupted, defiled and polluted themselves by their falling into sin, they must
also purge, cleanse and purify themselves by rising out of sin, and walking in
new obedience, and so all the good they do, and all the evil they eschew is
to pacify God, and appease their own consciences, and if they seek rest to
their souls this way, why it is the way of the Covenant of works, where they
shall never be able to reach God, nay, it is the way to come to God out of
Christ, where they shall never be able to come near him, he being a consuming
fire.


Neo. Then, Sir, it seems to me, that God in Christ apprehended by faith, is
the only true rest for man's soul.


Evan. I, there is the true rest indeed, there is that rest which David invites
his soul unto, when he says, Psalm. 116.7.
Return unto thy rest, o my soul, for we which have believed have entered into
his rest, says the Author to the Hebrews. And come unto me, Heb. 4.3.
says Christ, all ye that labor and are heavy laden and I will give you
rest. And truly my neighbors and friends believe it, we shall never find a
hearts happiness, and a true souls rest until we find it here, for
howsoever a man may think if he had this man's wit, and that man's wealth, this
man's honor, and that man's pleasure, this wife, or that husband, such children,
and such servants, his heart would be satisfied, and his soul would be
contented, yet which of us has not by our own experience found the contrary?
for not long after that we have obtained the thing we did so much desire, and
wherein we promised our selves so much happiness, rest and content, we have
found nothing but vanity and emptiness in it: Let a man but deal plainly with
his own heart and he shall find, that notwithstanding he has many things,
yet there is ever one thing wanting, for indeed, man's soul cannot be satisfied
with any creature, no, not with a world of creatures: And the reason is because
the desires of man's soul are infinite, according to that infinite goodness
which it once lost in losing God; yea, and man's soul is a spirit, and therefore
cannot communicate with any corporal thing, so that all creatures not being
that infinite and spiritual fullness which our hearts have lost, and toward
the which they do still re-aspire, they cannot give it full contentment.

Nay, let me say more, howsoever a man may in the midst of his sensual
fullness be convinced in his conscience, that he is at enmity with God, and
therefore in danger of his wrath and eternal damnation, and be thereupon moved
to reform his life, and amend his ways, and endeavor to seek peace and rest to
his soul, yet this being in the way of works it is impossible that he should
find it; for his conscience will ever be accusing him, that this good duty he
ought to have done, and has not done it; and this evil he ought to have
forborne; and yet he has done it: and in the performance of this duty he was
remiss, and in that duty very defective, and many such ways will his soul be
disquieted. But when a man once comes to believe that all his sins, both past,
present, and to come, are freely and fully pardoned, and God in Christ
graciously reconciled unto him: the Lord does hereupon so reveal his fatherly
face unto him in Christ, and so make known that incredible union betwixt him
and the believing soul; that his heart becomes quietly contented in God, who is
the proper element of its being: for hereupon there come^ into the soul such
peace flowing from the God of peace; that it fills the emptiness of the soul
with true fullness, in the fullness of God; so that now the heart cease to
molest the understanding and reason, in seeking either variety of objects, or
augmentation of degrees, in any comprehensible thing: And that because the
restless longing of the mind which did before cause unquietness, and
disorder, both in the variety of mental projects, and also in the sensual and
beastly exercises of the corporal and external members, is satisfied and
truly quieted, for when a man's heart is at peace in God, and is become truly
full in that peace and joy, passing understanding, then the Devil has not
that hope to prevail against our souls, as he had before, he knows right
well that it is in vain to beat his hook, with profits, pleasures, honor, or
any other such like seeming good, to catch such a soul that is thus at quiet
in God, for he has all fullness in God, and what can be added to fullness, but
it runs over, indeed empty hearts like empty hogsheads, are fit to receive
any matter which shall be put into them, but the heart of the believer being
filled with joy and peace in believing, does abhor all such base allurements,
for that it has no room in it self to receive any such seeming contentments,
so that to speak as the truth is, there is nothing that does truly and
unfainedly root wickedness out of the heart of man, but only the true
tranquillity of the mind, or the rest of the soul in God, and to say as the
thing is, this is such a peace and such a rest to the creature in the Creator,
that according to the measure of its establishment by faith, no created
comprehensible thing, can either add to it or detract from it, the increase of
a Kingdom cannot augment it, the greatest losses and crosses in worldly things
cannot diminish it, a believers good works do all flow from it, and ought not
to return to it: neither ought humane frailties to molest it, howver this is
most certain, neither sin nor Satan, law nor conscience, hell nor grave, can
quite extinguish it, for it is the Lord alone that gives and mayntains it:
Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in heaven but thee, says David, and there is none upon earth that
I desire besides thee: it is the pleasant face of God in Christ, that puts
gladness into his heart, Psalm. 4.7. and when that face is hid, then he is
troubled, Psalm. 30.7. But to speak more plainly though the peace and joy of
true believers, may be extenuated or diminished, yet does the testimony of
their being in nature remain so strong, that they could skill to say: yea,
even when they have felt God to be withdrawing himself from them; My God, my
God, Psalm. 22^1.
why have thou forsaken me: yea, and in the night of GODS absence to remain
confident, that though sorrow be over night, Psalm. 30.5.
yet joy will come in the morning: Nay, though the Lord should seem to kill
them with wickedness, yet will they put their trust in him, knowing that for
all this, Job 13.15. Job 19.25.
their Redeemer lives: so strong is the joy of their Lord: these are the
people that are kept in perfect peace, Nehem. 8.10. Isaiah 26.3.
because their minds are stayed in the Lord. Wherefore, my dear friends and
loving neighbors, I beseech you, take heed of deeming any estate happy until
you come to find this true peace and rest to your souls in God, o, beware lest
any of you do content your selves with a peace rather of speculation then of
power! o, be not satisfied with such a peace as consists either in the act of
oblivion, or neglect of examination! nor yet in any brainsick supposition, of
knowledge theological and divine, and so frame rational conclusions, to
protract time, and still the cries of an accusing conscience, but let your
hearts take their last farewell of all false felicities, wherewith they have
been all of them more or less detained, and kept from their true rest: o, be
strong in resolution! and bid them all farewell, and neither stay in Egypt by
the fleshpots of Sensuality, nor yet in the wilderness of religious and
rational formality; but strip your self of all: putten on contentments,
either in sensual honors, profits, or pleasures, or religious exercises, and
become truly poor, miserable and naked.


Nom. But stay, Sir, I pray you, would you have our senses to be no longer
exercised about any of their objects? would you have us no longer to take
comfort in the good things of this life?


Evan. I pray you do not mistake me, I would not have you Stoically to refuse
the lawful use of any the Lords good creatures, which he shall be pleased to
afford you: for I right well know that the mind of man has a natural motion
toward its own delight and recreation in these things* and that this motion
still remains in the mind of him that is the most mortified, and has taken
his truest farewell of them, but yet in such a man, that motion which before
was violent from the cry of the heart is now restrained* so that his appetite
is not so forcible, nor so unruly as it was before, the unrulinesse thereof
being subdued in the peace of the heart, and and brought into a very comely
decorum and order, so that now the sensual appetite can with much more
easiness and contentedness be denied the object of its desire; yea, the
sensual appetite can in a good measure be content, with what is most repugnant
to its desire, as with hunger, cold, nakedness, yea, and with death it self,
such is the wonderful working of the hearts quiet and rest in God. So that
although such a man's senses be still exer^ised in and upon their proper
objects, yet is not his life sensual, for his heart takes no contentment from
any such exercise, but is still (for the most part) exercised in a more
transcendent communion, even with God in Christ; so that he uses the world,
and the things of the world, as though he used them not; and receives no
cordial contentment from any sensual exercise whatsoever, and that, because
his heart is withdrawn from them, which withdrawing of the heart is not
unaptly pointed at in the speech of the Spouse, Cant. 5.2. I sleep, says she,
but my heart waketh; so, that it may be said, that such a man he is sleeping,
looking, hearing, tasting, eating, drinking, feasting, etc. but his heart is
withdrawn and is rejoicing in God his Savior, and his soul is magnifying the
Lord, so that in the midst of all sensual delights his heart, and secretly
says, I but my happiness is not here.


Nom. But, Sir, I pray you, why do you call rational and religious exercises a
wilderness?


Evan. For two reasons, first, because that as the children of Israel, when
they were got out of Egypt, did yet wander many years in the wilderness before
they came into the land of Canaan, even so do many men wander long in
rational and religious exercises, after they have left a sensual life, before
they come to rest in God, whereof the land of Canaan was a type.

Secondly, because as in a wilderness, men often lose themselves and can find
no way out, but supposing (after long travel) that they are near the place
whither they would go, are in truth further off: even so fares it with many,
yea, with all such as walk in the way of reason, they lose themselves in the
woods and bushes of their works and doings, so that the longer they travel,
the further they are from God, and true rest in him.


Nom. But, Sir, you know that the Lord has endued us with reasonable souls,
would you not then have us to make use of our reason.


Evan. I pray you do not mistake me, I do not contemn nor despise the use of
reason, only I would not have you to establish it to the chief good, but I
would have you to keep it under, so that if with Hagar, it attempt to bear
rule, and Lord it over your faith, then would I have you in the wisdom of God,
like Sarah, to cast it out from having dominion, in few words I would have you
more strong in desire, than curious in speculation; and to long more to feel
communion with God, then to be able to dispute of the genus, or species of any
question, either humane or divine: And press hard to know God by powerful
experience, and though your knowledge be great, and your obedience surpassing
many; yet would I have you to be truly nullified, anihilated, and made nothing,
and become fools in all fleshly wisdom, and glory in nothing, but only in the
Lord, and I would have you with the eye of faith sweetly to behold, all things
extracted out of one thing, and in one to see al, in a word, I would have in
you a most profound silence, contemning all curious questions and discourses,
and to ponder much in your heart but prate little with your tongue; Iam. 1.10.
Be swift to hear, but slow to speak; and slow to wrath, as the Apostle James
advises you: and by this means will your reason be subdued, and become one
with your faith; for then is reason one with faith, when it is subjugated unto
faith, and then will reason keep its true lists and limits, and you will
become ten times more reasonable then you were before, so that, I hope, you now
see that the hearts farewell from the sensual and rational life, is not to be
considered absolutely but respectively, it does not consist in a going out of
either, but in a right use of both.

And now for a conclusion let me tell you, when any of your souls shall thus
forget her own people, Psalm. 55.10.11.
and her fathers house, Christ her King shall so desire her beauty, and be so
much in love with her, that like a Lodestone this love of his shall draw the
soul in pure desire to him again, and then as the Heart pants after the
rivers of water, Psalm. 42.1. Cant. 25.
so will your souls pant after God, yea, then will your souls be so ravished
with desire, and so sick of love, that it will be manifest by your seeking him
whom your soul loves, Cant. 3.1.
and so shall your soul come to have a real rest in God, and according to the
measure of your faith, be filled with joy unspeakable and glorious; and how can
it be otherwise, when your soul shall really communicate with God, and by
faith have a true taste, and by the Spirit have a sure earnest of all heavenly
preferments, having, as it were, one foot in heaven, whilst you live upon
earth, o then what an Eucharisticall love will arise from your thankful heart!
extending it self, first toward God, and then toward man for Gods sake,
because his everlasting love in his Christ is made known to your soul, so that
then according to the measure of your faith, you shall not need to frame and
force your self to love, and do good duties, but being so assured of Gods
love to you in his CHRIST, your soul will stand bound ever more to love God,
and according to the measure thereof you will stand bound to the keeping of all
his Commandments, and this love of God in the heart will cut down self love,
so that now you will be for God, and it will be your meat and drink to do his
will whilst you live on earth, and much more when you come to heaven, the place
of perfect and everlasting rest whither our Lord JESUS CHRIST bring us all in
his due time, Amen.

And now Brethren, I commend you to GOD, and to the word of his grace, Acts
20.32.
which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them
which are sanctified.


Neo. Well, Sir, at this time I will say no more, but that it was a happy
hour wherein I came to you, and a happy conference that we have had
together, surely, Sir, I never knew Christ before this day, o what cause have I
to thank the Lord for my coming hither! and my two friends as a means of it,
and, Sir, for the payns that you have taken with me, I pray the Lord to requite
you, and so beseeching you to pray the Lord to increase my faith, and to help
mine unbelief, I humbly take my leave of you, praying the God of love and
peace to be with you.


Nom. And truly, Sir, I do believe, that I have cause to speak as much in
that case as you have, for though I have out-stript him in knowledge, and it
may be also in strict walking, yet do I now see, that my actions were neither
from a right principle, nor to a right end, and therefore have I been in no
better a condition then he, and truly, Sir, I must needs confess, I never
heard so much of Christ, and the Covenant of grace, as I have done this day,
the Lord make it profitable to me, and I beseech you, Sir, pray for me.


Ant. And truly, Sir, I am now fully convinced, that I have gone out of the
right way, in that I have not had regard to the Law, and the works thereof as I
should. But, God willing, I shall hereafter (if the Lord prolong my days) be
more careful how I lead my life, seeing the ten Commandments are the law of
Christ. And I beseech you, Sir, remember me in your prayers, and so with many
thanks to you for your pains, I take my leave of you, beseeching the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to be with your spirit. Amen.


Evan. Now the very God of peace, that brought again from the dead, our Lord
Jesus, that great sheepherd of the sheep, Heb. 13.20, 21
through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good
work, to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his
sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.


John 8.36 If the Son make you free, you shall be free indeed.

Gal. 5.1. Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free.

Ver. 13. Only use not your liberty for an occasion of the flesh; but by love
serve one another.

Chap. 6. ver. 16. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be upon
them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

Mat. 11.25. I thank thee o Father Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have
hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to babes.

1 Cor. 15.10. I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I but the
grace of God that was with me.

Psalm. 36.11. Let not the foot of pride come against me.

LOving Reader, the Printer drawing toward a conclusion, and wanting matter to
complete so many sheets, as was desired, I have thought good (by reason of the
sutablenesse of this with the former) to add these Propositions following,
which are proved by Scripture: and gathered long since by Patrick Hambleton
Scottishman, and martyred: who was burned in Scotland, the first day of March,
Anno 1527.

The first Proposition.
He that loves God, loves his neighbor.

This Proposition is proved, 1 John 4.20. If a man say I love God, and yet
hates his brother, he is a liar: for how can he that loves not his brother
whom he has seen, love God whom he has not seen.

The second Proposition.
He that loves his neighbor as himself, keeps all the Commandments of
God.

This Proposition is proved, Matthew. 7.12. Whatsoever he would that men should*
do unto you, even so do ye unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets: and
in Romans 13.8, 9. He that loves his neighbor, fulfilleth the Law. For this,
thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal,
thou shall not bear false witness, thou shall not covet: and if there be any
other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this, saying, Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self, and in Gal. 5.14. All the law is fulfilled in this
one word, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

The third Proposition.
He that has faith loves God.

My Father loves you because ye love me, and believe that I came out from God,
John 16.27.

Argument.
Major.
He that keeps the Commandments of God, has the love of God.

Minor.
He that has faith keeps the Commandments of God.

Conclusion.
Ergo, He that has faith loves God.

The fourth Proposition.
He that keeps one Commandment of God keeps them all.

This Proposition is confirmed, Heb. 11.6. It is impossible for a man without
faith to please God: that is, to keep any one of Gods Commandments as he
should do; then whosoever keeps any one Commandment has faith.

Argument.
Major.
He that has faith keeps all the Commandments of God.

Minor.
He that keeps any one Commandment of God has faith.

Conclusion.
Ergo, He that keeps any one Commandment, keeps them all.

The fifth Proposition.
He that keeps not all the Commandments, keeps none of them.

Argument.
He that keeps one Commandment of God keeps all:

Ergo, he that keeps not all the Commanments of God keeps not one of them.

The sixth Proposition.
Faith is the gift of God.

Argument.
Every good thing is the gift of God. Major. Minor. Conclusion.


Faith is a good thing.

Ergo, Faith is the gift of God.

The seventh Proposition.
Faith is not in our power.

Argument.
The gift of God is not in our power. Major. Minor. Conclusion.


Faith is the gift of God.

Ergo, Faith is not in our power.

The eighth Proposition.
He that has faith is just and good.

Argument.
He that is a good tree, brings forth good fruit, and is just and good. Major.


He that has faith is a good tree, Minor.
and brings forth good fruit.

Ergo, he that has faith is just and good. Conclusion.


The ninth Proposition.
He that believes the Gospel, believes God.

Argument.
Major.
He that believes Gods Word believes God.

Minor.
The Gospel is the Word of God.

Conclusion.
Ergo, He that believes the Gospel believes God.

John 4.26. Luke 1.47. Heb. 13.20. Revel. 1.5. Heb. 9. 1 Pet. 2.
To believe the Gospel is this, that Christ is the Savior of the world, that
Christ is our Savior, Christ bought us with his blood, Christ washed us with
his blood, Christ offered himself a sacrifice for us, Christ bare our sins
upon his own back.

The tenth Proposition.
He that believes the Gospel shall be safe. Go ye unto all the World, and
preach the Gospel unto every creature; he that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved, Mark 16.16.

A comparison between Faith and Incredulity.
Faith is the root of all good, Incredulity is the root of all evil.

Faith makes God and man good friends, Incredulity makes them foes.

Faith brings God and man together, Incredulity separateth them.

All that Faith does pleases God, all that Incredulity does displeases him.

Faith makes a man good and righteous, Incredulity makes him evil

Faith makes a member of Christ, Incredulity a member of the Devil.

Faith brings a man to Heaven, Infidelity brings him to Hell.

A dispute between the Law and the Gospel.
The Law said pay the debt, the Gospel said Christ has paid it.

The Law said thou art a sinner, the Gospel said thy sins are forgiven thee.

The Law said the Father of Heaven is angry, the Gospel said Christ has
pacified it.

The Law said where is thy righteousness, the Gospel said, Christ is a
believers righteousness.

The Law said thou art bound over to me, the Devil and Hell.

The Gospel said, Christ has delivered a believer from you all.

No manner of works make us righteous.
We believe that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law, Romans
3.28. No man is justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ, And we believe in Jesus Christ, that we may be justified by the faith
of Christ, and not by the deeds of the law, for if righteousness come by the
law, then Christ dyed in vain, Gal. 2.

No works make us unrighteous.
If any evil works make us unrighteous, then the contrary works should make
us righteous, but it is proved that no good works can make us righteous,
therefore no evil works can make us unrighteous, if we be believers.

Works then make us neither good nor evil.
It is proved that works make us neither righteous nor unrighteous, therefore
no works make us either good or evil, for righteous and good are one thing,
and unrighteous and evil another.

Good works make not a good man, nor evil works an evil man, but a good man
brings forth good works, and an evil man evil works.

Good fruit makes not the tree good, nor evil fruit the tree evil, but a
good tree bears good fruit* and an evil tree evil fruit.

A good man cannot do evil works, nor an evil man good works, for a good
tree cannot bear evil fruit, nor an evil tree good fruit.

Object.
A man is good before he do good works, and evil before he do evil works.

Answer.
A good man is known by his good works, and an evil man by his evil works, ye
shall know them by their fruits, for a good tree bears good fruit, and an
evil tree evil fruit; a man is likened to a tree, and his works to the fruit
of the tree.

If works make us neither righteous nor unrighteous, then it makes no matter
what we do.

I answer, If thou do evil, it is a sure argument that thou art evil, and
want faith, if thou do good, it is an argument that thou art good, and have
faith, for a good tree bears good fruit, and an evil tree evil fruit; yet
good fruit makes not the tree good, nor evil fruit the tree evil; so that
man is good before he do good works, and evil before he do evil works.

Faith makes the good tree, and incredulity the evil tree, such a tree, such
fruit; such a man, such works; for all things which are done in faith please
God and are good works, and all that are done without faith, displease God, and
are evil works.

Whosoever believes or thinks to be saved by his works, denies that Christ
is his Savior, for how is he thy Savior if thou might save thy self by
thy works? or wherefore should he have died for thee, if any works might have
saved thee.

Now seeing that he has paid the debt, thou need not pay it, neither indeed
could thou pay it, but should be damned if his blood were not, but since
he was punished for that thou shall not be punished.

Finally, he has delivered thee from thy condemnation, and all evil, and
desires naught of thee, but that thou will acknowledge what he has done for
thee, and bear it in mind, and that thou would help others for his sake
both in word and deed, even as he has helped thee, for naught and without
reward.

O how ready would men be to help others if we knew his goodness and
gentleness toward us, he is a good and a gentle Lord, and does all for
naught, therefore let us follow his steps.

So that I do not say, that believers should do no good works, but I say men
should not do good works, to the intent to get the inheritance of heaven
through good works, for if we believe we shall get remission of sins, or the
inheritance of heaven through works, we believe not to get the same for
Christ's sake, neither do we believe the promise of God that they are given us
freely, and so we make God a liar, for God says, thou shall have the
inheritance of heaven for my Sons sake, thy sins are forgiven thee for my Sons
sake, but thou say it is not so, if thou think to win them by thy works. Thus
you see that I condemn not good works, but the false trust in them, for all
the works wherein man puts any confidence, are therewith poisoned and become
evil.

Wherefore thou must do good works, but beware thou do them not to deserve
any good through them, for if thou do, thou receivest thy good, not as the
gift of God, but as a debt to thee, and make thy se^fe fellow with God,
because thou will ta^e nothing of him for naught. Press not th^rfore to the
inheritance of heaven through ^he presumption of thy good works, for if thou
do, thou shall fall as Lucifer fell for his pride.

FINIS.

