VOX SOLIS: OR, An ASTROLOGICAL DISCOURSE OF The great ECLIPSE of the SUN,
which happened on June 22. 1666. in 10 degrees. of the Watery sign Cancer.

SHOWING What EFFECTS may most probably attend it, AND Unto what Persons,
Kingdoms and Countries, they are chiefly Directed.

By JOHN GADBURY, (...).

With Allowance.

Intended to have been published in his Ephemeris for this present year 1667.
but prevented by reason of the late terrible Conflagration of London.

Sol and Luna, post Deum, omnium viventium vita sunt.

Hermes. digram of a solar eclipse North East West South



London, Printed by James Cotterel, for Eliz. Calvert, at the sign of the
Black Spread-Eagle in Duck-lane. MDCLXVII.

To the TRULY LEARNED, And most WORTHILY ACCOMPLISHED, Elias Ashmole, Of the
Middle Temple, Esquire;
Windsor-Herald, Comptroller of the Excise, and Keeper of the Medals and
Antiquities belonging to his sacred Majesty King CHARLES the Second, etc.
Most honored Sir!
THe Astrologers of this Age and Island, swarm to You, as their Patron, (for
shelter and protection of Themselves and Books) as Bees to their Hive. It is an
Argument of true Sapience (I confess) to lodge the choicest Jewels, in the
Noblest Cabinets: And the Worthiest Sciences, fare always best, with the most
Honorable Mecoenas. Such Policy I approve of, and (although, at some times,
(by reason of Tortuous interposures) I could not, yet) shall now, follow. For,
when after-Ages shall understand, that I have made, not the meanest Additions
to this Celestial Study; It may reasonably put them into Admiration, if not
Astonishment, not to find me, set within some convenient distance of your
honorable Acquaintance and Favor.

It Is true, in the twilight of Great Britains hope, and Restoration by his
Sacred Majesty, [when it was a Crime, either to be known Loyal, or to own any
one of that (then-despised) inclination and Judgement] I, with another, did
present unto You, An Emendation of the Learned Hartgil 's Astronomical Tables;
which Book, You were pleased generously, not only to accept, and approve of,
but nobly to encourage us, to a farther Enquiry into the Mysteries of that
Science we had then espoused.

But singly, have I never yet paid my Acknowledgements, or the honor I owe,
unto your exquisite Skill in all Mathematical, Hermetical, and Physical
Learning; your eminent acquaintance with the Constitutions, Customs, and
Manners of our own, and foreign Nations; your Admirable Knowledge in the Law,
Heraldry, etc. as also, in all Politiques and Ethics: Be pleased (learned Sir)
to accept it here.

I disdain to make you Patron of my Gall and Rudeness, as some (without a
Blush) have lately done: or yet, to play the Parasite with You, and propound a
Gain to my self, by this Undertaking. No: my Dedication of these few Sheets of
Paper, proceeds (ex intimis Medullis) not from a Spurious, but Legitimate
honor and affection, and a desire to let the Learned, in times to come, know,
That no Artist in this Age, had a more Cordial esteem for You, and your
incomparable Virtues; or, could more readily acknowledge, your continued, and
often-reiterated Favors, to the ingenious Students in all Learning, then He,
who assumes the boldness, (and accounts it his greatest Glory) to entitle
himself

(Honored Sir) Your most humble, and most obliged Servant, JOHN GADBURY.

To the READER.
THe Heavens of late years, have not been laden with more various Causes, and
Monitors of ensuing Mischiefs, then the Earth has been burdened with suitable
Effects. No sooner have we been quit of one Evil, but our Ears have been
terrified with the noise of another's approach; like that of Job's messengers.
Poor Europe has labored under many of Isreal's heavy Judgments; perhaps,
deserved them as much as she; for her Hypocrisy, Pride, Rebellion, etc. And
the two thundering Verses in Deuteronomie, Chap. 28. v. 21, 22. have been
notably fulfilled unto (almost) all the several Kingdoms and Countries therein:
Faciet Jehova ut adhaerescat tibi Pestis, donec consumpserit te ex ea terra quo
tu venturus es ad possidendam eam jure haereditario. Percutiet te Jehova tabe,
calidaque, and aestuante ac adurente Febre, and siccitate and uridine, and
morbo regio; quae persequuntur te donec pereas.

The late Sufferings of this Western part of the world, do eminently English
the most of the Latin: We have been smitten with the Pestilence to purpose; as
also, with the Consumption, and Fever; with the Sword, and extreme Burning:
yea, a different, and (perhaps) more dreadful Burning, then that mentioned in
the Text. God of his mercy grant, we be not pursued with Blasting and Mildew
too, to make up the complement of our punishments, which doubtless are the just
rewards of our Sins. A Learned Dr. Gell, in a Sermon entitled, Noah's flood
returning, p. 15.
Preacher observing the vicious inclinations of the men of this Age (some years
since) parallels us with Sodom, thus: They of Sodom prefigured the men of this
unclean generation; and must not we expect a like Judgment unto that of Sodom?
And (when we call to mind the late strange providence) we may for ever
hereafter believe it, for a divine and infallible Truth, That like Sins, have
like Punishments.

But there is hopes of a tree, ( though cut down) that it may sprout again! and
I have a more-then-ordinary reason to believe, ( and I hope I do not deceive my
self therein) that Englands afflictions are near their period: and can
therefore with the more confidence, add this word of Comfort unto it, That the
Famine, threatened by the late Solar Delinquium, is not likely to prove the
tithe so sharp and cruel unto this Kingdom, as unto many other Kingdoms and
Countries in this part of the world. [ Jupiter is in Aries.] Yet I cannot say,
that we shall be totally free, from the talons of that black and dreadful
enemy. Deus avertat. So prays, the earnest Implorer of Englands peace and
prosperity,

Jo. Gadbury.
Brick-Court, near Deans yard Westminster, March 14. 1666/7.
A DISCOURSE Of the SUNS ECLIPSE Which happened on June 22. last past, in the
morning.
IN my Ephemeris for. this present year 1666, I declared to the World my
resolution to publish a Treatise of this great Solar Eclipse: which promise I
had (according to engagement) discharged in my DIARY for the ensuing year 1667.
having much enlarged the same, and obtained License, thereof, for that very end
and purpose.

But the late dreadful Conflagration happening to London, wrought so great a
destruction among the Stationers and Printers in that City, (they suffering
the most by the Tyrannical Flames, of any one Society whatsoever) that I was
constrained to reduce my Annual Book to its old number of Sheets, and reserve
my Discourse of the Eclipse to be printed apart by self. And conceiving it to
be of convenient Caution and Consequence, not only to England, but other parts
of Europe, etc. I thought it proper, rather then stifle it, (after so much
pains) to print it. For although the Eclipse it self be over, its effects are
to come; and may continue among us (if Astrology fail me not, as seldom it
does) these two years yet: (of which more anon.) I therefore presume this short
Tractate will not appear like an unfortunate Guest, (post Festum) after the
Table is cleared; but very opportunely, for the Information and Advantage of
such as are thereby concerned.

I need not (for an Exordium) acquaint you, that Eclipses have been always
attended with Astonishing Effects; or that at the sight of them, whole Armies
have been smitten with amazement, fear, and horror: or of the scorching
Summers, unkind Winters, destructions of Countries, ruins of Cities and
Towns, the death of Kings and Great persons, alterations of Governments, change
of Laws, etc. that commonly accompany them. All these things I shall (at
present) pretermit, and come to the Discourse intended; which I will consider,

First, Astronomically. Secondly, Astrologically.
In the Astronomical part, I shall first take notice of some Notable
Observations that have been made of this Eclipse, by several eminent persons in
different places; which I shall exhibit in the following Tabular form.

This Eclipse was observed in the following places.
June 22. in the morning, 1666. At London. In Paris. At Madrid. In Southampton
Near York. At Oxford. H.M. H.M. H.M. H.M. H.M. H.M. Beginning at 5 43 5 45 5 0
5 25 5 34 5 27 The Middle of it 6 15 6 42 6 2 6 22 6 32 6 23 End thereof 7 37 7
43 7 5 7 23 7 30 7 24 Total Duration 1 54 1 58 2 5 1 58 1 56 1 57 Digits
Eclipsed 7 4 7 50 7 46 7 22 7 18 7 15

The Reader need not much to wonder at the Differences of these Observations,
if he do but consider they were taken in several places, where the Pole has a
different Elevation; and that the Parallax might materially differ. Yet it
seems a little strange, that there should be less difference between those
Observations made at London and Paris, then betwixt them made at London, and
those at Southampton and Oxford. But the Error thereof may be occasioned from
the imperfection of the Instruments the Artists made use of; or else, for want
of Exactness in the observers themselves: it being easier (in any thing) to be
overtaken by Errors and Mistakes, then to keep pace with Truth and Certainty;
chiefly, in Astronomical Observations.

With the most concurrent of these Observations, do the Rudolphine and
Philolaick Tables agree; so also do those of my loving friend Mr. V. Wing, and
our Countryman Mr. Jeremy Shackerly. The Ricciolan and Lansbergian, etc. are
found to differ much, both in the beginning, continuation, termination, and
obscuration of this eminent and famous Eclipse.

But next unto the safest Observations, do I prefer Mr. Wing's Tables, where
you will find this Solar deliquium

ho. min. sec. To begin at 17.28.0. June 21. P.M. The visible Conjunction at
18.22.38. Middle of the Eclipse at 18.24.48. The End of it at 19.26.4. Total
Duration 1.58.4. Digits Eclipsed 7.25.14.

This premised, I shall in the next place consider (with Ptolomy) how many
hours there are (on the day of the Defect) between Sunrising and the
middle-time of the Eclipse; unto which Astrologers always erect their Figure of
heaven. For take notice (says the same Author) how many hours the Sun is
Eclipsed, for so many years shall be the duration of his Effect.

Sun rises at 4 a clock in the morning. Interval between Sunrising and the
Middle of the Eclipse is 2 ho. 25 min. o sec. The Duration, according to the
best Observations, and Mr. Wing's Tables, is 1 ho. 58 min. o sec. This
obtained, I work by this Analogy:
As the length of the day on which the Eclipse happens, is to 365 days: so the
interval between Sunrising and the Middle of the Eclipse, is to the time ere
its Effects begin to show themselves.

Demonstration. Length of the day 16 ho. 20 min. or 1080 m. 30334237 365 days,
or one year, 25622929 Interval between Sunrising and the Middle of the Eclipse
is 2 ho. 25 min. or 145 min. 21613680 The sum is 47236609 Time ere the Effects
begin, 49 days. 16902372

Which 49 days numbered from the day of the Eclipse, viz. June 22. the Effects
thereof initiate, or first begin to show themselves, on the tenth day of August
following.

Now for the Continuation of the Effects, that is known from the Duration,
which is two hours fere; Ergo, they will continue in force near two years from
the time they first commence, viz. from August, anno 1666. until July, anno
1668.

Thus much may serve for the Mathematical part: now I come to the Astrological.
And therein I shall first present you with the Figure of heaven erected to the
Middle-time of this famous Eclipse, in the following form and shape; and
afterward with the genuine signification thereof.

Longit. Solis 10 d. 23 m. Asoentio^ Recta Solis 101. 18 Temporis 276. 15 Med.
Coeli sine Cir. 17. 33 Huc add pro primo domo 90. 0 Summa totius addenda 107.
33 Ascentio Obliqua primae domus

Thema Coelicum Eclipsis Solaris, 1666 D.H.M. Men's. Junii, 21.18.25. P.M. Sub
Lat. 51 degrees. 32 mi. a [] ad.
17 degrees. 33 min. 107 degrees. 33 min.

107 degrees. 33 min.

earth 5.10. 10.23. 19.23 Aldebaran.. 31.

19.2. Eridanus.

28.8. 20.

14. 28.41.

9.16. 9.16. Cor Leonis.

0.

20. 7.25.

Spica Virg. 19.2.

3. 5.10.

17.54. 14.

9.16.

0.

28.8. 20.

chart showing solar eclipse

The Fortitudes and Debilities of the Planets in this Eclipse.
is weak by 6 Testimonies. is strong by 3 Testimonies. is strong by 19
Testimonies. is strong by 6 Testimonies. is strong by 16 Testimonies. is strong
by 21 Testimonies. is strong by 13 Testimonies.
Hence it appears, that Mercury and Jupiter are Lords of this Eclipse, as
having the greatest number of Testimonies in strength: the Sun (the Luminary
eclipsed) is weak by 6 Arguments, and has not one Fortitude either Essential
or Accidental to assist him.

Judicium Astrologicum.
IN this Ecliptical Figure, the Regal and fiery sign Leo ascends the
Horoscope, and the Sun (the Dominator of that sign, and Luminary eclipsed) is
posited in Cancer, a Cardinal-Tropical-Feminine sign, moveable and watery. As
if many matters or things of most eminent note, that for diverse ages past have
been flourishing, fixed, or stative, are by this Solar Deliquium, portended
subject to a strange kind of instability, inconstancy, and fluctuation: and
this most apparent in Islands, and among such Nations or People as are
surrounded with, or chiefly live and inhabit by, and upon the Sea. The sign
wherein the Defect happens, is the Horoscope of Holland, and the nest of the
United Provinces, the Seigniory of Venice, Scotland, etc. and they may assure
themselves they are concerned therein: of which more shall be said anon.

It is the Moon, the lesser light, (or rather, a body that is opake, and has
no innate light at all) that thus Eclipseth the Sun, the Royal Lamp of heaven;
the glorious Fountain of Light, from whence she her self receives illumination.
I hope and pray, That no actions of Ingratitude, correspondent to so unusual an
Eclipse, may appear, or be perpetrated in any part of this our European world.
The Moon Eclipseth the Sun, in her own dignities; in a place, where she has
power to triumph and tyrannize to purpose. The Sun (say Astrologers) signifies,
the most illustrious and glorious, of Persons and Things: the Moon, the basest,
and most-to-be-contemned and despised. I could acquaint you with many such
kind of Eclipses, both of former and later times; and with the tristitious
attendants of them: but I would not be thought Dolores renovare, to renew old
Sorrows, or awake the sleeping Errors of either our own, or any other Kingdom
or Nation.

A Signo deliquii sumitur judicium generis rerum afficiciendorum. Astrologers
in giving Judgments upon the defects of the Luminaries, say, That the Effects
of them shall fall principally upon those kinds of men or things, which are
signified by the sign wherein the Eclipse happens.

Eclipsis Salis in, aut obscurae, turbae ignobilisque plebeculae interitus,
diuturnae bellorum, seditiones, and aquatilium marinorumque and aliorum in
aequore degentium magna pernicies. Procl.
The sign wherein this famous Eclipse is celebrated (as you have already
heard) is Cardinal-Moveable-Watery, and Foeminine. The learned Proclus says,
An Eclipse of the Sun in the Watery Triplicity (chiefly the diguities of the
Moon, she having signification of the Popular multitude) denotes a rot or
consumption of the vulgar sort of people, many rumors and discontents, great
Seditions, Mutinies, and expectations of Wars; a destruction of Waterfowl, and
death of Fishes; great Inundations, and overflowings of Sea-banks, drowning of
many places; with many great and unheard of mischiefs, acted and done by and
upon the Waters.

In secundo Decano, stuvios and fontes exsiccat, incontinentiam, and
petulantium mortalibus intentar. Procl.
And as very much damage and prejudice to some people, parts or places, is
probable to happen, by or upon the Waters, etc. so also it is very likely to
fall out unto others, by reason of a want or searcity of Waters. And so says
the same Author, in these words; -- When the Sun shall suffer an Eclipse in the
second Decanate of Cancer, Fountains and Rivers shall be dried up, and there
will be a great want of waters; match incontinencie among men and women does
also succeed; and a great deal of fraud, circumvention and deceit will be
practiced.

But now, as this eminent Eclipse falls in a sign of the Watery Triplicity; so
it happens in a Cardinal Tropical sign likewise. And all Astrologers consent,
that Eclipses in Aequinoctial and Tropical (which are the only Cardinal)
signs, are of the must eminent concernment unto this terrene Globe, and pour
down their influences upon it the most forcibly and violently.

Aequinoctia signa and Tropica turbulentiora and populariora dicimus, and
generaliter significant rerum Civilium mutationem, says one: (id est) We find
by experience, that your Tropical and Equinoctial signs are more violent,
turbulent, and popular, then are any of the other parts of the Zodiac; and
Eclipses, great Conjunctions, Comets, etc. happening in any of them, are the
most remarkable in their effects.

The reason hereof is near at hand: the greatest and most noble of actions and
things (be they Ecclesiastical or Civil) are dependant upon Cardinal or
Tropical signs; they are the Hinges or Axis upon which the most weighty and
illustrious Persons or Matters (either of Universal or Particular, Public or
Private concernment) move or turn. And when an Eclipse, Comet, or other
Celestial Phenomenon happens therein, such things, or persons, most naturally
and principally are designed to share in their Influences.

We have instances familiar enough, in the common vicissitudes of the Weather,
of the great verity hereof. For when any grand Satellitium, Conjunction,
Opposition, or Quadrate Aspect of the Planets happens to be in Cardinal Signs,
the Air is more then ordinarily perturbed; as we saw it in the Effects of the
Quadrate of Sol and Saturn, on March 30. this year, and upon the Opposition of
the Sun and Saturn on June 29. following; as also, upon the Quadrate of Sol and
Saturn on September 27. after that: these Aspects all happening in Cardinal
Signs; as may be seen by the Ephemerides. We know also, that persons born
under Cardinal Signs, are more vigorous, active, and (I was about to say)
violent, then others: as to instance in the late King of Sweden, Carolus
Gustavus; Oliver Cromwell; the present Emperor of Turkey; cum multis aliis, of
former and later times. We could prove likewise, that those Kingdoms, etc.
whose Ascendents are Cardinal Signs, are more spirituous, courageous, active,
furious, mutable, and inconstant, then are other Kingdoms, whose Horoscopes are
in other parts of the Zodiac; as Germany, Polonia, France, Saxony, Alsatia,
Holland, Denmark, and England too; for that is under Aries, and has been
subject (the more is the pity) to mutability and inconstancy as much as any
other Nation whatever.

But to pass by this little Digression: not only the Eclipse is in a Cardinal
Sign, but at the time of the defect, the two unfortunate Stars (so called by
reason of their intemperate natures and qualities, and the malignant Effects
they are always by experience known to send among mortals) Saturn and Mars, do
obviate the Luminaries from Cardinal Signs; thereby making the darkness much
blacker in its effects, then otherwise it would be. And these two Planets do
not only conspire against the Sun, (the Luminary suffering) and the Moon, the
Agent in this Deliquium; but cross and square each other, and that (in some
respects) maliciously. As if they intimated some more then ordinary mischiefs,
and alterations to be (under the influence of this Eclipse) hatching and
contriving (either in Italy, Holland, or some other parts beyond the Seas;)
which when brought to pass, the Projectors themselves ( Saturn and Mars) by
contending with each other, will but make room for the advancement and
promotion of some yet-unexpected and unthought-of person or interest. Mercury
sits and smiles at the forward solly, and rash adventures of the other Planets:
Planeta qui est in undecima domo, altior est illo qui in 9, 6, aut 3 est. Haly.
Mercurius dominus deli, uii generaliter quidem in illius stellae naturam se
insinuat, atque convertitur, cum qua fuerit configuratus, etc. Ptol. l. 2. C.
8. Apotel.
it is he that is the strongest Planet in the Figure, and of all most nobly
placed in the Heavens. A Planet in the eleventh house (says Haly) is higher
then one in the ninth, sixth, or third: And able (therefore) to attempt and
compass nobler things then he.

The nimble Planet Mercury being Lord of an Eclipse, generally assumes the
nature of that Planet with whom he is configurated. Howbeit, as he is the
Author of quick and violent motion, so he intimates celerity in humane actions,
affairs, and concernments; irritates much cunning, craft, and subtilty, lying
and deceit, perjury, etc. much robbing both at Sea and Land; makes much
controversy in the Customs and Laws of Nations, alterations of old
Privileges, Charters, or Corporations; many Lawsuits and unappeasable
differences he promotes. In the Air (he being cold and dry, and mostly near the
Sun) he generates high and blustering winds, great tempests, thunders and
hightnings, sometimes earth quakes, etc. Heresies and Schisms get ground under
his Regencie, ( Europe has no need of that) and a race of people usually
appear, that will contemn Ceremonies, and throw dirt in the face of all
Religious Worship: he also denotes depopulations, and a destruction of things
useful for the support of humane life; and hinders the growth of vegetables: he
stirs up diseases of siccity, as Consumption, Ptisick, Fevers, etc. These are
the natural significations of Mercury, as Lord of an Eclipse: but as he is in
Aspect of Jupiter, (though it be by a Quadrate) it is to be hoped that his
effects will meet with some abatement; but much I cannot promise my self,
because Jupiter is just leaving Pisces, and nearly in Opposition of Mars in
this Ecliptical Figure: yet somewhat he will perform, by virtue of his own
benefique nature, and of his having rule in this great Deliquium, next unto
Mercury, whose effects I have at large related.

And not only Mercury has signification of the aforesaid distempers, but the
Eclipse in general is the forerunner of many tedious and durable infirmities
that shall afflict the persons of men and women: Saturn^ is in Capricorn in the
sixth house, (of the Greeks called (...), from the great infelicity and
unhappiness which diseases bring to mankind; they being the envious opposites
unto health, which is the greatest blessing in the world, and most of all to be
coveted!) and there powerful to do mischief: Mars also is Lord of that Angle by
Exaltation, and (being in reception and Quartile of Saturn) shall in part
design the diseases portended, viz. the Calenture, Jaundies, Imposthumes,
Madness, Pestilence, Pox, Botches, Inflammations, etc. Wherefore, by reason of
his violence and destructive poisonous qualities, he is much to be feared. Cave
iram Martis: we ought, when in a Figure of an Eclipse we find Mars in a
position apt for the promoting of mischiefs, to beware of his raging and
thundering threats.

It is the opinion of Hermes, Aphor. 90. that Saturn performs evil more slowly,
but Mars more swift: and Mars is therefore (says he) observed to hurt more
then Saturn. Most sure I am, that although Mars, in regard of his velocity and
heat, hurts more, (that is, more furiously and ragingly) then Saturn does; yet
is Saturn (as I before urged) the author and procurer of the most durable
mischiefs and miseries unto mankind: And as he (secundum Hermetem) performs
evil more slowly, yet by reason of his tardous motion, and envious tenacious
nature, he is most certain to accomplish it the more surely: and this I am
afraid we poor mortals shall find and experience to purpose, from his envious,
malignant, and pernicious effects, portended unto us by his position in this
Solar defect.

Surely God is angry with these Western parts of the world, and that
exceedingly! in that he shows so many eminent and signal tokens of his divine
displeasure against us. But lately, viz. anno 1663. on October. 10. was
celebrated an unusual Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, in the Regal and fiery
sign Sagittary: such a Conjunction that happens but once in 795 years, it
beginning the circuit of those two Planets in the Fiery Trigon See more of this
Conjunction in my Dies Novissimus, or Doomsday not so near as dreaded.


And a little after that, there appeared three dreadful Comets or Blazing
Stars, as so many Monitors of approaching terrors and dangers to befall most
part of the habitable Globe: those Comets having relation in their motion, unto
almost three parts of the whole Zodiacal Circle. And now this year, (as if
those rare and unusual Phenomenon were not of themselves sufficient to presage
horror enough to complete poor Europes already-begun miseries!) we are fallen
under the effects of a Solar Eclipse, in a Cardinal Tropical sign: and this
defect was visible to all this Occidental part of the world: the glorious Lamp
of heaven refusing to afford us his wonted benign influences, by suffering (in
this defect) his nobler rays to be withheld from us.

As the sad and to-be-lamented effects of these several Celestial Ambassadors,
we have had our sufficient share of Wars, the company of that horrid, black and
dismal enemy the Pestilence; a miserable desolation and destruction by Fire;
and all these too long and too heavy upon us! and yet Gods anger is not turned
away, his hand is stretched out still (...) the envious Planet Saturn, and
furious Planet Mars (by their malesique positions and configuration in this
Solar Deliquium) are yet working more mischiess and disturbances, in the
minds, manners, and actions of mankind; and will (by their evil influence)
hinder and obstruct the course of things, both in Natural Generation, and in
Trade, and in affairs of most kinds. God grant a Famine succeed not those
several former severer Judgments of the Almighty, if it be his blessed will.
Although those other Judgments have been afflictions grievous to be born, and
eminently terrifying (almost) unto all sorts of people; yet the least part of
the Famine will be far more transcendently intolerable and crued unto mankind,
then all the other put together.

Famine (says one) is sometimes so fierce, that it makes the mother use the
teeth in stead of her lips to her own child; to bite without pity the infant
which she used to kiss; and in stead of giving it suck, to let out the blood of
it. God keep so black an enemy from the doors of all true-hearted Englishmen I
we have had our portion of Plenty, and this in so great and abundant measure,
that we have wallowed therein: Oh! that we might be able to divert our part of
Penury, by acts of Charity, Prayer, and Repentance.

Had we no assistance from the Celestial movers for our Judgments in these
matters, yet those observations we are able to make from common Experience,
might readily inculcate to us a more-then-ordinary probability thereof; since
it is the Order which God and Nature observes, to pursue a Plenty with a
Dearth, and to punish extreme Wantonness with griping Want.

Bright mornings often have blackest afternoons. Ecliysiu^ Solis effectus
potentes sunt, unde si in florentem Messim inciderint sterilitatem afferunt
Seg. 2. Aph. 16
The learned Hieronymus Cardanus tells us, (and I am afraid too oraculously)
that the effects of an Eclipse of the Sun are very powerful, which happening in
the beginning of a hopeful and flourishing harvest, denotes sterility and
barrenness to follow. I fear, I fear, that the great strength of Saturn (I
Cadentia sunt spiritus, and quicquid accidit in eis, them accidit in spiritibus.
Haly.
mean not particularly in this Solar Eclipse, but) in this whole year, and some
years yet succeeding, will, and does presage, not only Sterility, or a Dearth
of Corn, etc. but a destruction of all things growing upon the earth, useful
for mankind. He is in a Cadent house in the heavens, thence afflicting the
Lights: Haly says, that Cadent houses are as it were spirits; and whatsoever
happens in them, (he means either of fortitude or afflication) happens unto the
spirits of men or things. Hence I am fearful, that not only the spirits of
seeds of Vegetables will lose their soul and vigor, and not be capable of
rooting and bringing forth the fruits of the earth, as at oath times. Saturn is
a Planet cold and dry; and therefore (in a Physical sense) a great enemy to,
and hinderer of all Natures products, and indeed of all natural Existencies:
And he is now posited in Capricorn, in a cold, dry, melancholy and feminine
sign; as if the most hopeful conceptions were threatened to be destroyed in
(...), or in the womb, and scarcely suffered to see the light; much less to
come to maturity. The learned Rigel, in his 83 Aphorism, sets it down as an
absolute Conclusion, That Saturn is the most pernicious and destructive in his
effects, when he is posited (as now in this Eclipse) in a feminine sign.

Thus you see, Authors are positive and agreeing: An Eclipse in the beginning
of a Harvest, denotes barrenness, says Cardan.

The spirits of Vegetables, etc. are afflicted, says Haly.

Saturn is most destructive when in feminine signs, says Rigel.

The Eclipse it self began in June, a little after the beginning of the Summer,
viz. when the Grain begins to harden in the Ear. We have had a very dry Summer;
a hot and moist Autumn; (as if the natures of the Seasons were really changed.)
Let us petition, that God of his infinite goodness, would not permit or suffer
our Harvests for some years succeeding, either by unkind and bitter frosts,
Mildews, or unseasonable Showers, to be either blasted or lodged, or suffer
other damage or prejudice, before it comes to be fully hardened, and fit for
the painful Husbandmans Sickle.

Yet a little further. Sol omnibus Planetis tribuit vires: (they are Segm. 5.
Aphor. 171.
Cardans words.) The Sun (as he is Rex Planetarum, the King of all Stars) gives
strength and power to the Planets. And when his sight is hindered, his
influence is obstructed, and Nature receives a check in all her teemings, and
is thereby much molested in her noblest and freeest operations.

Sol omnium fortunarum maxima est, neque Planeta ullus magis benifious. Card.
And, There is no Planet more benefique and friendly unto this earthly Globe,
then is the Sun: for he is the greatest of the fortunate Stars, and disperses
his happy rays and influences most liberally. Great therefore must the damages
and injuries be unto mankind, when his most illustrious and nourishing beams
shall be withheld from them, though but for the smallest portion of time: much
more, when we shall be deprived of his friendly rays some hours together, as
now in this Solar Deliquium.

And although there be some men who weakly maintain, that Eclipses have no more
influences upon terrene bodies, then the black-fac'd night; yet deny they
cannot, that the one is natural and ordinary, the other prodigious and
extraordinary: and certainly their effects must be as different as their
natures. Nay, they that quarrel most against the influences of such obscurities
and defects, cannot (by their quarrelling) anticipate the effects thereby
portended, in either their own, or friends Nativities.

The Diurnal motion of the Earth, (or Sun, if people will have it so) is such,
that there is an apparent Physical reason to be rendered of the common and
never-failing intercourse of Day and Night. But Eclipses happening in no such
order, and at no such certainty, (in respectu temporis) clearly demonstrate the
darkness of the night less valid and efficacious, then that in Eclipses: the
one coming to pass by a constant and unalterable Law or Edict of Nature; and
the other happening by Natures Decrees also, but at no such certain, distinct,
and determinate times.

Were Eclipses as certain to happen as is she night, (I mean, when the same
reason in Nature is afforded) then should we have Eclipses of both Luminaries
every month: for, if we consider that the Sun is eclipsed only in his Synod or
Conjunction with the Moon; and the Moon suffers an obscuration when she is
diametrically opposed to the Sun; we must conclude the cause of the Suns
Eclipse to be the interposition of the Moon between him and the Earth; and the
cause of the Moons Eclipse to be the interposition of the Earth between the Sun
and her.

Now we know, that there is not a month passes us, but affords a New and
Full Moon; yet we may be six months and more, sometimes, without an Eclipse of
either Luminary: Ergo, Eclipses are of far greater concernment unto mankind,
then the Enemies of Astrology are aware of, whose ignorance in Starry matters,
would seem to make them of one and the same influence and effect with the
necessary darkness and obscurity of the night.

The natural privation of light in the night, is (in its kind) of as good use
unto all things sublunary, as the splendor and beauty of the day; and is as
necessarily opposed thereunto, as the siceity and calidity of the Summer and
Autumn, to the humidity and frigidity of the Spring and Winter. But as it must
be destructive to have two Summers in a year, where one is of sufficient force
to ripen all that one Spring can produce; so must it needs be contrary to the
increase and nourishment of the seminal virtues of all terrene productions, to
have a double night; or in the stead of one, a night and a half, whenas one
singly is endowed with vigor enough, to concoct and allay the heat of bright
Phoebus's scorching rays, that one day affords. I will conclude this Digression
with an Excursion of the learned Peucer concerning the effects of Eclipses:
Quantos incendit aestus quamdiu flagrantes, Solis sub anno quadragesinno? Quos
motus in Orb Terrarum commovit, cum haec Solis, tum altero anno post Lunae
Eclipsis? Nata ex illis and propagata sunt semina malorum omnium, quae tunc cum
nostras urgeant cervices, and vitae fortunisque minitentur, imme intentent
atque in ferant perniciem, evidentius sentimus and ferimus ac deploramus
acerbius. Quantas lites, quam superba dissidia, and occulta odia, insidiasque
quam violenta consilia severint struxerintque quae bella indicerint, quae
pericula nocument aque frumento fructibusque crearint, deliquia anni
quadragesimi quarti, cum Luna tota, atra caligine, ter foedum in modum
deformaretur? Sol plus de unce sui orbis obsuscaretur, adeo, ut in quibusdam
locis interdiu stellae illuxerint, ac conspectae sint; eo ipso, and sequentibus
annu, ex eventu didicimus. Casp. Peue. fol. 661. de Astrolog.

Prudenter Salem considera; nam judicia Solis non sant oblivioni ^^adenda. L.
Rigiis.
To proceed; we are advised by Rigel, prudently and warily to consider the Sun,
and in no wise to forget in our Judgments what effects are dependant upon him;
chiefly in an Eclipse.

And Leovitius writing upon the great Eclipse of the Sun which was conspicuous
upon April 9. 1567. with relation to the great Effects thereby portended,
exclaims, Profecto tam tetram ac horrendam Eclipsin Solis ab anno Domini 1544.
non habuimus, nec etiam multis futuris saeculis habituri sumus. (i. e.) We
verily (says he) have not had so horrid and prodigious an Eclipse of the Sun,
since the year of our Lord 1544. neither shall we in many ages to come, have
the like again.

As Leovirius said then of that, so may I say of this Eclipse; (and I hope, in
some respects in may be received as a word of welcome to the world; it
intimating, though not at present, yet a future happiness unto it) we shall not
in many Ages have the like Eclipse again: but (mistake me not) this I say not,
by reason of the number of digits eclipsed; but by reason of that part of the
Zodiac in which the defect happens, with a regard had unto the many sad
attendants it has, and the several rough concomitants it meets with, in
signification and portent.

Some (perhaps) may wonder I insist not upon the effects of Jupiter somewhat
more in this Discourse, he being the next in dignity to Mercury in this Solar
Eclipse. But to such I answer, that his benifique Jupiter must suffer many
hardships, run through great difficulties, combat with many hazards, torments
and afflictions, suffer several scoffs and jeers and many scars, wounds and
disgraces, before he can come to shine, and show himself in his native luster,
signification and portent.
significations are hindered by Mars, (as before I urged) and also Saturn; so
that his noble significations are herein totally impeded and obscured, at least
for a time: but possible it is, by that time Jupiter comes into Cancer again,
the Saturnine evils will be a little blown over, and Europe may then begin to
partake of his illustrious and noble rays and influences; which will then be so
glorious and dazzling, that Envy shall not stand before them.

Thus far in general: Come we next to some particulars by this Eclipse denoted.

The Effects (such sad ones as they are) you have heard of already: my first
particular Enquiry shall be of the Vbi, the place where those several
beforementioned Effects shall operate, or chiefly show themselves: And those
are such, as Astrologers (from a large Experience of the beauteous smiles, and
black events of heaven) have placed under the Celestial Sign Cancer, and its
Quadrangle, viz. Libra, Capricorn, and Aries; some whereof (as you may see in
my Doctrine of Nativities, from page 83. to page 87. in Part 1.) are Holland,
Zealand, Scotland, Granada, Burgundia, Numidia, Carthage, Africa, Bithynia,
Colchis, Denmark, Sweden, Germany, England, France, Palestina, Polonia mirtor,
Austria, Livonia, Sabaudia, Thuseia, Caspia, Maccedonia, Illyria, Thrace,
Albania, Bulgaria, Lituania, Saxonia, Hassia, Thuringia, India, Isles of
Orchades, etc. for Kingdoms and Countries. And for Cities and Towns, these:
viz. Naples, Florence, Capua, Ferraria, Augusta, Verona, Brunswick, Padua,
Amsterdam, Venice, Genoa, Constantinople, Tunis, Cadiz, York, St. Andrews,
Lisbon, Antwerp, Arles, Spires, Vienna, Frankfort, Placentia, Oxford, (poor
Oxford!) Constance, Mecklin, Brandenburg, Vilna, Cleves, cum multis aliis, etc.
All which Kingdoms, Countries, Cities and Towns, or any of them, I say, are
strongly menaced by this eminent Solar Eclipse; and their inhabitants will have
great need to make use of both prayers and tears, to avert the heavy
Judgments of a highly-offended God, at this time, and for some ensuing years,
impending over them.

A Word unto each of these Kingdoms and Countries, more plainly.

Holland and Zealand, you are in the first and chiefest place, concerned in
this Celestial Apparition. Saturn is in Opposition to your Ascendent: the Sun
is Eclipsed in your Horoscope: and the fiery Planet Mars is in Quadrate Aspect
unto it. Your Trade is in danger of being totally ruined; your Merchants, of
being utterly undone: your Great-ones, are at their wits end; and Poor-ones,
ready to mutiny for want of Bread! Make peace with England betimes, or shortly
it will be too late for you: a little more struggling will reduce you from High
and Mighty, unto Poor and Distressed States! Let not your own Astrologers (as
of late they have done) flatter you with the hopes of what is never likely to
happen: for I unfeignedly protest, all these (and greater) mischiefs will fall
upon you, unless you are wise in time, and by a prudent and sudden Submission
and seeking of Peace prevent it.

This was written before the late Rebellion there; but the Caution may serve
for the future.
Scotland has always had the reputation of a wise Nation: let not an Ignote
Zeal against things indifferent, overcome thy Prudence: Cross the Proverb which
says, Omne malum a Boreale. Be peaceable, and be happy.

Granada, thou wast first raised out of the ruins of Illiberis, and have long
continued in great splendor: be not too confident of thy strength and riches,
but keep peace and amity with thy Neighbour-Princes: pay thy Tribute quietly to
thy undoubted Sovereign, and then thou may escape returning into thy first
matter.

Burgundia, thou did first own the God of the Christians for thy advantage:
it will be for thy profit now, to maintain thy Religion, and thy Peace.

Numidia, be quiet within thy self; quell Mutinies and Insurrections in the
bud; and pray that thy Prince be as fortunate as Massinissa was.

Carthage, (once the Lady and Mistress of Africa, and so continued near 730
years;) thou have been often obscured; now thou art threatened again, but not
with total ruin: It was thy Custom to crucify, not only the unhappie
Captain, but even him whose bad counsel had a prosperous event: Improve at this
time the advice of thy virtuous Counselors, and be happy.

Africa, (the Roman Africa I mean) thy abundant Plenty is turning into Want.

Bithynia, thou wast not formerly more peaceable, pleasant, and fertile, under
the Government of the Christians; then now thou art likely to prove unquiet,
disturbant, and barren, under the Turks.

Colchis, the glory of Armenia, thy Chemical Sun is near an eclipse; thy Golden
Fleece, and all thy Mines, are departing from thee.

Denmark, thy Prince has a Royal Genesis, yet he is but a man: let not a
Cancerian people by their policy bring thee under water.

Sweden, if Sword and Sickness get not the upper hand of thee, thou may do
pretty well: thy damage comes from the South.

Germany, be patient a little, and let the Whirlwinde pass thee; and thy Sun
shall shine again, and thy Eagle shall extend her wings, and fly a pitch,
beyond the power of Turk or Tartar to molest thee.

England, be quiet a while, thy Storm is nearly over: practice Loyalty, keep
Peace within thy self, and the conspiring world shall never injure thee.

France, the effects of Med. Coel. to a Square of Mars attend thee: trust not
too confidently to thy Purse and Power.

Palestina, the Sun's ashamed to see thy Holy Land.

Polonia minor, thou art falling retrograde under the effects of this Eclipse;
there needs no other bridle to keep thee from advancing.

Austria, cherish not Factions within thy self: thy Eclipse will prove but
Platique, and that (sine mora) without continuance: thou will recover thy glory
again.

Livonia, thy Merchants smart to purpose; domestique Quarrels, and petit
Tyrannies, bring the scourge upon thee.

Sabaudia, thou art molested both at home, and from abroad, and wilt be for a
season: afterward, thou may of Malvoy, become Salvoy again.

Thuscia, the honor of Italy, for promoting Celestial Learning; the glory of
the world, for unexhausted and never-failing Steel-mynes: pray that thy
slighting the former, bring not upon thee the malevolent effects of the later.

Caspia, Intestine Jars, and Foreign Enemies, create much trouble unto thee:
be assiduously vigilant and preparing, that the Parthian sword prove not too
sharp and heavy for thee.

Macedonia, be careful to prevent Fires, and trade not too much Westward.

Illyris, it is thy lot to have many Conquerours.

Thrace, thy ancient Custom was to mourn at the birth of Children, and to
rejoice at their death: it was a Practice Orthodox and Pious; assume it again,
it may now be necessary.

Albania, kick not against thy Superiors, nor thy Peace; lest another
Scanderbeg rise out of thy own bowels again, to punish thee.

Bulgaria, be wise; lest thy too strict adhering to a Turkish faith, ruin thy
stately Palaces, and destroy thy Princely Cities.

Lituania, Worship and serve the true God; your Dishpan, or God of Smoke,
cannot save you from common Flames or Troubles.

Saxonia, keep peace with the Emperor, and ward a Westward storm.

Hassia, thy Lion barry is like to lose his Crown; engage not too far, for fear
on it.

Thuringia, History makes mention of thy having been many times burnt, but thou
have revived, like a Phoenix out of the ashes, into greater glory. God grant
thou may be so happy now, and ever.

India, as thy Country is great and populous, so thy afflictions designed by
this Eclipse, will be great and eminent.

Orchades, thy Swans sing not so sweetly as in times past; and thy great plenty
of Fish, seems wasted: thy inhabitants grow sluggish and inactive; Diseases
waste their courage: but you will meet with timely relief and amendment.

Secondly, and not only to Kingdoms, Countries and Cities, etc. are these
Ecliptical effects carried or directed; but unto many individual persons, men,
women, and children: more especially unto such, that shall have either the
tenth degree of Cancer, or its opposite Sign Capricorn their Medium Coeli,
Horoscope, or place of either of the Luminaries in their Nativities.

Unto some persons, they denote death; to others, tedious and durable
infirmities; unto a third sort, they denuntiate a Catastrophe of Honor, and a
ruin of reputation, fame, etc. affliction by continual Controversies,
vexatious Lawsuits, etc. to a fourth sort, destruction of Parents, friends and
acquaintauce, or an absolute hatred between them and the Natives contracted or
procured, no ways reconcilable. To a fifth sort, Imprisonments, Banishments,
Exile, the wrath of Princes and Potentates. To a sixth sort, Blindness, or loss
of one of the Luminaries of their bodies: and this most certain, if the Sun and
Moon were weak, or any way afflicted at the birth of such persons.

Thirdly, such persons as shall be born at the time of this Eclipse, will
either suddenly, (or else in some short time after it) die: or if for some
competent space of time they should possess a place among the living, they will
live most miserable and diseased; subject to a thousand troubles and
infortunacies, etc. And I could wish that any ingenious adversary to
Astrology, (for some such I have charity to think there are) would take the
pains, and observe the births of such children, (for I, God permitting life and
liberty, intend to do the like) and after a candid inspection, of the Figures,
and serious observation of the Natives unto whom they belong, publish them,
either to the disparagement of Astrology, or conviction of their former
thoughts thereof. The trial would be easy, and might either correct the
confidence of Astrologers, or better in form the judgments of their
Antagonists.

Fourthly, to put a little more weight in the Seal; persons that shall be born
at the time of this Eclipse, if they shall prove vital, will be ugly, or of an
ill-favored aspect; that for their evil looks they shall be hated and abhorred
by many while they do live. The reason hereof is this: Saturn and Mars, the two
unfortunate Stars, afflict the Luminaries at the time of this Eclipse: and
Astrologers say, (nemine contradicente) When the Sun or Moon shall be (an any
Geniture whatever) in Conjunction, Quartile, or Opposition of Saturn and Mars,
(chiefly when both of them shall so suffer) it portends an ill aspect, and
great detriment and damage to the Natives sight, if not an absolute blindness.

But then (perhaps) you will say, this Astrological reason is not Universal
enough: take then a Physical one: The sight resides in the Eyes, and
particularly in the Chrystalline humor there; which is by nature cold and
moist, and governed by the Luminaries of heaven: [for Man, you must know, is a
(...), or little world, and has a Sun and Moon in him, like the greater:] now
this noble and Celestial humor, being opposed and oppressed by one more
earthly, (as Saturn properly signifies) or by one more hot and fiery, (as Mars
governs) is attracted beyond its proper and peculiar seat; and thereby made not
only less serviceable, but less pleasant, according to the quantity of the
oppression it labors under. Whence come those unpleasant looks, and abhorred
defects in many persons, commonly called Purblinde, Squint-eyed, etc. and
sometimes an absolute blindness, or total deprivation of sight.

Many more matters might have been observed from this eminent and famous Solar
defect; but these short Animadversions touching upon the principal things
thereby signified, shall serve to illustrate the effects thereof; and also to
commute for my promise made in my last years Ephemeris concerning the same.

POSTSCRIPT, Ad Lectorem.
BEing in London all the late terrible Visitation, and observing this
quondam-glorious City laboring under the mightiest Discontents imaginable;
sadly lamenting the dismal sight of Coffins, and their Cadaverous guests;
having no other Music heard within her, but Bells to a mournful tune, and her
inhabitants in every corner wretchedly bewailing the loss of their Relations of
all kinds: And taking notice, that, not only Empericks, but the learned
Physicians themselves, were deceived in their Prognostics and Cures of that
Raging Pest. It Is true, they used diverse Means, to put a check unto its fury;
but, as the number of their Antidotes increased, the Weekly Bills augmented: as
if God and Nature were angry beyond an ordinary degree of Pacification, and
would not suffer those Celestial influences to be baffled, from whence these
cruel Calamities issued.

Observing these things, I say, I was resolved to try how far Astrology might
be serviceable in this matter, and accordingly took Pen in hand; and (for this
dejected Citie's comfort and encouragement) wrote a short Discourse, which I
entitled, London's Deliverance predicted, etc.

In which Book, according to the true and plain Rules of Astrology, I
acquainted the world, when the Pest should arrive at its greatest height; and
afterward, with the time of its abatement; as also of the several Countries
suffering thereby.

And although I aimed at nothing in that Tractate, but the comfort of the
(then) many suffering souls in this great City; I have had the hard hap to be
mis-interpreted for many things therein; chiefly, for my plain discussion of
this urrifying, but most necessary Question to be scanned, viz. Whether the
Plague be catching.

For my pains in this Enquiry, Mr. John Booker, in his Almanac for 1666. is
pleased to spend above a Page upon me; and urges a Definition of the Plague,
and ingeniously explains it: but yet is pleased to let my Arguments stand
untouched, and only says, he could instance the Plague to be infectious and
catching by innumerable means, but that he wants room. I should (I confess)
have been glad to have seen his Arguments brought in opposition to mine; being
as ready (if Reason require) to retract an Error, as write a Truth. But for
any man to say, he is not of my Opinion, and not to show me a reason wherefore,
is not (I conceive) the way to win me unto his.

There is another Gentleman also, a Doctor of Physic, (which Title (fairly
obtained) and Profession also, I exceedingly honor) has been pulling at me in
Print, for my maintaining the Negative in the Question above propounded. This
Antagonist is angry in earnest, and tells the world, That I deserve to be
answered by the Magistrate, and that there is no way to suppress my Opinion, or
answer my Arguments, but by putting in execution an Order published in Queen
Elizabeth' s days.

To which I answer: If there be any such Order as he pretends, I humbly submit
my self and Opinion unto it; as also unto all other Edicts proceeding from
Authority. Contra Legem nonest disputandum: and he must be strangely
Rebellious, that opposes the Laws he lives under.

To contemn what we cannot conquer, some commend as good Policy; and to
pretend to answer a serious Argument with the power of the Magistrate, or an
Act of Parliament, is (I confess) the only infallible way to stop any
Opponents mouth. How like a Philosopher that way of arguing is, let the knowing
world judge.

But I believe this Gent. is as bold with Authority, as rigid with me: for I
never yet heard or read of any Order published, to prove the Plague contagious,
or to prohibit a discussion of that Question; except from his Pen: although I
can say, I have often consulted Poulton.

And considering some other passages of his, I perceive that he is not more
angry at that my Opinion, then at the Celestial movers, the Stars; whom (says
he) many have accused as the Authors of the Plague. I have (I acknowledge) in
the Book before mentioned, proved the Stars to be (sub Deo) the Causes of the
Pestilence: but nowhere do I bring an accusation against them, as I know of;
believing them free from guilt, and not meriting an Impeachment for the same;
they only performing that Office therein, which God appointed them for at the
beginning.

But this Gentleman (notwithstanding his aim, and fruitless pains, to render me
ridiculous, and the Stars (I study) inefficacious;) is not (in the mean time)
aware, of his own running into an Error of far greater magnitude; viz. in his
asserting the Original of the Plague to have been the ROTTEN MVTTON eaten in
the year before.

Now, let any rational man consider whether of the two, come nearest the Truth:
I, in asserting the Stars; or he, in maintaining Rotten Mutton, to be the Cause
of the Pest. An Epicurean may, and frequently does ascribe more to his belly,
then unto those glorious and ever-busied Lamps of heaven. I cannot stand here
to repeat the Arguments I have urged, to prove the Plague contagious; I must
refer the Reader, for that, to the Book it self.

But if Rotren Mutton be attended with such fatal effects, why not a Plague
every year after a Rot of Sheep? which is the common consequence of every moist
Summer. Or, if the Plague were truly the effect of Rotten Mutton; how then
holds it true, what he asserts elsewhere, in the same Discourse? viz. That the
Plague came to us from the Netherlands, and to them from Smyrna, in a parcel of
infected goods. Was there a Rot of Muiton in Smyrna too? Risum teneatis, etc.

To conclude: let it suffice at present, that I deny any such way of infection
by Goods; and reject the Romance of his Rotten Mutton: and (as before) do
assert, the Stars (sub Deo) to be the true and essential causes of all Plagues:
and subscribe unto it.

John Gadbury.
From my Study in Brick-Court by the Bowling-Alley, near the Deans Yard
Westminster.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THe BODY of ASTROLOGY (so often by me promised) consisting of many various and
different Subjects, each of which requires much more Study and Pains then I at
the first expected, will, I hope, this year be fully ready for the Press; I
having gone through the greatest part thereof already, and doubt not (by Gods
assistance) to complete it in due time: which whenever done, I shall (with
all Candor and Faithfulness) make public, for the Advantage of the
Industrious Students in this Art, and perfection of Astrology in the English
Tongue.

Several Books written and published by JOHN GADBVRY.
AN Emendation of Hartgil's Astronomical Tables. The Celestial Ambassador. The
Doctrine of Nativities. The Nativity of King Charles the First, of blessed
Memory. Britains Royal Star. The Nature of Prodigies. The King of Swedes
Nativity. The Spurious Prognosticator unmasked. The Novice-Astrologer
instructed. Nuncius Astrologicus. The Collection of Nativities. Dies
Novissimus, or Doomsday not so near as dreaded. An Astrological Disceurse of
the three Comets, in 1664, and 1665. Londons deliverance from the Plague. Vox
Solis: or, A Discourse of the Suns Eclipse in June 1666. Besides his Almanacks,
annually continued since 1655.

