AN ANSWER TO THE ARTICLES PREFERRED AGAINST EDWARD FINCH, Vicar of
Christ-Church, by some of the Parishioners of the same.

Whereunto is added a just and modest Reply, to a most Scurrilous, Scandalous,
and Malicious Pamphlet (as by the Title may appear) of an uncertain AVTHOR.

By EDWARD FINCH, Vicar aforesaid.

Printed in the Year, 1641.

TO THE READER.
READER,
ENvious Pamphlets, and scurrilous Frontispieces, the dear delight, and itch
of this Scribbling Age, are but ad Populum phalerae, rather the act of Malice,
then Ingenuity. For my part, I am Vir dolorum, The chastisements of my
youthful fraileties are upon me, and so to retort virulent language upon my
Delator, were more to betray, then fortify my innocence. It was not of old,
Deus in turvine, God in the whirlewind, or in the earthquake, but In aura
tenui, in the still voice. Certainly, 'twold have argued more of God in the
man, if he had been less blustering in his distractions. To thrust out only
the right Eye was modest cruelty in Naash the Ammonite; But Philistinelike to
put out both Eyes, and to produce the Sampson a laughing stock, this is at
least, Laesa patientia.

To murder me in my Morality, in my Religion, to make me the peoples scorn,
to condemn both my person and function to a night more horrid then that of
Egyptian darkness.

But as David of Shimei, forbid him not, it may be the Lord will look upon
mine afflictions, and do good unto me for his cursing me this day. Leaving the
wretch to the repentance of his fact, and the pardon of his and my good God; my
business now makes to thee Gentle Reader, Let me in the bowels, of our Savior
implore thee, impartially and without prejudice, to peruse the brief and
modest contents of my just and forced Vindication. In this doing thou shall at
once both oblige and felicitate

Thy much humbled, E. F.

MY ANSWER TO EACH ARTICLE in Order, as I delivered it before the Grand
Committee.
Article 1.
FIrst, That the said Master Finch is very officious and observant in
worshipping the great Idol lately erected in the said Church, viz. the Altar.

TO the first, I utterly denyde and do any officiousness or observancie in
worshipping the Altar, as is alleged: only thus much I confessed, That I never
came into the Temple to execute my Ministerial Function, but I gave a decent
reverence to God, being his own house, and not only at the Administration of
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but also when I came to the Font at the
administration of the Sacrament of Baptism, and with as much reverence and
humility, appearing before so great a Majesty, whose unworthy Minister I was,
and am, when I was conducted by the Officer into the Pulpit.

Artic. 2.
That he exacteth sometimes twenty shillings a piece, and many times more, for
funeral Sermons, himself seldom preaching any of them, and affirms his
Pulpit to be his Shop, and therefore must improve it to the utmost.

To the second I confessed, that I demanded for the most part of the most able
sort, twenty shillings for a Funeral Sermon; to those of an inferior rank,
I either took ten shillings, or upon notice of their inabilitie, (though they
were desirous to bury their friend in a fashionable way, being the last duty,
or office of love they could perform for them) I gave it them freely, and not
only forgave them my own duties, but persuaded the rest of the Officers of
the Church to do the like.

Artic. 3.
That he is very careless and negligent in executing his Pastoral duty,
having appeared scarce twice in twelve months to Officiat the same, nay, not
once in a year.

To the third I confessed, that by imprisonment, I was enforced to execute my
place by others, allowed Preachers, sufficient and able men, my self not being
sufferd to come abroad, without great charges, which I was not able to disburse.

Artic. 4. 5.
^^at he ordinarily preaches in his Surplice.

That he also wears his Surplice in going the Perambulation of the Parish.

To the fourth and fifth, I answered, that I held the wearing of the Surplice
to be a matter of indifferency in it self. But it was ever accustomably worn
in that Church: For besides that it is Parochial, it is also (by the
Foundation of H. 8.) Cathedral, where all solemnities of that nature are used.

Artic. 6.
That he has not for many years been resident in the Parish, but lets to
farm his Vicaridge-house

To the sixth I confessed, I let my house, constrained thereunto by Imprisonment,
as before, but is no Vicaridge house as is alleged.

Artic. 7.
That he makes no conscience of Oaths, but is a frequent violater of Gods
holy Name, by often swearing thereby, with fearful and horrid Imprecations,
and execrations, as was most abundantly proved.

To the seventh, I did (as it was fit for me and every good Christian to do)
acknowledge Swearing to be a great and most abominable sin; but denied that I
ever usde it frequently. But said, that if at any time through passion and
forgetfulness I had offended my God that way, I humbly before them craved
pardon of him in the first place, to give me grace, that I might never offend
any more in that kind, and entreated their Christian compassion to pass it by
upon promise of amendment.

Artic. 8.
That he is a common haunter of Tavernes, and Alehouses, and is often and
openly drunk.

I denyde it, otherwise then upon necessity, society of Neighbors and
friends, and I hope without offense, or scandal.

Artic. 9.
That he has exacted excessive Fees, as ten shillings for a Christning.

I denyde any exaction of Fees, other then my Predecessors had formerly taken,
nor so much neither, and no ten shillings for a Christning, neither came it in
proof.

Artic. 10.
That before he will perform his duty in Burials, and upon other occasions, he
will have his lawless and unconscionable demands satisfied, whereof some of
the Petitioners have complained to the Diocesan, but it seems his correction
was gentle, for no amendment has followed.

To the tenth I gave this Answer, that the Article answered it self; for it
pretended a Complaint, and a Correction, and n^ man is to be punished twice for
one fault. But before whom this complaint was, and when it was, for my part, I
know not of it, nor ever heard of it.

Artic. 11.
That he has demanded, and taken for Burials of Parishioners, ten and twelve
pounds a piece, and has shut, or caused to be shut up the Church doors, and
not suffered the ground to be broken for Parishioners, until his undue
exactions have been satisfied.

To the eleventh I denyde it.

Artic. 12. 13. 14. 15.
That he has administered the Communion to a dying woman, when he was so
drunk, that he forgot the Service, failed in rehearsing the Lords Prayer, and
at his departure was not able to return to his place of abode without leading.

That at the same time he caused all present with the said woman to depart the
room, and then enjoined the sick party to confess unto him all her secret
sins.

That being so alone with the said woman, he demeaned himself so uncivelly,
and used such unseemely gestures toward her, that she was feign to cry out for
her husband to come in.

That afterward for performance of this good service about the said woman, he
sent for a Fee of three shillings four pence.

To these, I confessed that I was sent for to administer the Sacrament to a dying
woman, then dwelling at the George in Warwick lane. I confessed likewise, that I
desired two or three women that were there to depart the room, that I might
speak one word to the sick party. And it was this. If any sin trouble your
conscience, you shall do well to reveal it, and I will give you the best
comfort I can. She replyde, she thankt God there was none at all, whereupon I
called in the company immediately, and we went to the performance of what I
came for, namely, the administration of those holy Mysteries of the body and
blood of our blessed Savior. But that I was drunk I utterly denyde it,
neither was it positively proved, but merely by the threats of some of the
Prosecutors, as I can make appear, fairly extorted from them, and that in a
doubtful and ambiguous sense too. The husband and the women acquitted me
before the Committee for any ill behavior, or incivility, or any outcry made
by the Woman.

Artic. 16. 17.
That November 5. 1639. he would suffer no Sermon to be Preached, unless out
of the Collection for the Poor, he might have a Fee of thirteen shillings and
four pence, but finding the Collection to be small, he took ten shillings.

That this last November 5. 1640. he would neither preach himself, nor suffer
any other to preach.

To these I answered, that I did acknowledge to have received ten shillings for
a Sermon on the 5. of November last was Twelumonth, from my then Curate, master
Thomas Risdon, who came to me from the Parish, as he pretended, with an earnest
request, that I would give way to it, and he would preach. But from whence the
money came, I professed ingenuously, I did not to that day know, nor do I yet.
It is known in my whole practice, for near upon 11. years, I have been more
careful to add then to diminish from the poor, which has causde some
differences between my self and some of the Parish, which is still an
heart-burning, I am afraid. As for an instance, Master Whales 100. l.
mis-imployde contrary to the express Will of the Testator; the mis-imploiment
of which, I know has been out of the Poores way many a sum of money, which
they feel the smart of. I added over and above, that in regard of the
Commemoration of that blessed and happy Deliverance on the above named day, at
Saint Paul's Church whither some Reverend and grave Divine is, by the right
reverend Father in God the Lord B. of London, chosen out of one of the
Universities (my Church being so near there was never any Sermon there before.
But the Right Honorable the Lord Major, the Aldermen his Brethren, with the
rest of the grave Citizens of every Parish, do in a solemn manner go thither.
And the next 5. of November I was never so much as asked. If I had, I would
willingly have given way to it. And this year there was one.

Artic. 18.
That he and his wife having for many years lived asunder with much obloquie,
he keeps company with diverse women, suspected of incontinency.

To this I answered, that I knew not any woman I kept company withal, any
ways suspected of incontinencie, unless it were by such scandalizing
Pamphleters, who first raisde the same, and study nothing more then to take
away men and women's reputations. Besides, I have answered those Calumnious
aspersions in two several Courts, and been freed in both, viz. In the Arches,
and upon an Appeal against me in the Court of Delegates.

Artic. 19.
That he has since his being Vicar of the said Parish much opposed the
Lecture, which without intermission has for many years been continued in the
West end of the said Church, called the Old or Lower Church, (early in the
morning on the Lords day) not suffering any one to preach the same, unless he
the said Vicar might have extraordinary hire for permitting of it, viz. about
forty pounds at one time, and twenty pounds at another time, and diverse other
sums at other several times, and at this present twenty pounds a year, and
yet not contented therewith, he threatens to arrest the present Lecturer,
unless he may have his unjust demands satisfied.

This I denyde, And I wonder they were not ashamed to make it an Article, since
diverse of the Parish know the clean contrary, and others also Nay, some did
profess to me, that I had been very just and earnest in setting it up, and had
not deluded them as others did. And without my pains and zeal in it, they had
conceived no hopes of it. For which they gave me many thanks, and said, I
should find the love of the Parish ever hereafter, which you may see and judge
by the presenting of these Articles, what the requital of my love showed to
them has found.

Artic. 20.
That he detaineth and keeps away diverse Books belonging and appe^taining to
the said Church.

To this I answered, that by direction from that Honorable Assembly, the
Churchwardens received the Book of the Foundation of H. the 8. and the
Register book of Burials, Marriages, and Christnings, which was always
accustomably left in the Chest in the Church. My self having one Key, and each
Churchwarden another, according to a Canon in that case provided.

Artic. 21.
That many times in receiving his own exacted Fees for Burials, he has also
received Duties due to the Churchwardens for the use of the Poor of the said
Parish, and detained them to his own use.

To the last I denied it, But admitted* I said I was responsable by Law; and
when the accounts were brought in by the Churchwardens, which always use to
be at Easter, I would give satisfaction for what could be made justly appear
to be due to them on my part.

An Answer to the pretended proofs, which the Author has falsely colected, and
inserted in his Pamphlet.
THat the Communion Table was removed, I grant it; but that was no particular
act of mine, but a command from Authority at a public Visitation. I do not
remember that my self set any helping hand to the removal of it; but if I
did, I am sure I used no insolent or proud gesture, either at my approaches to
it, departure from it, or passing by it, as is falsely suggested: but what I did
was, as in my answer to my first Article.

That I bow at the Name of Jesus, I confess it, induced thereunto by the
practice of the Church, for many hundred years, and conceiving it to be due by
the Text, Phil. 2. 10.

Concerning exacting of Fees (a thing for which I stand so much condemned) I
have given an answer to the Articles in general, but will give the Reader
satisfaction in the particulars alleged. And

1. For Master How: He was indeed an ancient Parishioner, and one to whom (so
long as he lived) I was much beholding; and because he was one that honored
the Church, and the well established Government thereof, and was indeed a
Benefactor (if it may be so properly called) by his daily solicitation of
friends, to a good value. I gave order he should be decently and solemnly
enterr'd, and attended on to his grave by those that appertain to the Church
(the Quire.) It was desired Master Risdon should preach, I gave way to it, but
it was not performed, and the reason was this. There came an Order from
Authority, that there should be no night Funerals, upon a complaint made by
the Heralds at Arms; the Executor of master How had notice of this, and that
the whole Solemnity must be finished by four a clock; this was promisde, till
past six we waited, at last Master Risdon said unto me, I neither will, nor
dare preach, because it is past the Canonical hour, and against the Order of
the Lords, nor is it safe for you to bury it this night, let us attend no
longer, but be pleased to give order that the Church doors may be shut up.
Whereupon they were; presently after the Guests invited to the Funeral came
with the Coarse, and knocked, I caused the doors presently to be opened, and
the Body was buried presently. Without a Sermon indeed, because of master
Risdons former refusal, not out of any denial of mine. It was never proved
that I had five pound for a Sermon for him, and that master Joyce, who was
brought as a witness, knows well, and so does one master John Wright a
Gentleman of our Parish, who was by at the agreement, and will testify that it
was for the ground, and the other Church Officers duties, which for my share
came but to five shillings, besides the ground which was in the Chancell, and
by consequence, the benefit of opening of it, and interring of the Body,
totally belonging to me, for which I had three pound laid down, of which master
Wright lent the Executor twenty shillings.

2. For master Darnton, I confess, that he dying in my Parish, I did expect as
large a proportion for my duties, as any that should come out of another Parish
to Officiate in my Pulpit. He mistook himself that said, I called it my Shop.
Indeed, this I said, both upon that and the like occasion to himself and
others, that it was my livelihood, and that I had reason to make the best
benefit, as well as any of them of their shops; and this I hope may receive a
favorable construction. That I denied absolutely that Doctor Holeworth should
preach his Funeral Sermon, is utterly false, but as master Pettit, I presume,
upon occasion will testify for me, I said, I thought my Pulpit honored by
him, and so indeed I do, and ever shall; He is known to be a man so generally
learned, a man of so rare abilities and indowments of nature, and on whom God
has bestowed such an admirable gift and faculty in the way of his Preaching.
That I spent my time as the Tavern while the Funeral was Solemnizing, is like
the rest of the Authors Scandals, maliciously inserted, and utterly false:
neither did any such thing come in proof.

To the Articles concerning my Superstitious affection to the Surplice, and
other (as he ignorantly terms them) Popish practices; which I thank God, I am
far from, and hope in God, ever shall be. I have answered to them before; and
his vain babbling Tawtologie, and multiplication of terms, to infuse suspicion
against me, in point of my Religion, into the peoples heads, my practice being
known to be otherwise, shall not make me wast my time, and tire the Reader.

As for the Article concerning my Drunkenness, It was testified by Master
Risdon, the Lecturer, who for fear of losing his quarterly Contribution might
happily be drawn to say that, which I daresay, and he himself had since said,
he will not, if he came upon his oath, swear for a World. And it was observed
by many, that he gave his Testimony very faintly, and not without being jogged
and egged forward by one William Greenhill, a Chandler, that stood behind him,
(That Arch-incendiary of Christ-Church Parish who, together with his brother in
Law John, I know not what to call him more, have been the Plotters and
Contrivers of these Articles in Parliament against me, and the Procurers of
witnesses to testify upon them, as I will make appear. Were it not by means
of these two, I am confident, and so are many more besides me, that my self
and Parishoners should live as lovingly, and as peaceably, as any Pastor and
people in England. But this by the way. In brief, I believe it is an hard
matter to swear positively when a man is drunk: but he that glanc't at that
testimony, let him knock at his own breast, and see if he be not guilty
himself of that sin, and in a higher measure too, which he lays to the
charge of others, though that's no warrant for me nor any other to sin,
because I can produce Presidents.

Concerning the Administration of the Sacrament to the dying woman, her husband
himself did before the Committee, and will any where else clear me for any
rudeness, or any incivillity, which might cause her to cry out, and so did
Mistress Johnson her Neighbor in Warwick Lane, and the rest of the Women then
present. All that one of them said, was this, that she conceited me to be
distempered in drink, and that she we might; my distractions and griefs have
been so many, my miseries and afflictions so great, that when it is well known
I have neither eat nor drank that day, by my looks, discourse, and unwonted
alteration of speech, I have been supposed to be distempered, and I desire the
Reader to judge of me in a Christian way, and to believe this to be true. The
improbabilitie to tempt a dying woman in an uncivell way, being in all men's
opinions, so abominable, rediculous, that I should injure my self to God,
about a confutation which the Witnesses did for me.

Concerning my Sermon which I Preached on the 5. of November, about two years
since, it was alleged by one Bamfoard, that I should deliver words to this
effect, The Plotters in that business were but a few male-contented Persons,
and that they desired at their death that this act might be forgotten, and that
I should say, that I thankt God that it was so almost, and I hoped 'twould be
quite forgotten.

Should I have delivered any such Doctrine in a Pulpit, or spoken such words in
any place whatsoever, upon the perprecation of so horrid and damnable Treason
as that, a Treason never to be forgot while the World lasts; I confess, I
deserved to suffer the same, if not a far greater punishment then they did;
Hanging, drawing, and quartering were not considerable punishments, they were
too low for the offense in me, because a Minister; and I could not for shame
sue for any mercy here. And it is a wonder, if not a miracle to me, that in
so great a Congregation as mine is, not one of the Auditors were able to
testify any such thing but himself, and he but fumblingly neither. I am sure
there are diverse of the Parish, learned men and good Scholars, many that have
tenacious memories as he can possibly have. But God forgive him for casting
such an horrid aspersion upon me, I do forgive him from my heart, 'twas a
mistake in the carriage, that is my construction of him, in point of Charity.
And as it falls out, it is well I pen all I Preach, as the Pamphleter says, in
a written Book, for by that means, I am able to give the Reader satisfaction,
and set it down word for word as I delivered it.

The words upon which I Preached, were these, Or despisest thou the riches of
Gods goodness, etc. After I had spoken of the riches of Gods goodness in
general, I descended to particular instances, wherein this Kingdom, above all
other Nations whatsoever, had reason to contemplate of the riches of his
goodness. And first I instan'st, for blessing us with the glorious Sunshine
of the Gospel, in a perspicuous and clear way, wholly hid from many, and
dark unto others, etc. Then I showed how the riches of his goodness had be ne
manifested to us, in his manifold and sundry Deliverances, from 88. the
Pestilence, and from the Gunpowder-Plot, and there I took occasion to say thus
much. This days Solemnity, I hope, we shall never forget; but as once a year
publicly, so every day privately commemorate, A day on which the King himself
and his Issue, that State, and all the Commons assembled in the High Court of
Parliament should at one instant have bin blown up, and our Kingdom brought to
utter desolation. This could not certainly be any project or invention by
mortals, how politic soever: Certainly the Devils broke loose from Hell, and
took upon them humane shapes to lay the groundwork of so great a Conspiracy.
No History can parallel it, no Age come near so cruel an intention, so bloody
a Design, tending to the utter extirpation and dis-hereditation of us, and all
our Posterities, rights and interests to the Worlds end. The subject is
mooving, and able to melt the most stony and obdurate heart. And I am persuaded
that though the desire of change and innovation in Religion, or hope of Honor
and preferment (being formerly discontented persons, which works much in such
spirits) or desire of gain, or profit, or some such like thing: yet they
themselves could not choose but have some relactancie, and startle at it, being
a fact of that high nature, so generally prejudicial to the Country in which
they received their birth and education, all their means, livelihood, and
subsistancie in this world. Resolute I know they were ever to the last moment
of their lives, and little or no confession, no signs of sorrow or repentance
could be drawn from them, though strongly labored that way for the good of
their souls. Yet there were amongst them that did profess, not only a
dislike, but even an utter loathing and detestation of so horrid and prodigious
a Treason, And wished this, that no records might be registered, no remains
might be kept, whereby it might appear to Posterity: what enemies and slaves
they had been? how vilianous and treacherous to their own Country? Non
ignota Cano, Their Confessions are extant, and I have read some of them to this
purpose. It Is greater to conceive the horridness of this Treason, then to
endeavor to aggravate it with words and language. No tongue how fluent soever,
being able to set forth the foulness, the Devillishnesse of it. Vox fancibus
haeret, I am at a stand, and will forbear to name if any more, but leave you
to meditate on the riches of Gods goodness in that great deliverance.

Pardon good Reader, my rediousnesse, it stands me upon to be punctual upon
such an allegation as this, and laid down to be fully prooved. Let any that
has read that and reads this, and compare them together, see if any such
doctrine can be picked out of that part of my Sermon, but merely the contrary.
'Twas a profitable inversion of my words, for them to make me more odious (as
they have done in the rest) to the Honorable Court of Parliament, which I hope
they will take into their grave considerations, and not suffer me to groan
under the pressure of their malicious accusations.

Touching the proof that I had taken for the Sermons, at seven of the clock on
Sabbath day mornings several sums of money of the Parish, I confess. And
thus it was, The Parish after the choice of a Lecturer there, before they
stirred, at the motion of a worthy and eminent member of that Honorable House
of Commons, whose Name I dare not be to bold with. For my willingness to
condescend to let them have a free choice of a man they liked of, did
voluntarily under their hands, as will appear in the Vestry Book, give me 20.
pound a year, as an addition to my small Living, to be paid by 5. pound a
quarter, this fell short. The Sickness drew on, it was thought fit that
Lecture, above others (because it was a Lecture, to which all persons, both out
of the City and Suburbs, Out-places, and By-Alleys, which might breed a
general Contagion) should surcease. When it pleased God, to stay his hand, a
new Lecturer was chosen, and the money I received from them was not for the
setting up of the Lecture, but for the arreares of the 20. pound unpaid, and
that they know very well.

Touching the Testimony of the Coachman, I hope the World will conceive, that
it is no argument of Incontinency to ride abroad in a Coach, and take the air.
And I hope the world will judge that if every man had made choice of his Mate,
and intended any incivility, and vile and obscene gestures, certainly we would
not have been so impudent as to call up a Coachman to be witness of it.
Besides the fattest of the three was my own Sister, since dead, and I hope with
God. And I hope the World will in Charity believe, that God has not given me
over to a reprobate sense, to be so unnatural, as insuch, as is alleged to
pollute and defile my own Sister. That supposd, I hope the World will yet
further in Charity believe, that I would not stand by and see another be
uncivil, and she so immodest, flesh and blood would not have endured that.
And for setting them down at Newgate, and studying there to make an excuse to
their Husbands, where they had been, for my part, I know no such thing, neither
am I acquainted with any such conditions in Women.

And because the scandalous Pamphelter says, we arrived at a house fit for our
intention, I shall satisfy you in that, The place we arrived at, was the
sign of the Goat at Hammersmith. For which cause, the ridiculous fellow, in
the Frontispeece of his abominably absurd Pamphlet, pictures a Coach with
persons in it, and over the head, Away for Hammersmith. The ground of his fond
conceit. The persons that live there, and have done for many years, are of
that credit and repute, so generally known for their honesty and sufficiency,
that they would scorn, if they had suspected any such thing, to have suffered
the least show of incivilitie in their house; and besides, they knew us all to
well for that. But to aggravate proofs in a continued malice, I believe they
hired this journeyman Coachman for a small matter (for he is foully slandered if
that will not do it) to say any thing they would have him

Concerning my frequenting Mistress Stevensons company, I could hardly avoid
that, because I dyeted and lodged in the house: and for Mistress Valentine,
her husband going to Sea, left me in trust with the mannaging of his whole
estate, and the bringing up of his Children. David Lloyd his servant, and
diverse others, can, and will at any time be ready to testify: but never kept
company with any of them both, in any uncivil way. Concerning the woman he
calls my wife, which I do not, nor have reason to acknowledge to be so,
reasons not only known to my self, but many more, it is as false as malicious.

Concerning Mistress Valentines Kinswoman, I neither know her, nor to my
remembrance ever saw her above once, and that was in the Kitching at the
Chequer at Dowgate, an open and public place, for all comers, and therefore
unfit for such a lustful desire as he mentions her. Neither did I ever know
her name, till of late, and upon enquiry I find that before she was married,
her name was Margaret Sweet, one that lived by making of Buttons (a profession
I dislike not, I speak it not for that) but she seldom wrought not above once
or twice in a month, but ran up and down after several young men, no
constant abode at any certain place, but ran from lodging to lodging, a common
Talebearer, and makebate between party and party, and noted for this among
all her kindred, that they could never believe one word that proceeded out of
her mouth. Let the World judge what a witness this demure creature is. And the
Pamphleter tells me one thing, which I never knew of, that a Bishops wife may
be a Lady, we have no such honor conferred upon their wives in our Kingdom,
and in other parts they are not married. But the Devil owed him a shame, and
be forgot himself before he was aware.

Concerning the Testimony of one Benson, that lived once at the Queens head in
Smithfield, but now at the Bull head in Cheapeside: It is alleged that I should
speak in his house six years ago, at a dinner upon occasion of discourse,
these words, That man which has a handsome woman to his Wife, and was jealous
without a cause, it was lawful for her to make (so the Pamphleter deserved,
nay, the testimony of Benson) him a Cuckold; and rather then he should not be
made one, I would ride an 100. miles to do it my self; that this point of
Doctrine I had preached, and would preach, and that to all eternity: I take God
to witness, as I shall answer it at his Tribunal, when I have most need of his
mercy, I neither remember any such, either words, or meeting. And what is
spoken in mirth at a Table, may in six years be easily forgotten; and the
former part to be jocular and inoffensive. The latter troubled me, that I
should Preach it, whereupon I besought the Committee that they would be pleased
to ask Benson, and the rest, whether he, or any of them present, who were my
Accusers in other matters, and my constant Auditors, whether he or any of them
had ever heard me preach it, or no. They conceived it to be a very material
question, and accordingly demanded it, the rest were silent (not an argument of
consent, but of ignorance, as not knowing any thing of the matter) and Benson
answered, no indeed, I never heard him preach it. This being only a merry
speech (if any such speech did proceed from me) will, I hope, be conceived not
to be an offensive of any such nature, as the Pamphleter would have it.
Heartily sorry I am, if any such inconsiderate words past from me, and I hope,
God and the Parliament, will forgive my extravagant language.

Concerning my coming in unseasonably, when I lay in the Cloisters with Master
Stevensons wife, pretended to be testified by the then Porter of Christ
Hospital, Master Phillips; it is utterly false, there never was any such
thing, he never affirmed any such thing, and I have inserted a Copy of his
renunciation, under his own hand, the Original whereof I have.

And this it is,

KNow all men whom this does concern, Against the Scandalous Papers published
in Print, against Master Finch Vicar of Christ-Church, That John Phillips the
late Porter to Christ-Hospitall, does, and will prove and maintain; That
Master Finch did never, at any time, at what hour soever of the night, he went
forth, or came in at the Gates, to his Lodging at M. Stevensons, misbehave
himself in words or deeds to the said Porter, as is published, but always
demeaned himself courteously to him, not giving any cause of grumbling or
mumbling at him. And for his sweet heart Mistress Stevenson, as is suggested
in the Book, he never saw any more familiarity between them, whereby to show
any cause of suspicion of secret love, more then to any other woman.

Subscribed JOHN PHILLIPS.

This was a proof much insisted upon, and of which there was taken by the
Committee more then ordinary notice. And therefore this appearing to be utterly
false, I hope it will be conceived, that the other Articles are as well
Scandalous, by adding to them more then was delivered before the Comittee,
as well as his Testimony is wonderfully enlarged, and clean altered by the
Pamphlerer from what he spoke.

Concerning the two Sisters mentioned in the Book, 'till long since the
publication of it, I never understood who they were, but by accident I was
informed, that it was one Mistress Buckle and Mistress Jordan; In the first
woman's company I never was, and if she dyed of the Pox, and her head dropped off
in the Coffin, that concerns not me, and I believe it a mere slander. In
mistress Iordans company I was twice, and no more, upon a difference,
mistress Johnson and mistress Whitney, both of my Parish, referred to master
James Waters the then Churchwarden, and my self. And this diverse are living to
testify.

Thus the Pamphleter ends his proofs in particular, alleging that more such
foul and scandalous things might have been proved, but glances at the heads
of none. Indeed he need not, these were sufficiently bad, if they were true,
but I thank God they are not.

Ex ungue Leonem, Let the World conceive but thus much by this little, that if
he had had any other crime, of any consequence whatsoever, or his malice could
have invented, what favor I had been like to find from a brazen faced
fellow, void of all sense and truth, that has dip't his pen so falsely and
injuriously against me.

He might as well have inserted in his Book, that I writ diverse and sundry
Letters, between two and three hundred to be seen, sent to the Lady Wolley
deceast, for several sums of money, for the relief of Prisoners, poor
Scholars, decea'st Ministers Widows, setting up of new married couples, and
many more such Stratagems, converting it all to my own use, without having yet
given any account. He might as well have inserted, that I seldom taught any
Scholars, whose friends were of ability, but I got money from their Parents,
for the above named uses, and kept it to my self. He might have inserted that
I was found behind a Grammar School door, young, and know not mine own name,
nor the offspring from whence I came.

His naming of places of Scripture, in the thundering of judgments, concerns
all men as well as my self: and I hope neither I, nor any other of the Clergy,
take them ascendently from the foot of us to the head; for to those the fellow
chiefly, but most ignorantly, applies them. His terms upon me of Athisticall,
son of Beliall, and putting on a Whores forehead, carrying my self most
proudly and insolently, are terms I return upon himself, as being most
guilty of them; I take them as scurrilous and railing language, and therefore
pass them by with scorn and indignation. I do only observe one thing in a
word, to see how the foolish fellow contradicts himself; he accuses me for
Officiating shamelesly in mine own person, and presently after condemns me,
that I seldom or never come amongst them. And for that, Courteous Reader,
suspend your Judgment when time shall serve. I hope to give a clear
satisfaction to all men, for forbearing as yet my constant personal
performance.

To conclude, he condemns me that I commit many of the forsaid condemned
Superstitious, wicked, and drunken practices afresh without any blushing, or
the least sign of relenting.

For the satisfaction of the Reader, I have inserted this ensuing Petition.

To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in the Commons House of
Parliament assembled.
The humble Petition of the Parishioners of Christ-Church, London.
Shows
THat the Petition and Articles have been heretofore presented to this
Honorable assembly, charging Master Edward Finch, Vicar of the said Parish,
with several misdoings, in part attested by witnesses, upon hearing before the
Grand Committee for Religion; Which we find him to have fallen into his time of
many Suits, Troubles, and Imprisonments, and consequently, will admit of the
more favorable construction, and he more capable of pity; that the end aimed
at by the said Petition, who wish the reformation not the ruin of the said M.
Finch.

Wherefore they are humble Suitors to this Honorable Assembly, that the said
Petition and Articles may be withdrawn, and no further disquisition be
thereupon had, that the said M. Finch may be restored to the good opinion of
this Honorable Assembly, and left to Officiate his Cure amongst them, as to
his duty belongs, and by which all his livelihood that he has in the World,
and that but a slender one neither.

And they shall ever pray
This Petition which I have to show was subscribed by most of the Gentry, and
diverse other persons of quallity, honesty and ability in the Parish. And many
more hands I might have had, had I regarded the number of the men, above the
integrity and worth of the persons.

This has not as yet been presented unto the Parliament; the weighty Affairs
of the State considered, I hope it will be conceived to be rather modesty in
me, to forbear pressing upon their more urgent businesses, then negligence in
following my own occasions. In all humility I cast my self at the feet of
that Honorable Assembly, imploring their favor and charitable construction of
me; and deploring my own misfortune, that any sincere and well intended
Ministry has not brought forth so good fruit, by reason of some particular
prejudices cast upon me, as I hoped it would have done, and which I continually
prayed to God it might had done, and still may.

I have now done, and refer all to thy consideration, Courteous Reader. And I
could have heartily wished that the Pamphleter, had rather spent his time in the
due execution of that profession whereunto God has called him. Doing what
belongs to him without Dissimulation, not consuming his time in writing of lame
and ridiculous Rhimes (I cannot for shame call them Verses, for fear some that
have read them should laugh at me) and setting forth Scurrilous Pamphlets,
without any sense, wit, truth, or approbation.

FINIS.

