A DISCOURSE Whether it may be Lawful to take USE FOR MONEY

Written by Sir ROBERT FILMER, And published by Sir Roger Twisden, with his
PREFACE to it.

LONDON, Printed for Will. Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar. 1678.

TO THE Reader.
AS soon as I had understanding in the affairs of this World, I became sensible
how grievous it was to lie under the heavy disease of paying Interest,
Consideration, or Use, (term it how you will) for Money: And finding it
generally cond^mned by those Judgments and Learning I did most esteem, I began
to question with my self whether the sin were not of that rature that I my self
in ^aying did concur in the some offece with the taker, according to that Romans
1. 32.
of St. Paul, in the vulgar Latin, qui talia agunt digni sunt morte, non solum
qui faciunt sed etiam qui consentiunt facientibus. Which doubt I found after
propounded by Aquinas 2a 2ae q. 78. a. 4. but neither so resolved by him, or
his learned Commentator Cajetan, as that I received satisfaction in the point.
Upon which occasion I began to search farther, and as for the Scripture I
confess the prohibitions in it seemed to me to have much of the Lawsframed for
no other than the Commonwealth of the Jews; And to be of the same nature the
Levit. 25. 8.
Jubilee, Numb. 35. 11. Deuteronomy. 19. 3.
the Cities for Refuge, Deuteronomy. 15. 1, 2.
The Release to be made every seventh year were: for it is no way probable God
who commanded them neither Exodus 21. 22, 23. 9.
to vex, nor oppress a stranger (which it is apparent was of such an one to
them as they were to the Egyptians) would have permitted the free exercise of
Use toward, him could it not have been without either oppression or vexing.
And prohibited the Jews who (either in respect of their often Releases and
Jubilees) could not give the assurances might be required in such contracts, or
for some other reasons alone known to the Divine Wisdom. As for the other
places in the Psalms, Ezekiel, etc. they ever seemed to me no more
prohibitions, but were to be referred to the first limitations of it. Besides,
what was me thought very considerable, no one Writer I met with condemned the
taking Increase upon lone of Money if offered with willingness and not
contracted for; be the party never so poor that paid it, yet I observed that
to be against Levit. 25. 36. as all oppression in buying and selling. verse 14.

Touching the practice of the Primitive Christians there is nothing more plain,
than that it was not only common amongst them, but allowed by Laws, for proof
of which there needs no more than the Title De Vsuris, found in both the Codex
of Theodosius and Justinian, and that in so high a manner as the Emperor
Constantine at the very time the Council of Nice sat, seems to have moderated
the excess, De Usuris, leg. 1. Cod. Theod. l. 2.
yet so as he that lent two Bushels was to receive a third, usurae nomine, quae
lex ad solas pertinet fruges: Nam pro pecunia ultra singulas Centesimas
creditor vetatur accipere. I know it is not without question what is the
meaning of Centesima; Accursius says it was as much as the principal in a
year. Glossad Novel. 2. c. 4. ad verbum Centesima.
Est Centesima quae sorti in anno aequiparatur. And elsewhere gives this
example. Glossin Cod. de Usuris, Leg. 26. ad verb. tertiam partem, and ad Leg.
28. in principio.
Sors est duodecim usura fit in anno qualuor, sed et si octo tunc est bessis,
si aequiparatur sorti tunc est centesima. And so understands it, he that made
the Gloss upon Gratian Did. 47. c. 2. verb. Centesima.
Centesima dicitur usura quae sorti aequiparatur in anno. So that by
Constantine's allowance no man was to receive of Fruits above a third, but for
money by the year the whole sum, which was intolerable. Others are of opinion,
that the Roman manner of paying for the lone of money being by the month, which
Horace Epist. 2. in fine.
shows, Haec ubi locutus foenerator Alphius,
Jam jam futurus Rusticus,
Omnem relegit Idibus pecuniam;
Quaerit Kalendis ponere.
And of a Debtor to pay use, -- Satyr. 3. l. 3.
Tristes misero venere Kalendae.

They therefore Budaeus de ass. l. 1.
think no man should pay more than the hundredth part of the principal by the
month, called therefore Centesima, which was 12 per Cent. in the year, a large
increase, enough to ruin any Borrower. But be it which it will, it clearly
shows as De usuris Cad. Theod. Leg. 2.
the Emperor Valentinian and Theodosius say, Usury or increase for money was
jure permissum.

Neither the Laity alone, but Bishops themselves (not so careful of their
pastoral function as was fit) did Cyprian de lapsis Annotat. Pamel. 23. cap. 4.
per alienas provincias oberrantes, negotiationis quaestuosae nundinas
aucupari, esurientibus in ecclesia fratribus non subvenire, habere argentum
largiter velle, fundos insidiosis fraudibus rapere, usuris multiplicantibus
foenus augere, so that not content with what the Law allowed, they did increase
their stock by use upon use, which how unconscionable it might be, and how
performed, I will not here dispute, he that would understand how it past, may
read Accursius his Gloss. ad Leg. 28. Cod. Vsuris.

These exorbitances in the Clergy procured the 17 Canon in the Council of Conc.
general. edit. Romae. 1608. p. 23.
Nice, which yet reached none but those that were (...), within the rule of the
Church. And is undoubtedly there set down not as a thing in its own nature bad
and forbid jure divino, but as we say, jure positivo, upon the Churches
command. For, first, it did not extend to the Laity, which had it been a sin in
it self, could not have been exempted out of the command. Secondly, At the same
time the Emperor, so renowned to all posterity for piety and equity in making
Laws, established the thing it self by an Edict, as did diverse godly Princes
who succeeded. Thirdly, It only provides for the future, (...), he that should
after that time take Usury, not with any reference to the past, which had been
most inconsiderately omitted, had the thing been in its own nature bad. Neque
in ulla Lege praeteritumtempus reprehenditur nisi ejus rei quae sua sponte
scelerata ac nefaria est, ut etiam si lex non e^^et magnopere vitanda foret.
Cicero lib. 3. in Verrem. n. 76. p. 75. edit. Rob. Stephani. 1339.
As the Heathens observed, Laws looked not at offenses past, if the thing were
not in its own nature faulty. So when it provides only for the future, without
any censure of the past, there is a great probability it was tolerable before.
Fourthly, the other particulars provided for with the like severity, are
clearly juris positivi, as that none should use any manual occupation, for fo I
interpret (...) there. Which however it may be very indecently exercised in any
of the Clergy, yet certainly has no other ground for being unlawful than the
command of the Church; for St. Paul doubtless did it, Act. 5. 18. 3. 1 Cor. 4,
12, etc. Lastly, the offense seems to be much in the quantity, for they exacted
not less than (...), that is, the whole and half.

Conformable to this decree of so famous a Council, diverse provincial ones held
at Conc. Carthag. 1. cap. 13. Arelaten. 1. cap. 12. Arel. 11. c. 14.
Carthage, Arles, and elsewhere, did prohibit Usury, but everwith the
restriction to the Clergy only; indeed the Council of Carthage being put in
mind by one that in his parts it was condemned in Churchmen, Gratus the Bishop
of that Sea replies, quod in laicis reprehenditur, id multo magis in clericis
oportet praedamnari, which plainly shows it not to be condemned as in its own
nature a sin, for then the Laity as well as the Priest had been in all times
culpable, but as of that which however in some it might be tolerable, yet was
not fitting for them to exercise. And truly the excesses then taken, did so
much pass all proportion of Charity, as it well deserved reprehension, and
cause the Fathers to speak with more earnestness against it than other sins to
which men were by nature less addicted than that of Covetousness. And for proof
of it, there needs no other testimony than that of Justinian, whose care was
veterem duram and gravissimam usurarum molem ad mediocritatem ducere, etc. and
does therefore establish what should be taken; too long to be here inserted; he
that would know more particularly, may have recourse to De usuris, Leg. 26.
cod. Just.
the law it self. It suffices me, that the Emperor having there proportioned
what people of several conditions should take, he concludes, Caeteros autem
omnes homines dimidiam tantummodo Centesimae usurarum nomine posse stipulari,
and eam quantitatem usurarum etiam in aliis omnibus cafibus nullo modo ampliari
in quibus citra stipulationem usurae exigi solent; what dimidium Centesimae
was, I must refer you to that I have said before, though Acursius explains it
to be half the principal, by this verse, quaerere semisses possunt communiter
omnes: It seems by Novel. 121. 138. and other Laws, Use in those times, however
thus moderated by the Emperor (who likewise took away Ibid. Leg. 28.
Use upon use) was very high.

If any shall question how these Laws were censured by the holy Fathers of
those times, I confess my self to have read nothing in particular of those
concern Usury, yet in general De vita Constantini, l. 1. c. 26.
Eusebius observes Constantine reduced old Laws to more equity, and indeed so
we find him to have De exactionibus Leg. 3. l. 11. Cod. Theod.
done, even those did pertain to debts, which are of near Relation. And of
Justinian we find this testimony in the sixth general Council, Conc. general.
p. 45. b. tom. 3. edit. Romans 1612. Act. 4. Sext. Syn.
(...), Which I translate thus; Justinian a King of happy memory, above all
things jealous of the true and Apostolic Faith, the truth of whose belief, as
much as it did please God by his sincere confession, so much did he raise the
most Christian policy; the Godly memory of whose devotion is to this day
famous, and the truth of his Faith dispersed throughout all the World by his
Imperial Edicts is praised. And somewhat after Ibid. p. 58. Eprope finem
Actionis 4.
(...). That is, The great Justinian, the last, but most worthy of all, whose
virtue and godliness reduced all things to a better order. How can we then
imagine Princes, so pious, so careful to correct all they found amiss, should
permit what was so full of sin as some now take it to be?

And thus for ought I know stands it amongst the Eastern Christians to this
day, unless the Mahumetan have made in some parts an alteration. But in Europe
after the year 800, that Charles the Great divided the Empire, it received some
change: For in his Capitulars we find a clear determination that it ought not
to be; Carol. Magn. and Ludovic. pi^ capit. Lib. 5. cap. 36. lib. 1. c. 5. 38.
130. etc.
Vsuram non solum clerici sed nec laici exigere debent: Which is the first
prohibition I have at all met laid upon the Lay. The Council of Nice, and the
Can. Apost. cap. 44. at post Gratian. cap. 43.
Canons attributed to the Apostles, did condemn it in the Clergy, and so
likewise did some particular Synods. And that of Carthage did not approve it
them; and Leo the first, who went farthest, did grieve Leo Epist. 1. cap. 3. p.
5.
condolere the exercise of it did cadere in Laicos qui Christianos se dici
cupiunt, intimating it had been a greater perfection of Charity, had they
abstained from it; but none extended to a command, or to determine it a thing
they ought not to do, before this Decree of the Emperor; which no doubt wanted
not Pens to defend it; for about two hundred years after, certain learned men
collecting out of Councils and Fathers, such Rules as were most apt for the
Government of the Church, and direction of a Christian, called therefore
Canonists, as those who were the beginners of the Canon Law, such were
Burchardus Bishop of Worms, Ivo of Chartres, and Gratian a Benedictine Monk,
who writ the last of them, yet began his Work 1151, Hist. Bologn. da
Ghirrardacci lib. 3.
and finished it ten years after; neither of them omitted sundry Burch. lib. 2.
cap. 129. Ivo. par. 6. cap. 196. and par. 13 in principio Gratian. Did. 47.
cause. 14. q. 3.
Chapters in condemnation of Usury, and were therein followed by Canonists,
Casuists, and Schoolmen, insomuch as there is hardly any collection of the
Decretal. lib. 5. tit. 19. in sexto lib. 5. tit. 5. Clerent. lib. 5. tit. 5,
etc.
Canon Law since, without one title de usuris, it turning infinitely to the
advantage of the Ecclesiastic, who by that was made judge of almost all
Agreements between man and man, as who shall read the Title in the Canon Law,
and what the Doctors have writ of Usury, restitution upon it, and participation
with the Usurer, etc. may plainly discern. And not content with what has past
in foro animae, in private, they have gone so far, as a Hieron de Geval. de
cognit ione per viam violentiae par. 2. q. 96.
Temporal Judge, being sometimes ready to give sentence upon a Contract, has
been stopped by the Ecclesiastic, on a pretense the Bargain was Usurious. Yet
the necessity of humane commerce has caused diverse, so great enemies to the
name of Use, with their A Mountain of Piety, is a stock of Money raised by the
Charity of good people, who observing the poor ruined by the Usury of Jews,
did voluntarily contribute good store of Treasure, to be preserved and lent
unto them, whereby they upon security might have money at a low rate to relieve
their wants, which because the mass is great, and the thing pious and
charitable in it self, is called a Mountain of of Piety. But in respect the
Officers and other charges incident unto it cannot be had without some
emolument, therefore the borrower pays somewhat by the Month for the lone of
that he receives. Cajet opusc. de monte pietat. cap. 1.

There is another sort, which is, when a Prince or State has need of a good
quantity of Money, and does for his supply, either impose a Lone upon
particular men, or voluntarily receive a good sum from them, and for their
security assigns of his Revenue 5, 6, 7, or 8 per cent. This differs from
Use-money with us, in that the lender cannot at his will call it in, or make
use of the money it self, otherwise than by transferring his right in the Bank
to another, only the Prince at his pleasure may, by paying all in, dissolve the
Bank. Antonin. par. 2. tit. 1. cap. 1^. in principio. And there wants not
learned men which hold both these ways receiving increase to be Usurious, and
likewise that defend the contrary, that neither of them is, See Matheo Villani
lib. 3. cap. 106.


Mountains of Piety, their distinctions of lucrum cessans, and damnum emergens,
to palliate so the thing it self, as to call that no Usury, which has the same
effect, at least to my understanding.

After the year 1200 much of the Ecclesiastic power, especially what concerned
Heresy, was delegated by the Pope to certain Inquisitors (called since the
Court of Inquisition) Insexto de usuris c. 8. 9. de quaestioibus.
whom Alexander the fourth, about the year 1255 did expressly charge not to
meddle with any Question of Usury, though there wanted not some, who in that
Age affirmed, Vsuram non esse peccatum mortale, as appears by In Clement. de
usuris cap. Unico. and Giovan. Villani. l. 12. c. 57.
History, and that resolution of Clement the fifth in the Council of Vienna,
1311. Si quis in illum errorem inciderit ut pertinaciter affirmare praesumat,
exercere Usuras non esse peccatum, Decernimus eum velut haereticum puniendum.
Upon which the Inquisitors grew very busy in many parts. At Florence in the
year 1345, Giovan. Villani ib.
upon a great disorder that then fell out, they were forced by Laws conformable
to those of Perugia, Spain, etc to regulate their power though in Ludovi. a
Paramo. de origin Inquisit. lib 2. c. n. 36.
Arragon by a, Bull of Leo the tenth it seems they now proceed in such causes.
In Venice, that wise State would never admit the Inquisition Tattato
d'Inquisitione. c. 23. 30, 31.
Che si trattino causa di usura di qual si voglia sort, to meddle with any
kind of Usury, nor the Trade of any Artisan, etc.

Touching the Church of England, farther than that the Council of Nice was
received both by the Epist. Constant. apud Socr. lib. 1. c. 6. and apud Theod.
lib. 1. Hist. cap. 10.
Britans and Beda l. lib. 4. c. 17.
Saxons even at the very first, I know no particular prohibition of Usury, if
we omit that imperf^ct clause c. 17. p. 299. council. Spelm.
in the Council of Calcuith, about 787, till Edward the Confessor, who having
lived long in France, and seasoned with the Principles of that Kingdom cap. 37.
Leg. Ed. p. 151.
did

First, banish all Usurers out of his Kingdom.

Secondly, if any after that prohibition should be found to exercise it, he
then confiscated all he had.

Thirdly, he barred them of the Protection the Law afforded, and gives this
reason, that having lived in the French Court, he had learnt, quod usura radix
omnium malorum esset. But as a Cook Instit 3. c. 74. p 163.
learned Gentleman wisely observes, Too severe Laws are never duly executed;
so happened it with this, which certainly was not all put in practice in England,
for in the year 1126 in Sim. (...). An. 1126. Col. 254. 19 tit Contuat Florent.
^igorn. Anno 1125. p. 501.
a Council held at Westminster, by Cardinal de Crema the Popes Legate, and the
Clergy of England, we find it only prohibitory to those of the Church; Vsuram
and turpe lucrum clericis omnimodis prohibemus, qui vero super crimine tali
confessus fuerit aut convictus, a proprio gradu dejiciatur. And again in
another held at the same place by Apud Richard. Hagulstad. p. 327. 66.
Albericus Bishop of Hostia the Popes Legate 1138, thus, Foenoratores Clericos
and turpia lucra sectantes, and publica secularium negotia procurantes, ab
officio Ecclesiastico nihilomnius removendos censemus: Which is indeed no more
than a renewing the Niiene Canon, of which before. After this I do not remember
any one made directly against it in England. Neither has Lynwood any Title of
it, though there be so many in the Common Law, nor at all that I know does he
touch upon it, unless in one De pignoribus. c. unico verbo Usura, fol. 81. a.
place, and that very lightly, which shows clearly it was not much prosecuted
here.

By these steps that which at the first was exercised by Bishops and others,
afterward forbid the Clergy, as what might 2 Timothy 2. 4.
entangle them in the affairs of this world, and show minds 1 Timothy 3. 8.
too greedy of filthy lucre, allowed by so many Imperial Edicts of the most
pious Emperors, first became disliked in the Lay, after that prohibited, and
then they proceeded so far, as to determine to affirm it no sin, was Heretical.

Upon the whole matter I could not conclude, either by express words, or
necessary inference out of Scripture, or the practice of the Primitive Church,
either giving, or taking use for money lent, to be in its own nature amongst
Christians sinful, so as no other circumstance made it so, as either the
exacting the height the Law permitted, or upon the borrowers poverty, not
accepting what he is willing and able to pay, but with rigor forcing from him
the uttermost penalty, or using some other way against Charity, not so fit for
me to explicate; In short, I saw no reason not to submit to that of Alstedius,
Cas. Conscienc. c. 20. n. 29. p. 418.
Vsura non est intrinscie sive suo genere mala, sed est res indifferens; nor to
deny that of Epist. 383.
Calvin, Nullo testimonio Scripturae mihi constat usuras omnino damnatas esse.

Yet I do not take upon me to determine it to be absolutely lawful, I leave
that to some learned Divine, only I have here historically related what I met
with in the inquiry. I know many of Conscience and Learning are of a contrary
opinion, and I take this to be of that nature Enchirid. c. 69. to. 3.
St. Augustine in one place held Purgatory, utrum ita sit, quaeri potest et aut
inveniri aut latere, that every man ought to satisfy himself, and do
accordingly. Men of great Sincerity and Judgment may differ in Theological
tenets. Cardinal Cajetan, of that integrity Chamier has left this testimony of
him, Chani. de canone. to 1. lib. 12. c. 1. n. 34. p. 424.
Vir meo judicio quamvis Papista tamen candidus, plurimumque distans ab ea
pertinacia quam in reliquis deplorare cogimur, is fully of opinion the paying
money for loan to those Banks are called Mountains of Piety is Cajet. opuscul.
to 3. de monte. pietat. cap. 6. 9.
unlawful and usurious. Cardinal Tolet, in whose Writings, to use Casaubon's
words, Causab. ad Fron. tonem Duaeum. Epist. p. 38.
cum excellent rerum Philosopharum et Theologicarum notitia par certat
modestia, is clearly contrary and against him, holding them very lawful. In
these disputes I cannot but think of that of Quaest. quodlibet. ut citatur apud
Antonin. par. 2. c. 11. Sect. 28.
Aquinas Quando quaestio qua quaeritur de aliquo actu utrum sit peccatum
mortale vel non, nisi ad hoc habeatur auctoritas expressa Scripturae sacrae,
aut Canonis, seu determinationis ecclesiae, vel evidens ratio, non nisi
periculosissime determinatur; and indeed, if he mean by the determination of
the Church the four, nay that of Faith that was resolved in the six first
general Councils, I know nothing to oppose against it; but of this too much.

Whilst I was thus in search, this piece I now give thee, which was written
almost thirty years since by Sir Robert Filmer, (a very learned Gentleman) for
satisfaction of a person of worth, and relation unto him, fell into my hands,
fromwhence some friends were importunate for copies of it, I fearing the thing
it self might receive injury by ill Transcribers (as those of some S. Aug.
Retract. 2. cap. 13.
famous writers have done) I have put it to the Press. If thou be a Lender
and it shall not satisfy thee in the receiving profit for loan of money, I can
assure thee it has me fully in the paying of it. Farewell.

East-Peckham, Roger Twisden.

The Author's PREFACE.
IF Exceptions be taken either to the Argument or Author of these Notes, The
Answer must be, This question of Usury concerns no Article of Faith; But is a
point of Morality, and case of Conscience, and in that regard it admits of a
disputation without Scandal: the rather, for that the Church of England has
not Defined or Described Usury. The Divines of the reformed Churches are
divided in this Controversy; The greatest part of them oppose or mislike the
rigid assertion of such as condemn all Contracts for gain by lending; Namely,
Bishop Babington, Mr. Perkins, Dr. Willet, Dr. Mayer, Mr. Brinsley, and others
here at home; and abroad, Calvin, Martyr, Bucer, Bullinger, Danaeus, Hemingius,
Zanchius, Ursinus, Bucanus, Junius, Polanus, Molineus, Scultetus, Alstedius,
Amesius, Grotius, Salmasius.

The Author, though he be neither Divine by calling, nor by profession a
Scholar, yet as he is a rational man he may, and as he is a Christian he ought,
for the direction of his own practice, to examine what may be done with a safe
Conscience, and what not. The Civilians and Canonists frequently dispute of the
nature of Usury, he knows not but that any other Laique may do the like. The
Arment was first undertaken for the satisfaction of the tenderness of the
conscience of others, and not to justify any practice of the Authors, who has
always given, but not taken Usury. This point of Usury, as it is at this day
controverted, is a mere popish question; first broached by the Schoolmen and
Canonists, no ancient Father or Writer that I know of ever defined or disputed
it. Since the Reformation Melancthon and Chemnitius are the only noted men
abroad, and here at home Dr. Downam Bishop of Londonderry in Ireland, Dr.
Fenton, and learned Dr Andrews late Bishop of Winchester. I have made choice of
Dr. Fenton's Treatise to examine, because it is the latest, and I find little
of any moment but is in him. I desire his book may be first thoroughly read, for
otherwise, what I write will not so easily be understood. To give some brief
account to the Reader of the substance of the scattered arguments in this
Tractate, he must know; That my scope and intention is to show that Usury is no
where in Scripture forbidden to Christians: but that it is as lawful as any
other contract or Bargain, unless the laws of the Land do prohibit or moderate
it, as a point of state or policy. And that no State or commonwealth can or
ever did stand without it, or that which in contracts is equivalent to it,
since the valuation of the use of money is the foundation and rule which govern
the valuation of all other sorts of Bargains. I further maintain, that Usury
was never forbidden to the Jews; only by (reason that by a more special
appointment of God they dwelt in a land in the midst of many strangers) Moses
made a politic Judicial law, that the Jews should take Usury of those
strangers, and not of their poor brothers, not much unlike, as if the King
should ordain in London, That Citizens should take Usury of men of Midlesex,
and not of poor tradesmen of the City. More particularly, I undertake to
manifest, that the Definitions of Usury (wherein Dr. Down and Dr Fenton mainly
differ between themselves) are neither warrantable by the rules of art, nor
justifiable by any proof or ground in Scripture, or by any testimony of
antiquity either in Councels or Fathers. And that the laws given by God about
Usury are such as by the Coherence of the Texts, and the conference of other
places, do show that those laws did only intend a prohibition of taking Usury
of such as borrowed in case of extreme necessity, and were so poor that they
were in Charity to be relieved. And yet those laws which did in such case only
prohibit Usury to the Jews, were not moral or perpetual, but Judicial and
temporary, and no way bind us, but we are left to the laws and customs of the
Kingdom to guide us in our Contracts so long as they be not contrary to the
rules of Charity. I show that all the properties of Letting do agree to money.
And that Usury in it self is neither unnatural, ungodly, unjust, or
uncharitable. Lastly, I do show that Dr Downam, Dr Fenton, and all others that
do most condemn Usury, are forced to confess at last that Usury may be lawful;
they all allow the taking of Interest, Mortgages, Annuities and Leases for
years, all which by their own expositions and confessions are of the same
nature with Usury, and do only differ in the manner of the security or
contract: after they have eagerly disputed that all Contracts for gain by
lending are Usurious at the end they quietly conclude, that the Contracts are
not Usury, but only the secret intention of the heart makes it to be Usury or
not Usury.

Thus in few words they overthrow at last the foundation of their own doctrine,
and play fast and loose by a multitude of their irresolute distinctions, so
that either their conclusion must be that Usury is lawful, or else they can
conclude nothing at all.

If I wrong either Dr. Fenton, or the truth, I desire friendly to be showed my
error. I do not follow him here Line by Line, for so I might tire my self, and
vex others with unnecessary tautologies: I have only endeavored to extract the
quintessence of his reasons, and to apply my self to the examination of them.
His Reasons not his Rhetoric I except against, whether Justly or Unjustly let
others judge, to whose Censure I submit these Papers.

I would fain know of the Ministers of the Gospel, who do often reckon up in
the pulpit Usury as one of the Crying sins, what warrant they have in the
Gospel for such boldness: we find several sins numbered up by our Savior and
the Apostles, but Usury never so much as named for a sin in the whole New
Testament. St. Paul in the fifth to the Galatians, does with one breath reckon
up together seventeen sins which he reproves, and yet Usury is none of them.
But many preachers cannot Reckon up seven deadly sins except they make Usury
one of them.

Robert Filmer.

THE CONTENTS.
1. TOuching the Definition of Usury. 2. Of Testimonies of Scripture. 3. Of the
names of Usury. 4. Of the Properties of Letting. 5. Concerning humane
Testimonies of Fathers, Councils, Divines, Heathens, and Laws. 6. Arguments
against Usury. 7. Of the unnaturalness of Usury. 8. Of the ungodliness of
Usury. 9. Of the injustice of Usury. 10. Of the uncharitableness of Usury.
A TREATISE OF USURY.
Touching the Definition of Usury.
I Let pass Dr. Fenton's Chapter of names of Usury, because he Confesses that
by them he has proved little or nothing at all, Page 12.

The main point is the Definition, which he says must not be omitted, or
slightly passed over, because it is a great and necessary question to resolve
the understanding what that Usury is, whereof we dispute, page 13. And
therefore he does entitle his first book wholly about the Definition of Usury:
although when he comes unto the point, he does nothing less than define it; As
may thus appear: Actual Usury (says he) page 15. is of diverse diversely
described, a variety tedious to relate. First, in stead of all unlawful Usury,
he speaks of a description of part only, to wit of actual usury; whereas he
should first define, and then divide: but inverting the Rule of method, he
suffers mental usury (which he says is a sin) to escape out of his description.

Neither does he so much as describe actual usury, only he tells us of
diversity of descriptions of others, but never lets us know which he approves.
Yet at last he contracts the pith in three words, but resolves not how we
should place them; so leaves us to a thus, or thus, or thus. First, he puts
Lucre in the place of the Genus, and Covenant in the room of a difference.
Secondly he makes Covenant the Genus, and Lending the difference; and lastly he
puts Lending for a Genus, and Lucre for a difference. Thus by turning the Genus
into the difference, and the difference into the Genus, he leaves us uncertain
of his description, yet concludes that within the compass of three words we may
find Usury; but who knows not that three words diversely placed breed many times
different, and some times contrary senses. Yet this is all the definition you
are like to find in him. And thus in few lines he passes over slightly that
necessary question which would resolve our understanding what Usury is.

But let us draw a little closer, and examine the pith of these three
descriptions cited by Dr. Fenton, and contracted in three words.

Pactum ex mutuo Lucrum. Usury is Lucre for Lone upon Covenant; or The Covenant
of Lucre for lending, or Lending upon Covenant for Lucre.


1. Whereas he says Usury is Lucre, he seems to make Lucre or Gain to be the
Genus of Usury. This undoubtedly is a false Genus; For certainly Usury is a sin
of Commission, and therefore an action of operation; so that Lucre, or gain
which is only a passion or product of Lending, cannot be the Genus of it.

2. He makes Covenant to be the Genus; Let me ask him but this question; A
Father to stir up only, and try the industry of his Son, does lend him an
hundred pound with a peirastical covenant for Gain, not intending with himself
to take any interest at all of his Son; Does any man take this to be Usury in
the Father, who never meant to take the least increase from his Son? Surely
then the bare Covenant cannot be the sin of Usury in this case.

3. He says, Usury is lending upon Covenant for Lucre. In this description,
asalso in the two former, I find a manifest contradiction of his own Principles
and Grounds. To lend for gain is no lending at all; for Lending (says he, page
16.) in its own proper nature is free; Letting is for hire or gain. So that by
this his Doctrine, Lending for gain is no lending at all, but letting or hiring
out. Therefore if Dr. Fenton had been true to his own principles, he should
have defined Usury to have been Letting upon Covenant for Lucre; or in brief,
Letting or Hiring of Money, But both Dr Fenton, and all other Antidaenists
cannot endure to have Usury called Letting or hiring of money.

Moreover, I find in these three descriptions, that he imagines the Gain or
Lucre is for the bare act of Lending; In which he is much mistaken: It is not
for the lending, but for the using of the thing lent that men give Usury: and
answerable to the time for which Money is let, the increase or Usury is more or
less, although the simple act of Lending be alike in both. The ordinary word
Usury (which Dr. Fenton derives from usus rei, the use of the thing) teaches,
even children, that usury is given for the Use of the thing, and not for the
bare Lending,

Again, in these his three descriptions the word Covenant is perpetually found,
without any warrant of Scripture: Yet he pretends by deduction to fetch it out
of the Text in Exodus 22. 25. Thou shall not be as an Usurer unto him, thou
shall not oppress with Usury. In the Original it is, Thou shall not exact, and,
thou shall not impose Usury. From whence Dr. Fenton concludes, that there can
be no exaction or imposition upon a free person, but by way of Covenant. page
26. Under favor, this his inference is false; for exaction may be of things
neither covenanted for, nor due. In the construction of our common Law, and of
our vulgar phrase, Extortion, and Exaction are thus distinguished, Extortion is
a wrong in taking more than is due, Exaction is the taking of that which is not
due at all: Which distinction were false, if that Exaction must be by precedent
contract. The poor Jews did ordinarily borrow victuals, money, and other
necessaries upon Pawns, as may appear by many Texts. The Lender, who did take
the pledge as a caution for his Principal, might detain it from the poor
Borrower until he would allow some gain above the Principal, and by such
unjust means exact or impose an unconscionable increase, without any precedent
Covenant.

There is small reason to imagine, that such indigent people (as are described
by Moses) who borrowed only to supply a present want, should have credit
sufficient to take up so large a sum for so long a time as might deserve an
Obligation or Covenant for the payment of increase. A man who could not have
his Bond taken, might yet have his Garment received for a Pledge; and Pledges
were ordinarily given with intention of speedy redemption, because raiment is
almost as necessary as food. The borrowing in this kind being of things of so
small value (that the use of them for a small season was hardly valuable) might
be a great reason of the prohibition of Usury by Moses in such cases: Neither
is a man that lends upon Pawns in the like hazard with him that takes Bonds, or
such security.

It is the confession of Dr. Fenton, that When the Law against Usury was given,
there was none that borrowed but only the poor for need, and upon necessity.
Therefore without better warrant by direct and literal proof from the
Scripture, it cannot be evinced that this word ( Covenant) must necessarily be
required in the definition or description of Usury, although Dr. Fenton
conclude, it is no Usury except it be by Covenant, or by some dumb Contract at
the least.

Dr. Downam omits this word Covenant in his definition of Usury. I am strongly
persuaded by a place in Nehemiah, to think that Usury does not consist in
contracting for gain. I find in the sixth Chapter, a grievous oppression
described; A great cry of the people against their Brethren the Jews, they were
forced to take up Corn for themselves, their sons and daughters, upon mortgage
of their lands, vineyards, and houses, they sold their children for bondslaves.
These were men oppressed by Contracts, and were to pay twelve in the hundred, as
appears by the eleventh verse. And yet for all this, there are such passages
and circumstances of the text as move me to think that this Oppression was not
properly Usury.

First, Nehemiah never calls it Usury, but only a Burden; neither the word
Neshec, nor Tarbith, nor Marbith is to be found in this Chapter, and yet these
are the only words in the Law to express Usury.

Secondly, Nehemiah never tells the the Nobles and the Rulers, that they had
broken the Law against Usury. Any man would think, that to rebuke and reclaim
men from their sin, the way had been to have named it in particular, or the Law
by which it was prohibited: but Nehemiah does neither of these, he only tells
them, it was not good what they did, and asks them if they ought not to walk
in the fear of their God, because of the reproach of the heathen their enemies;
not because of a particular Law against Usury, but for that the nane of God
should not be blasphemed by the heathens, when they saw how miserably the Jews
did oppress one another.

Thirdly, Nehemiah tells the Nobles, that he and his servants might have
exacted as well as the other Nobles: Whereas if this exacting had been Usury,
he could not justly say, that he might have exacted, for it had been against
the Law.

Lastly, Nehemiah does not threaten to punish them as he was a Magistrate, but
entreats them by his charitable example to leave off their exacting that
Burden.

So then Nehemiah never naming Usury, nor mentioning the Law against it, but
supposing the act of the Nobles to be lawful, but not expedient, does incline
my belief to think, that this Oppression was not properly Usury, although it
had a Covenant for gain.

And one reason why this was not Usury might be, because the people were not
primarily such poor necessitated brethren as are described in the firrst Laws
against Usury: For though these fell into want, yet at the first they had
lands, houses, vineyards, and olive-grounds, for which they were to pay unto
the King a yearly Tribute.

Another reason that avails with me to persuade that all contracts for gain are
not prohibited as usurious, is the testimony of our Savior, Luke 19. 23. who
mentions a Bank of Usury in the Jewish Commonwealth, out of which a man by
delivering in his money, might at length receive his own with Usury. Although
our Savior do neither show dislike nor approbation of such a Bank, yet for it
to be within any City of the Common wealth of Israel, without the ordinance, or
at least allowance of the Prince or Magistrate, is a thing most improbable. And
almost as unlikely that the State should tolerate such a Bank if all Usury were
of it self unlawful, and also so pernicious to the Commonwealth by the
oppression of it as Dr. Fenton pretends.

I find many reproofs in the Gospel of the false glosses and interpretations of
the Scribes and Pharisees, whereby they perverted the Law in many things; but I
find not any rebuke of the Magistrates for this of Usury; if it had been such a
(...) violation of the Law, it could not have been forgotten by our Savior
Christ and all his Apostles.

But to what purpose it is to dispute about the terms of the description of
Usury? or what sort of Contract it is? when it appears plainly in Dr. Fenton,
that not only the Covenant of lending, but also (in his opinion) buying,
selling, letting, exchanging, and the rest, may be all Contracts of Usury. To
give an instance, these are his words, page 21. With a hundred pound I purchase
an annuity of twenty pound per annum for ten years: this is Bargain and Sale,
differing in the manner of the Covenant, yet is it the same thing in truth with
Usury. And so in another place ( page 129.) he says the like. I must say this
is an express contradiction, to affirm that purchasing is buying, and another
manner of Covenant differing from Lending, and yet to say in truth it is the
same with Usury, which he says is Lending, this is to make buying and lending
all one. And to confound all Contracts.

As the term of Covenant is not to be found within the Texts against Usury, so
in the Fathers of the Church there is no mention of it; they abuse us
therefore, who pretend the consent of the Primitive Church for the condemning
of all Contracts of gain for the use of money. The truth is, the Canonists and
Schoolmen were the first broachers of these descriptions of Usury which are
now pressed upon us by some few Modern Divines. Antiquity was more modest and
observant of the phrase of Scipture, which does deliver the Laws against Usury
in such restrained terms as are by a just construction appliable properly to
the Rules of Charity and Equity, for the relief of the poor only.

From the Canon-Lawyers (who are the Popes learned Counsel in the Law) has
Dr. Fenton borrowed not only his descriptions, but also his arguments and
distinctions at the second or third hand: For he takes all from Dr. Downam, Dr.
Downam from Melancthon and Chemnitius, and these two fetch it from Canonists,
Casuists, and Schoolmen. And although Dr. Fenton be free from the sin of Usury
by borrowing freely his whole Treatise from Dr. Downam without paying the
interest of one new Argument or Reason: Yet if Dr Fenton did not Contract with
Dr. Downam for the borrowing of the Treatise, he is little less than a
Plagiary, and if we take this word in as large signification as they do the
word Usury, it will follow, that though Dr Fenton be not guilty of paying
Usury, yet he has offended against another Law in Exodus 21. 16 Deuteronomy. 24. 7.
which is the greater sin; for although the Law of God appoints no punishment
for an Usurer, yet a Plagiary was to be punished by death.

2. Of Testimonies of Scripture.
I should have proceeded now to examine the properties of lending and le^teng,
and how they differ; but because I find mention of them in several places of my
Author, I will reserve them a while, and first handle the Texts of Scripture
that are most material in this controversy.

Three texts only are to be found in the law of Moses about Usury. In the two
first the poor is most expressly named, and in the third necessarily implied.
Exodus 22. 25. If thou lend to my people the poor with thee, thou shall not be
as an Usurer unto him. Thou, shall not oppress with Usury, Levit. 25. 35. If
thy brother be impoverished or fallen into decay with thee, thou shall relieve
him -- take thou no Usury of him or increase -- thou shall not give him thy
money upon Usury, nor lend him thy victuals for increase. By these two texts
we have an exact description of the poor, who must be one impoverished and
fallen into decay, one whose hand (as the text is) is weakened and shakes that
he cannot labor, one whom thou have need to receive and relieve, and one who
is forced to borrow victuals for necessity. The third text though it does not
expressly name the poor; yet that it has reference only to such is most
probable. First, because as in the former text in Levit. where the poor are
described, and one of their properties mentioned to be borrowing of Victuals,
so in Deuteronomy. 23. 19. where the name of poor is omitted, yet the property of
borrowing food is set down, which to be the Custom only of the poor in extreme
necessity, common experience does daily teach us. Secondly, the law here does
only use the word of biting or Nescher, which word is also only used in the
first text, where the poor is named. Thirdly, if we will allow (as all men do,
and as we needs must) this law in Deuteronomy. to be the same with that in Exodus and
Levit. then it must have the same object the poor, and the same end, which is
the relief of the same poor, for we find no other reason or end alleged in
Scripture for the prohibition of Usury, but that the poor brother may live with
thee and have sufficient for his need. God where he ties men to lend, he
provides and binds them to lend freely. The law is, if there be among you a
poor man of one of thy Brethren, thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thy
hand from thy poor brother, but thou shall open thy hand wide unto him, and
shall surely lend him sufficient for his need in which he wants. Deuteronomy. 15. 7,
8. For the observation of this law God was careful that this lending should be
without Usury: He makes no law to bind men to lend unto the Rich, and therefore
there is no law to restrain taking Usury of them: The lending to the poor was
to be so free that it must be in the next degree to giving, and we find that to
this law that commanded Lending, is added in the very next verse, Thou shall
surely give him, and thy heart shall not be grieved when thou give unto him.
Likewise in Levit. 25. it is said, thou shall relieve him, and then it follows
presently take no Usury of him. Thus the Scripture does couple the work of
Charity with the prohibition of Usury, to teach, that they are both conversant
about one and the same object. Therefore he that shall make the Rich also the
object of this law in Deuteronomy. he must of necessity invent some new End and Reason
of it more than the Scripture does afford, and also make the laws themselves to
differ; whereas a true reason why the law in Deuteronomy. is in so short terms, may be
for that the law having been twice before more particularly set down, Moses
does in Deuteronomy. only repeat it in brief and few words, as being sufficient to
call it to their remembrance, now they were ready to enter into the land of
promise. If we consider also the unmercifulness of the Jews amongst themselves,
it was high time to make provision for the poor, they would not stick it seems
to strip a poor man stark naked for a debt, as appears by the law concerning
the restitution of pledges before sunset if they were the covering only and
raiment for the skin wherein a man might sleep, Exodus 22. 26. Besides, they
would sorbear to lend to the poor because they were in danger to lose their
debt if they did not recover it before the seventh year. The law is Deuteronomy. 15.
1. Every seventh year, every creditor that lends ought unto his neighbor
shall release it, -- that which is thine with thy brother thy hand shall
release. This releasing of debts had the same end with the prohibition of
Usury, the relief of the poor; and although this law of releasing be delivered
in the general terms of neighbor and brother, yet they must be understood only
of the poor brother, as it is most apparent by the exception following in the
fourth verse, which says this release must not be save where there shall be no
poor among you: and in the 11. verse, after the releasing of debts, and the
lending to the poor enjoined, the conclusion is, for the poor shall never cease
out of the Land, therefore lend to thy Brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy
in the Land. These places do teach us that this word Brother is sometimes in a
special sense used for the Poor. This law of releasing made men afraid to lend,
and therefore God warnes them in the ninth verse, Beware that there be not a
thought in thy wicked (or Belial) heart Saying, the Seventh year, the year of
release is at hand, and thy eye be evil against thy poor Brother, and thou
give him naught.

Now since the law of God which prohibiteth usury only in three places, has in
the two first expressly named the poor, and described them, and in the third
clearly intimated them, By what reason, Conscience, and Charity, can any man
extend those laws to all men in general, which the Holy Ghost has so
carefully restrained to the poor? And since the Law first given against Usury
does mention oppression of the poor, I wonder Dr. Fenton would not fetch his
definition from the text, and call Usury oppressive lending to the poor: but
never mentioning oppression of the poor, he calls it a Covenant of gain for
lending; which is quite beside the text, which seems only to forbid Usury to
such as stand in need to be relieved by our Charity

And for this cause I do conjecture Calvin did say, that unto him it did not
appear by any testimony of Scripture that all Usury is altogether condemned,
and it is conceived that one reason why the law of Moses does appoint no kind
of Judicial punishment for Usury, might be, because the sin is determinable
only by the judgment of a man's own Conscience, and not by any precedent
contract for gain.

As for those texts in the Psalms, Proverbs and Ezekiel, their general words
cannot make any new law, but their rebukes and exhortations re^^e to the breach
or observance of the law formerly gived by Moses: And even Ezekiel who most
declaims against Usury, Ezekiel. 18. 17. joins it with making the poor Sorrowful,
not giving bread to the hungry, and not Clothing the naked. Nor can these
texts be any exposition of the laws of Moses against Usury, because the laws
themselves are expressed and explained in more particular significant terms by
Moses than by David, Soloman, or Ezekiel, who give but a touch.

3 Of the names of Usury
I know the adversaries to all Usury do much triumph in their Origination of
the Hebrew term for Usury; because it is derived from a root that signifies to
bite, they conclude it is like the sting of a Serpent, and in that regard to be
esteemed as an abominable sin. Answ. First we must remember that Dr. Fenton
does confess that names have been no definitions, and therefore are not
demonstrative arguments in any question. Secondly, I do acknowledge that the
Original word Neshec might well denote some malignant quality in Usury, and I
conceive a true reason of it might be, for that the first kind of borrowing
which was in the world, or at the time when the law against Usury was given,
was in Case only of necessity, and to ask an overplus in such Cases was a sin
that well deserved the worst name. We all know that Riches of money and many
other goods were brought into the world by degrees, as arts and trades were
multiplied by the industry and wit of man. Stately buildings, rich furniture,
gorgeous apparel, and dainty feasts were not prepared against the Creation of
Adam; It was a long time before so much silver was dug up and Coined as
would fill men's Coffers that they might spare or employ large sums by the
negotiations and traffic of others; men first looked after things necessary
only, and the want of such things taught them to borrow of one another

Also when the law was given, the People of God ( says Dr. Fenton p. 10.) were
traveling in the desert, and afterward being troubled with wars in the Land
of Canaan, there was little borrowing of money, but only by the Poor for the
Supply of their want, and of them to take Usury was more sensible biting, and
oppression, in that they borrowed not to lay out for Commodities, but to spend
for necessity. Therefore David in his troublesome days used the word Neshec
only for Usury, as best fitting those times where the poorest were most bitten
by this sin.

In these passages of Dr. Fenton, we may note, what manner of borrowing Caused
the first name of Usury, which name afterward for the similitude only of the
increase might be applied to all other sorts of borrowing, although they were
not of the same uncharitable nature. The like observation of a good name used
for a bad thing Dr. Fenton produces in the Latin name of Usury. Usura (says
he) was originally a good honest word, until Usury did mar it. For Usura in
truth is nothing but usus rei, primitively taken for the use of other things as
well as money.

In conclusion, although the uncharitable gain that was practiced upon
necessitated borrowers did justly deserve a befitting name of biting, yet a
Gain that is taken from such as borrow where necessity constrains not, is but
an equivocal biting, Because properly there can be no biting but where there is
oppression, and oppression is only of the poor. A man may deceive a Rich man,
but oppress him he cannot, the reason is evident, oppression is a Violent
action of Injustice, necessity compels a poor man to borrow, and the lender
forces him to pay an increase, in this is a violence which a rich man cannot
be subject unto, because no necessity forces him to borrow, it is not
necessary but arbitrary whether he will borrow upon increase: for although
there be a moral necessity that if he will borrow he must pay an overplus, yet
that he must borrow is not absolutely necessary; so then it is the necessity of
the borrower that must concur to make a violent action in the lender

If a rich man be forced to pay the whole forfeiture of a bond, it was his own
folly to enter into such an obligation without necessity, whereby he does
enable the lender to deceive him by a legal means, who in extremity makes
benefit of all that which the law did provide only for a caution of his
indemnity: This deceit of the lender is injustice, but it is not the violent
sin of oppression which is properly found in Biting Usury.

A second word there is found in Scripture which they say is an Exegetical
addition, which signifies any increase at all. If what were said were true, it
neither hurts nor helps the question if the text be understood of the poor
only, for although all increase from the poor, yet what is that to the taking
Usury of the Rich? But let us see a little how they restrain this word [
tarbith] for increase, first if tarbith do signify of it self a multiplying,
as it does indeed, or an excessive increase, it is then all one with Neshec,
which Dr Fenton makes to consist in the quantity of the gain, but I think to be
in the quality of the person from whom it is taken, and then where will they
find their exegesis if these terms be Synonymaes. Secondly, I would know how
Dr. Fenton can prove that the Scripture uses tarbith for the Usury of money:
The Prophets (says he) who be true expositors of the law, join both words
together, applying them both indifferently evermore to one and the same thing.
It is true that the Prophet Ezekiel. joins Neshec and tarbith, and so does
Solomon; but it is false that they apply them both indifferently evermore to
one and the same thing, for they apply them not at all, they neither name money
nor victuals; I can find them but once applied in the whole Scripture, and that
is by Moses in Levit. 25. 36, there Dr. Fenton might have found them both named
together, and then applied, Neshec to money, and tarbith to victuals, so that
the law of God no where in plain terms forbids the increase of Money: which
point is carefully observed by the translators of our Bible; for they all
consent and agree to translate Neshec only for Usury: the words tarbith or
marbith they have never translated by the name of Usury. And in the Proverbs
28. 8. whereas in the Original it is tarbith, our Divines have rendered it
Unjust gain, thereby intimating they did not think all increase or gain to be
meant, but only such as was unjust.

It will be said, that since Money and Victuals are both in the same text, they
are both of one nature, so that tarbith may be referred indifferently to either
of them. Answ. The text does conjoyn them, not for being of one nature in
spending or using, but the law did intend only the mention of such things as
the poor in extremity do necessarily borrow for maintenance of life, which is
either victuals it self, or money, which does easiliest and soonest procure
victuals: Otherwise these two differ as Dr. Fenton has showed in the example
of a loaf and money, the first is spent, the latter is used: victuals then when
they are spent or quite consumed, and no further use can be made of them, it is
otherwise with money which cannot properly be said to be spent; the same 100 l.
that has been used by one, may be used after by a 100 men successively: and in
the passing of it away some other Commodities may be procured by it of greater
or equal value, which may be used for increase; so that the use of money is in
asort Perpetual. This difference well considered, there might be a greater
reason to prohibit the usury and increase of Victuals, than Usury only of money:
But I do not rely upon the argument from the names of Neshec or tarbith, and
the rather because I think the true propriety of them (as of many other words)
is quite lost as to us.

A third strain of Dr. Fenton is to have the word tarbith to expound and
explain the term Neshec: we find Neshec used alone in Exodus Deuteronomy. and the
Psalms: tarbith is never used alone, but is joined with Neshec in Levit. Prove.
and Ezekiel: so then the first is used in all texts, the latter but in some. Now
the question is, whether a particular word which is always used shall expound a
general which is used but sometimes; or on the contrary as Dr. Fenton thinks,
for he tells us p. 39. it is the manner of Scripture after a law is given and
a sin forbidden in a sensible term, by the addition of a more general to
express Gods meaning more fully, lest men should seek liberty in restraining
the former terms more narrowly; thus he, but what sense is there in his words
to express a sensible by a general? he should have said a particular by a
general, or a sensible by an insensible, and then his error would have been
more sensible; for I trust it is the nature of things sensible to express
things insensible, and of particulars to expound generals, as may manifestly
appear by the instance alleged by Dr. Fenton, and which makes somewhat strongly
against himself. Theft says he, is set down in the Sensible term of stealing,
the Holy Ghost adds dealing falsely or Circumventing, teaching thereby
overreaching in bargaining by Cunning to be theft. Here I ask if Stealing be a
sensible term, whether dealing falsely or circumventing by cunning be a
General, surely Dr. Fenton must not say it, for deceit in contracts is but a
particular kind of theft or stealing, and therefore not a more but a less
general term than stealing: so that quite contrary to Dr. Fenton his Doctrine
the general sin of stealing is explained and expressed by the particular sin of
deceit in dealing, therefore it is more reasonable that the particular term of
biting should expound the meaning of the general word increase, since nothing
is more usual than when a matter has been particularly expressed, to mention
it afterward in more general terms.

Besides this shift of expressing the Sensible by the more general term, is to
imagine the wisdom of God subject to humane infirmity, as if God had not been
able to perfect his law till the cavils of men, and their Seeking liberty to
restrain the terms taught him how to mend it. No doubt if the law of God had
intended the prohibition of all increase, it could have done it in plain and
short terms (as it does in Murder, Theft, and Adultery) by saying thou shall
take no increase by lending or letting money, but instead of increase the Law
says biting or oppressing of the poor; if Murder and Usury were prohibited
and permitted alike, why does not the Commandment say, thou shall not murder
thy poor brother, but a stranger thou may murder? Surely God does not use
these qualifications for naught. It is demanded by Dr. Fenton, upon the law
thou shall not trouble any widow or fatherless Child, whether it follow that I
may trouble a married woman or a child that has a father? Answ. I may not. But
yet the reason is not for that I am prohibited by this special law for Widows
and Orphans, but for that by a general Commandment of not stealing I am
forbidden to oppress or trouble any man: The like may be said of the words of
Solomon, Thou shall not rob the poor, yet I may not rob the rich, though these
words forbid me not; but because of the former general Commandment. But the
like cannot be said of Usury, there being no former general law that forbids
taking increase of the rich.

But Dr. Fenton says that Usury bites the rich as well as the poor, and does
promise to prove it, but it seems he forgot it, I am in doubt he is never able
to do it. Indeed he would persuade us that to lend to the Rich is to enable him
to oppress the Commonwealth and so consequently the poor: But he does not show
how the Commonwealth can be wronged by Usury, and yet no particular person be
first oppressed; sure I am the text speaks not of oppressing the Commonwealth,
but expressly names particularly thy poor brother to whom thou lendest that he
be not oppressed. So that the law points at an apparent and sensible person
whom Usury bites.

But Dr. Fenton comes and tells us p. 36, Alas good simple widows! can they
tell when, or whom, or how many their Usury does bite? nay can the wisest
Usurer of them all tell? Thus Dr. Fenton because he sees that in some cases he
cannot show how any particular person is oppressed by Usury, therefore he flies
for Sanctuary to the Commonwealth, to hide himself in the crowd, whilst he
must confess he cannot tell who is oppressed, but yet the Commonwealth or some
body in it (God knows who) is oppressed.

But let us see how he knows in general that the Commonwealth is oppressed by
Usury, Forsooth he says, it makes things dearer and enhaunces the prices of
the Market. p. 36. Ans. the dearness of things is caused either by the scarcity
of the things themselves, or by the plenty of money. As for the scarcity of
Commodities it cannot be caused by Usury, for it neither eats up corn nor
cattle, nor wears out apparel, nor destroys the native commodity of any
Country. But contrarily merchants and others (who by Usury are enabled to
trade) do export such things as are cheaper and plentifuller here than in other
Countries, that so they may gain there: and do bring back such things as are
dearest and of most necessity at home, that so also they may gain here. So that
Usury does not only not cause a scarcity; but it is the means of plenty in a
kingdom, for as it Consumes not that we have, so it procures us that we want.
As for dearness by reason of plenty of money, it is no misery but the happiness
of any Realm to know such a dearth: those places are not the Richest where
things are cheapest, for then Scotland would excel England, but it is the want
of money which makes things cheap in such Countries: Nor let any man think that
if Usury were not, things would be one whit cheaper, for by Dr. Fenton's
confession, p. 38. if Usury were not, men would tenter their wits either in
trading themselves or employing others, so that the same gain would be raised
an other way; for in the point of Usury the question is not whether gains may
be made of money, but who shall have the gains.

As for raising the market it is not caused by Usury, the Governors and Rulers
of the Rates and Prices of all things are the owners of money and masters of
stocks, for the Lenders rule the Borrowers, and the richer govern the meaner.
The monyed men proportion the valuation of goods, and by practice and custom
agree in a common gain to be raised by the Contracts of bargaining, selling,
letting and the like. For instance, the masters of money of this kingdom by
their trading raise so much gains as ordinarily amounts to 20. or 30. in the
100 at the years end; which being considered by the meaner sort of people,
they reckon with themselves, that if they can borrow at 10 in the hundred that
then by such trading their gains may both pay the use and leave them 20 or 10
l. gainers: so that the borrowers do trade by buying and selling in the Market
at the same prices that the owners of money do, and it is the rates of the
Market that rules their using, and not their Usury the Market: The difference
is only that the owners prove the greater gainers and grow richer than the
borrowers who keep but part of their gettings, because that their stocks are
not their own: And questionless the Common estimation of men would not value at
8. or 10 in the hundred if it did not ordinarily produce a Competent increase
both for borrower and lender. If any man object that the prime gain which comes
by buying and selling, and leads the rate of Usury, is too great, I know no
other answer but this, if Common custom may not determine reasonable gains, I
know not how it will be resolved, since there is no rule in Scripture for it:
but that men may grow rich by gain I find both practiced and warranted by
Scripture, neither are men restrained from gaining more by trade than is simply
necessary for life and being.

If Dr. Fenton and those that condemn all Usury had been so observant of the
letter or literal sense of the Laws as they do pretend, they would never have
troubled themselves so much about Contracts which are not named in the Law: but
would rather have Concluded that the very taking of Usury or increase (though
it be not contracted for) is utterly unlawful by the law in Levit. 25. 36.
where it is said, Take thou no Usury of him. How then can these men justify
the Taking of their foenus liberale, which they commend, or the foenus
nauticum, which they allow, or the Contractus Societatis, or partnership, which
they so much extol, since all these are expressly forbidden by the Law, If to
take increase be unlawful? To the Jews themselves the letter of the Law did
seem to condemn the taking of a gratuity, nay, some of them did think it Usury
if a man did but salute or bid good morrow to him that had lent him money, if he
did not use to do so before he borrowed it; because in the Original it is said,
thou shall take no Usury of any word, Deuteronomy. 23. our translation has it, Usury
of anything: Surely such saluations were not contracted for, nor were of any
valuable price, or money worth.

I do not find any text brought by Dr. Fenton out of the New Testament against
Usury; for the truth is, there is none, although Dr. Downam and some others do
cite two texts, first Mat. 5. 42. Give to him that asks; and from him that
would borrow of thee turn not away. If we ask Dr. Dow nam whether every one be
bound to lend to every one that asks, his answer is, Respect is to be had of
thine ability, and of his necessity, and also (if it be not a Case of urgent
and present necessity) of his honesty: if his necessity urge him to borrow, and
thine estate enable thee to lend, thou art bound to lend unto him, especially
if his honesty deserve to be respected, Lect. on the 15. Psalm. page 224. Why
may not the same respects be observed in the interpretations of all texts
against Usury? Secondly he cites Luke. 6. 35 Lend, looking for nothing thence.
Lastly both he and Dr. Fenton do apply all texts that do mention lending
freely, or charitableness to the poor, or mercifulness to our neighbor, as
heaps of so many places against Usury, although the name be not so much as to
be found in the whole New testament as Condemned. For my part I do gladly hear
all exhortations to Charity, and think them more than needful; and if any man
be so great an Usurer as that he make himself thereby unable to be merciful to
the poor, such a man may be justly condemned, and I shall never defend him: But
to conclude, because a man must give to the poor, therefore he may not let to
the rich, is no good consequence, The text that bids me lend freely, does not
thereby forbid not to let at all, but that upon several occasions and according
to diverse Circumstances I may do either; if the Commanding to observe one sort
of Contract were the Prohibiting of all other kinds, it would follow that I
might neither give money to the poor, nor fell victuals to the rich, because I
am Commanded to lend both.

But let us admit that both in the Old and New testament the laws against Usury
had been Moral and delivered in as general terms as can be devised: Be there
not many laws and texts which must of necessity be expounded otherwise than the
bare letter sounds, and according to such a sense as may stand with natural
reason, so that it contradict not any other plain or necessary doctrine, nor
overthrow the analogy of Faith? There is a law of our Savior Christ that
says, swear not at all, and again he says, to him that asks, Give; Neither
of these Laws must be literally understood, but interpreted according to the
rule of natural reason, and discretion. Christ forbids his Diciples to carry
gold, or silver, or any manner of coin in their purses: I do not think that Dr.
Fenton and others have followed the letter of this law, but I trust they will
grant an interpretation over and besides the bare letter. There be diverse such
texts, as, if thy eye offend thee, pull it out; pray continually; if any sue
thee for thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also: all which if they were not
otherwise understood than the bare words do bear, would bring great confusion
with them, and such inconvenience as no reason nor law could or might allow in
any case. The light of Nature must help to guide us in the interpretation of
many texts. It is Dr. Fentons own confession p. 34. that Usury is a Question of
that nature, as is not only determinable by the law of God in Scripture, but
also by the law of Nature, those Maxims and Principles of Common equity, which
are written in the hearts of men by the finger of God; which point had need be
well considered, because as Mr. Hooker says, a number there are who think they
cannot admire as they ought the Power and Authority of the word of God, if in
things divine they should attribute any force to man's reason, for which Cause
they never use reason so willingly as to disgrace reason. p. 97. Nor let any
man think (says he) that following the judgment of Natural discretion we can
have no assurance to please God; for to the Author and God of Nature how shall
any operation proceeding in natural sort, be in that respect unacceptable? the
nature which himself has given to work by, he cannot but be delighted with,
when we exercise the same any way without Commandment of his to the Contrary.
p. 60. Now if any place in the Bible may receive an interpretation from the
rules and principles of natural reason, why might not the texts of Usury? since
it is conversant altogether about Covenants and Contracts which are grounded
only upon the laws of Nature and Nations: and many Cases there be which are
confessed by all to be no apparent breaches of Charity, nor any injustice found
in them; Insomuch that Dr. Downam is brought thereby to such a straight as he
is forced to maintain that there be other respects which makes usury unlawful
besides the hurt of our neighbor p. 44. and 125. But if Charity be the
fulfilling of the whole law, I will give them leave to talk their fill, yet I
cannot believe how Usury can be a sin if it hurt not my neighbor. Their
pretenses of the oppression of the Commonwealth by taking Usury of the Rich is
but a mere Sanctuary of ignorance, and a fiction which can never be proved,
since it is practiced in the Richest Commonwealths.

Whether the law of Usury be Judicial.
To prove the laws against Usury to be Moral and not Judicial D. Downam
produces a main argument which is not in Dr. Fenton, his words are, The law
which commands free lending is not Judicial, but Moral; for the same law
which commands the affirmative forbids the Negative. Answ. 1. Dr. Downam
mistakes in thinking free lending and lending for gain to be terms of
affirmation and negation: Lending and not lending which are Contradictorily
opposed are only Affirmative and Negative terms; Lending freely or for gain are
only several sorts of lending, and differing in qualities, and though their
qualities differ yet they are both positive and affirmative, for it is an
axiom Contrariorum utrumque membrum est positivum, In Contradictions and
Privations, one term is always negative, but it is not so in Contraries.
Secondly let me retort Dr. Downams argument in a stronger Case. The law which
commands resting on the Sabbath is not Judicial but Moral, therefore the law
which forbids Kindling a fire on the Sabbath day is Moral, for the law which
Commands the affirmative, forbids the negative,: what will Dr. Downam
answer to this his own argument? here is affirmation and negation, Resting and
not Resting in the kindling of a fire, not Contraries only but Contradictories,
yet I presume Dr. Downam will not conclude that kindling a fire on the Sabbath
day is a breach of the Moral law. Dr. Fenton is of opinion that if God does
forbid biting and oppressing Usury only by his law, that then the law must
needs be Moral and not Judicial, except we will give liberty to Christians to
oppress and bite their Brethren. page 44. The answer is, The Equity of the law
is still in force, the Rigor of it is abrogated; or thus, that the poor should
not be oppressed is Moral, that they should not be oppressed by Usury is
Judicial. To make the meaning of this distinction clear, we must know that all
Judicial laws were made for that hedging in or enclosing of the Moral law, and
whereas the Moral law was delivered either in General affirmative
commandments, or negative prohibitions, the Judicial comes after and gives
some particular politic directions in the observation of them; for example,
the Moral law says in general thou shall Sanctify the Sabbath, then comes the
Judicial and says, Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon
the Sabbath day, Exodus 35. 3. so the Moral law tells us thou shall not steal,
the Judicial adds, if a man steal an ox, or a sheep, he should pay five or
four fold for it, and in most cases but double, Exodus 22. 1. 4. So then there is
a general equity in all Judicials which is Moral and eternal. There is a law
Levit. 25. 23. the land shall not be sold for ever: whereby selling of
inheritance is forbidden, and this law did bind Naboth 1 Kings 21. 3. that he
would not sell his inheritance to king Ahab. The equity of this law which binds
all men, even infidels, to preserve or procure an inheritance or estate for
their posterity, remains still in force; yet absolutely, not to sell any land
is esteemed no otherwise than a Judicial law fitted for the Commonwealth of
the Jews: so the perpetual equity of Sanctifying the Sabbath, and of not
Stealing abides, although the kindling of a fire on that day is now arbitrary;
and the Compensation of stealing is left to the positive laws of each nation.
The same law that forbids us to steal, bids us to relieve the poor, and so does
the equity of the law of Usury. It is sufficient that the general equity of
this law be observed, and the poor relieved, but that in particular they must
be relieved by the not taking Usury of them is not necessary. It was a sin in
any Jew to take Usury of his poor, although he did relieve him otherways,
because God did restrain him to that particular manner of relieving the poor.
But with us it is otherwise; if by any other means we do sufficiently relieve
the poor, then even the taking of Usury of them is no sin nor oppression.

Concerning the Judicials of Moses we must also observe, that they were not so
particular, but that many things were left to the Ordinance of the Magistrate
or high Priest, and humane ordinances (as Mr. Hooker does observe) are many
times presupposed as grounds in the statutes of God, Deuteronomy. 24. 10, There is a
Judicial Law which orders only the manner how a pledge must be taken; this
necessarily does presuppose some former humane law that did order that pledges
might be taken. Even that ill law or Custom of divorce, Deuteronomy. 24. 1. is
regulated by a Judicial law, that it might thereby be made less hurtful. The
reason why I note these things is, because the law of God concerning Usury did
presuppose and was grounded on a former law or custom of the Jews which was
then in use and practice; And the special caution for the Poor might leave the
Rich to the customs and laws of the Magistrates which did always regulate all
sorts of contracts. And whereas the law of Moses did allow Usury only to
Strangers; It does not follow but that others that were neither Poor nor
Strangers were left to the ordinary laws of the Country. No Magistrate could
give a dispensation for Usury toward the Poor, nor a Prohibition for it
toward Strangers: so much as God ordered no humane laws might alter; as for
other cases not specified, they were left to the ordinary policy of the State.
For we must not think that God provided all the civil laws of Israel: His
especial care was to ordain laws for the reformation of such sins as had been
learnt by his people of the Egyptians, or for the prevention of such as might
be taught them by the Canaanites.

I know that Dr. Fenton does infer that the law which prohibits Usury is
Moral, page 45. because the allowance of it to strangers is only a Judicial,
for unless it had been a sin, what needs a toleration: since lawful things have
no need of a permission? Answ. 1. If the allowing of Usury to strangers be no
Law at all but only an Exception or proviso annexed to a former law, then it
can be no Judicial; all laws do Command or forbid something, but this if it be
an exception does neither, because it leaves the thing indifferent as it is the
nature of all such provisoes in statutes. But if they will have it to be a Law,
then it must bind affirmatively, and not only that one May but that one Must
take Usury of a stranger, for in the Original it is thou shall lend upon Usury
or shall cause to bite; And the Hebrews understand this to be a Commandment
and not a Permission only.

Secondly, whereas they Compare the allowance of Usury to the permission of
Divorce, they err notoriously: for the difference between allowing and
permitting is most manifest, as Dr. Downam confesses page 298. We allow those
things only which we suppose to be good, or at least indifferent: But we permit
only such things as are esteemed evil. God has said by Moses thou may or
thou shall take Usury of a stranger, he never says thou may divorce thy wife
if she displease thee, or thou shall put her away. But the law is, If she do
displease thee, and find no favor in thine eyes, and if thou shall put her
away, and if she do marry another, and if he also put her away, Then (says the
law) her first husband may not take her again. Deuteronomy. 24. 1. 2, 3, 4. so that
the end of the whole law of divorce is only to keep the woman from returning to
her first husband after a second marriage; all that goes before is but by way
of supposition: But if any man will contend that the writing of a bill of
divorce is enjoined in the law, it must follow that it is not a Permission but
a Command, contrary to our Saviors doctrine who calls it a Permission, Mat.
19. 8. And if it be a Command, we must needs understand it as an order only how
and after what manmer the divorce should be, to wit by bill in writing: but not
as an order that did command men simply to be divorced. It is very little less
than blasphemy to say that Moses law should allow any thing that was evil. It
is the power of the lawgiver to make both the Rule and the Exception to it. It
is an over-bold speech of Dr. Fenton to say, that notwithstanding Moses law had
given liberty to the Jews to take Usury of strangers, yet it was a sin to do
it, and that they could not be absolved in the Court of Conscience, although
they might be absolved in the external Court, page 45.

Whereas Dr. Fenton does pretend that a Reason that moved God to permit this
sin of Usury to strangers, was to prevent the greater oppression of his own
People, and that the hardness of the Jewish hearts was such that if they might
not have taken Usury of strangers they would have made a Prey of their own
Brethren. ib. Answ. How much does this derogate from the laws of God? as if
they were not able to bridle one sin but by the toleration of some other; and
if the hardness of men's hearts must be born with, since men's hearts are as much
hardened in other sins as in Usury, why are not some other sins tolerated as
well as Usury? surely the Idolatry of the Jews was as great as their Usury, and
their hearts went a whoring after strange Gods, yet Dr. Fenton cannot show that
any Idolatry was permited them in any kind.

I find some Criticism used by Dr. Downam; upon the Hebrew names in Scripture
which signify a stranger, page 208. but I cannot find that Dr. Fenton does
make any use, the three sorts of Ger, Tashab, and Nocre (which he translates to
be Advena, Inquilinus, and Hostis) are insisted upon by him. He would have
Nocre to signify an alien by birth, Religion, affection, and Dwelling. This
distinction he labors not to prove, neither do I think it sound, because I am
informed by those that are skilful in the tongues that the Hebrew root does
signify to be ignorant or not to know, so that whosoever was unknown, was
Nocre, a stranger, though he were not of another nation, if he were but only of
an unknown family; the word is used by Solomon Pro. 5. 20. and 6. 24. where he
calls a Whore a strange woman, no man must think that he means such whores
only as are of another nation or religion, but all such as were not to be known
to them as wives; So God forbids the Jews Deuteronomy. 17. 15. that they should not
set a stranger to be King over them: surely he meant such strangers as dwelt
amongst them, there was little danger that they would choose an Enemy that
dwelt in another Country. I find in Levit. 22. 10. it is said, there shall no
stranger eat of the holy thing, that is, whosoever is not of the Priests
family; so that the word stranger may sometimes signify an Israelite of
another family or tribe.

D. Downam affirms that a Jew was permitted to take Usury of such strangers
only as were enemies and aliens both in affection and religion, birth and
habitation: so that if a stranger did but dwell or converse amongst the Jews,
they might not take Usury of him. But Dr. Downam should remember that a Brother
and a Stranger in the Levitical law are Membra dividentia, he that is not a
brother is a stranger, and e contra, etc. Now a brother Levit. 25. 42. is only
an Israelite circumcised brought out of Egypt, If therefore the law had
prohibited only the taking of Usury of an Israelite, and allowed only the
taking of it of an enemy stranger, then the law had been very imperfect and
defective, because there had been no direction in the law for such strangers as
had been sojourners or proselytes, who are neither Brethren nor Enemies; if any
man think that a proselyte or sojourner might be accounted a Brother let him
but read Levit. 25. verse 39, 40, 42, 44, 45, and 46.

I know Dr. Fenton p. 46. would have us think that a Jew might take Usury of a
stranger, because he might also kill him: But I must deny that any private man
might kill a stranger but in a public war; neither can the like text be
showed for the allowing of the murder of a stranger by a private man. Many
places there be in which the Jews were enjoined to be Charitable to strangers,
Thou shall not vex a stranger, Exodus 22. 21. Love ye the stranger, for ye were
strangers in the land of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 10. 19. Thou shall not oppress a
stranger, for ye know the heart of a stranger, because ye were strangers in the
land of Egypt, Exodus, 23. 9. There was in many Cases the self same Charity to be
showed to the stranger as to the poor; The corners of the harvest-field, the
gleanings of it, and the single grapes, Thou shall leave for the poor and the
stranger, Levit, 19. 9. Also the third years tyth, the forgotten sheafs, the
feasts of Pentecost, and of Tabernacles, were appointed for the relief and
benefit of the stranger, fatherless and the widow.

There are many more laws to be found in the book of Moses which are made for
the benefit of the poor; the equity of them certainly continues unto this day;
but no man but a Jew is so mad as to say the rigorous observation of them is to
be required of us; why then must they law against Usury more than all the rest
be necessary? It may as well be affirmed that all the Judicial laws are Moral;
let them show us by what rules they do distinguish these laws: I do apprehend
that the Judicials were conversant about the morality of outward actions, as
about the distinctions of rights, the distributions of inheritance, the
Punishment of crimes, as of Blasphemy, Perjury, Murder, Adultery,
Manslaughter, Fornication, or the like, about the rites of Marriage, of
Divorces, of Bondage, of Usury, of Witnesses, and of many other actions, the
equity of all which is reducible to some one Commandment or other of the Moral
law.

If all the Levitical laws be read over, it cannot be found that ever any
Judicial was delivered with such restrictions, qualifications, and diminishing
terms, as the law of Usury: thy brother, thy poor brother, thy poor brother
that is with thee; the general name of neighbor is not so much as used about
it: it is no where said thou shall take no Usury of thy neighbor. Besides,
this law has an allowance which no other Judicial has. And lastly, this law
of Usury taken in the sense of our adversaries (for all increase from the rich
also) can be no breach of Charity in some Cases, and then there will be no
Equity in it, which is found even in all Judicials. Indeed I find Dr. Downam
brought to such straights as to maintain that there be other respects which
make Usury unlawful besides the hurt of the neighbor, page 295. But if it be
forbidden by the Moral law, and that law be a branch of the second table (as
Dr. Fenton affirms) how it can be a sin without breach of Charity to the
neighbor, passes my understanding, since Charity is the fulfilling of the law.

Whereas Dr. Downam does compare Usury to an officious lie, which is a sin,
though it hurt not but help the neighbor, page 277. It is true an officious
lie is a sin: but a sin against the first Commandment of the first Table as it
is repugnant to Truth which is an essential Attribute of God: Every one that
lies does thereby deny and forsake the true God. Let Dr. Downam tell us, which
Commandment of the first Table is by Usury violated. It is not sufficient to
say, that all Usury is a breach of our allegiance to God, this is but begging
of the question, unless this disobedience can be referred to some particular
precept of the Decalogue, as the officious lie is to be first; as for general
disobedience, it is a sin that goes through all the Commandment, and is to be
referred to each particular precept according to the several objects of it.

It is further insisted on, that the prohibition of Usury is coupled in Ezekiel
18. with sins against the Moral law, from thence an inference is made that it
self must be Moral.

Answ. 1. If we look upon other Scriptures we shall find Judicials and Morals
mingled together in the giving of the Law: We may see in Levit. 19. 9. the
prohibition of Reaping the corners of the field, and gleaning the Vineyards,
which were Judicials, set immediately before the forbidding of Stealing, Lying,
and Swearing, which are parcels of the Moral Law. In the 13. verse of the same
Chapter it is said, Thou shall not defraud thy neighbor, nor rob him: The
wages of him that is hired shall not abide with thee all night until the
morning. The former of these is Moral, the latter is Judicial. And also in the
16. verse, the prohibition of Enchantment, or Witchcraft, is set between the
forbidding of eating blood, and rounding the corners of the head, and marring
the corners of the beard.

Secondly, Whereas Dr. Downam says page 219. The Holy Ghost deciphers a wicked
man, that should dye the death if he did any of these things: We find first
that the words in the Orginal are, if he do like to any one of these things; or
as our new Translation has it in the Margent, or that does to his brother
besides any of these.

Thirdly, Whereas Dr. Downam conjoyns these sins by the disjumctive Or, our new
translators use the Copulative And,

Lastly, To confound Dr. Downam's opinion, the Text in the 13. verse says, He
has done all these abominations, he shall surely dye. And good reason; for
some of the crimes were capital by the Law of Moses, as Idolatry and Adultery,
but Usury, or the taking and keeping of a Pledge has no kind of Punishment
appointed by Moses, neither has any man denied, but that the law of restoring
the pledge was Judicial, and not Moral.

But let it be granted to Dr. Downam (that which he can never prove) that death
is threatened by Ezekiel to Usury; May it not still be a Judicial Law for all
that? Was not the Law in Exodus 21. 1. a Judicial, whereby it is ordered that an
Hebrew-bond-servant should at seven years end be free and at liberty? Yet God
does threaten the People for breaking this Law, by reassuming their servants
with a liberty to the Sword, to the Pestilence, and to the Famine, Jerem. 34.
17. Also in Numb. 15. 35. the man that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day was
stoned by Gods appointment, and yet the Law was but Judicial, and not Moral.

Before I conclude this question about the nature of the Law against Usury, it
is not impertinent to remove a scruple that is objected. It may be asked of me
that maintain there is no Law in Scripture now in force against Usury, what
Text can be showed that it is lawful?

Answ. There needs none; for if the Law of God do not now forbid it, it is
sufficient that the Law of Nature, Reason, and Custom does make it lawful.
About things easy and manifest ( says Mr. Hooker) by common sense, there
needs no higher consultation -- the means of some things is such, that to
search the Scripture of God for the ordering of them, were to derogate from the
reverend authority, and dignity of the Scripture.

If I should ask Dr. Fenton what Text he has to prove that Letting of Land is
lawful, it would ask him some time to find it; or how he can warrant the
selling of Land, which is expressly forbidden in the Law, Levit. 25. 23. It may
be I can allege as good a Text for Usury. I think the 6th of Luke which is
alleged against it may with better reason be produced for it, and if we will
stand to the literal and common sense of the word in the Original, we may
conclude that it is not only allowed, but commanded there; what exceptions can
be taken if a man should translate (...) lend upon Usury? Is not that the
proper signification of the word in all Authors? Has not the Latin borrowed
the words Danista an Usurer, and Danisma Usury, from the Greek? Although our
Translation says only Lend, this general word may also comprehend Lending upon
use. It accords with the Original, and crosses not the Translation. But it may
be Lending upon Usury may be here in this Text allowed by our adversaries, if
we will observe, as it follows in the Text, to look for nothing again. These
words of looking or hoping for nothing again although they be answerable to the
vulgar Translation, yet in the Original they have another more proper
signification, as is showed by Beza, who is no friend to Usury; you shall have
his words in his Annotations upon Luke. 6. 35. I confess (says he) that I
never read in any other place the word (...) in this signification [to hope
for] when as properly it signifies to Despair. And surely it may seem that our
Lord in this place did consider what does many times hinder men from lending
their money to their poor brethren (to wit the fear lest they lose what they
lend to the poor) and therefore he would remove that fear from us, and bring us
to this pass, that as often as we help our neighbor for Gods sake, we should
never think that it may be to our loss, since God makes himself a pledge and
surety that we shall receive with much Usury whatsoever we lend: If we follow
this interpretation, then instead of [looking for] we must say [despairing] and
so the Syriack Interpreter understood this place -- They are decei^ed which
wrest this place for the prohibition of Usury; as if Christ had forbidden us to
covenant or exact any thing above the principal. Thus far Beza; wherein we have
his opinion and reason, and by the help of his direction the Text may be most
fitly translated, Lend upon Usury not despairing; for to lend looking for
nothing again, is, as the Bishop of Winchester has observed, not to Lend but
to Give.

4. Of the Properties of Letting.
Dr. Fenton and Dr. Downam cannot endure to hear that Usury should be called
Letting of money. Many are the properties that are (as they think) inseparable
from Letting, and cannot be found in the putting out of money. Hiring or
Letting (say they) is of such things as are not spent in the use, but have a
fruitful use in themselves naturally; which use may be valued apart and be let,
the property remaining in the Letter, and the thing if it miscarry without the
fault of the hirer belongs to the Letter only. If we ask from whence they
collect these distinctions and properties of Letting, or whether they have any
rule for them in Scripture; They answer, though there be no Text for them, yet
the Law of Nature and Reason which orders and regulateth all humane
contracts, does teach them. Let it be so: And let us have leave a little to
examine by the same Law of Reason and common sense these properties of Letting,
and see whether any or all of them may be applied to money.

I confess things hired are not to be spent in their use. Neither is money
properly said to be spent in the use, it is not to speak like a Grammarian, to
say any thing is spent in the use, for spending and using are in propriety of
speech distinct actions, howsoever by reason of some similitude between them
they be used promiscuously by the vulgar phrase. A thing used does remain the
same after the use to be used again; but a thing spent perishes or is consumed
in the spending, so that no further use can be made of it. Money is not thus
spent, at the most it is but said to be spent to him that has made no
profitable use of it, in it self it remains unspent and useful to others. Thus
much Dr. Fenton saw very well, and therefore he does not urge this property as
Dr. Downam does, but seems to yield, and say page 65. That also of spending
money in the first use, as if the use and property were inseparable, so stood
upon by School Divines (he might also have said Canonists) is much subject to
cavil, for there is sensible difference between spending a loaf of bread, and
disbursing money for gain -- a loaf once eaten has no second use to him that
eat it, or to any other: money laid out remains still the same to be used by
another; and the same in the Equivalent to him that laid it out: and the same
individual pieces which once delivered shall never happily return again to the
same person; there may be some difference in a Philosophers brain, but not in a
merchants purse, it is all one whether it be the same shilling or another as
good.

Things let (say they) must have a fruitful use naturally in themselves. If
this property were true, I would confess money might not be Let. But common
sense does confute this assertion. What fruitful use has a house naturally?
does one house beget or bring forth another? is it not an artificial thing, as
tools, instruments, and furniture? all which are lawfully Let, although they
have no more fruitful use by nature than money has. All things that are useful
either by Nature or Art, that have either fructum in themselves, or questum by
industry, are the object of Letting: no man will deny the artificial use of
money, yet I find Dr. Fenton to contradict himself in this point of the use of
money, his words are, p. 20. The moneys of a Tradesman be his tools by which he
gets his living: if therefore they be retained from him to his sensible
detriment, satisfaction is due in justice and equity without touch of Usury, In
an other place ( page 94.) forgetting this he determines that Nothing
whatsoever it be, natural or artisicial, but it serves either to feed, or to
cloth, or to work withal, or to play withal, yet for money there is no use to
be made of it.

Money have thus an artificial use distinct from the spending of it, this use of
it is valuable apart, and to be guided by the same rule which serves for the
true valuation of any other Lettable thing: we see by daily experience that the
valuation of the use of money is more certain than of other things. It remains
then, that Money has an artificial use which is valuable, and in that respect
may be let as other artificial things are.

To proceed. Another property (say they page 16.) of Letting is, that the use
only is passed over, the property resting in the Lender. Whereas Lending
passes over the property with the use for the time it is Lent. Is this true?
Then a man had need take heed of Lending, If when he lends he loses the
property of the thing lent: Surely I should think that the use and possession
only (and not the property) is passed away in Lending and Letting also. He that
has Lent his money during the time that it is Lent and out of possession, has
power in law and a right to give or bequeath at his pleasure, that which he
could not dispose of, if he had no property in it. A property in the sum Lent,
or to the equivalent, which is all one, as Dr. Fenton has ingenuously
confessed. It is a frivolous exception to say he has not a property in that
Individual shilling which he lent, since art has so ordered it that all
shillings are the self same in use, and as one shilling. If all other natural
and artificial things, which are confessed to be Lettable, were of equal value
and use; if all horses and sheep were alike in all things without any real
difference in their goodness and use, it would be all one to him that had let
his horse, to receive his own horse or another.

We must understand (says Dr. Fenton) a special kind of Lending which for
penury of words, and narrowness of our English wants a proper term. in Latin
it is called [Mutuum] or Mutuatio -- which is (says he) the free passing over
both of use and property for a time, at the time ended to receive the like
gain; thus he. If it be passed over but for a time, then at the time ended the
same again. must be restored; why then does he name only the like again? if
only the like be restored then the thing it self is passed over for ever.

Dr. Wilson the Civilian in his Book of Usury puts the Case how hiring of money
may be lawful; if a man borrow a 100 l. only to make show of, either at some
Bank, or otherwise to persuade the world that he has a 100 l. of his own, and
if he never spend it but presently restores the self same 100 pound which he
borrowed, in this Case the Lender may lawfully take and Contract for hire or
use of his money because it is not spent in the use. This Case is borrowed from
the Papists, and allows a man to take Usury for helping to Cosen the world,
although himself be no way damnified by the want of his money.

But the grand impediment of Letting money is, that the Borrower (say they,
page 17.) stands to the hazard of it, which they think to be against the law of
Exodus 22. 14.

Answer. Concerning hazards, we find that in the Law Exodus 22. 12. about beasts
delivered to a neighbor only to keep, that if a beast be stolen he shall make
restitution to the owner thereof; which Case shows the owner does not stand to
the hazard but the keeper only, who yet has not so much as the use or property
but only the possession of the beast, so Jacob tells Laban Genesis 31. 39. that if
any of his sheep were stolen by day or by night, that he made them good;
therefore their rule fails which says every thing perishes to the right
owner. page 17.

It may be answered, that whatsoever the Law was for things deposited, yet for
things Let the Law is Clear that the borrower shall not make it good or stand
to the hazard, because it came for the hire. Exodus 22. 14. This Text is either
not understood, or wrested to a false sense, as may best appear if we cite the
whole Text which Dr. Fenton has curtailed to fit his own turn; the words are,
If a man borrow ought of his neighbor and it be hurt or dye, the owner thereof
not being with it, he shall surely make it good, but if the owner thereof be
with it, he shall not make it good, If it be a hired thing it came for the hire.

Answ. 1. It may be thought the Text intends beasts only, and not other goods
or money, because the four precedent verses, to which the Text has reference,
are restrained to ox, ass, or sheep, or any beasts: and the same words of
dying and hurting are used in this verse which are used in the tenth verse
where beasts only are meant, which words are not so proper to express all sorts
of hazards of other goods: withal there is greater reason that the hazards of
beasts should not light upon the borrower, because, they by the course of
nature are daily subject to decay and perish, and many secret diseases lurk in
them which the borrowers cannot discern; whereas other goods, and especially
money, are not of so perishable a disposition, but their sudden destruction is
most times by the act or folly of man, and not from the God of Nature. But if
it be granted that the Text understands all goods, then indeed it comes home to
the point of Usury; but it makes for it and not against it: for the law is for
things let, that if they be hurt the owner thereof not being by, he (the
Borrower) shall surely make it good. Now in Usury the owners do not, and for
the most part cannot stand by and see how their money miscarries. Indeed when a
thing is hired for some particular end wherewith the Letter is made acquainted,
then he may stand by and see how it perishes, and of such a lending the Text
is best understood. It is plain that the Letter (though he had the property)
did not always stand unto the hazard, but only when he stood by, that it might
appear (says Dr. Fenton, p. 17.) not to be the Borrowers default. The Rabbines
exposition of this text may give some light to the understanding of it, and it
is thus; The words are, if it be hurt or dye: that is, hurt in the use, or dye
in the work for which it was hired: If a man (say they) hire a tool for some
particular use, if it be hurt in doing the work it must not be made good: so if
I hire a horse to plow with, and the horse whilst he is in plowing dye, then I
am free. But if I borrow goods or beasts, and they be lost or stolen, or hurt,
or taken away by violence, or dye, I am bound to pay all, if such violence do
not befall it in the time of the work. If I borrow a horse to plow with, and he
dye either before or after the plowing, I must make him good.

To apply this Text to money, the most that can be gathered is, that if money
be hurt in the using of it, without the Borrowers default, it must be at the
Lenders hazard. But since money is not ordinarily hired for any one particular
use expressed, but in general to be employed at the Borrowers discretion; how
can the Lender of money be comprehended within that law, which did only
relieve the Borrower in case the thing hired did perish in that special use for
which it was borrowed? The ground of the equity of this Law is, if the thing
hired be not able in its own nature to do the thing for which it was hired
without perishing, the Hirer is not to be at the hazard of it; money all men
know to be able of its own nature to do the thing for which it was hired; if by
any casual or external accident money perishes, the Law provides no remedy in
such Cases. It is one of the singular benefits and the privilege of money in
traffic that it is not of a perishable nature. The ends why policy found out
the use money were many: the Chief are, that it might be Durable, Portable, and
Partible.

But to grant them that he that stands to the hazard should have all the gains:
Is there not hazard to be found in the Letter as well as in the Borrower of
money? many that have contracted for Usury by bonds and other security have
lost both Principal and Use, and have been thereby undone; surely such people
find hazard in it. It is a rule in the Civil law, that omnis mutuatio plerumque
damnosa, eoque meretur compensationem. It is fit therefore in equity, that
since the Lender stands in hazard there should be a gain due to him also.

But this gain they allow, So it may be conditional, if the borrower gain. And
this conditional gain can only be by Partnership. As for letting of money upon
Condition of the Borrowers gain, it is a course as mischievous and impossible
as the letting of land upon like Condition; without experience no man can
sufficiently describe it. It would make all bargains to be nothing but suits
in law, no debts should be due but upon proof and witnesses examined; nay there
is no possibility of knowing men's gains or losses without racking their
Consciences, and opening a gap to perjury for every unthrift in his own Cause.
Or if loss and gain could be discovered, how shall it appear, whether it be by
default of the party or by the act of God? many times they both concur, and are
so twisted that no eye of reason can distinguish them. In effect, hereby every
man is tied to have an eye to watch the disbursing of every penny which he
lends, which is a thing impossible, and therefore the law of reason and of all
nations does think it fitter to tolerate sometimes a mischief which may happen
by an unfortunate bargain upon an absolute contract, than to allow of a
perpetual inconvenience, which would follow a Conditional Covenant and
overthrow the contracts of all Commonwealths. In all letting there is a
consideration had of the casualties, and because there may be a possibility of
extraordinary gains it must counter-value the extraordinary loss if any
happen, both which being contingent, and seldom happening, they are set one
against the other, and a middle indifferent rate between them, which does
ordinarily happen, belongs to the Lender, who is not to partake in the
extremes: Because it is rarely to be showed that any loss can befall a man in
lifeless goods merely by the act of God, without the concurrence of some fault
of man, either of negligence, ignorance, indiscretion, willfulness, or the
like. To conclude, the rule that guides the valuation of all Contracts, is not
what Casually is or may be, but what ordinarily is like to happen.

As for Partnership (which is a project much magnified by the adversaries of
Usury) let it be examined what it is. Those are truly Partners who in a Joint
stock communicate their pains and travel: so that an equal industry and
privity goes along with the employment of the stock. There the Trust being
reciprocal, the covenants may be equal and the Laws do relieve men upon their
Covenants and mutual agreements in such Partnership: But in this their
pretended Partnership, where there is but a trust of one side, no equality of
pains, no privity in trade, no partnership in the matter of stock, nor in the
form or consent of negotiation, but only a Partnership in the gains, this
cannot truly be called a Partnership, but it is only the office of Master and
Servant under another name, or false title, and differs only in the manner of
the wages, which this their case of Partnership is contingent, and in the other
absolute. Besides, in this their counterfeit Partnership, a man may make no
covenants that can be good in Law, nor so much as take a Bond for his
Principal, but he must only trust to the honesty of his friend, since no
articles can be made that shall be legal except they be Usurious: nor can be
drawn so reasonable as an honest man will be bound by them, or so firm that a
dishonest man cannot safely break them.

It seems to me, that after all the stir about Usury, Dr. Fenton, and all his
fellows do allow of Usury under another name, Interest; they all agree a man
may lawfully take so it be against his will; that is, when a man detaines his
money from him against his will; but if a man be so courteous as to consent that
another shall keep his money, he must then stand to the courtesy of the
Borrower.

Now that which they do call Interest, they do allow in two cases; Either where
there is, first Damnum contingens, a loss arising; or secondly, where there is
Lucrum cessans, gain ceasing: so that if either a man receive damage, or that
his gain be but hindered, he may take interest. Now in all lending a man's gain
is hindered, because he has not his money to employ when occasion serves, or
shall be offered: Nor is it requisite that ceasing gain must be certainly
proved; for that is impossible, being a thing contingent, but a probable
estimation of it may be allowed (by Dr. Downams confession page 166.) and in
all probability gain cease, or is hindered, wheresoever there is Lending.
Therefore by this their own Scholastical distinction there is Interest due for
all Lending. Only successive or intervsury which is before delay of Payment
they would fain exclude. But if Interest be (as their own Melancthon says) a
debt which he owes by the law of Nature, who has been to another an effectual
cause of damage, or has hindered his gain, because Nature teaches that no man
must be enriched by the hindering of another, according to the rule of St. Paul
2 Cor. 8. 13. That one be not eased, that another may be burdened: Then it will
follow, that delay of Payment does naturally begin from the first minute of
Lending; if any will abridge himself of the privilege of Nature by the giving
day for payment, yet if it be by a Covenant conditional to pay so much interest
at the day appointed, then such a Contract is but the ratifying of a natural
debt, with a dilatory payment for the benefit of the Borrower.

Thus after all their pretended impediments of Letting money, they are forced to
confess at last, that an Interest may be justly due and taken; which is nothing
else but a hire, a recompense, or an increase of it. The sole doubt they make
is about the contracting for interusury. Neither is Dr. Fenton nor Dr. Downam,
so stiff against contracts when they come to the point, as at first they made
show of. Dr. Fenton says, page 64. It is great reason that the debtor should
trust the creditors charity, and not the creditor rely upon the fidelity of the
debtor; and Bonds may in some cases be lawfully made, which cannot so lawfully
be exacted. This he speaks of contracts without any condition of hazard
expressed.

Also Dr. Downam does add, That if there be a covenant of the one side in
eventum lucri, to partake of the gain, and on the other side but a purpose of
bearing part of the loss -- I would not altogether condemn such a contract, page
163.

Thus both these Divines do consent that a contract may be made for interest,
if there be but a purpose in the Lender not to exact or oppress thereby. Yet
like men uncertain and doubtful what to conclude, they sometimes allow a man to
take interest so he do not contract for it, at other times to contract for it,
so he do not take it, ( p. 27.) One while a bond may be lawfully made, so it be
not exacted; another while it is lawful to take where it is not lawful to
covenant or contract. Again, Dr. Fenton says, page 129. That the poison of
Usury is in some contracts so closely and cunningly conveyed, as the very turn
of the intention of the mind may alter the case to make it just or unjust; the
contract remaining one and the same. If one and the same contract may be just
and unjust, then all contracts are not unjust by his own confession. In another
place ( p. 125.) he tells us, We may puzzle him with some cases so cunningly
contrived wherein we can find no difference either in Justice or Charity from
other lawful contracts: Then quaere whether it be within the Definition of
Usury -- If it appear just and lawful, it shall not appear usurious, it may
perhaps border or coast upon Usury. Yet our conclusion shall still remain
entire, That Usury properly so called is simply unlawful. A trim Conclusion.
But what are we the wiser for knowing that all Usury is unlawful, unless he
teach us what is properly called Usury? This is the main doubt, what is Usury,
and what is not; whether all increase, or increase only from the poor; whether
all contracts for gain by money be Usury. If Dr. Fenton may be puzzled, and be
not able to tell us what Contracts differ from Justice and Charity, and what
not; If one and the same contract may be just and unjust; if that usurious
contracts, as they do approach unto equity so far forth do decline the nature
of Usury, then are we still ignorant what properly is Usury, only we may know
that it is unlawful if we knew what it were. This is the last and safest
retreat that Dr. Fenton finds.

5. Concerning humane Testimonies of Fathers, Councils, Divines, Heathens, and
Laws.
As for the Testimonies of Fathers and Councils, we do affirm, that neither
Father nor Council did ever define Usury to consist in the contracting for
gain, they were not so curious or subtle in those ages as to define it at all.
But most of those few passages that are in them may best be understood to mean
only such Usury as was an oppression to the poor.

As for Aristotle, Plutarch, Cato, Seneea, Pliny, and some others, I shall
offer the confession of Dr. Fenton, ( p. 65.) Who is persuaded that the very
conceit of these grounds (of the Philosophers arguments) has moved many to
think more favorably of Usury it self than there is just cause -- The force of
the Philosophers argument taken from the barrenness of money, and the unnatural
brood of Usury, being mingled with metaphors, if it be not rightly apprehended,
is obscure and doubtful. That also of spending money in the first use, as if
use and property were inseparable -- is much subject to cavil.

By these passages we may see what little confidence Dr. Fenton puts in the
arguments of the Heathen Philosophers against Usury. As for the bare authority
of these men, the speculative determinations of so few Philosophers, are no way
to be compared with the grave wisdom of whole States, which by practice and by
Customs in all ages have approved thereof. I know the abuse of Usury has given
just cause both to Christians and Heathens to declame bitterly against it.
Merchandising (as Dr. Fenton tells us) also Letting of Land, and other tradings
have their manifold abuses, and yet are things lawful in themselves; and
whereas all other trades do oppress but within their own Circle or limits, and
in such particulars wherein they deal, Usury dealing with money which is used
in all trades, has made the abuse thereof more general, and therefore all men
have the more frequent occasion to speak against it.

The Civil Law which was gathered out of all the best ancient Laws both Heathen
and Christian, and which is most in use at this day, does allow Usury. The Laws
of Venice, Genoa, and the Low Countries (three simply the richest States in
Europe) do allow thereof, and yet are free from poor, which persuades that
Usury is not so hurtful to a state. As for the statute Laws of this land they
do vary, and one statute mislikes and repeals another, but they all allow Usury
of Orphans; And the Law last made since the death of Dr. Fenton in the 21. year
of King James does allow eight in the hundred.

The constant practice of the Common Law of this land, and also of the Chancery
in point of equity, does not only allow Interest where there is a Contract for
it, but also does give it where there is none.

To end this point, if all Laws and States had thought all Usury to be
unlawful, and also mischievous to a Commonwealth, And if that Partnership be a
means both lawful and beneficial, It were strange that no practice nor Law of
any Nation would never establish this latter; And for all the world to tolerate
a sin when so easy a remedy had been at hand, had been an universal madness.

6. Argument against Usury.
It is to some Doubtful, therefore unlawful; because Whatsoever is not of faith
is Sin.

Answ. This argument does not make it simply unlawful to all, but only to such
as doubt, and therefore it proves not the point. For Dr. Fenton his position
is, that all Usury is of it self a sin, and so nothing indifferent. By this
Doctrine he first perplexeth the understanding of the weak, and so makes them
doubt, and when he finds them doubtful, he uses their doubting to prove it
unlawful, because they doubt, whereas if it be simply a sin of it self it is as
well a sin if a man doubt not as if he doubt. And the place of St. Paul Rom*
14. by him alleged, speaks not of sins, but of things indifferent (as eating)
which by doubting only are made sins to the doubters, and to no body else. Now
if the Cause why men doubt whether all Usury be sin, be only for that Dr.
Fenton and some others teach so, then the sin of those that doubt may fall
heavy upon the Causers of it. And if Dr. Fenton allow Usury to be doubtful, it
cannot but argue rashness peremptorily to determine there is no doubt of it,
thereby to ensnare the Consciences of the simple.

Besides the doubting spoken of by the Apostle, though it were of things
indifferent, yet formerly before the coming of Christ they were things
necessarily prescribed by the Law, but, after, taken away by the Gospel, so
that to doubt of them was consequently to condemn the Gospel, and deny the
faith in Christ. But the doubting of Usury is no establishing of the Ceremonial
Law, or overthrowing of our belief and faith in the Gospel. Neither is all
doubting meant but such only as overcomes Faith, for there is no faith but it
is mingled with some doubting. Lastly, it is not necessary that faith should be
always grounded upon the Word of God, for if a man be persuaded of any thing
by the light of Reason, or by Sense, he is justly said to believe it. To the
confirmation of this doctrine, I must produce some places of judicious Hooker.
The will of God (says he) by which we are to judge our actions, no sound
Divine in the world ever denied to be in Part made manifest, even by the light
of Nature, and not by Scripture alone, page 97. And he adds in another place,
that there may be a certain belief grounded upon other assurance than Scripture
-- we are said to believe whatsoever we are certainly persuaded of, whether it
be by reason or sense, page 60. And in a third he gives this reason; It is not
required, nor can be exacted at our hands, that we should yield unto any thing
other assent than such as does answer the evidence which is to be had of that
we assent unto: for which cause, even in matters divine, concerning some things
we may lawfully doubt; of some things we may very well retain an opinion that
they are probable, and not unlikely to be true. Then are our Consciences best
resolved and in most agreeable sort unto God and Nature settled, when they are
so far persuaded, as those grounds of persuasion which are to be had will bear,
which thing I so much the rather set down, for that I see how a number of Souls
are for want of right information in this point oftentimes grievously vexed,
when bare and unbridled conclusions are put into their minds: they finding not
themselves to have thereof any great certainty Imagine this proceeds only from
lack of faith, and that the Spirit of God does not work in them, as it does in
true believers: by this means their hearts are much troubled, they fall into
anguish and perplexity; whereas the truth is that how bold and confident soever
we may be in words, when it comes to the point of trial, such as the evidence
is, which the truth has either in it self or through proof, such is the hearts
assent thereto, neither can it be stronger, being grounded as it should be:
page 73. 74. Thus far Mr. Hooker. Therefore it is no argument to conclude that
because the Scripture does not allow Usury, therefore it may not be used: for
if the Scripture do not absolutely condemn it, it is sufficient if Reason or
Sense do guide our belief for the practice of it.

I leave those that doubt to consider what Dr. Fenton himself says within a
few lines in the same page, p. 75. This Usury which we have in hand is no
principle of faith, no mystery of Salvation to be apprehended in the simplicity
of belief: but a point of Morality belonging to the second Table, and so
determinable by the rules of Equity and Charity.

It is objected (p. 77.) that it is Scandalous, and therefore unlawful.

Answ. If Scandal be taken and not given, it is not in it self unlawful. Still
he flies from the question.

7. Of the unnaturalness of Usury.
A fourth Reason of Dr. Fenton is, p. 91. that the increase of money is
unnatural. Therefore unlawful.

Answ. This is no argument of Divinity from Scripture, but of Philosophy from
Aristotle.

Secondly, If it were of force, it serves only against Usury of money, but not
of all other things.

Thirdly, It is confessed, that money considered as it is a metal, is not
perhaps by nature apt to generation and increase; and yet even that may be
doubted of: But money considered as it is money, which Art not Nature has
produced, may be allowed an artificial increase or gain, as well as houses,
ships, and mamy other things not natural. Policy has ordained the value of
Metals to be the common rule and measure for the worth of all things vendible,
and by common estimation it is accounted in the place and stead of such things;
so that in opinion and use money is both land, house, horse, corn, or any thing
that is valued by it; even man himself, who in worth exceeds all other
creatures, is by Gods own valuation, prized at a certain sum of money, and fifty
Shekels of Silver were accepted by God in the place and stead of a man who by
vow belonged unto him. Levit. 27, 3.

It being then so apparent, that Money is by Art taken, and used for all things
valuable, both by man and God himself (who had his peculiar Coin, the Shekel of
the Sanctuary, for all sacred uses, Exodus 30. 13.) It follows in all reason,
that since the nature of most things that are valued and sold is to bring forth
an increase, that Money it self also which is esteemed for them should do the
like, or else Art is frustrated of her intention, who found out the use of money
only for the ease and benefit of Trade, which proves to be a discommoditie if
the benefit of inincrease be lost by the conversion into money.

It is further objected by Dr. Fenton, that money may not be let for hire, as a
horse, a house, or a cow, because these things are the worse for letting.

Answ. What thinks he, may a man take hire for a house when he binds the Lessee
to leave it in as good repair as he found it? Many times a horse by a moderate
journey after long rest is the better, whether may the Letter take money for his
hire? If this Argument were sound, that no hire ought to be taken, but where
the things are the worse for using, then I believe all the Rent that has been
paid for land since Noah's Flood has been unjustly taken: For it will hardly
appear that any Acre of Land is worse now than in his days; since many Acres
are bettered by tillage and manuring, which by lying waste are hurt; and houses
also decay most for want of inhabiting. The true rule of Letting is not only
the Lenders loss in the impairing of the thing lent, but the Borrowers gain by
the use of it. And we must consider, as well what the owner is the worse by the
want of that use, as what the thing lent is impaired. If another use my land,
though it be not the worse, yet he is the better by having the crop of it, and
I am the worse by wanting that benefit of it which he made; therefore I justly
challenge Rent for it. The like case is for money, the Borrower has the use of
it, and though the money be not the worse for using, yet the Lender is the worse
by missing the commodity which the other makes of it, and the Borrower is
bettered by the employment of it.

Also it is objected (page 148.) That money is void of all immediate use in it
self to the possessor while he does enjoy it.

Answ. So it is with Land, which immediately neither clothes nor feeds any man,
but by the mediation of tillage and pasturage both are effected, and though no
man immediately eats or wears money, yet by the means of it food and raiment
are procured.

Another objection is, That money the more it does increase the more it may,
which is unnatural, and contrary to other increase.

Answ. It is so in other sorts of increase; for one sheep brings forth a Lamb,
and that Sheep and Lamb in time bring forth a double increase, which multiplies
to a third, and so forward: so one hundred pound brings forth ten pound, and
both together in time increase to produce eleven pound. The only difference is,
that money is more durable than other fruitful things, which by course of Nature
are more perishable.

8. Of the ungodliness of Usury.
It is ungodly and impious, against the first Table, because it depends not
upon Gods Providence, but is assured by Bonds against the Act of God.

Answ. 1. Dr. Fenton forgets that he said Usury belongs to the second Table;
Why is it here made a breach of the first?

Secondly, the Usurers security is to arm himself against the ordinary frauds,
negligences, or other follies of the Borrower. If by the hand of God an
extraordinary loss do happen, by the like means also an extraordinary gain
may be raised sometimes, both which belong to the borrower, except the mercy of
the lender, to whom he is to trust, relieve him. And surely the Usurer has
greater cause, and seems also to trust God more than any other man, and is
least armed against him. He had need pray against foul weather, tempest, wind,
and wrack; for although he be no Husbandman, Merchant, Tradesman, no Labourer,
yet by the thriving of all these he must live, if all or any of these miscarry,
it is not his bonds many times which help him. Neither against the hand of God
only is he unarmed, but against the frauds of men many times his security
cannot defend him. How many have been defrauded of their principal debts by
fraudulent deeds of gift, by concealing of goods, and diverse other ways? It is
true some few in a City may sometimes attain to a noted wealth by Usury; but
these are but as ciphers in comparison of hundreds, who living by the like
employment of money, do scarce attain to a moderate gain whereby to maintain
themselves in their first condition; and many times as skilful Usurers as the
best, what by the loss sometimes of interest, sometimes of Principal, and other
whiles of both, and many times by the lying still of their money for want of
reasonable security, have proved in the end perfect Beggars by this trade. And
what greater Argument can there be of the hazard and danger of money that is
lent, than the Common opinion of the world, which esteems a small revenew in
land of Fee simple, more safe and certain than almost a double increase in money
with perpetual hazard? and for this cause land is dearer than money.

As for taking of Bonds for payment, it is no more injurious to the Providence
of God than to have a bond or covenant of a Tenant for the payment of his rent;
for although some years by the unseasonableness of the year, or by some other
act of God, the land yields not the rent contracted for, yet the Tenant is
absolutely bound to pay it without any condition of gaining so much by the
land: And the reason is grounded upon great equity, and is all one both for
contracts of land and money to be absolute.

Nither GOD nor Nature have proportioned the valuation of Lands, Commodities,
or Moneys; no Text can be brought to prove an Acre must be just sold at such a
price, or a commodity at such a rate; the worth of things in proportion one to
another, is a humane arbitrary custom, grounded upon the several necessities
or opinions of each particular Nation. Thus the common estimation does allow
Lands, Goods and Money taken with all casualties, hazards and charges, to be
worth one year with another about a certain value; and it is reasonable that
such a certain value should be contracted for: so that as the Seller or Letter
is not to participate of the extraordinary gains that may be raised, so he is
not to sustain the losses if any do happen.

9. Of the Injustice of Usury
It is further urged, (page 98.) that it is unjust, because it takes hire for
loan, and sels Charity, which should be free, so that things are not lent but
let, if they go for hire.

Answ. 1. Dr. Fenton can show no reason why money may not be let, as well as
lent; as well as a house or a horse which may be both: I ought in great
necessity to lend freely to the poor, yet this work of Charity does not hinder
me from letting the same thing where there is not the like necessity.

If the use of money for a time be worth money in buying and selling, as Dr. F.
confesses ( page 99.) The rule may better hold in Letting, which is no work of
Charity, though both in Letting and Selling Charity is to guide us. It does not
follow that because I must lend a shilling for a day, therefore I may not lend
a pound for a year. Besides, even in letting for hire, there is often both
Charity and Friendship showed: As, if I let a thing for half the value the use
of it is worth, to one whom others dare not trust with their goods. If some
things which are spent in the first use may be sold for increase, why may not
other things that are used be let in the same sort, since letting is but a
temporary kind of selling, and selling in effect a perpetual kind of letting.
If such things as are bought this day for ten pound may be sold to morrow for
eleven pound, may not the same ten pound which by buying and selling may
increase in one day to this eleven pound, may it not by letting increase in a
whole year to as much?

Nor can there be any reason showed, since money has a gainful use in it self
(and as Solomon says, answers all things) why I may not as well let a
hundred pound in money, as a hundred pounds worth of Cattle, Houses, or Lands,
which I buy with my money: And because they often tell us that he that bears
the hazard must have the gain, I must ask what they will say to a Lease for
Life wherein both Parties hazard, yet but one gains.

Dr. Andrews Bishop of Winchester has an argument against Usury, taken from
the Rule of our Savior, Luke 6. 31. as ye would that men should do to you, do
ye also to them likewise. Nemo (says he) sibi vellet Vsuras infligi, cum
fratre sio agat igitur. No man is willing to have Usury taken of him, therefore
he must not take himself; every man desires to borrow freely, therefore he must
lend freely.

Answ. The Rule of our Savior must necessarily be thus expounded, Whatsoever
ye will, that is, Whatsoever you will according to right reason or common
Justice; for if any man be so unreasonable or so frantic as to will that
others should kill him, yet my Lord of Winchester will not say that therefore
that man may kill another. So he that desires to borrow freely, breaks the Rule
of common equity and rectified reason, by coveting his neighbors goods; for he
that desires to benefit himself by the use of another man's goods, does therein
uncharitably desire the hindrance of his neighbor.

Also it is objected, that the greatness of gain which is made by Usury is
unlawful. page 100.

Answ. 1. This is no proof against all increase of money; but only against
excessive gains: whereas it should be proved that Usury of a penny in the
hundred is a sin, as well as of ten pounds.

Secondly, By this Rule all gain of merchandising is condemned, which is
ordinarily far greater than that of ten in the hundred.

Thirdly, The greatness of gain by Lending must be estimated by the common
opinion of the Country: otherwise how can any man's Conscience warrant him to
purchase any inheritance? Men buy Land to them and to their heirs for ever,
that is till Doomsday; which when it will come no man knows, and yet as if
every purchaser knew the hour, he bargaineth for Land at fifteen or sixteen
years purchase. But the last day may come within a year, or within fifteen, or
perhaps not within fifteen hundred years: howsoever it be uncertain, yet the
public valuation does esteem it Certain; And no man buys land at fifteen
years purchase, upon Condition that Doomsday come not before, because perhaps
then he may have a dear pennyworth: Nor upon Condition that if the World last
longer than fifteen years, that thenceforward the Purchaser should pay a
further sum. No, but Custom thinks fit to make an absolute bargain, though by
the mere act of God it may be made a dear purchase.

As the Argument of the greatness of gain in Usury makes against trading or
merchandising, so thereby also bargaining for Leases for term of years will be
made unjust; And this may the better appear if we examine one of Dr. Fenton 's
examples of Usury in this kind: If ( says he, page 21.) purposely to avoid the
Statute, I will purchase an annuity of twenty pound per annum with an hundred
pound for ten years, this is bargain and sale, yet the very same with Usury,
differing only in parchment, and manner of Covenanting, subject to the same
iniquity and inequality; poisoned with purpose of avoiding the Statute and
penalty of Usury.

Ans. 1. If only the purpose to avoid the Statute makes his Case to be Usury,
then before the Statute it was no Usury, for there could be no purpose to avoid
a penalty that was not, and this is to make Usury a breach only of Man's Law and
not of God's. Let us ask Dr. Fenton whether a Lease for years and annuity
bought with money be Usury simply in it self; he dares not say it, his answer
is, page 129. We cannot condemn it for Usury; and yet he sees most apparently
it is of the very selfsame nature with Lending upon Bonds, and differs only in
the security: upon Bond a man ties himself, upon a Lease a man ties his Land,
in both these there is the like increase by Money, and both pay alike at the
end.

Secondly, This Case I find put of a Lease that brings in above ten in the
hundred, thereby to make it more odious: but give us leave to put it in other
terms, and then ask his opinion, If with a hundred pound I purchase an annuity
of ten pounds per annum and twenty shillings over yearly for ten years, is
this Usury because it is an increase above the principal? It is the very
self-same bargain in nature with his, it differs only in the quantity of
increase. Now both by his definition and argument, as well the increase of a
penny is Usury as of ten pounds in the hundred, so then by his doctrine a man
may not buy a lease worth one penny more than his principal. If it be pretended
that bargain and sale of leases be lawful if it be reasonable, otherwise not;
then if the unreasonableness only of the bargain make it a sin of Usury, then
the former doctrine which says all increase is Usury, is thereby denied, And I
confess that an unreasonable bargain is a sin, but of theft in general not of
Usury.

Thirdly, The principal purpose in buying an annuity or lease for years is to
gain by a hundred pound, which since it could not safely be done by bonds,
therefore by a second intention men labor to avoid the Statute, so that to
gain and in gaining to avoid the Statute is the purpose of such Contracts, and
not chiefly to avoid the Statute, which might best be avoided by not purchasing
at all.

Fourthly, It is no sin to avoid a Statute by lawful means; if the Contract of
bargain and sale be in it self lawful, why should it be a vice and not a virtue
thereby to avoid the penalty of the Law, since laws are purposely made to force
men to avoid them by lawful means.

Fifthly, Whereas Dr. Fenton (page 129.) concludes, that if simply without any
pretense such annuity of rent be bought or sold, we cannot condemn it for
Usury. It follows that the pretense or intention of the heart, and not the
Contract makes it Usury: and that (as he himself confesses page 128.) if the
intention be right, that which formally is Usurious, upon the matter may in
justice be equivalent to a lawful Contract. If formal Usury may be no Usury, we
must look for a new definition of Usury in the Consciences of men, and not in
Dr. Fenton's treatise; And if Usury be committed in Buying and Selling, what
Contract will be found in the world without Usury.

To Instance in some other Contracts, let us consider of the absolute buying
and selling of land, or of purchasing an annuity for life; because these two
Contracts are esteemed by most men to be the lawfullest of all others, yet in
both these, the just and ordinary valuation both of fee simple land and of
leases for lives is grounded and guided by Usury only, and as the use of money
goes higher or lower, so the prices of these rise and fall, so that in very
truth he that purchases land is the greatest Usurer in the world, because he
makes the greatest and certainest gain by his bargain, for example; Admit land
is bought and sold for sixteen years purchase, and let the inheritance of the
land be made away for so little a sum as the land will bring home in sixteen
years; what Conscience is there to keep that for ever, which in so short a time
pays the purchaser his principal? There can be no other reason yielded for
this great disproportion but this, that both the Purchaser and Seller do
equally value the use of the money, and do make the bargain accordingly. The
purchase-mony considered with the Use of it would last about a 1000 years in
paying yearly so much as the Rent of the land is, therefore the Purchaser
expects to enjoy, and the Seller intends to part with the land for ever,
because the inheritance of the land after a thousand years is not valuable,
for that ordinarily within four or five hundred years the possessions of the
ancientest families come to a period, or decay. In like manner, an annuity for
life is bought for nine years purchase, not because a man's life is ordinarily
taken to last but nine years, but because the money with the use will last
almost twice nine years in paying the annuity: so that if the Purchaser of the
annuity dye within eighteen years, the Grantor may be a gainer, or at the least
a saver, by the bargain; but if he live above eighteen years the Grantor must
be at a loss. This Casualtie of a lease for life, wherein the Buyer hopes by
his own life to be a gainer, and the Seller hopes by the death of the Buyer to
be a gainer, has made some men (if we will believe Thomas Aquinas) to think
that a lease for life is the worst kind or double Usury, beause there is an
Usurious intention on both sides, as well in the Grantor as in the Grantee to
gain.

If many men who are fit for Callings live idly on Usury, they sin, but no
otherwise than those that let their lands: they may and ought to serve God and
their Country in some Calling, if they do not, it is no fault of Usury, but an
abuse of it. Neither let any man fear that Usury will bring idleness in the
world, for if all men be idle there can be no Usury. It is the usury-imployment
of men by their trading that makes the use of money to be at so high a value,
and many must be idle if they borrow not a stock to set them on work.

10. Of the Incharitableness of Usury.
In the last Chapter of Dr. Fenton his second book, I did expect some
extraordinary argument against Usury, because it treats of the breach of
Charity by Usury, and the opposition between them: I did long to see it proved;
but now I am come to it, I find it the shortest Chapter in his book, both in
quantity, and proof, the little that he says is in effect, that Usurers are
commonly uncharitable page 106.

Answ. I. did expect to have it proved that all Usury is in it self
uncharitable, and he tells us that all Usurers are so: It is the fault of the
men, and not of the thing. Thrift which of it self is a virtue, being abused is
the hinderance of Charity, and yet Thrift is no breach of Charity: A thrifty
man and an Usurer may be merciful to the poor, because they are many times
better able than others. If Usury of it self were a breach of Charity: then not
to lend to Usury were an act of Charity: which is but a mere Privation and no
Act at all. The reason why Usurers be commonly found merciless, is for that in
many men Covetousness makes them Usurers, and not Usury brings them to be
Covetous. Many Usurers are found well disposed to Charity, and give twice as
much to Charitable uses as those that have twice their estate in Lands and are
no Usurers. Since then all Usurers are not uncharitable, and those that be, are
found, and not made such by Usury, it is but small Charity to say that Usury of
it self is the breach of Charity.

FINIS.
Books Printed for William Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar, 1678.
1. THE Complete Vinyard, or the most excellent way of planting of Vines: by W.
Hughes. Octavo, price 2 s. 2. The Complete Measurer, or a new and exact way of
Mensuration: by Thomas Hammond. 8o. price 1 s. 3. Praxis Curiae Admiralitatis
Angliae: Authore F. Clark. 8o. 4. A description of Candia, in its ancient and
modern Estate, with an account of the Siege and surrender to the Turks. 8o.
price 1 s. 5. The Deaf and Dumb man's Discourse, a Discourse of those that are
born Deaf and Dumb, and a Discourse of the Reason and Speech of Beasts,
particularly the Elephant. in 8o. price 1 s. 6. Des Carts Life. 8o. price 1 s.
7. Gee' s Steps to the Temple. 24o. 8. Imitation of Christ. 24o. 9. An Answer
to Mr. Ferguson about Justification and Christ's Satisfaction, by J. Knowles.
8o. 10. Mr. Hobbs de Mirabilibus Pecci. 4o. 11. Sir Hen. Blunts Voyage into the
Levant. 12o. 12. Mr. Hobbs Rosetum Geometricum. 4o. 13. Greek Testament in 8o.
14. Darling's Carpenters Rule made easy. 12o. 15. The Flower-Garden Enlarged,
showing how to order and increase all manner of Flowers, whether by Layers,
Slips, off-sets, Cuttings, Seeds, etc. Also how to draw a Dyal as a knot in a
Garden: to which is added a Treatise of all the Roots, Plants, Trees, Shrubs,
Fruits, Herbs, etc. growing in his Majesty's Plantations. 12o. by W. Hughes.
16. The Poems of Dr. Corbet Bishop of Norwich, 12o. 17. Boccalin' s Pernassus,
Fol. 18. Ogilby' s Virgil Engl. with cuts, 8o. 19. Brownlow's Reports complete,
in two parts, 4o. 20. The Court of Curiosity, being a pleasant Fortune-book, a
Learned Treatise of Dreams, and an ingenious Discourse of Physiognomy: Written
in French, now Englished, the 2d Edition Improved, 12o price 2 s. 21. Lux
Mathematica, Author Tho. Hobbs, 4o. 22. Principia and problemata aliquot
Geometricae ante desparata etc. Auth. T. Hobs, 4o. 23. The American Physician,
treating of the Roots, Plants, Trees, Fruits, Herbs, etc. in America, by W.
Hughs, 12o. 24. Shafto' s Great Law of Nature, against Mr. Hobb' s Leviathan,
12o. 25. Calliope's Cabinet opened; wherein all Gentlemen may be informed how
to order themselves for Funerals, Feasts, and all noble Meetings, to know all
degrees of Honor, and how all are to take place, with a Dictionary of Heralds
terms, etc. 12o. 26. A New Collection of Songs and Poems, etc. 27. A Discourse
of the Dukedom of Modena, 4o. 28. Brevis Demonstratio, proving the Truth of the
Christian Religion by Reason, 12o. 29. The Memoires and are Adventures of the
Life of Henrieta Sylvia Moliere, in six parts, written by her self in French,
and now translated into English, newly made complete, 12o. 30. Walton's Lives
of four Eminent Men, 8o. 31. Nomenclatura, Greek, Latin, and English, 8o. 32.
The Lord Bacon's Collection of Apophthegms, 12. 33. Mary Magdalens Tears wiped
off, 8o. 34. Parthenissa, a Romance, Written by the Earl of Ossory, Fol. 35.
The Primitive Institution, or a seasonable Discourse of Catechizing, by L.
Addison, D. D. 12o. 36. The present state of the Jews, wherein is contained an
exact Account of their Customs, Secular and Religious, as used at this time,
with an Account of the Talmud, by L. Addison, D. D. 37. Homers works, most
Excellently translated out of Greek into English by the famous Thomas Hobs,
12o. 38. The Golden Rule of Arithmetic made more Easy than any other books of
Arithmetic has it, 8o. 39. A supplement or third volum to Mr. Hobs his works,
4o. 40. Seventy eight Characters, 8o. 41. Euterpe Revived, being late Epigrams,
8o. 42. The Grounds of Greatness, 4o. 43. Camera Regis or a short view of
London, containing the Antiquity, Fame, Walls, River, Bridge, Gates, Tower,
Cathedral, Officers, Courts, Customs, Franchises. etc. of the said City, 8o.
price 1 s. 44. A Sermon at the Funeral of a man drowned in a pit not long ago,
8o. 45. Howel' s Visitation Sermon, 4o. 46. Historians Guide in 2 parts, 8o.
47. The Circumcision of the great Turk' s Eldest Son. 48. Naked Truth, or the
Intrigues of Amourous fops 8o. 49. Kitchin's Court Leet and Court Baron, 8o.
50. Scarron's Comical Romance, or the History of a Facetious Company of
Stage Players, interwoven with variety of pleasant things. Written in French by
that great Wit, Monsieur Scar ron, Fol. 51. A Letter about Liberty and
Necessity, Written by Tho. Hobs of Malmesbury, with Observations thereon by Dr.
Lany late Bishop of Ely, 12o. 52. A Modest Plea for the Clergy, wherein is
briefly considered the Original, Antiquity, Necessity, together with all the
Occasions of their Contempt, 8o. price 1 s. 6 d. 53. The Astrological Judgment
and Practice of Physic, deduced from the Position of the Heavens at the
Decumbiture of the Sick Person. By Richard Saunders, a Practitioner 30 years,
8o. 54. There is printing an Excellent Piece of Natural Philosophy in English.
Written by Tho. Hobs of Malmsbury, 8o.
These 11 Plays are Printed and Printing.
1. The White Devil, or Vittoria Corombona, 4o. 2. The Old Troop, or Monsieur
Raggou, 4o. 3. Cataline's Conspiracy, 4o. 4. The Amorous Gallant, or Lov^ in
fashion 4o. 5. The Mock Duellist, or Frenc^ Valet, 4o. 6. The Wrangling Lovers,
or Incessisible Mistress, 4o. 7. Tom Essence, or the Modish Wife, 4o. printing.
8. The French Conjurer, 4o. 9. Wit led by the Nose, or the Poets Revenge, 4o.
10. The Rival Kings 4o. 11. Constant Nymph, or Rambling Shepherd, 4o. 56. A
Treatise of Wool and Cattle, 4o.

