Servants on HORSEBACK: OR, A Free-People bestrided in their persons, and
Liberties, by worthless men: BEING A Representation of the dejected state of
the Inhabitants of Summer Islands.

CONTAINING Short Illustrations upon a Petition presented to the High Court of
Parliament for REDRESS.

Published by Will. Golding Master of Arts, and Teacher to the Congregation in
that Island

2 Chronicles. 16. 10. Then Asa was wroth with the Seer, and put him in a
prisonhouse, for he was in a rage with him, because of this thing: and Asa
oppressed some of the people the same time. Quam quisque pessime fecit, tam
maxim tutus est, Salust.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

THE EPISTLE To the Honorable Committee of Lords and Commons, Entrusted to
examine the Petition presented unto the Parliament, in the behalf of the
Inhabitants of the Summer Islands, by Captain Sail, and William Golding.
June Anno 1646.
Honorable Sirs,
IT pleased the high Court of Parliament to accept a Petition, in behalf of
the Summer Islands, and to recommit it unto your selves, for examination, your
care and readiness in attending that trust, was very eminent, only you met
with obstructions, partly from the Company who are concerned in the Petition,
partly from the sad breach between City and Armies emergent in that nick of
time, and since, by the necessitated absence of Captain Sail, and my self,
whose attendance was requisite. In pursuance thereof, Honorable Sirs, I
beseech you resume the Complaints which are before you, That your Petitioners
may not languish under an usurped power; nor the power and honor of Parliament
be trampled on, by the vilest of our English Nation. Sirs, to set this wheel
on motion, I have presumed to publish the copy of the Petition, and papers
affixed, as presented unto the High Court of Parliament. As also some few Acts
and Laws, made by governors Council and Assembly with us; with some
Animadversions upon them for your better information, leaving it to the wisdom
and justice of Parliament to judge thereof. Sirs, I have taken this course, not
with desire to asperse the Honorable Company, the Nobility and Gentry of that
Court, from whom we have always found help, when their leisure would permit
their presence at the Court; but to discover the practice of the trading-party,
who hold the people in bondage, and study to vex those, who plead for liberty.
Besides, Sirs, Those of the Company concerned in the Petition, will be ready to
give out, that your Petitioners durst not own their act, and therefore
withdrew, and declined the prosecution thereof; whereas the world shall know,
that was not the reason; But the attendance upon places, care of our families,
a good providence opening a way for our return; with our great expense, under
long delays, were the true causes of it. Sirs, Mr. Steel, who is of Council
has the copy of papers at large, if you desire further satisfaction then what
is Printed. The wise God make you as Angels to judge righteously, and as Gods
to relieve the oppressed.

Sirs, I am you humble Servant, William Golding.

PPOLEGOENA OR, The Preface to the READER.
MY purpose is not to compile a History, nor to enter upon a distinct Narration
of all trans-actions with us: (I suppose that will be performed by a better
hand) but only to give a brief assay of things, that the Honorable Court of
Parliament, with others, may clearly perceive, we have not complained without
a cause. I shall briefly premise a few things to clear a way to the ensuing
Treatise, viz. The Reader is desired to take notice,

1. That the Island called Summer Islands (alias Bermuda) is governed by a
Company of Merchant Adventurers of London, who hold their power by Patent from
King James, who keep Courts, make Laws, and reverse them at pleasure, chose
Deputy governors, Magistrates, and Commanders over the Inhabitants there, all
which, depend for direction in their respective places, upon the Company of
London.

2. That though there be many noble Lords, and worthy Gentlemen of that
Company, yet are they strangers (for the most part) how things are carried in
the Bermuda Court; for their more weighty employments, take them off from so
low and inconsiderable affairs. The Court is upheld by a Deputy, and a few
assistants; many of whom being of the trading party, wait upon the quarterly
Courts, to consult what may tend to their advantage, and the government of the
Island in subordination to that end.

3. That the pretense of the present difference in the Islands, is about a
congregation gathered there into Gospel-fellowship; the beginning whereof, and
by what authority gathered; the manner of its proceeding, with the oppositions
it met with in its infancy; is faithfully reported by Mr. White, Pastor of that
Congregation, in his answer to a scandalous paper, sent from the Island, and
Printed under the Patronage of Mr. Prynn; all which I shall pass over to
prevent tediousness.

4. That through the indulgence of the High Court of Parliament, and Honorable
Committee for the American plantations, the Congregation in Summer Islands is
indempnified in matters of Gods worship by their orders.

These things premised, I shall give a brief account of the proceed of things,
occasioned since the Company of London chose Captain Turner to be Governor of
these Islands.

Servants on Horseback.
IT pleased the Company (or part of them) Anno 1645. to change their Governor
in Summer Islands (how regularly they proceeded I say not) and chose Captain
Thomas Turner, pretending that he being an honest and dis-ingaged person, and
now clothed with authority, might the better heal the distempers of the
Island, who arriving at the Island, soon discovered his purpose and design,
and within six or seven months acted so excentrically, that many of the
Inhabitants finding themselves agrieved, did earnestly entreat Cap. Sail, and
William Golding to address themselves for England, to seek shelter for
themselves, and others, against the black storm which was fallen upon them;
who, casting themselves, and families upon the Lord, undertook that Dura
quidem Provincia.
Province, and by the good hand of God upon them, coming to London, they
besought the Company to hear their complaints, and put them into a way of
security and peace: The complaints were read and committed to examination, but
no report made after five months attendance: At length it pleased the Lords,
and many Gentry to be present at Court, resolving to hear, and issue matters:
But the trading assistants (with their friends) perceiving this business would
be now called upon, left the Court, in whose absence (though thirty or forty
still remained) yet according to their orders, requiring seven Assistants at
least, with the Governor or his Deputy, there was not that number to make a
Court, which lost us that opportunity, and clearly taught us what to trust too;
upon which, Captain Sail and William Golding besought the Parliament. The
Copy of whose Petition was as follows:

To the Honorable, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses assembled in
Parliament;

The Petition of Will. Sail, and Will. Golding. Humbly shows,

WHereas your Petitioners (with the Inhabitants of Summer Islands) the
freeborn natives of this Kingdom, groaning under several pressures,
inconsistent with their native privileges, having duly sought redress from
the Company of that plantation, and waited these six months for a favorable
issue; but, without success, are enforced to spread their sad condition before
your honors, viz.

1. That your Petitioners at the pleasure of the Company (or part of them) have
been, and may again be, restrained of the liberty of their persons.

2. Your Petitioners are denied the free disposal of their proper goods.

3. Your Petitioners are burdened with an Impost upon their Tobaccoes (which
is this year raised a third part) amounting usually to as much (or more) then
the principal yields. The company little regarding the ends therein
pretended, nor are the Inhabitants satisfied in the disposal thereof.

4. Your Petitioners complain under excessive fraught set upon their Tobacco,
and Rates upon the Merchant goods sent them.

5. That the Deputy Governor, Captain Tho. Turner, lately sent over, refused
to Jtake the Oath (usual at the enstalment of other Governors) yet summons an
Asembly, who (by their Speaker) calls themselves a Parliament, gives them an
Oath of secrecy* Together with them makes new Laws, and enforce them, slight
the power of Parliament, imprison, (men at pleasure;) turned out Magistrates of
known integrity to this state, without, and against the known Order of this
supreme Court, forbid appeals, silence Ministers, approved by the Honorable
Company, and whose labors were desired by the Inhabitants, conceal good
Orders, for the encouragement of honest men, and strengthens the hands of lewd
persons, with many other vexatious ways. Your Petitioners deeply resenting
these grievances, humbly pray.

1 That your Petitioners may be free to transplant themselves, and substance,
when providence goes before them, and be protected in their due liberties,
whiles they remain in these Islands.

2 That liberty of free trade be granted to the Inhabitants, according to their
desires, and the subscriptions of many worthy members of that Company, as
appears by the papers affixed, by which also your wisdoms may difcerne, whence
most of these sorrows flow.

3 That Offenders against the Parliament, and just liberties of the
Inhabitants, may be put into a way of trial.

4 That the Deputy Governor may be questioned, and (if your wisdoms see just
cause) suspended, and his new elected Council, raised by his sole power, by
your wisdoms reduced, Your Petitioners (entrusted by many of the Inhabitants
as to the premises) having run the hazard of their lives, to escape the
violence of a mere Arbitrary power, and wasted themselves, families and
estates, in the pursuance thereof, having a ship ready to return them to their
relations.

And fearing to fall under the power of those who have already envaded whatever
is dear unto them (except their lives, which are next in danger) are humbly
bold to fly to your honors for just and speedy relief, your Petitioners
refreshed with by past favors, (which they humbly acknowledge, and crave
continuance of,) shall continue praying etc.

A Copy of the Papers affixed to the Petition when presented to Parliament,
the first being the Answer of the Assembly in Summer Islands, to the
Inhabitants, suing for free trade (viz,)
Summer Islands. Die Lunae 6 April. 1646.
HAving received diverse Petitions from several of the Inhabitants of these
Islands, thereby craving a free trade for Tobacco, and to have privilege to
transport the same at their own pleasures, not weighing nor regarding the
privilege and royalty of the Honorable Company, after long dispute, and
serious debate, and well weighing how far forth we can in justice answer your
expectations in this particular; and moreover well regarding his Majesty's
Letters Patent, granted to the Honorable Company, we for your better
satisfaction, have thought good to affixe that branch or clause, whereby we are
absolutely prohibited, and debarred of this privilege; and as we are all nearly
concerned in the premises as you are, so we do hereby declare, and ingenuously
promise, that if it were in our power to grant, or lawful for us to do, etc.
we should be no ways wanting, and dilatory to advance our own privilege, and
profits, and whereas it does appear to us, that we all groan under the
excessive rates held, and set upon the goods sent hither from the Honorable
Company, and that our Tobacco, and goods, passes at low rates, we shall in
that behalf use our best skill and endeavor, by enforming the Honorable
Company, as well on your, as our own behalf: to have such things reformed, as
are neither for their honor, nor for our profits: not doubting of relief
therein, when we shall, with all candor and integrity, hold forth our just
grievances unto them, this we hope will clear us from having any self end, or
want of will and affection, in the discharge of the trust reposed in us by our
Country: But we are bound by oath, and duty, to maintain that power from
whence we derive our own, yet always regarding our own, so far forth as
civility, and justice will warrant it.

Ordered to be read in the several Churches of these Islands.

Signed, John Vaugham Clerk of the Assembly.

A Branch of the grants extracted out of the Letters Patents,
ANd to the intent that the said Company, their Successors and Assigns, shall
and may enjoy the full and sole benifit and profit of this our grant, according
to the true intent and meaning of the same, our will and pleasure is, and by
these presents for our Heirs, Successors, of our more especial grace, certain
knowledge, and mere motion, and of our supreme and absolute authority (which
we forbid to be argued, disputed, or brought in question) we do straightly
charge and command, all and every person, and persons, whatsoever, of what
degree or condition soever, he or they or any of them be, that none of them,
other then the said Company, successors, assigns, deputies, servants, factors,
or the assigns of some of them, do at any time hereafter attempt, presume or go
about any manner of way, directly or indirectly, to transport any moneys, goods
or merchandise, out of any our Kingdoms into the limits or bounds of the said
Summer Islands, or import out of the said Islands, or any part thereof into any
foreign parts, or into any of our Kingdoms upon pain of forfeiture of all
such moneys, goods and merchandise, which shall be so imported, or exported
contrary to the true meaning of these presents, and of the Ships and Vessels
wherein the same shall be so transported, or imported to the use of the said
Company, their Successors and Assigns; and upon such further pain and
penalty, and imprisonment, as by the Laws and Statutes of this our Realm of
England, or by our Prerogative Royal, may any way be inflicted or adjudged for
their contempt in that behalf.

The Copy of another paper, affixed to the Petition, was as follows:
Upon certain weighty confiderations presented to us, Subscribed with
eightteen hands.
We of the Company whose names are subscribed, find our selves obliged in
point of pity and justice to declare our free consent, that the Inhabitants of
Summer-Islands be at liberty to dispose of their Tobacco, and other goods, to
whom, and how they please for their best advantage; always reserving the Rents
of the Company or any members thereof, to the use of the proper landlord.

Illustrations or Animadversions upon the heads of the Petition. 1. The
Inhabitants have been denied the liberty of their persons. Illust.
In a letter from the Company to Captain Sail, then Sheriff 1638. or
thereabout, under the hands of eleven of the Company, there is this straight
command, We charge you from his Majesty upon like pains viz. (his head)
neither to depart your self, nor to permit or suffer any other to be shipped,
etc.

The occasion of this Order from the Company; 1. The Inhabitans of the
Summer-Islands, had sent forth a Colony to inhabit St. Lucea (one of the
Caribee Islands) and many more straightened for want of land and liberties,
intended to have transplanted thither, and had been at charge to make provision
aforehand, by sending a small Pinace, and servants thither; but upon this
straight command were restrained, and the Colony sent forth, for want of timely
supply and aid, were cut off by the adjacent Indians; and many by this means
damnified in their estates and lives. The trading party of that Company foresaw
that they would soon want Tenants and servants, if a way were opened to the
inhabitants of Summer-Islands of more freedom and enlarged subsistence. Also
in the government of Captain Woodhouse a new oath was devised, every one was
to bring forth his Tobacco, and to swear there was all that they had made, and
because Mr. Painter, Magistrate, refused to take that oath, and M. Stirk
Minister, drawing up a modest Petition to the Governor for the non-imposing of
it to the prejudice of the Subjects liberties, both were banished the Island;
and though the Company of London, did not allow the sentence of banishment, yet
they did make no manner of reparation unto M. Painter and M. Stirke upon those
who had so censured them. Will. Righton is at this present under the sentence of
banishment by Captain Turner the now Deputy governor, because he refused to
have his children baptized by Mr. Vyner, though the said Righton, belongs not
to any of those tribes to whom M. Vyner was sent to take charge of, An. 1647.
by the now governor a council of War was called, and one Feadle was judged
(without any other trial) to be tied to the Gallows, for words (as it is
said) he should speak concerning the Governor tending to muteny; Mr. Painter
Magistrate, first wronged, and after railed upon, by one Edwards of the Company
in an open letter sent to Summer-Islands, Mr. Painter for returning this
answer; Mr. Edwards the Oyle-man has done me much wrong, the Lord reward him
according to his deeds; was judged by the Company to suffer corporal pains,
an exemplary punishment. In the government of Captain Tucker, a silly boy,
whose name was Deane, for stealing a piece of cheese, was condemned to dye, and
executed.

2. The Inhabitants may not dispose their proper goods. Illust.
Instance in Tobacco (the only staple commodity and means of support to the
Inhabitants) which the Company straightly forbids to be disposed of, otherwise
then to their Magazeen ship, witness their known practice, and [frequent
orders in their letters to their Governors and Officers; one of their letters
has it thus, The Governor and Sheriff, are to be required (as formerly) not
to permit any trade at all, either with natives or strangers, nor any Ship or
Vessel to come and remain there longer then the space of -- days, Mr. Steel
has the original letters under the hands of several of the Company.
and that only to take in water and provision to supply them in case of
necessity and not otherwise. Also in another Letter of the Company, they
expressly forbid the Island to trade upon any terms with New England, who at
that time wanted cattle, which we could spare, and they had such commodities
as we wanted; but neither they, nor we might enjoy the liberty of mutual
commerce, surely this savours of want of bowels toward them, and envy to the
good of our poor Colony. Witness the Company approving under ten of their
hands, their Sheriffs act in ceasing the Tobacco traded for by a Dutchman,
1636. for such power the Company gives to the Mr. of the Magazeen ship,
requiring the Governor and Sheriff to be assistant to them; likewise Captain
Robert Dennis by Commission from the Company, An. 1643. ceased some three or
four thousand of Tobacco, traded for by a Merchant of Barnstable ship, with
the Inhabitants for shoos, stockings, lockram (commodities which the
Inhabitants wanted to cover their nakedness, and the Magazeen ship brought not
that year, whose loading (except that which she left by the way at Barbadus,
was chiefly salt and Madera wine) and though offer was made by the Merchant to
pay penny per pound which the Company claims as their due, yet unless three
halfpence for fraught was added, Dennis would not suffer him to carry away the
Tobacco but possessed himself of it as forfeited to the Company, See answ. of
Comp. to Mr. Copl. Mr. Steel.
this practice had almost put the Island into a muteny, who hereby enraged,
threatened Captain Dennis ship; but by the wisdom and vigilance of Cap Sail our
Governor, the people were appeased; yea the desire of trade from M. Copeland
Minister, in a letter to the Company, has muteny in it, so the Court judged in
their answer to his witness; Captain Turners words at his first coming, who
protested in the hearing of many, that if any Inhabitant should refuse to send
their Tobacco, home in the Magazeen ship, he would seize on the Tobacco, and
imprison their persons; at this present year 1647. he commanded his counsel
to take notice what Tobacco every man had, and return the names of such as
should refuse to send it home in the Magazeen ship. Instance in other goods,
Anno 1636. or thereabout. At a full and honorable Court, liberty was granted
unto the Inhabitants to build a Pinace or two, to trade with the Plantations
for such commodities as they had (excepting Tobacco) the year following (when
some of the Inhabitants to their great cost and hazard had prepared a vessel
for that purpose) the Company or part of them, sent express command, 1 That no
person should be transplanted, as above, 2. no live cattle, 3. no provision
(but upon limited conditions, incompatible with merchandising, should be sent
away. It Is as though they had said, you shall build a vessel (if you will) to
look upon, and undo your selves, but shall have no encouragement to employ
her. That it was thus ordered by the Bermuda Court, their orders in Mr. Steels
hand can witness.

The denial of this freedom of a Pinace once granted, and before revoked,
built, was probably the occasion of the loss of Lucea, the lives of many
there, and hopes of that plantation, and therein, that addition of honor and
revenue to the English Nation: for the Colony sent forth thither from
Summer-Islands, engaged their undertakers to supply them with men, and other
necessaries, which was that chief cause of building that Pinace, which (before
finished) might not be employed to help the Island, or them at Lucea. After
this, some of the Inhabitants, craving the concurrence of some of the Company
of London, bought a ship, and furnished her with a Cargoe of goods, sit for the
plantation of Summer-Islands, which when the Company understood, they made a
strict order, forbidding the ship (now ready to set sail) to come at that
plantation, till first their Magazeen ship had been there; the Traders feared
she would gather up the Dollards which the Spaniards left there the year
before, and mar their Market, the hindering this Ships coming to Bermuda, was
a great prejudice to that Country, and the undoing of many owners there; for
missing that opportunity the ship was lost to them both in hopes and
principal. Instance in Oringes and Lemons, with which the Country abounds, and
most perish for want of use; even these may not be disposed of, until the
London Ship (which usually comes out of season) be first served, nor may the
Inhabitants dispose of their own Cedar, but by order from the Company; nor any
of the Inhabitants have wine, or strong water sent them but by order of their
Court.

Furthermore the Companies censure of Mr. Painter to pay 40 li. Ster. unto Mr.
Edwards oyleman (besides corporal and exemplary punishment) for writing to Mr.
Edwards as before; yea the Court have ordered that planters in the Island might
be prevented of buying shares, desiring rather to keep them racked Tennants,
and perpetual servants, and yet the Inhabitants who are free of the Company
have no more privilege in the Island, then the most wretched Tennant. Thus the
trading party serve themselves of all the profits, which that poor Island,
with the industry of the Plantours produces. The orders of the Company in the
hand of Master Steel can witness, I have not wronged them in the premises.

3. To the third Complaint, Impost upon Tobacco, formerly three halfpence,
since one penny per pound, this years 1647. three halfpence. First, this
Impost was never granted by the consent of the Inhabitants, that I can gather.
Secondly, protested against by diverse of the Company. Thirdly, and why may it
not be lawful (if the trading party will vote it) to take 2d. per pound
impost, yea the whole bulk of Tobacco; yea our beds, lands, servants,
children; truly, they and their now Governor are agreed to take all, as you
shall hear afterward. The ends pretended, not regarded.

First, the Commanders in the Island, not supplied with that number of
servants, which the book of Orders, and the Companies Law allow.

Secondly, but two Ministers, who have salleries paid them, to wit, 40 li. per
annum, when yet there are nine public Churches (besides the chapel) to be
supplied.

Thirdly, the congregation, with the Pastor and Teacher, are compelled to pay
Impost out of their Tobacco toward the maintenance of the universal Ministers
sent by the Company, when yet they attend not their Ministry, nor were they
sent to the most of them, nor has the Pastor or Teacher the least allowance
from the Company: truly the singing men and Porters under Artaxerxes in the
time of the Babylonian captivity found better usage; for it was decreed
concerning them, that it should not be lawful to impose tol, tribute, or
custom upon them Ezra 7. 24.

Fourthly, no considerable quantity of Ammunition and Arms, to secure so
considerrable a Garrison. And all the use the Ammunition serves to (for
present) is to keep in awe the Independents; for when Captain Sail was in the
Harbor, with a small ship, with some twenty men Captain Turner kept a guard,
pretending fears, but when a Spanish ship was wrackt, and a hundred of
Soldiers, and Seamen came a shore; and most of the Inhabitants of ability
gone aboard, But dismissed the guard before the pretense of fear was removed.
no appearance of a guard. Captain Turner had another game in chase, the nine
Hogs-heads of corn paid him by the Country for the former guard, is a trifle
to what he rakes now from the Spaniards, without regard of justice or civility.

5. Debts not paid by the Company, no satisfying account given the Country. The
Company had in stock about Anno 1637. eleven hundred pound Sterlin, were in
debt Anno 1647. eighteen hundred pound have had yearlly for impost upon the
Tobacco, three hundred, four hundred, it may be five hundred pound Sterlin;
we know of little in comparison laid out for the good of the Country, or
honor of the Company, and yet a new tax is levied with pretense to pay debts:
The Company will never be out of debt, whiles they know to pay themselves out
of the Tobacco of the Country. Captain Butler when his time of government was
expired, coming to London, sued the Company, and recovered damage, the which
was levied upon the shares, even theirs who had done no wrong. In Anno 1635. or
thereabouts; the Traders of the Company bought the Plantors Tobacco, and agreed
for a price; but the price of Tobacco falling, they turned it upon the
Plantors, to their exceeding damage.

Fourthly, excessive fraught, to wit, three halfpence per pound; first, the
Tobacco for the seven or eight years have seldom yielded more to the Plantors
in the Island, Secondly, other Plantations, viz. Virginia, Christophers, etc.
who trade with what ships they will, pay not above penny per pound, and yet the
distance between them and England is greater. Excessive rates set on Merchants
goods. This the paper affixed to the Petition witnesses, as the sense of the
Inhabitants, yea of the Assembly, the choice friends of the trading party: nor
will men wonder, who consider the state of the Inhabitants who must trade with
no ships but the Company, and must have their goods, or go naked, and at their
prices, and the Company ship their Tobacco, or it must perish, and at their
price too, not allowing in goods for Tobacco above two pence per pound, which
at first penny amounts not to above one penny per pound; yet I must not wrong
the trading Company, for Anno 1647. they sent little or no goods to supply the
Country, their Cargo and Purser stayed at Barbadus, where is better trading,
and sent the ship to make a fraught out of the Countries Tobacco.

The truth is, had not providence put the inhabitants into a way of weaving
Cotton, which they buy for Porke, Beef, and Fish, of one ship or other (upon
hard terms) trading between them and Barbados, the Inhabitants had long
since turned Adamites out of necessity. I have heard some passionately profess
that if the Company would take care to feed and cloth them and theirs, they
should bore their ears, and they would be their servants for ever: and now let
the world judge what Masters they serve. I could add much more, and tell the
world, of particular wrongs, offered by some members of that Company, to the
poor Plantors here, but I spare them, as not the miscarriage of the body, with
whom I have to deal, and not with the body neither, but with the feet and toes
of it.

I proceed now to reflect on the government in the Island, Qu. 47. A crooked
bark fellow brought a private letter, and had 5 l. allowed. 1. Branch of the
fifth genesis head.
as it lies in order in the Petition, confining my self to the time since
Captain Turner was sent over by the trading party, who being one of them, acts
their principles, and from beginning told us of private instructions, under
which (its like) we have suffered much, though not under that plea, but by an
assumed power, and a high hand. I shall branch the fifth head into particulars:

First, Captain Turner refused to take his oath at his enstalment, which other
Governors never did, this will be witnessed by men of fidelity; if he has
since taken it before his counsel in a clandestine manner, it is unknown to
us, and I suppose (if done at all) it was near two years after he took his
place. I mean not the oath of Supremacy, Allegiance, or Covenant, but that
proper to the Deputy Governor of Summer-Islands. His excuse was, he took it
in England, but that was denied by the Deputy and Secretary of that Company in
open Court.

Secondly, Bran. 2.
calls an assembly, pretending the Company so ordered it; but that also was
denied, and the laws of the Company say, the second year it may be lawful
for the Governor to call an Assembly, he within twenty days. It Is probable
this plot was laid at Barbadus, where Captain Turner meeting with Captain
Parker (who not long before stole away from Barmuda thither, and since (coming
well from his companions) in his way homeward, dyed of an impostume, blood
issuing out of his mouth, ears, and nostrills.) The grand ingenier of trouble
to the Congregation in Summer-Islands, put Captain Turner upon this design,
and named the men fittest to act therein, who for the most part were made
choice of. This Assembly thus met, call themselves a grave Assembly. Truly
there were many grave and gray headed drunkards of that Concilium or rather
Conciliabulum.
Convention, who proved the grave of piety, justice, and civility. But this is
too low a style for them, therefore (by their Speaker) they are called a
Parliament, and by the Governor summoned down under the name of Burgesses,
that under this pretense, without respect to the Parliament of England or
Company under whom they stand, they might exercise an independent power over
the Congregation.

Thirdly, being met, an oath of Secrecy is imposed, viz.

You shall swear by all means to conceal the secrets of the house, Bran. 3.
and not impart or discover, either by word or writing, or by any other means
to any one not being of this present Assembly, the passages or carriage of any
affairs or business that shall be treated of, and disputed during the whole
time of the sitting, and continuance of the said Assembly, etc.

I shall not tell you how their grave wisdoms, spent seven or eight days in
little else then finding out who it was should say a Cole merchant was come our
Governor, as though this had been a greater disparagement, Then to feed Hogs
and Ducks, cleanse ponds, and such like drudgery. I proceed to higher
trans-actions.

Fourthly, Bran. 4.
they make new Laws viz. of purpose to snare the Congregation. Dongson of the
Assembly at Assizes, when one of the Congregation pleaded he had transgressed
no Law of England, answered, you have transgressed our Laws, otherwise we
could have had no advantage against you.

An Act for casting out Independent Magistrates and Commanders.
WHereas by common experience we find, Act.
that where people will not readily and cheerfully obey the Laws, Orders,
Rules, Government, under which they live, undoubtedly there must follow upon
that state and people, inevitable misery and confusion: And the rather when the
Magistrates, and those who fill the seats of justice shall apparently withstand
the same. Now whereas we the Inhabitants of the Summer-Islands have at this
present many Magistrates and public Officers placed over us, members of the
Independent Church, and will not yield obedience to the established
fundamental Laws of the King, nor yet submit to the Ordinance of the high
Court of Parliament, Nota.
nor direction of the honorable Company.

We the General Assembly, Audactur calumniare and. aliquid adherebit.
for prevention of so great disturbance which we have cause to fear may
suddenly fall upon us, by the power of those Magistrates, Independent
Covenanters desire it should be enacted; And by the power and authority of the
General Assembly, be it enacted, That no manner of person, or persons, who
has or have entered into Covenant, To this day our adversaries cannot prove any
of these things against us.
and is admitted a member of the Independent Church, being at this present, a
public Officer or Magistrate, and being hereof lawfully convicted, by proof,
or his, or their own confession, shall ipso facto be discharged from his or
their office or offices of command, and others chosen to their places by this
Assembly,

Joh. Vaughan, Secretary.
Dat. 14. April 1646.
This Act was forthwith put in execution, before any crime was objected or
proved against them whom it did concern.

Die Jovis 16. July 1646.
WHereas at the At the former sitting, they rose and adjourned not, and yet
they sit again as though clothed with full power.
last sitting of this present General Assembly, it was amongst other things,
enacted, That all manner of Ministers, and other persons, inhabiting, and
residing within these Islands should conform themselves in all things touching
the public worship of God in obedience to the Directory of the Parliament of
England: And whereas Mr. Nath. White, Mr. Pa^rick Copland, and Mr. Will.
Golding, and diverse other persons adhering to them, have most presumptuously in
contempt of authority taken upon them to congregate themselves together in a
public place of meeting, and there set up a new form of Discipline according
to their own wills, not acquainting the Governor and Council here; although
by their petition to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, they promise
obedience to the Civil Magistrate, They had allowance from the Company, and by
an order of Parliament
which practice of theirs is against the Laws and government of this place,
hereby drawing unto them many of the Inhabitants from their Parish Churches,
upon such days and times, as our faithful Ministers, now sent unto us by the
honorable Company are exercising the Ministry in preaching Gods word unto the
people, and have likewise received into their Church Covenant diverse and sundry
persons contrary to all Laws and rules of government, which doings of theirs,
if not timely prevented, must and will be destructive to the long established
peace of these Islands.

Wherefore this Grave and General Assembly do order, and by the authority and
power of the same be it ordered, that the said M. White, Mr. Copland, and Mr.
Golding, and other members of their congregation; nor all, nor any of them, do
from henceforth presume to practice, or set up any other discipline or order in
Church Government, other then what is commanded by Parliament and Directory set
forth unto us. And we do further order by the Authority aforesaid, that no
manner of person or persons inhabiting within these Islands shall or do
hereafter presume, to enter into Covenant with them to be of their
congregation, nor bring in their children to be baptized, or any marriage
solemnized by them, they being not in our judgments, capable to perform the
ministerial function or administer either Sacraments. Having They laid down
only what they had from the Bishops.
laid down their Ministry, and declared themselves to be but Laymen, but
these duties shall be performed by our Ministers, already conformable to the
Ordinance aforesaid. And likewise be it further ordered that no person or
persons inhabiting within these Islands, shall absent themselves from their
own Parish-Churches, unless to such Churches where our Ministers shall be
then teaching upon such pain and punishment as shall be thought fit upon high
contemners of Authority, They proclaim to the world that they govern
arbitrarily.
as to the Governor and Council for the time being, shall be thought
expedient.

John Vaughan Secretary.
Ordered to be published throughout these Islands.
This Act was sent forth with a Proclamation to put life into it; which was as
follows:

By the Governor and Council, July 18. An. 1646.
WHereas it pleased Almighty God to design me for this place, and the
honorable Company reposed the trust and government of these Islands into my
hands: I have hitherto endeavored with all mildness and meekness of spirit,
to gain a right understanding in and to the manners and orders of the people
in these Islands, and have (through Gods providence) discerned diverse
ill-affected people, which are refractory to the Laws, and long established
Government of Church and State here established, and observed by my Worthy
Predecessors, in consideration whereof, we the Governors and Council, for
the prevention of the evil that may ensue, do by this my Proclamation declare
unto all his Majesty's loving Subjects inhabiting within in these Islands, that
we do expect the like conformity unto all his Majesty's Laws and Statutes,
and to the Acts and Orders made and established to be observed in these
Islands, as our predecessors might have, had, or should have; assuring all
those that shall persist in their wilful disobedience to the power and
authority derived from the honorable Company by virtue of the letter patents
granted by his Majesty King James of blessed memory unto them, Summum jus,
summa injuria.
and from them unto us; to proceed against bona verba.
such, to the full measure of their demerits, being too sensible how my lenity
and mild behavior toward some, has been slighted, and experimentally too
to much abused; But for such as will endeavor to live in the fear of God, and
in obedience to the Laws, I shall both by my state and person endeavor to
maintain them in their rights and just privileges; and whereas (with grief
of heart I speak it) there is a party in these Islands, that have withdrawn
themselves, not only from the rules of civil Government, which are prescribed
and warranted unto us to walk by, but also have of their own inventions set
up, and imposed a discipline, and bound them in covenant to observe the same
without my The congregation was gathered before Cap. Turners governourship at
least two years.
privity or consent, which rule and order, or rather indeed disorder (as I may
justly term it) being not warrantable by the Parliament, and Synod in
England, but otherwise commanded by that Authority and Directory set forth to
us. Wherefore I have been enforced, with the advice and consent of my Council
and Assembly, to make and set forth an order, thereby to declare the danger of
such unnatural division, tending to the subversion of the known Laws, and
orders of Church and State. And I do hereby in his Majesty's name, will and
require, all the Inhabitants of these Islands, to yield due obedience to the
same, as they and every of them may avoid the penalty due to contemners of
Authority, and as they tender the peace and quietness of this Colony. And
moreover, I charge, and require all Counselors, Justices, Church Officers,
Constables, Head-boroughs, and all, and every his Majesty's Subjects to yield
obedience to the order annexed, and to all the Laws and Acts made, and set
forth in and by this present Assembly, and all such as shall be Cap. Turner
Kings it bravely in his expression.
dissoyall to authority, or disobedient herein, I charge and require the
Officers aforesaid respectively in their several tribes, to be vigilant and
careful to take notice of all such as shall in the least degree oppose this my
Command; and them, and every of them, of what condition or quality soever they
be, to bring them before me to be proceeded against as contemners of the Laws,
and utter enemies to the peace and safety of this Colony.

I do further require, that this Proclamation be published in all the Churches
and public meetings, together with the order above mentioned. Given under my
hand at my house, at S. Georges the day and year aforesaid.

Tho. Turner.

The intelligent Reader will easily discern the contradictions between the
Order and Proclamations, the Order requires obedience to the Directory of
Parliament; the Proclamation, conformity to the Laws, Acts, and Orders
established ^o be observed by his Worthy predecessors; now in his
predecessors time the Directory was not in being, but the Episcopal way. They
made a Law forbidding rests upon the Sabbath day.

A Proclamation May 19. An. 1647.
By the Governor,

WHereas an Order of Assembly bearing date, Die Jovis, 16. of July 1646. with a
Proclamation thereunto annexed, and ordered to be published in all the Churches
of the Islands, thereby requiring conformity to that order, and to all other
orders here established to be observed as This mock Parliament assumes
legislative power.
a Law: And for as much as since the publishing hereof, I have manifestly found
diverse ill-affected people (contemners of our government) have not only
slighted our authority, but have and Woe to them who make lies their refuge.
do contemn the power and authority of the honorable Company and Parliament,
and have drawn themselves from the discipline, and orders established to be
observed in our Church Government, and ever since continued in disobedience and
contempt of our Laws, and Government, endeavoring the subversion of the same
to the continual disturbance of our peace The wicked are like the troubled sea.
and quietness in these Islands. In tender consideration whereof, and out of
zeal to Gods glory, and the hallowing of his Sabbath, which of late has been
too much polluted, and blasphemed, by reason of our unnatural division: I do
therefore in his Majesty's name, and by virtue of the power given to me by the
honorable Company and Parliament, straightly will and require all the
Justices, Constables, and all other officers, with all, and every his Majesty's
subjects to take special notice of the aforesaid Order, and Proclamation. And
that every Justice in his respective tribe, do immediately apprehend all
manner of person, and persons, that have gone contrary to that Order or
Proclamation, or hereafter shall do contrary to the same. And the persons so
offending to bind over with two sufficient sureties to answer their contempt
at the next General Assizes, and such as shall not give sureties, that they be
forthwith committed to prison, to be proceeded against according And the
governor, and his counsel must be the judges.
to their demerits. And of this I shall require a continual and strict
account, as you, and every of you will answer the contrary at your peril.

Tho. Turner.
Dated 19. May, 1647. Ordered to be published the next Sabbath day.
An Act for the suppressing of all such persons, that under the name of
Independents have separated themselves from the Discipline which is held forth
unto us in these Islands.
WHereas through the providence of Almighty God, This poor Plantation from the
foundation hitherto, has enjoyed, and has been partaker of many gracious
blessings, whereby every poor Plantor might, and that (through the goodness
of the same God) may sit and enjoy Their own language.
under their own vines, while diverse other Countries through Nota.
Apostasy and Rebellion, do welter in their own blood. And as the Lord, who
is just in all his ways, and righteous in all his judgments, does threaten us
likewise, intimating thereby, that by reason of our sins we have deserved
the same measure of punishment to fall upon us. (The Lord of his mercy prevent
it.)

And whereas likewise the Lord has ordained wholesome Laws and Orders for the
punishment of vice Independency.
and for the maintenance of true Religion and virtue. In tender consideration
thereof, and in regard of the trust reposed in us, and confirmed upon us by the
fundamental Laws, and laudable customs of the Kingdom of England, we have
taken notice of sundry persons men and women that have withdrawn themselves in
their O ye sons of men how long will you seek after leasing. Ps. 4.
allegiance from his Majesty in their obedience from the honorable Parliament
and Company, and from the Laws and Ordinances thence derived, and here
established to be observed in Church and State.

It is therefore by this present Assembly enacted, and by power and authority
thereof, be it enacted, That all and every person and persons which shall not
immediately after the publishing hereof conform themselves and be obedient to
our Laws, That by virtue hereof from henceforth they be reputed and esteemed
See how their esta^es and lives are in danger.
as malignants, and utter enemies to the peace and quiet government of these
Islands.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That each Counselor in
his or their several Trybes, with the assistance of the Constables, and as
many other as shall be needful, do demand and take sufficient sureties for
the good behavior from every person and persons, that shall refuse conformity,
the principal in 5 l. Ster. and the sureties in 50 s. a piece. And such as
shall refuse to give such you security, that the Counselor aforesaid do seize
their estates, as opposers and contemners of our Laws and Government.

And be it also enacted, that from henceforth no public meetings or
Conventicles be frequented, either at the Mill-house, or any other place in
these Islands, upon pain of 20 s. for every one so offending, to be levied for
public uses, and such as shall not be able to pay, to be sent down to work
at the Colony, until the said 20 s. be satisfied, provided that family duties
be not prohibited or neglected: And for their disobedience to our former
Orders; We also enact, and by the same power be it enacted, That every person
and persons that has so offended shall be forthwith seized, according to an
Ordinance of Parliament, dated Westminster Aug. 23. 1645. Contradiction.
provided always that it is the sense and meaning of this present Assembly,
That all manner of person and persons, that shall yield obedience to civil
authority, and live henceforth in all godliness and honesty, shall have
protection, immunity, and freedom from all trouble and molestation, by or from
any ceremony, or imposition in matters of Gods worship, according to the Order
of the right Honorable Committee of Lords and Commons ordained for the
Plantations.

And we do further order by Authority aforesaid, that this present Act be
forthwith published, observed, and duly put in execution upon the penalty
before specified on the delinquents part, and under the pain and penalty of 5
l. Ster. to be imposed on every officer that shall be remiss or slack therein,
and to be cashered from his or their places; provided nevertheless that it is
our intent and meaning that this Act be in force until the honorable Company
by due order of their Court, shall alter or make void the same; any Law, Order
heretofore made to the contrary thereof, or to any part or parcel thereof in
any wise notwithstanding.

Joh. Vaughan, Secret.
Charles Whittenhall, Speak.
June 25. 1647.
I desire wise men would weigh what that passage import (Apostasy, and
Rebellion) whether Apostasy relates not to the Episcopal way, and Rebellion,
to the just defense of Parliament against an open Enemy? This look like
tyranny.
Also the act provides that in some case, the whole estate be ceised, and yet
after a forfeiture of 20 s. is added, or vassallage adjudged in case not able
to pay.

An Act for enforcing such as either causlessely neglect the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper (...) wilfully refuse to have their children baptized.
WHereas there are now amongst us too many men and women, who savor of
Anabaptizme, and do either neglect, or out of wilfulness refuse to have their
children baptized: It is therefore enacted by the present Assembly, and by the
power there of be it enacted, That from henceforth every person or persons upon
the next Sabbath or Sermon-day within the Tribe, wherein any child is, or
shall hereafter be borne, shall bring their children to be baptized, if
convenience permit; but if convenience will not permit, then such children
shall be brought the next Sermon-day following, upon pain of 5 l Ster. to be
levied upon every offender for general uses, provided that this reach not to
the baptizing of Bastards or Negroes children. And be it further enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, that every person and persons, do receive the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper in his, or their now Tribe wherein they dwell, at such
times, as by our Ministers they shall be Nota.
prepared for the same, and such as shall negligently refuse to come to be
examined, and to receive at the hands of our Ministers, M. William Vyner, or M.
Tho. Hooper, who are for the time being, or such other Ministers as shall be
conformable to the Directory, such person or persons being found capable, shall
be liable to one Fides suadenda est non impera ida.
months imprisonment, without bail or mainprise; and if he or they will not
then conform, 40 s. shall be levied for every such default for public uses.

John Vaughan, Secret.

An Act for the establishing the Right worshipful our Governor to have the
command of the Castle in his own hands, and all the land, and commodities and
profits thereunto belonging.
TAking into consideration the weakness of our Castle and Forts, which are the
keys and Bulwarks of these Islands, against a foreign and domesticke Enemy,
the sad experience of our present condition being sufficient motives to rouse
up, and to shake off dull security, to use all lawful means for the
preservation of this poor Plantation in peace and quiet government. It is
therefore enacted by this present General Assembly, and by the power and
authority of the same be it enacted, that our present Governor do continue
the command of the Kings Castle in his own power, with all the land, servants,
and other privileges, and commodities to the same belonging, and to place
there such Officers under him, as he shall find both faithful, and able to
discharge the trust, and to dispose of several Forts, to his discretion, being
of right belonging to him as he is by Commission Captain General of all these
Islands, provided always that this Act be in force until we receive answer of
the last General letters, or until the honorable Company do alter or make
void the same, any Order or Commission heretofore had, or which Though from the
power of Parliament*
hereafter may entrench the honorable Resolution to the said letters in any
wise notwithstanding.

John Vaughan Secret.
Charles Whittenall Speaker.
June 25. An. 1647.
Thus I have given the world an account of some of the Laws enacted by this
Grave Assembly, leaving the godly-wise to judge of them; We now proceed.

They enforce these Laws, Bran. 6.
viz. by their sole power. Instance, 1. The Magistrates, under the odium of
Independents (though standing by power of Parliament and Company) are ipso
facto discharged of their place, and others chosen by the Governor and his
council. Instance Andrew Bromlow, Samuel Wise, William Reighton, had their
cattle distrained upon the breach of that Act, requiring the baptizing Infants,
supra. M Jenor, and one Phillip Clemons wife, were sent down as prisoners to
the Governor, for not frequenting their Parish Church. The whole Congregation,
and their friends, keeping a Fast at their usual place of meeting, upon a day
appointed by the Governor (but the Governor not approving that place) by
warrant commanded them to Town, who going together in their boats, he would
not suffer them to land, but sent his Martial to choose out some ten of them,
whom he detained prisoners eight days, and when he dismissed them, he confined
them, and the rest of the Congregation to their own Plantations, withal
binding them over to answer it at the Assizes, only reserving to them the
liberty of fishing, and hearing the word.

Imprisons men at pleasure. Bran. 7.
Instance Lieutenant John Davis, who was by the censure of the house committed
close prisoner, and cast forth of the Assembly, for saying that what the
Assembly did, was of no force till confirmed by the Company. They pretended
this was a breach of the oath of Secresy, when yet they be the express words
of the Companies Printed Laws, which all the Inhabitants are bound to take
notice of. This Davis was not for their turn, though no Independent, therefore
they sought this occasion against him. Instance the imprisonment of M.
Wilkinson, M. Reyner, M. More one whole month, protesting against the
Assemblies meeting a second time, and others of their proceedings at first
sitting; and because the world shall see what was done by those Magistrates,
had no muteny in it: I shall give you a copy of their protest, and the
Assemblies censure thereupon, viz.

Right Worshipful Governor,
WHereas your warrants are issued forth to command all such persons who are
under the name of Burgesses, to tender their attendance at Georges Town,
pretending their meeting to be for the ordering things tending to the safety of
this Island, we of your Council whose names are subscribed, do crave leave of
your Worship, to deliver our judgments of the same.

1. We conceive, that this which you call an Assembly, to be no other but an
Innovation, having neither Precept nor Order, from the honorable Company, nor
president in this Island for it.

2. That in the former meetings of these persons now conveened, was handled,
maintained, and (as they would have it) acted, things absolutely contradictory
to Order of Parliament, and the honorable Company.

3. Rumor being spread by some of these parties, that at this meeting, they
will quite put down the preaching of the word, by those faithful Ministers of
Christ, M. White, M. Copland, and M. Golding, though by Parliament and
honorable Company allowed.

4. Certain of those persons now conveened, insinuating into your Worships,
that the whole Country (with urgency) solicited this meeting, which we find
not to be according to truth, with much more which we sorbeare to relate till a
hearing before the High Court of Parliament, and Honorable Company in England
be made, to which we appeal, and in the mean time declare we may not, we dare
not (for the glory of God) the safety of this Island, and our just obedience to
the trust by higher powers reposed in us) comply with this your meeting, nor
the putting into execution any thing that there shall be, or heretofore has
been by them agitated, till heard and confirmed by the honorable Company in
England, who have not been defective to express their minds in that point to
that purpose. And as by necessity enforced, do crave your Worships protection
for our peaceable being in this place, till we, or such of us as by the mercy
of God shall receive opportunity for transporting our selves unto the
Honorable Court of Parliament and Company, for redress of such grievances
raised and fomented by those persons now conveened; and humbly pray we may in
behalf of the Parliament and Company, have liberty to take such attestations,
as may be needful for the maintenance of the premises.

Subscribed, Will. Sail. Will. Reyner. Will. Wilkinson: Joseph More.

July 21. 1646.
The Assemblies censure upon this paper, July 13. 1646.
UPon dispute of a scandalous paper brought in as a charge against the power
and proceedings of this Assembly under the hands of Captain Sail, Mr. Reaner
Sheriff, Mr. Wilkinson, and Mr. Moore, the said Mr. Reyner standing to
justify the same, to the derogation of the power of Parliament of England, the
power and privilege of the Honorable Company, and the subversion of the
government of this place, upon Not half an hour.
mature debate had of the premises, it was voted and ordered by the whole
Assembly, that M. Reyner should be committed to the Marshalsey during the
pleasure of this Assembly and be suspended from bearing office in this Island,
with reference to the Honorable Company, Mr. Wilkinson, and Mr. Moore, being
severally examined did likewise, in contempt of the Court, and power thereof
justify the same paper, and contrary to their oaths refuse their assistance,
and voluntarily deserted their places, thereupon were both censured by the
general vote, ut supra.

John Vaughan Secret.

Let wise men judge what weak Logicians these Grave Assembly be, who take in
more into the conclusion, then the premises will bear. We proceed,

Imprisoned one Watkins, upon suspicion of crime, whereof he had been formerly
acquitted at an open Assizes, nor could the Grave Assembly fasten any new
matter upon him, but after some days imprisonment dismissed him. Instance the
imprisoning of Mr. White, themselves cannot say for what; one whiles they
pretend words spoken by him, in deregation to the Company, which (if spoken)
would not bear an action at Common law, to which Mr. White appealed, under
this pretense he was prisoner fifteen weeks. After some respite M. White was
again imprisoned six weeks, the pretense I know not, after (their malice being
restless) there is a special warrant (without any name) issued forth. It runs
thus, You shall apprehend and send down to prison, the first, and so the
second that preach at the Mill (so they in scorn call the place where the
Congregation meets) who yet refuse to allow them so much as the Chapel to
exercise in) by virtue of this namelesse warrant, Mr. White upon a Lords day
was apprehended by the Head-burrow of Pagets Tribe (who a few weeks before was
tied to the Gallows for pretended words of muteny.) Who, assisted with some
twenty Apprentices of Pagets Tribe, sent Mr. White to prison, where he remained
for several weeks, since that the Governor and Council have fancied
concealment of treason against him, for words as they pretend spoken in his
hearing some four year since; and upon this color they keep him prisoner,
notwithstanding Captain Turner offered to give Mr. White his Who now is the
best subjects
liberty, if he would be bound to wave the care of the Congregation; and now
the Governor speaks like himself, and profess the quarrel to be against
the Gospel; at the next Councell-tables are the law of the Island, where
quicquid libet, licet. Pet.
Council table, they order Mr. White should be sent home prisoner, whom I
leave to make relation of the insufferable wrongs done him, and the shields of
the earth to right him against such high oppression. Instance, The imprisoning
of Robert Nalton seven weeks, because he would not be dispossessed by the
Governors warrant, of that house and land, on which he lived, but appealed to
the Assizes, for a legal trial; during the time of whose imprisonment:
another was possessed of the land, and house, and all the goods therein; nor
might the said Nalton be released out of prison, till he would submit to the
Governors order under his hand, or be bound to his good behavior, the later
he was forced unto. If I mistake not, this proceeding was not only Arbitrary,
but has Tyranny in it. Instance, the close and straight imprisoning of Mr.
Kestaven; and fining him 50 l. for presenting, and Mr. Reyner jun. in like
manner for writing a Petition, for the satisfaction of the world about this
proceed. I shall give a copy of the Petition, with the Governors answer, as
follows:

To the Right Worshipful Captain Thomas Turner Governor, and Captain
General of these Islands, with the worshipful his Council. The humble
Petition of certain Inhabitants of the Summer-Islands.
THat whereas the Honorable Court of Parliament at Westminster in England,
Submissively shows.
have by their high power and authority granted license unto M. Nath. White,
and to all that shall adjoyne themselves unto him, to exercise the liberty of
conscience in matters of Gods worship, with all immunities and privileges
thereunto, desiring the honorable Committee in power for the government of the
Plantations in America (whereof the state of England takes the Summer-Islands
for a parcel) to see their honorable grant executed, who under their command,
with their hands and seals have given and transmitted unto your Worship to
observe and perform, as also the honorable Company for this Plantation,
granting under their hands and seals the foresaid Ministers, sundry liberties
and privileges in the aforesaid matters of worship, with your own Acts in that
your late Assembly, therein allowing that liberty so granted, as aforesaid; but
of late threatened (by what means we know not) with molestation and trouble, we
your Petitioners protesting to yield and render all due honor to your
authority, and respect to your persons, endeavoring by all means to avoid all
occasion of actual offense, humbly pray these aforesaid liberties may by you
be allowed, and against our adversaries maintained; so shall you be instruments
of Gods great glory, reap the prayers of the Saints, and we your Petitioners be
obliged at the Throne of grace for you. Subscribed with about a hundred hands.

The issue was, the Assembly is called, and an Answer returned unto the
Petition as follows.
FOr as much as you challenge the High and Honorable Court of Parliament in
the Kingdom of England, to have granted license unto Mr. White, Mr. Copland,
and Mr. Golding, whom you call Ministers (the which themselves have denied) and
thereby free power to exercise the liberty of their consciences in matters of
Gods worship. In answer hereunto, we say, That the Honorable Parliament, have
given them no such liberty, but upon the Petition of diverse Inhabitants in
Summer-Islands, with such others as shall adjoyne themselves to them, that they
without molestation have, and enjoy the liberty of their consciences, But not
to exercise, we find no such word mentioned, and the Honorable Committee has
given them protection and freedom, from any Ceremony or Imposition in matters
of Gods worship: all which we never denied, but A superlative power, this our
Parliament confirms what the Parliamen of England does.
confirmed by an Act of our Assembly; neither do I believe, that any amongst
them has cause to complain of any such imposition, since my coming, unless
it be the Innovation which they wilfully run into, In answer to the request of
you who are the Petitioners, most or all of you being Not to be drunkards,
filthy persons, swearers,
known to us, or most of us, we speak unto you as in the presence of the
Almighty God, we have not the least thought to entrench upon your liberties, or
privileges, or confine your consciences, so that you practice things lawful,
if the contrary, the law will reduce you; we shall expect reformation in you by
your obedience to Authority, and we desire to live in love, and amity with you,
and so by Gods blessing we doubt not of your compliance, and your conformity.

Signed John Vaughan. Secret.

The Imprisoning of Mr. Copland, an aged and reverend preacher many weeks for
exexcising on a fast day at the Mill (as they call it) the day was by
Proclamation allowed by the Governor, but the place liked him not. Also a
second time he was imprisoned, the Governor pretending Mr. Copland should say,
That the devil in the Governor and his Council had cast some of the Church
into prison, and before Mr. Copland could be released, he must be bound to his
good behavior, who asking the Governor what would break his behavior, he
replied, if you preach again; to which Mr. Copland answered, Sir I knew not
till now, that preaching was a breach of the good behavior. Instance, the
imprisoning of John Bristow ten days, and fining him three hundred pound of
Tobacco, because he would not deliver the keys of his hired house, unto the
Governors new Marshall, without the consent of the Landlord, or the Governors
express command; and for that the said Bristow (the Marshal) took M. White
committed to his charge, till the Governor should secure him. This Bristow was
no wise peccant in his office by the Governors own profession, he is no
Independent, but an honest man, and not for the Governors turn. Instance the
imprisoning of Mr. Moore, for saying he was Counselor (as he thought) of
Pagets Tribe, and therefore refused to pay his levy, and before his censure or
imprisonment. The London ship arrived, and Mr. Moore was chosen Counselor (as
he had information it should be) by the Company, yet is he committed to common
Jail, and denied the place of Nequid usquam honesti oculis occurrat. Bran. 8.
Counselor notwithstanding the Companies order. Capt. Turner knows no
authority above himself, but is come in Conqueror over the Summer Islands.

Slighted the power of Parliament, which appears, First, by denying the
liberty granted M. White, and others, by that supreme Court. Secondly, by the
words spoken in the Assembly (the Governor present) by Th. Wood a member
thereof, when that foresaid grant was publicly read, it is said he, but a
piece of parchment, and a little wax. Thirdly, by that secret charge of
Apostasy and Rebellion on Parliament and Nation. See the act for suppressing
Independents, supra. Fourthly, by the anticipation of any power to possess the
Kings Castle, except from the Company. See act for the establishing Captain
Turner to have the command of the Castle in his own hand, supra. Fifthly,
their sleighting the Ordinance and power granted to the Committee for the
American plantations, When pleaded by the Magistrates against the Act for
casting them out.

The Governor and Assembly turned out of place, Bran. 9.
Magistrates of known integrity; which is first against the Ordinance of
Parliament to the Committee of Plantations then pleaded to by the Magistrates,
but none regarded the power and authority thereof. Secondly, It is also against
the Companies Declaration, which was likewise urged but without success, in
which course the Governor and Council still persist, for Anno 1647. Mr. Moore
chosen Counselor by the Company was rejected; likewise Captain Turner making
an overture in the vacancy of a Counselor in Smiths Tribe, that the Tribe
should have liberty of naming two men, and he with his Council would agree to
choose one of them; but when it came to acting, the Governor set by the men in
nomination, and chose one Thomas Burrows formerly censured at an Assizes, as
unworthy to bear the place of Constable for misdemeanors there proved against
him.

Of known integrity to the Parliament. This Island (Captain Sail being
Governor assisted with the Council, since cast out by Captain Turner) owned
the Parliament, when the most of the Plantation stood either newter, or in open
defiance to it; the report whereof occasioned one Ferns a Kings Man of war to
make prize of goods belonging to Captain Sail and other friends to the
Parliament, to their damage at least five hundred pound.

The Governor forbids appeals. Bran. 10.
The Magistrates aforementioned after some days imprisonment, sent their
appeal to the Parliament and Company unto the Governor; but were kept in
prison, at least three weeks after; Mr. White has been denied his appeal to
the Assizes held in this Island, to Honorable Committee, and High Court of
Parliament. So in Robert Naltons cause, whose appeal to Assizes would not be
granted, the Governor at Council table is above all.

The Governor with his Assembly forbids Ministers to preach, witness the
order of Assembly, Bran. 11.
which is as follows:

Die Mercuriae 29. Aprilis 1646.
WHereas we find by daily experience what great distractions does arise,
Tyrannis boni quem mali suspectiores sunt semperquae aliena virtus, formidolosa
est. Salust.
by the intrusions of M. White, M. Copland, and M. Golding, into our Churches,
who will not conform themselves to the Directory of Parliament, to the great
disturbance of the present Ministers, and other well disposed people; We the
General Assembly tendering the peace and well-governing of the Church of God,
and for the prevention of further mischief, do order, and prohibit the said
M. White, M. Copland, and Mr. Golding to preach in any of our Churches or
Chapels, unless they submit to the Directory of Parliament as aforesaid; not
prohibiting them to exercise their gifts, according to the extent and
limitation given unto them by the High Court of Parliament, until we receive
further order and direction from them. Ordered that this be sent under the
Clerks hand, to the said Mr. White, Mr. Copland and Mr. Golding.

John Vaughan Secret.

This Order has no truth in it, unless, in that passage, to the great
disturbance of the present Ministers; to wit, Mr. Vyner, M. Hooper, both of
them professing they will administer no Sacrament (which yet was the condition
they made with the Company) to the people of those Tribes, where M* White, or
M. Golding, should be suffered to preach publicly, the only engine to keep
up the spirits of the people in opposition to M. White, and M. Golding. These
Ministers whom the Assembly silence, are allowed by the Company, sent over by
them at first with approbation.

Secondly, even since the difference about the Congregationall way, the Company
wrote thus unto M. Copland and M. Golding, for the satisfaction of the people,
we have sent over two Ministers, who (we doubt not) will be ready according to
the Directory to give them due satisfaction in point of administering Sacraments
and Marriage. We will not take upon us to prescribe you any thing. Our desire
is, that you and they, as fellow laborers may join hand in hand, for the good
of the people. We are far from pressing you against your consciences, we know
well, that conscience is a tender thing, and must be tenderly dealt withal.
Your own discretion (we doubt not) will sufficiently instruct you to be
peaceable, not to vent your selves one against another in the Pulpit, but to
mind your maine work which (as we conceive is) to preach Christ to the
people, etc. Subscribed with nine of the Companies hands.

Now our adversaries cannot charge us with disobedience, unto the wise, and
Religious counsel given by the Company in this their letter: though (to our
faces) and in the hearing of others, we and the Congregation have been in
Pulpits charged with Schism, Heresy, Errors, to be as Chora^, Dathan, and
Abiram, the disease of the land, and the Magistrate (as Physicians) stirred up
to cut us off, and resembled to Sampsons foxes with firebrands at their tails,
and (to bring us yet further into contempt) the people have been publicly
taught, that God is not present at the Mill (though Christ says, two shall be
grinding at the Mill, the one taken, and the other left) with such like stuff,
which we forbear to publish; whose labor were desired by the people. The most
considerable of Sandios Tribe petitioned the Governor to enjoy M. Whites
Ministry, and many of Smiths tribe, M. Goldings; but the Governor would not
hearken to the desires of either, and yet (if we may believe him, and I have
heard him speak it forty times) he does all for the glory of God, and the good
of the Country.

Conceals good orders. Bran. 12.
An. 1647. The Company required that the Congregation should enjoy their
liberty and the Chapel to exercise in, this the Governor conceals from the
Congregation, and makes the people believe, there is no such liberty granted to
the Congregation, stengthens the hands of lewd persons. Those private
Instructions which the Governor termed (as it is said) a box of poison, were
doubtlessely communicated to his Assembly, else they durst not have proceeded
with so high a hand against the Congregation. Also the letter that went in
Captain Sails ship, carried by a crooked fellow, supra An. 47.

With many other vexatious ways. Bran. 13.
1. Instance, The Governor swears men, to their own damage. Vexatious ways.


Secondly, by warrant caused eighteeen men of Sandyes tribe to appear at
Georges (twenty miles distance,) before the Assembly met a second time, because
under their hands they signified, they desired not that the Assembly should so
meet. Also many of Pagets Tribe were molested upon the same pretense, by
warrant commanded Tho. Bostwick, and one Oker, to answer their contempt for
being active in getting hands to a Petition to the Assembly, desiring them to
mediate with the Company for free trade. Likewise the Governor sent forth a
warrant to apprehend Mr. John Somersale as fellon upon supposition, he would
refuse to obey the warrant of the Assembly met a second time, against which
Assembly, he the said Somersale one of them, had openly protested and withdrawn
from them Octo. 7 An. 647. Will. Golding was served with a warrant to attend
the Governor sitting with his Council and Assembly eight miles distance, and
when the said Will. Golding appeared, the Governor with the rest, said nothing
to him; at which time Will. Golding heard Captain Wood, and other say, they
would maintain Their Laws with their lives.

Thirdly, Governor and Council have changed the levy, payable by the Country
for general uses, it was formerly assessed by the head. Now by the Acre, to
wit, one pound of Tobacco per Acre; the levy this year amounted unto eleven
thousand of Tobacco, or thereabouts, usually (in other Governors times) not
above five thousand; all the general work in view, is the covering of the
Sessions house, which is made a Dove-coat, and set with looking-glasses for the
Pigeons to dress themselves by, no forts, no public houses repaired, though
there is need enough.

The Governor gives the Country no account, but in gross how this levy grow,
only the Counselors told us, Item three hundred pound of Tobacco for Cedar
planks sent by the Governor as a present to Mr. Prim (who aspersed the
Congregation.) And one Major Williams, Item seven hundred pound of Tobacco in
arrears since the former year, five hundred pound of Tobacco for servants to
over-see Mr. Whitnalls, and Mr. Halls business, when they were employed
Ambassadors to England from the Governor unto the Company; also more for
their charges levied upon the Country thirty six pound Sterlin, since which
time, sixty pound Sterlin, out of the Spanish wreck has been disbursed upon
that account. The occasion of sending these men for England was this, Captain
Sail and Will. Golding having appealed from the Governor and Assembly, and
resolving to go for England to exhibit their Complaints against them; the
Governor with some of his Council judged meet to send Mr. Hall, and Mr.
Whitnall to maintain the Acts made by the Assembly, and accuse the
Congregation, but prevailing in neither, they returned.

Now the Country must bear their charges, yea the Congregation (against whom
they were employed) before convicted of any offense done, must contribute to
the vain expenses of these men. Also the Congregation are forced to pay for
Communion wine for the use of the Tribe, though neither they, nor theirs, have
any benefit by it. Also to the Readers of the respective Tribes, though some
(or most of them) be known drunkards.

Many of the inhabitants unsatisfied with this account, refused payment; and
the Counselors by the Governors warrant (signed before any levyes were
demanded) distrained on their Tobacco, and took their own demands.

Fourthly, The Governor at a mustering dis-armed those of the Congregation,
and their friends, and all at the same time, passionately beat one Chapline
with his keyne, for asking (after his arms were taken from him) whither he
must stay in the body, or go forth. Also one Hill upon a slight pretense.
Likewise, he commanded a file of Musketeers to seize Mr. Painters Arms,
which were then delivered; and why may not the Governor send a file of
Musketeers to cease my bed money, or servants?

Fifthly, at an Assizes Will. Golding (then in England) was sued by Mr.
Christopher Pits for five hundred pound of Tobacco, which the said Pits
recovered, and upon execution forceably took from the wife of Will. Golding in
his absence: but how comes Will. Golding to be liable to this debt? Thus,
Captain Chadocke undertook for some such debt, for Mr. Worth, whom he took
with him to Trinidado, but stood nor engaged to pay that debt to M. Pits,
Captain Chadock makes M. Rich. Waylet (who married Captain Chadocks daughter)
a letter of attorney, Captain Chadock dyed, and his two sons inherit and
divide his estate* M. Waylet Actio personalis, moritur cum persona.
dies. Now M. Golding marrying with M. Waylets widow is sued for his debt, and
the Governor informs the Jury, that it is just that Captain Chadocks
daughter should pay it, and the Jury found it so. At the same Assizes, M.
Painter is warned to make his appearance, but must not know wherefore, who
giving his attendance, an action of defamation was laid against him by M.
Vyner, for saying M. Vyner drunk Aqua Vitae, as fast as Mrs. Foord could still
it, or such like words, M. Painter desires respite until the next Assizes, but
would not be granted. M. Painter denies the words

The Governor is his accuser, the sole witness and Advocate to the Jury to
heighten the action, and likewise the Judge, and lury finds the action five
hundred pound Sterlin for the Plaintiff.

Seventhly, at an Assizes held An. 1647. M. White obtained a warrant to summon
down some persons, against whom he had just acceptions, entered his Actions, and
prepared his witnesses, but when he moved the Court, his actions might be
called upon; it was denied, notwithstanding the Assizes before he took the
oath of Supremacy, which the Governor urged upon him, supposing his refusal
would have rendered him incapable of the liberty of a Subject, the Governor
ashamed to urge the oath a second time, is not ashamed to give Mr. White a flat
denial of trying actions.

Eighthly, whiles Will. Golding was in England, the Governor complying with
lewd fellows, sought to take away the life of his dear wife, pretending words
of muteny against her, and told her aforehand, he would hang her; but nothing
being proved, he lost his longing, and dismissed her accusers without a check.

Ninthly, a Spanish Ship endangered amongst the Rocks, Feb. 14. 1647 the
Governor (before the ship was wrackt, or the Company of the Ship forsaken her)
with his own hands, and by his appointment, did so pillage and ransacke (even
beyond modesty) the distressed men that came a shore, that he has made the
Island stink in the nostrills of the Spaniards, and exposed the Inhabitants,
and other of the English Plantations to their wrath, when they shall fall into
their hands; and herein he is encouraged by the trading party (who not
contenting themselves with invading the liberties of the Inhabitants, expose
their lives to the fury of a forreigner) for the Company in their instructions
sent over with Captain Turner give liberty to pillage all Spaniards who shall
fall upon the coasts. As also in a general letter to Captain Chadock, An.
1640 they give these instructions: and that when any Spaniards do hereafter
fall into distress on those Islands, and shall send, or seem to capitulare
before their arrival on land, that you and the Council there, do require
them to cast themselves on, or stand to your courtesy, or otherwise, that you
keep them off, and do not suffer them to land. Signed with fourteen hands:
Captain Turner laying hold upon this advantage, so minded the enriching of
himself thereby, that he neglected the safety of the Island; for how easy had
it been for the justly provoked (though disarmed party) if the fear of God had
not restrained them, to have joined with the Spaniards, and have wrought their
will upon him, and his faction without resistance. I only hint this, to let
the world see, that Independents (as they call them) dare not take those
advantages, which carnal prudence prompt others too; but quietly commit
themselves unto the Scutum tibi potius, quam gladium sum. Liu.
Righteous Judge of all the world for compensation for wrongs done them, in the
day of recompense for Zions controversy.

Thus much touching the complaints contained in the Petition. Animadversions
upon the requests therein, fall next under consideration.

First, we crave liberty to transplant our selves; first, because it has been,
and may again be denied, Requests.
while the Company continue an unlimited power over us, in what we have and are.

Secondly, The Island will not bear the increase of men and beasts.

Thirdly, The Land is worn out, not enjoying a Sabbath these thirty years.

Fourthly, We have served the Trading Company long enough and for naught, and
are unwilling to leave our children bondslaves.

Fifthly, We cannot bear the yoke of tyranny, nor the insolency of worthless
and illiterate men, to be our lawless judges; especially in the matters of God
the things whereof they savor not.

Sixthly, We are deserted of the Company who in justice should relieve us; and
at best in our redresses to them, the remedy has proved worse then the
disease, who (if at any time they have saved the children of the needy, yet,
have not broken in pieces their oppressors, Psalm. 72. 4. the failing in either
is a defect in justice.

Seventhly, Suppose our Rocks were Ambergris and our mountains the finest
gold, yet would the trading party invent waves, by raising rents, by new
impositions, by limiting us to their ship and goods; by demurages or the like,
to keep us still in rags (almost) to nakedness.

Secondly, Liberty of free trade of propriety of goods.

First, it is our birthright, and that ancient bounds left us by our fathers
to inherit, let them whom it does concern consult the word of truth* Deuteronomy. 27.
17. Cursed be he that removes his neighbors landmarke, and let all the people
say, Amen.

Secondly, we earne it with the hazard of our lives, and a kind of banishment.

Thirdly, It is the privilege of all other English Plantations, who have
either means, or hopes of support, besides Tobacco, which we want.

Fourthly, in case the London ship should miscarry, where should the
Inhabitants seek supply, or hope for it.

Fifthly, If Tobacco bear a low price, the Company will send a ship but little
goods. Instance An. 1647. hardly one hundred pound Cargo from the Company to
accommodate four thousand people, and Captain Turner, the mouth of the
trading party, protested he cared not if the Tobacco yielded but (...) and
duties* it should be sent home, if the trading Company may be maintained; it
matters not what becomes of the poor Planters.

Sixthly, The life of man Homo quasi (...) simul Scal.
why should the Inhabitants be debarred of the benefit of society and commerce,
which is the Islands cause, whilst ships that pass by have no encouragement to
anchor in our Harbor.

Seventhly, Many worthy members of the Company would grant this liberty, who
being free thereof, are interest in all due profits as any other.

Third head. That offenders be put into a way of Trial; First, because the
faction of the Governor is so prevalent, that we can have no hopes of right
here, having this experience, that such as have been named by the Tribe for
Jury men (if they comply not with the Governors liking) have been discharged,
or put upon the Jury of life and death, though no use of such a Jury at that
time.

Secondly, because many crimes are capital, requiring witnesses to depose viva
voce: now we have not liberty, or power to examine witnesses, and take
attestations which they desired from the Governor, could not be obtained, or
not exercised, when seemingly granted.

Thirdly, most of the Magistrates are parties in the charge, and how can we
with prudence engage them in these causes.

Fourthly, we cannot confide in all, who have power to take attestations, it is
known to us, Attestations have been mended ^^^ed; and how should we in this
confusion be secure.

Fourth head: That the Deputy Governor may be questioned: First, in errorem,
that his examples be not a president or emboldning to the succeeding Governor,
because justice upon offenders, is not speedily executed, (...) heart of the
sons of men, are set to do evil.

Secondly, That the peace of the Country may be preserved.

Thirdly, how else shall the oppressed be righted, or secured for the future?
Job has a saying, That the hypocrite reign not lest the people be ensnared,
Job 34. 30. That the new elected Counselors and Commanders may be reduced.
First, The Company who plead this privilege, have nor done it; they restored
indeed two Counselors but the Governor allows but one of hem? Secondly, else
usurpation in authority will be justified. Thirdly, else it is all one, as
though the Governor was paramount; for if he be left to himself, to place and
displace Magistrates and Commanders, (they being his creatures) must in all
comply with him or lose their honor. Fourthly, else those Magistrates and
Officers who have been faithful to the State and Company, and have suffered
so much infamy cannot be repaired in their reputation. (Fifthly, they and
others will be discouraged for the future to serve the public, if thus left
under the feet of vile men. Sixthly, else the Island will soon be corrupted;
most of that new creation, being men of foul mouths and lives, giving bad
examples, not daring to punish sin in others, themselves being in the same or
greater condemnation.

Truly there is nothing owned for sin with us, but going to the Mill, walking
soberly, humbly, and noncompliance with workers of iniquity. These are the
ill-affected persons, the Malignants, the disobedient to Authority, refractory,
etc. In the language of the Governor and Assembly, in their Acts and
Proclamations. Ob virtutes certissimum exi^ium Sac. Hist.


Conclusion. The result is, to leave the world to judge whether these things
gathered up, and put together, will not amount in the Governors Council and
Assembly in Summer-Islands, to a praemunire exercise of Arbitrary power,
injustice, impiety, oppression in a high degree, (that I say not) tyranny in
some of them who have thus acted? and whether it is not a righteous thing that
those who have usurped power should be made incapable of the exercise of power
for the future? As for the Trading party in the Company, who have drawn down
(at least collaterally) dishonor (that I say not) guilt upon that Honorable
Society, I shall leave them to the wisdom and justice of a full Court of their
own; or rather at the bar of the supreme Judicature of our Nation, before
whom the Complaints lie; waiting with patience their Honors Resolution.

Now if any man shall object. I am (...), and besides my calling.

I answer, First, I am forty that there was occasion given me.

Secondly, Ministers are men, their lives, families, estates, and liberties,
are civil things, and whilst invaded, cannot but complain.

Thirdly, the Company and Assembly have quited me of a third part of that
labor in the exercise of my Calling, whilst a Preacher to the Country. I can
now spare time to study men especially those who study my undoing in whatsoever
is dear unto me.

Fourthly, It is not improper to the Ministers of the Gospel to bear witness
against all unrighteousness of men, and when their mourhes are stopped, to
speak in Print, the words of truth and soberness.

Fifthly, who knows but the discovery of these things may lead some concerned
in them unto repentance, which is all the harm I wish these lines produce.

Lastly, I am engaged, and should seem to mock the Honorable Parliament and
Committee, should I not pursue the complaints exhibited to them; nor would the
condition of that Congregation, the state of my family, my personal
infirmities and expense, far above my estate, (not having the least allowance
from the Congregation or Company) nor yet the unsettled state of the Nation, as
then it stood; suffer me to stay and plead to the Petition, all which
considered I am enforced to make this Remonstrance professing (in the presence
of God) I have endeavored it with all fidelity, not making lies my refuge; if
any mistakes be, it is through misinformation and in lesser things. The
substance of the Remonstrance, specially in matters concerning the Governor,
his Council and Assembly, will he attested (if need be) by faithful
witnesses. The Lord settle truth, justice and peace, throughout the earth, and
honor our Nation to be the Coryphaus and first leader in it. Amen.

Summer-Ilands 7. of the first Month, viz.March, 1647.
FINIS.

