To the Right Honorable, the Right Worshipful, and the Reverend, the Lords,
Knights, Gentlemen, and Clergy, of the Diocese and County of Worcester; The
humble proposal of a Native of that County, in the behalf of Ingenious Young
Scholars, that have a serious desire to be Educated in good Literature.
Rgiht Honble, Worshipful, and Reverd.
I HAVE had many sad thoughts concerning the unhappiness of my Native Country;
really very unhappy in this; that whereas almost all Counties in England and
Wales have convenient Maintenance allotted for the Education of young Students
in one of the two Famous Universities of Oxford or Cambridge; VVorcester-shire
is altogether destitute of any considerable Encouragement for Ingenious
Scholars; whereby many that have had parts worthy of higher employment, have
been condemned to inferior Callings; and others who might have been eminent in
their generation, 2 Samuel 10.5.
have been snatched away from those famous Nurseries unto poor Country Curacy's
before their Beards were grown; Canon. 74.
where their lean and scandalous Sallaries have scarely afforded them a short
Canonical Coat to cover their nakedness; which is a great reason (if not the
only one) why our County has not been so happy as others in many eminent
Divines, Lawyers, or Physicians of VVorcester-shire extraction.

Truly Right Honorable, Worshipful and Reverend it is some reproach to the
memory of your worthy Ancestors, that our Country is more unfortunate in this
particular then almost any other in the whole Kingdom, for it is an evident
demonstration that there has been a great scarcity of such noble and public
spirits as in other Counties have been a blessing to the respective places of
their Nativity, by their Liberal Munificence for the Education of ingenious
youth.

May it please your Honors, and you Right worshipful and Reverend to take the
premises into your serious consideration, and to consult together about the
settling of two, or more Fellowships and Scholarships in Baliol College,
(commonly known by the name of the Worcester College) for the Education of
young Scholars, of that County: In so doing your Memories will be precious in
after ages, which will have just reason to celebrate your praises, and to bless
Almighty God for such truly noble Benefactors and Patriots.

Oxon Febr. (16) 1674. Right Honble, Worshipful, and Reverd, Your very humble
Servant, THO. GOOD* D.D. Master of Baliol Coll.


