The fair Lady of the West: AND The fortunate Farmers Son.
Relating, how a Gallant young Lady in the West-Country, Being courted by many
Persons of Quality, refused them all, and cast her Affections upon a
Farmer's-Son; to whom she discovered her love; And, having neither Father nor
Mother living to Contradict her, they were privately Married to both their
Hearts desire; And now, live in joy and happy Content.

This may a pattern be to young and old;
True Love is to be vallued more than Gold.
Tune of, A gallant Damosel in Bristol-City, etc. or, William the Weaver.


A Beauteous Lady of comely carriage.
whom many a gallant sought in Marriage;
But she, with Modesty refuseing
would have a Lover of her own chuseing,
Both noble Knights, and worthy Squire^s,
to gain her love it was their desires,
But she consented not to any,
although she courted was by many.
With patience she the time prolonged,
whilst many Suitors about her thronged:
Which gave her little Satisfaction,
(...) did breed distraction*
For often times she would confess it,
And to her friends she did express it:
He is not come yet, that I shall marry;
and therefore, longer I yet must tarry.
At length, one day she did discover
the party that should be her lover:
A Farmers Son, of brisk behavior;
He is the man must win her Favor.
We wore no Robes off rich attire,
for ^o Inflame her hearts desire:
But yet his person did so please her,
that Cupid with his Dart did Seize her.


Strange fancies in her mind did waver,
that one of low desent should have her:
Yet, by no means, she could withstand it,
Once destiny did so command it.
Being thus tossed in Cogitation,
she asked no ones Approbation:
But sending for her dearest Lover,
to him she did her mind discover.
Quoth she, your pardon, Sir, I crave it,
and by your Looks, I hope to have it:
Call not my modesty in question,
for making of this bold transgression:
My heart is prisoner at your pleasure:
the God of Love has made a Seizure:
Then let my Love be kindly taken,
that I may never be forsaken,
I want no honor, nor no riches;
it is only Love my heart bewitches:
For, many a Gallant I disdained,
who my affections nere obtained.
Then since it is my happy fortune.
your Love at this time to Importune:
It Is your kind Answer I desire,
which for my Love I do require.
The young man being much amazed,
upon her Beauty long he gazed:
Admiring at her great perfection
which brought his heart into Subjection,


At length, being with Love Surprised,
this loveing Answer he devized:
And breaking Silence, to her Honor,
he thus replied in Humble Manner:
Fair Lady, if your love be real,
I should be loath to make denial:
But bless my fates for such a fortune,
If of your Love I may be certain.
And Madam, since it is your pleasure,
for to possess me of a Treasure:
Of which, I am so far unworthy,
with heart and Soul, I Will ever love thee.
Although I lowly and descended
with kindness all shall be amended:
And what I want in wealth and Beauty,
I Will make it up in Love and Duty.
Quoth she, for this your loveing: Answer,
my hand and heart you shall Command Sir:
And, I will be thy own for ever:
and so they kissed and went together.
And to redeem the time they tarried:
in private they were shortly married:
For why; she had no parents liveing,
for to oppose her marriage giveing.
And now they live with hearts contented,
on neither side it is repented:
I wish all Lovers be so served,
that for their constancy deserve it.
London, Printed for W. Thackeray, T, Passenger, and W. VVhitwood.


