A Friendly APOLOGY, In the behalf of the Woman's Excellency: Together with some
Examples of Women-Worthies. As also the Character of a Virtuous and
Accomplished Woman: Wherein Ladies of Pleasure are taxed and admonished.

Written in Verse by J. Golborne, sometime Fellow of Trinity College near
DVBLIN.

Si Natura negat, facit admiratio versum Qualemcunque potest. -- LONDON,
Printed, for Henry Mortlock, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Phoenix in
St. Paul's Churchyard, and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1674.

TO THE Most Virtuous AND Pious LADY Mrs. Katharine Booth.
Madam,
SInce famed Laureates never durst
Adventure on the noblest Themes at first,
But were so modest doubtfully to peep
Out of their private Cells, and then to creep
In arguments much lower, till well how
To trust their wings they knew, from bough to bough
Of various subjects fluttered, judging best
So to attempt that danger might be least,
Till arts had been more liberal thought, they might
Not safely venture an Heroic flight.
Pardon this boldness, that presumes to try
First hand on piece of Curiosity;
Which better would deserve the richest vein
Of smooth conceit, out of the pregnant brain
Of one, to whom kind Nature first had been
Of much more virtue than the Hippocrene.
My fancy (not well versed when first put to it)
Would not persuaded be to stir a foot
On other subjects; yet did freely run,
That her due service might in part be done
Unto your sex; and if she limps, the fault
She calls her own: lameness does make her halt,
You cause her move; and what is to express
Her gratitude, will make crime somewhat less.
In this Essay, I have sought to no Fairy,
Called Muse, that keeps her wild haunts at Canary.
Your mind is sober; nor durst I think fit
To offer you poor gathering of wit.
You need not such collection, which is more
Fit for those persons, that in worth are poor.
Grant very small allowance: bate the Verse
That waited on your pious S^sters horse:
And charge not some choice sentences which you
Know well, to whom their service best is due;
And what is stolen will not amount to be
Fit to be charged with Pettit-larceny.
Should I call women Deities, you would be
Displeased (Madam) with the blasphemy:
Or phrase them nobler creatures than men are,
You likewise might, condemn the flatterer.
Should I pass bounting Lasses and the Jigs
Uncivil, of the City-whirligigs;
Their pride, their luxury, their antic dresses,
Their bare necks, painted faces, and their tresses,
Whereby they would ensnare their wanton tongues
In lovesome Catches and lascivious Songs;
Their going unto Church, bringing no more
From thence, than what new dresses Gallants wore;
Frequenting Plays, lest therein they should do
Too little, there becoming Actors too.
I should unworthily at least suggest
That you so little baseness do detest
Of shameless Hippia's, as not to admit
They should be lashed by Scorpions of wit.
Whereas I know you loath that hateful Crew
That brag of breeding, brave, and fruitful too,
Use broad words, and large liberties as seat
Of gallantry, the way to become great-
Bellied, that they may bear their shameful sin,
And suffer plague of birth and lying in.
Should I forget my Gossip, that can tell
How to turn over tongue a spic'd-cup well,
With whose loud tittle tattle those folks are
Troubled, that deal not in such peddling ware;
But mind their own concerns, and do not pry
Into concerns of the next family:
Should I pass her, whose spungy lungs, as sayls
Are swollen, but not when dry, with telling tales
Of private merriments, scarce Civil jars
Familiar talk, and of Domestic wars;
Where will be next, and where was the last wedding,
And all the pretty passages at bedding;
How Madam Hasty gave to little Grace
Her chambermaid, a blew and broken face,
Because she came not at first call; how ill
Her Master took it, that showed his good will;
How Nell came to mischance by Knavery
Of Will; how Joan beat silly Ralph, and why:
Not to chastise such gross defectives must
Show me more Civil to the Sex, than Just
Unto the virtuous, who bear others shame,
B^ushing at boldness of the wan^on Dame,
And their impertinence vain, that are grown
Knowing in all concernments, but their own.
To set off virtues of your sex, a whole
Venus if painted, will but make a mole.
Apolles when he drew his masterpiece,
And summoned in the Paragoas of Greece
For beauty, as their excellence did very
Unto his pencil to be tributary,
Venus her mole forgate not; but did place,
And make, her comely with it in her face.
Praise of a sex, without exception, may
Fit only people of Utopia;
Cannot sincerely be adapted to
The state of sinful mortals here below,
Where those few persons do appear most rare
And excellent, in whom least vices are.
They cannot be from Adam of the whole blood,
That are without all humane faileurs good.
Let idle brains make silly sport to vex,
And force their fancies to disgrace your sex
With all the virtuous; vainly they do try
To level at the Stars which are too high.
This most will fret them, and stir up their gall,
That they provoke, and move you not at all:
When unconcerned you gain the victory,
And overcome them by your passing by.
The Rustic that all day has toiled at plough,
Puts off his clogs at night, begins to woo
At a strange rate; in Complementing Amy
He takes up phrase befitting Academy.
Not single flowers of Tropes will do, but clustered,
That with conceit do make him foully fluster'd,
And strangely elevated: he scorn now
To term her Pigsney, darling, Ladicow.
His heightened fancy longer will not truckle,
In pleasing her his Primrose, Honeysuckle.
The Gardens fair sweet; serve him not in prose;
Talip, Clovegilliflower, Lilly, Rose.
Out of the Sun, Stars, and the brightest Rosy
Blushes of morn he gathers her a Posie.
And if he gets some little Scribe to write,
He makes small matter, matter to endite.
Hearing of Po'sie, she thinks to disclose
Meaning, by holding letter to her Nose;
Or sticking it in bosom, knows not well,
That paper flowers are for the sight, not smell.
The frantic gallant eyes his Ladies look,
More than young Chanter does his Singing-book:
Dancing attendance most officiously
After the lessons of her fidling eye:
Like Statue stands in admiration of
Each syllable, st^p, frown, smile, glance, and coff.
The sacred Laurel he will need invoke,
That never learnt so far as Holioke;
To celebrate grace that was never in her,
And yet condemn himself a mortal sinner
For his Omission: but that is not it
Makes him so bad: but what he could commit.
How like a Malefactor does he stand,
Expecting sentence? What is her command?
Shall he or live or dye? Upon one breath
Depends his happy life, or woeful death.
Great Empress she, that with a pleasant I?
Can make him live; and with a No to dye;
Though much dejected, and cast down erewhile,
Yet she can set him up with a kind smile.
When his brains thin'd are almost into air
Turned by Sunbeams of her face, he will swear
He plainly sees the tippling Graces sip
Nectar distilling from her ruby-lip:
Though dazzled, Angels yet that he espyes
Sporting within those Crystal Spheres her eyes.
There Is no such Music in the heavenly Spheres
As in her voice, which always charms his ears.
She Is in each sound, he hears no ring of bells,
But what of her some pretty story tells.
The little chirping s^ngsters in his thought
Speak her so plain, as if they had been taught
To sing their Sapp^^i^ks; and her praise in Rhyme
His head well stuffed with fumes does learn to chyme;
All this is naught, he is below his Theme
Unless he be right Artist to blaspheme.
What is his heaven here on earth? her love;
And there is no heaven that he seeks above.
Were not his admiration without
True object, you would think him Saint devout.
He cringes, and with superstitious fear
Stands, as her Divinity draws near.
Good cause, if you believe his precious stories
Of the strange brightness, and celestial glories
He sees incircling her, these witnessed by
Those that are sick of his love lunacy.
The man thus Planet-stricken, gives full rein
Unto his fancy, the utmost he can feign
Of Complements bestows, runs on the score,
Until his Worship can take up no more.
If she contract her countenance, and frown
Upon him, that is death, he is tumbled down
From all his hopes, and happiness, which now
He did enjoy in smoothness of her brow.
How wretched is the man, since fallen from grace,
And excommunicated from her face?
He hates the light, his life, you cannot give
Greater affront, than wishing him to live.
What can you love him, and be so unkind
To wish him bear such torments in his mind,
As while he lives he must? Then snatches sword
Kisses it as dear friend, that will afford
Deliverance: but stay, before good night
Pray give him leave to take up Pen and write
Some doleful Verses of his faithful love
In his brave death for Phillis, which may move
Her to relent, and to vouchsafe a tear,
Or show her more unkind than Marbles are.
He orders Ceremonies to attend,
And lively to set out a Lovers end
In his last Will and Testament; forgets
His soul to God to bequeath. And what lets?
She was his only Deity, alone
To her he paid his Devotion.
What hence will follow, reason must not tell,
His madness does suppose a milder hell
Than her displeasure: this this makes him snatch
His sword again, resolved to dispatch
Himself: but that he wisely thinks withal
He shall not have a Christian burial
As felo de se, and he scorns to be
Guilty of any act of Felony.
Is he content to live? fie on it: he will go
Unto some foreign broyls, and force his fo
To do, what friends would not, though begged, and ten
To one time, wars do make him wise again.
But if quite desperate he seeks relief,
And with his Rapier makes a vent for grief
What hazard runs he? leaving friends this sad
Ground for their charity that he was mad.
Phrenetick passions of such men may serve
Those that do not know what it is to deserve
Sober affections, would not well resent
Any thing, that were truly excellent.
Let the inamoured ^ress painted Jayes,
Address them to the Idol of their praise*
Here the design is honest, to give due
Honor to Ladies, that be such as you
Are, and would be; not living just by sense
Of some folk good esteem; but Conscience.
Not pleasing humor of that sort who have
Great fear lest that they should be thought too grave.
Discretion you make not to withstand
Civility, but give it more command;
Obligingly that it may entertain
The civil person, and ^ongue-tye the vain.
Such was deportment of the English Dame
Of old, which gave a luster to her name
Over the world: but with disdainful brow
Is looked upon as out of fashion now.
Amongst vain Gallants strait laced modesty
Is ill b^ed, rustic; too precise, too shye.
Amongst parts of Philosophy we range
Ethics, and with the rest they bear a change.
As some young Empiri^ks their skill must try
Body to pu^ge of Physiologie,
Which they say Physic wants, and principles
Her bodies head, are head of her disease.
Though purged soundly, her they think not sound
Enough, until with her the world turn round.
It may be visit Mistress Dialectick,
Feel her pulse, find her in a fearful Hectic:
Her Terms are naught; her Syllogisms all
Obstruct her, they must out both great, and small.
Sorites fears he shall be laid in chains;
And Violent^m looks for horrid pains:
Exemplum to be made example: scorns
Cause poor Dilemma to pull in her horns.
Celarent wishes she were safely hid.
Festino runs in danger to be chid.
And Barbara the best of all abused,
Fears to Bocardo she shall be reduced.
But F^rio will not be baffled so,
If he must out, he will leave a parting blow.
Thus Physicking of her, they are find no season
To end, until they leave her void of reason.
So have some wantons quite rejected old
Moral Philosophy, as dry, and cold:
Questioned all principles, and practice too
Of antient^ virtue, and set up a new
Model of modesty, which you presents
With much more strange, than safe experiments.
They say, a place that is fortified does s^eak
The outward strength, but City to be weak.
That City's strong, that has not its defense
From walls; but valor of the Citizens.
Strength of their virtues only way to try,
Is to expose it to the enemy.
If you will believe, their honor by the trial
Is brighter; for they ^empt to m^ke denial.
Their husbands living they contract and call
It innocence; may pass the Ordeal,
Run through hat coulters blindfold, safe and sound;
And yet not fear the danger of a wound.
These can mistake their husbands beds, and be
Not to be charged with disloyalty.
Such resolution, that can make defense
At disadvantage, is the quintessence
Of virtue: if you can, you may believe
(Like Tutia's on trial) in a ^ieve,
That they can water carry, lead and bring
A ship b^sanded by their ap^on-string,
As Claudia, have heaven standing by
And witnessing unto their chastity.
They must give leave to fo^k to be more wise,
To judge by charity of sober size,
And then their virtue in Heroic sense
Elixar is of highest impudence.
Your virtue (Madam) takes it all one
To forfeit, and to give occasion
To folly; and for medicine does not lie
At the Bethesda of worlds charity.
A most heroic, and approved repute,
Neither makes way for baseness, or dispute.
The Libertine, before that knew no Law
To curb him, must confess your power to awe
Into Civility feigned; what he hates,
Charmed by your presence, yet he personates.
Ashamed you are not piety to own
Amongst so many, when a scorn it is grown:
And for Religion publicly appear,
To practice which, in private some do fear.
May I presume, here to present to view
Beauties, such as Apelles never drew:
May I adventure to defend their Rights
Of old, that tried the Chivalry of Knights,
To plead their cause, since they are made unfit
For want of Learning, not for want of Wit.
May this my Pencil venture on a face,
Where every taking feature is a Grace.
May this not seem in vain, which seldom done,
Yet is the duty of each Mothers son.
May these few Rhymes (Madam) accepted be,
And gain your License, but to publish me,
Your humble Servant, JOHN GOLBORNE.

THE WOMAN'S EXCELLENCE.
WHen man against unclean concupiscence
Had a pure mind an adamantine fence,
And heart more cleanly, than which does possess
The breast of most Religious Votaress,
Without so much as thought of vain desire,
And spark of that base culinary fire:
Alone, it was not good that he should be
Without a woman, and good company.
When Sophy, Prester, and Imperial
Highness, with Monarch Ecumenical,
Were summed up in Adam; yet a she
Is made to peer him in his dignity.
The glorious Angels, those bright morning stars
Too high were, to be his familiars.
The plants, and sensitives were not thought meet
For him, as being set below his feet.
But Eve created is, and made his Bride,
First taken out of, then unto his fide,
To be one with himself, that he may see
In her a rational Imagery.
Pictures are dark resemblances, they can
Give outward form, and figure of the man.
Glasses afford obscurely (save the shape
Of man) scarce any thing but Antic Ape.
She is the lovely glass, where he may find
The lively picture of his noble mind.
Likeness of outward frame, and inward too
Creates affection, makes the wise man woo.
Not without likeness of the same soul can
The outward feature make help meet for man.
Who can then think, that any man should be
Besot^ed with a piece of Masonry,
Or marble? that Lot's Wife petrified,
Should chance to have been courted for a Bride?
That man so monstrously should play the Ape,
Upon a cloud, as to commit a Rape?
Yet is it certain, flesh, blood, shape affects
The most, much more than reason of the sex.
Men gaze at colou^s, and neglect the coal
From heaven that is sent, a prudent soul
That suffers not by time; but pure does last,
When feature and complexion are defaced.
He shows not least part of man, to whom
A marble Madam is companion.
And with incestuous Pygmalion
Carveth the Statue that he dotes upon.
Though what her husband did command to be
Done, or undone, he found her always free:
And silent she could bear, what heart of stone
Would mo^e, to be called Slut, foul Carrion;
Though this rare property were in his Bride,
In all her time she never was heard to chide;
Nor with some costly Dames was at vast charge,
That she might follow each new Mode at large;
Nor with new fashions keep an equal pace;
Nor had brave Flanders prancing on her face;
For back or belly though she raised no score,
And like good huswife, never stirred out of door:
Yet since she wanted reason, sense, and life,
She could not make a comfortable Wife.
That Gallant is not half so wise as nice,
That is afraid of wisdom in his choice.
Is she a wise woman? That makes him start,
As if she were a Mistress of Black Art.
He fears she will be proud, and learn the foul
Practice of some Wives, Husbands to control
With sweet advice, which makes the Bedlam roar,
Fret, fume, swear, ban, and so much rage the more.
For to his great disparagement she will be
Not without cause esteemed more wise, than he.
Give him a Wench that knows no more than how
Her clothes to put on, when he speaks to bow
With reverence; and not without a Sir
Before his Worship suffers tongue to stir;
And as well disciplined does understand
How to obey what he is pleased to command;
That Is troubled with the softs, and while he tires
His wiser hearers, stare^, gapes, and admires
At every sentence; this, this is a Lass,
That for a most obedient Wife may pass:
She stirs not, though he have her not in string:
At a proud word has learnt to fetch and bring:
A creature tame; and therefore thought more meet,
Because she lies couchant at his feet.
Who, though all manhood he has qui^e withdrawn,
And spit^eth in her face, begins to fawn,
They that say women have no humane souls
If true; they are not men, but may be foals
Of some wild Ass, and should they be allied
As husbands, they would be quite brutifi'd.
And more like beasts than Centaurs were, and then
They might beget a monstrous race of men,
Much worse, than where the pye-bald issues sight
Presents with Negro's black, Europa's white.
These from themselves do only differ in
The outward color, in a spotted skin.
But they are preternaturals, at best
A sort of Mongr^lls strange, half man, half beast.
They may deny them souls, and judgment too,
If that they think those men are ^it to woo,
And make their applications with success
In complements, and humors that profess
By all their carriage in their lovesome fits
That they are mad, and quite beside their wits.
Else certainly they could not be so base
In face so foully virtues to misplace,
Where beauty playster'd wantons to invite,
Is but a Pict, and odious hypocrite.
She Is odly self-conceited, that thinks praise
He throws at random on her, what he brayes,
Rather than speaks of virtue, to be due;
Or (if perchance it should) that he speaks true,
That keeps no measure in his passions heat,
Nor aims to speak what is suitable, but great,
Nothing does limit whose invention vain;
But that he cannot reach an higher strain.
She that has real worth, and sober thought
Of it, must needs disdain the fancy brought,
Upon pretense (forsooth) to make her more
Admired; some think upon another score.
Whereas blew envy could not have spit forth
Venom that is more malignant to her worth.
Enough amongst most to have this effect
To make them real goodness to suspect.
As drones do very much i fest the hive,
Eat what by labor of the Bees would thrive.
So, though these Humble-be^s devour, and bring
Nothing; yet what is strange, they have their sting.
What thinks, the wild fantastic ornament
Of virtue, needs a flatterer to invent?
Cannot she be with virtues ^ully stored,
Unless made object fit to be adored?
True honor strictly looks for this its due,
That all its praises (if not great) be true.
Is not beholding as a Popish Saint
For glories, not to virtue, but the paint.
Would he be credited? that cannot be,
Unless she forfeit all sobriety.
If not, he does his folly but proclaim,
And makes it not hard to know his Name.
Alas, (good Madam) be not too severe,
To call him knave, or fool, and domineer
Over his weakness; for desire to have
Your love, does make him in such fashiors rave
From the first sight of you, some influence
Has quite bereft him of all sober sense.
Do you not see in yonder secret grove,
Him Courting the Idea of his Love?
How one while he creeps poorly, proudly stalks
As antic straight, stands silent now, then talks
Unto himself in a low voice: see how
He does his honor in a Civil bow,
Since he has mist it in some point, he will try
Do it with much more curiosity,
To please himself and ^^ncy: then accosts
The shrub, where he can find no painted post,
And to it speaks words in an humble mutter,
More sweet than honey, and more soft than butter.
What is it thus transports, dejects him too?
Its fancy (Madam) which is type of you.
He cons how Civilly he may address
Into your presence, and with life express
The passions of a lover, what will be
Your answer? How to make a safe reply,
And those odd postures which you so admire,
Are but the strange fruit of that frantic fire
You kind'ed in him: for you speak no word
But what he treasures up, and does afford
Matter of thousand thoughts: with what a Grace
You did oblige; What Majesty took plac:
In your commands; how with your looks you read
Lectures at once, to make him hope and dread;
How sweet was such a smile corrected by
Too harsh a Mistress your severity;
How killing were your frowns: and thus in pain
He Is tossed with thoughts of favor, and disdain.
He clasps the air contained you: not to look
On your track serves him, unless he snook
On saucy servant, when you do bestow
Flap on the lips for talk, to make her know
Her distance; wonders that she takes it ill,
To be so dealt with: if she had his skill
She would deserve more; he does understand
It no unpleasant kissing of your hand
Would you not (Madam) bring him to despair?
Then you must be more kind, or else less fair.
Let pity move, wherelove will not, t'impart
A smile, or sorrow soon will break his heart.
And can you think your triumph glorious,
If you destroy a Vassal-lover thus?
How cruel, and hard-hearted need must you
Appear to all the world, if it be true,
That you would not be at small cost, and pains
Of one good word, to keep him out of chains,
And Bedlam? for some hink could he obtain,
No doubt he would be his own man again.
You may command his reason; for he is bent
Not to be cured, unless you do consent.
Your harmony will set him right, they say
Thus of the man stung by Tarantula,
That would to death dance, were he not cured by
The virtue of harmonious melody.
If you resolve to be wise, and to laugh
At all his follies, are not caught with chaff
Of vain pretenses; if you think it true,
When cured, he will revenge himself on you
For all his folly past, and will not pause
Upon his bondage base, but hate the cause.
Yet let me beg one kindness, to advise
The Gentleman, to let you be more wise:
If he will not himself, then think it fit
To entertain that love, which spoils his wit:
And to condemn the incivility
That wishes you may be as mad as he.
The horrid Courtships that did pass between
Nero, and Sporus his he-concubine.
The T^umpetter, and Gracchus as they break
Natures chaste tie, so they forbid to speak
Their shame; for nothing can be worse than thus,
Unless the wedding of an Incubus.
He truly does deserve the term of wise,
Whom no perfections outward do surprise,
To make him forfeit; since they may adorn
A shameless Messaline, and be a scorn
To time, like flower fading, which does last
Small time, and at its prime is almost past
Its glory; yet when withered quite, and gone,
Gives hope of budding resurrection.
But Beauty is a superficial thing,
That, when by age decayed, knows no spring.
What folly many men so far bewitches,
To make them fondly Court an heap of riches;
And vainly wish, that they were blessed with such
A faculty as Midas in his touch?
And then be sure, they soon would change the mold
Of their dear Dames, and turn them into Gold,
That those whom they looked not upon to prize,
But with disgust, might be lust of their eyes.
How do they Court you Ladies? Is your faith
So easy to what this, or that man says?
Can you believe, what their pretenses vain
Make show of? when they truly do but feign
Love to your persons fair, and virtues: Money!
O that that is their Dear; and that is the honey
That may be help meet for them if they speed.
That Is double help, which is an help at need.
And their estates in deep consumption call
For present help, and the best cordial
Aurum Potabile is, all agree,
For weak estates not past recovery.
Your Lands their Chemistry can soon dissolve
Into some ready Cash; or else involve
In deep encumbrances with your consent:
Nor will their servile kindness quite be spent,
Till all is gone; and then, however large
Your portions were, you will be thought a charge.
He that with vile submission did approach
As humble Orator erewhile, did crouch
And bend like any Willow, will revoke
His kindness, and be stiff, as any Oak,
To your requests, when he has in his hands
Your thousand pounds of portion, or your Lands.
Now you are costly, now the man begins
To grudge you money, but to buy you pins.
And if more kind, yet what he does, must be
Reputed as an act of Charity.
So by your soft belief, you will soon be grown
At his command, and beggars of your own.
With silly easiness thus you contrive
To give the loaf, and after beg the shive.
Yet him, if covetous, you shall not stir,
Although you come with I beseech you Sir.
It may be, what less tolerable is
He can the charge bear of a costly Miss.
Nor is it rare to find these two agree,
One paltry hard, and prodigally free.
There are accomplishments of higher kind
Such as do give a luster to the mind,
Are not less precious, though they latent are,
Contribute much to make the person rare.
A quiet frame of temper, and a meek
Demeanor, which occasions still does seek
To please, and keep all calm; and modesty
Not too adventurous, nor weakly shye,
More than mere bashfulness, that blossoms cast,
If once saluted by unwholesome blast.
An holy temperance, which takes place
Of Nature in its strength, and is a Grace
A prudent soul to comfort, counsel, prove
Reproof may be an argument of love:
Where through a waspish, and weak rage are bred
No words so hard to break her husbands head,
But soft as oil; and if the oil be warm,
It may do much good; but if scalding, harm.
And her discretion understands the art
To dress the wound, and yet prevent the smart.
Romes triple-headed Cerberus, so fell
Against a married li^e does loudly yell,
With resolution never to dispense
With state so well befitting innocence,
In any of his Clergy: yet these Masters,
Or Fathers rather, are but Demicasters
Of Chastity: but read you some Popes lives,
You Will find it safer to keep Whores, than Wives.
This chaste Divinity (long since foretold
The Devils Doctrine) is not grown so old,
But it can yield a Nephew now, and then
The bastards of the Romish Arch-flamen.
It is mysterious that one should be
His Holiness, and yet want honesty.
Pope Joan is wonder stranger than the other,
An Holy Father, and dishonest Mother.
Thus Cretan Town-Bull in the Fable odd
Bore Bacchus in his thigh, was feigned a god.
Tom Dove the traveller will tell you news.
What Is that? at Rome the Pope admits of Stews,
Some hundreds of foul Bawdy-houses. How?
Such places can his Sanctity allow?
What else, when they their annual rents disburse,
And only do their penance to his purse?
The man of Miracles beyond his strain
Of skill must stretch, to make this honest gain.
Are women by his Highness here below,
Taken to be no higher than his Toe?
Great Toe indeed! Would it disgrace his pride
If women were advanced to his side
In Matrimony? without charge of Trope
Adam we call much greater than the Pope;
Whose Holiness with baseness tax't has been,
And to be perfect is not such a sin.
What though he pleads Infallibility,
That when set in the Chair he cannot lie?
He lies in that, or else pretense must go
For quibble good sensu Composito.
So Merchant brought to very hard condition,
Pays off his debts by broken Composition.
We say for Adam thus with reason good,
That then he could not fall, just when he stood.
By the Popes Holiness we safely mean
With mental reservation what is clean (contrary.)
I would not have Eve plead her nobler birth,
Since she was made of man, and man of earth.
Nor (as from bodies Politic is bred)
Argue that she sprang from him as an head;
That she may rule, a stranger Title bring,
His Mother was a Subject, hers a King;
Nor have her daughters to press instance, since
Xerxes of old that was the Persian Prince,
Because his Brother to a private man
Was born, he to the same as Sovereign.
Nor would I have them due subjection call
Forbidden bowing of the knee to Baal:
Since that in Paradise the social state
Did stand with reason of subordinate.
There Is no pretense to say, that God did give
To male, and female, power alternative.
Profanely think not, that to work his bane,
God did create the woman for the man:
That the wise, just, good, Orderer of all
Made her an help meet, but to cause his fall:
That man himself had never fallen so low
Without her, since the Word tells us not so.
Contemn her not, that was since man, but rather
Consider, who was Mother to the Father
Eternal: she was from the man her Brother,
Of the same Father, grant that he, as Mother,
Had such a Daughter, what else do we find
But him to bear the praise of womankind?
Blush then to urge that pitiful pretense,
A crooked, cross-grained piece of innocence.
Since she was taken out of his side, that he
Has been stitch't by an irksome Pl^urisie.
By such little conceits play not with wit,
Lest that it chance thereby thou forfeit it,
And fall to cry out with a Gotham-brother,
That thou art troubled with fits of the Mother.
Why may it not be likely? to say true,
Toy wit is ill of the Greensickness too.
Her, whom thou ought to pity, cease to call
Dam of damnation in the dreadful fall,
The woe of man, the ever cursed Eve
To all the black days of our saddest grief.
It Is true, she did procure the fall of men:
The woman's seed does raise us up again.
Some are elaborate, and mighty pains
Take needlessly, to show that they want brains.
This is the most they bring from learned Schools:
With reason they can act ingenious fools,
And argue stiffly: Eve was kept alive,
Her native reason only to survive:
That it is lawful, in the Logic tree,
Man should have one side, and the other she,
As it is in Eden pictured. Did the men
Impropriate all Wisdom: surely then
Children half-witted are; yet will they call
Their Mothers fools, for fear lest naturals
They should be thought; when they that are most fit
To be thought fools, do want their Mother-wit.
The Pagans were more humane far than these,
Of famed Ladies that made Goddesses,
Would have three Graces female, and did feign
The wise Minerva sprang out of Joves brain.
Invoke no more the Muses: none will side
With thee, to mother thy foul Matricide
In wronging of this S^x; make haste, and run:
Timon may chance to adopt thee for his son;
For sweetness of thy Nature, thou may be
Made to inherit his humanity.
Thy slender wit true wisdom never begat,
No learned School will it Matriculate,
If it be Alma-mater. Learn again
What petty Scholar means by Epicene,
Or fall out with haec Homo (if you can)
To save the head of Mr. Priscian.
Correct you Lilly's candor, that does render?
Dux, Praesul, Pugil in the Common-gender.
Were women all (Leaena-like) among
Grateful Athenians without a tongue,
That chose to be adored, for being Mutes,
They justly might be pictured as Brutes,
As she was, for her praise. Debasing thought
Of their discourse, though sober, solid brought
Reproach that they are wordy, if they go
Beyond the narrow bounds of I, and No.
The want of learned rules, their misery
Is called their fault, and great infirmity
Of Nature. Had their fit endowments been
Favored by men, as Nature, we had seen
Scholars divided into Sexes, and
Some Females challenging the better hand
Of them for wit, that do vouchsafe to call
Them creatures but made up of tedious braul,
And empty noise; with fury (when they dye)
In Vulcan's quiet anvill choose to lie,
For fear of clamor; lest their Oratory
Should vex them in that silent Dormitory.
Some such wise Rabbis surely did invent,
That on a time the bounteous Heavens sent
Ten quarts of Speech into the world, and men
Got to their share but one poor part of ten:
Women the rest. If that the case were thus,
They cannot but be thought too gluttonous,
To take nine cabs of pra^t^e, when a quart
Is not scarce half enough to make a part
For the good men, that lavishly estate
Spend in good fellowship, and endless prate.
Gownmen are not all speechless, nor the Hall
Of Justice freed from their litigious braul.
Had it been so: then the loud wranglers had
For all their joyful Hilaries been sad.
That Ens of reason Sophomore not able
Had been to make a tedious empty squabble
About some Logic nicety, nor sp^nt
So many hours in eager battlement
With strange Chimaera. Then what should the men
Have done, that are stout Champions at the pen;
Whose worthy parts must not be sized by
The Childish seventeens, but seventy;
Whose skulls are so well futur'd, that not any
Air can offend them through the smallest crany
To make them vain; yet fight Antagonists
With railing Rh^torick to save their fists.
Their mighty reason scarce presents a For,
But such as drops from the Posterior,
Scornful disdain. The dealing is not square
That men should be advanced to the Chair,
And women not such Scolds by far to rule
Their lavish tongues presented to the stool.
Women have got no privilege to write
Books stuffed with slander, base contempt and spite,
Which purged of their choler might be meet
As skeletons bare for a winding sheet.
Although their words are spightful, keen men can
Yet get them reckoned as Patritian
Sobriety: so well have some men sped
To have their malice meekness Christened.
Bragged of tame tempers: such tame creatures be
Safely presented through a grate to see:
On sweetness of their temper true Comment
Is Pius, Clement, Urbane, Innocent.
The privacy of women's narrow sphere
Domestic, makes their virtue less appear.
Wa^ing occasion their parts buried lie
In the dark vault of base obscurity,
That have not only unconquered charms
Of winning beauty, but affrighting arms.
It therefore is unhappiness of state
So much embases word effeminate,
And keeps their spirits under: Had they ways
And opportunities to get them praise:
Were they inured to hardships, they would outvye
Those that do hold estates in Chivalry:
Or have done brave Knights-service, and afford
More gallantry than those that were adored.
Though mention of their due praise envy call
A Tattle more than Hyper-prodigal,
And the surmise of feats that might be done
In arms by them, an idle Fiction:
For what they have achieved nobly, fame
Will ever stand indebted to their Name.
And if they do not sue the jangling Lass,
It is because amongst them she does pass
Not worthy of regards, too base to be
Sought unto by their true Nobility.
Yet famous men have Courted much her honor,
Of fawning titles cast whole leads upon her,
Were humble suitors they might be among
Those, who had interest in her idle tongue,
Promising they would be her Champions bold
To do great feats: but only to be told.
When slattering fame commended did not cry
Out with this womanish Loquacity,
Let her be packt out of the way, and go
Seek place in Psittacorum R^gio.
Amongst the Vegetables, nobler trees
Fruitless have been, we read, without their she is:
So on the Erythrean barks, for want
Of other dwellers, noble Palms do plant
And grow in couples; showing that the entail
Of Honor runs not to the issue male
In special; he would have a barren root,
But that the generous female bears the fruit.
It Is reasonable women have as well
The pra^se, as they have power to excel.
They that deny them honor, must profess,
And likewise seem to prove their worth is less.
Would they attempt it, they would desire no more
To make them see their Heresy before;
And show them that a Volume should be spent,
And not a single Sheet when they repent.
Are faults and blemishes in them so thin
Scattered, that works of God must be clapped in
To make crimes more: that his works are so large
To them, is full enough to ground a charge
Against them; whereas had he but less spent
On them, they had been judged innocent.
Since their great beauties to some become snares;
Fault (Tarbox) straight must be concluded theirs.
If this be Logic, let us borrow tools
From Crafts-men of the Chair to make us fools,
Condemn the light, because some over-wise
By staring at it chance to hurt their eyes.
We Will strain our fancies, and conceits to think
Aqua Coelestis, which the Stars do drink
Too lib'rally, makes them to blink, and keep
Their heavy eyes scarce open for want of sleep.
Dark^n the luster of those radiant lights,
That we may favor weakness of our sights.
If in the women's feature crime be known,
The fault of right should not be called their own:
This noble fabrics beauty must reflect
Upon the goodness of the Architect,
That made the work so rare, as to entice
To folly curious spectators eyes.
Good form by wise men has been made to go
For that, which is Dignum Imperio,
Teaching in outward features how to find
A correspondent beauty in the mind.
Let them smart under cens^res, that delight
To walk, in habits like Hermaphrodite;
That by their manlike looks, garbs, fashions rare,
Make it a question of what Sex they are;
Debasing thus Virago's nobler sense,
And making it to hide their impudence.
May they be hateful to all modest sights,
That turn into almost half Adamites,
Whose visage must not Natures power express,
But their pride, and affected wickedness;
Despising nature of their sex they call
A meal-mouth'd-modesty, base, rustical.
Talk what the ears of wantonest might load
To make their wanton tongues too Alamode.
May those slye cheats (that modesty do own
For naught, but base immodest ends) be known:
Who baiting with a pretty sober look,
Make the young fool to swallow down the hook.
In men and women when the fault is same,
How comes it to pass they share not blame
By equal moieties? In men a Beam
Is called a Mote; a Mote, a Beam in them.
Upon what ground takes the saying place?
This fault is bad in man, in woman base.
Shall we thus aggravate? they have wisdom more:
But very few will charge them on that score.
Precedence by none will be granted in
Knowledge, although it were to lessen sin.
Is it their inclination less to vice
At first unto the scandal that gave rise?
They that to wickedness are less inclined
Must be acknowledged to have purer mind,
Which makes spots more conspicuous: oftentimes
Better the persons are, the fouller crimes
Appear in them. Deformities are not
Observed in darker bodies; when each spot
Shows it self in the brighter; thus we soon
Espy the spots, that do obscure the Moon.
So Authors Venus mole do Memorize,
So least pearl blemisheth the brightest eyes.
If this will not be granted, all must say,
That men in somethings, and in others they,
Plead excellence. Let guilt, as equal then
Be charged upon the women, as the men.
Yet women, knowing freedom does not lie
In what is but licentious liberty,
Are well content with honor of their state,
That does their crimes so highly aggravate.
Has Britain suffered any prejudice,
By being called Women's Paradise,
Giving them thirds, the highest seats, and wall
So Civilly, with so great share of all
Their husbands lands? This they return again,
Their freeborn children make the bravest men.
They cannot have their souls scarce half so brave
Where Father is a Tyrant, Mother Slave.
In vain Italian women are kept fast
By Husbands Jaylorship to make them chaste.
How many vexed, and tempted by the thought
Of Jealous-pated-men have been made naught?
Thinking disloyalty would nothing cost
More than what had been quite already lost
In his esteem: setting more vainly by
A good repute, than real honesty.
Security for virtue, if undone
By wrongful, and but bare suspicion,
Is small; if what the Husband does invent,
Is cause enough for Wives imprisonment.
On as good ground the poor might be bereft
Of all their liberty for fear of theft.
Here by Lucretian chastity might fall
Under the black rod of foul Criminal;
That cannot testimony give confined,
Before the fact, to honesty of mind.
The felons prison, shackles, bolts impart
What is according to the men's desert;
It Is not enough against him to allege,
By witness, that he looked over the hedge*
In Goal, when he is laid, we make no doubt,
But as he stole in, so he would steal out.
These Dames for nothing else, but being Wives,
Are made the closest prisoners for lives,
Never but in the Husbands death to see,
Or their own death, a Jail-delivery.
Barbarian X^^ifs-concubines, escape,
It Is said, if they but see a man, a rape;
Before their count begins they must cry out,
For what? to bring their honesty in doubt,
Rather than shield it. He who them espyes
By chance, is not beholding to his eyes:
Whose case* (Actaeon-like) presents strange kind
Of misery, which is not to be blind.
Proud Masters think their rule entrenched on,
If the good Wives their reasons dare to own.
When they make question whether musty Must
Of cankered spirits should be born as Just,
Or with due reverence beseech, and pray,
They may not be exposed as f^ols in play.
This boldness makes the sottish soul invent
A plot, and wish an Act of Parliament,
That each man in his house may rule, and be
Invested with a full authority
To domineer, command, control, make Laws
Void of all reason; but a proud because.
Scripture without a Word of God they bring
To justify their tyranny. The King
A^a^^erus cited is: the Queen
Vasthi arraigned, as grossly overseen,
That would not show her self; make Majesty,
She did partake of with the King, to be
As picture showed to subjects; and moreover
In this command they think the King was sober:
That a decree so necessary was
Fit to be made a Monument in brass.
I leave them with Memucan to prevent
Imperiousness, the woman never meant,
And to sue out the formallest decree
Against what never was, will never be.
The thing called Matrimony thus beguiles,
And makes a John a Nokes, a John a Styles,
To swell with mighty titles: for his Cur-ship
To his proud hasty humors pleads for worship,
With prayers, tears, she our John may not assault,
When dubbed Sr. Walter Walter Knight of Malt.
Sarah called Abraham Lord; his Wife must do
So to his honor, he will be Baron too.
If she thinks, all her livelihood too much is
To be exposed to his greedy clutches,
Since he reels all away, that she can spin,
Spends faster than hard labor can bring in:
Her chests, and coffers, boxes straight he breaks
Open, to show his License to play Rex.
If Caj^tanes vote carry, he may hope
To be elected as Donestick Pope;
That, since the woman's head is man, does call
His power by title that is Mystical,
Hard to be understood: what does infer
As Mystic something, that he is Mystic Sir.
The toyling Wife may give her self the case,
And judge it fit that Peter keep the keys
In his power over her, children, servants see
Mark of the Beast a Triple^ Sovereignty,
And be forbidden ever for to own
That she believes the story of Pope Joan.
If he do tyrannize, and reason fail
For what he does, he puts on Coat of Male,
Pleads he is an husband: so right, or behoof,
Or promise shall not pierce him: this is Proof.
If Layship cannot well absolve the man,
Nor give indulgence, Mystic Headship can.
This speckled creature, without charge of pelf,
May do wrong, give a pardon to himself.
We need no ancient Histories to tell us,
That meaner sort of Dames may grow good fellows,
Follow the trade of Gossippings; they can
Toss jovially their pots like any man:
If the poor Gaffer have weak jacks, their wills
May not be served without their lustier Gills;
Whose spirits make them keep most woeful rackets
It may be fall hard on their husbands jackets
If so Viraginous, that must allow
What such Wives say, or do; cannot tell how
To help it; scarce may think that expense sad,
Which beggars families, and makes them mad.
For me, Xantippe never shall be too old,
To bear the stigma of an odious scold.
As punishment just let her always be
Under the tongue-strappado Railery.
Yet this may sober Civil women vex,
That faults, not general, upon the sex
Are cast. What made Philosopher to load us
With silly p^ssinus habendi Modus?
Was there no matter for the wise to write
Upon, but women's eager appetite
To men? by slender matter first begot
To serve, they say themselves, they know not what;
The most for which this poor conceit can bid,
Is little something called Nescio quid.
What means unkind Dilemma, that says women
If beautiful, must therefore needs be common?
Such base Dilemma's always in dispute
Deserve to bear the Odium of Cornute.
Leave off your tyranny, you pievish elves,
Whilst you do harm your Wives, you wrong your selves.
Making their grieving hearts through eyes express,
What tongues would not, the great unhappiness
Not to be suffered, that they are brought to,
Endeavoring most vainly to please you.
What can you swagger, storm at, and confine
Them wrongfully, and call it Masculine
Thus to insult? It is but foolish mind,
Seeks to advance the Sex, debase the kind.
Is It mercy to thy family to make
Subsistence of Wife, Children lie at stake,
And run a sad adventure; when they All
Must be exposed by a doubtful fall,
And but uncertain cast at Dice? wherein
She suffers much, although thou chance to win.
But (if some unexpected hap do cross
Thy greedy aims) she must sit down with loss.
When all is cast away, may she not gain
The liberty of losers to complain?
Can thou think to run through all in thy sport,
And not endure thou should be blamed for it?
Or make it run through thee by drunken fit,
And yet not suffer her to grieve for it?
Women-Worthies.
EXamples crowd upon us, lest the flaws
Of some irregulars should wrong their cause,
The innocence of others blemish, and the blame
Of envy should be charged, i will further name
Out of those many, thought to equal best
Of men, some few, that did outshine the rest.
Since the great Amazonian Ladies seats
Are mentioned by good Authors, and their feats
Of War, successes, progress, and the Dates
Of these related with Confederates,
Their government, declensions, and last Queen,
But to suppose they have not been, is spleen
In them, in questioning that make us know,
They are ashamed much that it should be so.
The greatness of the things they did atchieve,
Puts the world so much to it to believe.
Others do talk at a prodigious rate,
And that which noble was, call desperate.
As though their valor in first gallant fight
Were to be thought a better sort of flight.
Were we disposed this reason to allow
As likely, possibly who could tell how
To vindicate great Warriors; for men,
When desperate, fight their way back again.
In dangers vilest Recreants are made stout
Only to make way to creep poorly out.
But they consult not safety to make peace,
Which soon might have been done; since cause did cease*
For their exile, and sufferings: but go on,
Leaving their names to fame Thermodoon.
Revenge was not the main cause; for that lamp
When flash is over, soon is quenched by damp
Of fear. Their courage in the proof was clear,
If not from wild-fire-rashness, yet from fear.
Not a few ages puts this out of doubt,
Wherein their valor through defeats held out.
Many Commanders courage did commence
Famous, at the Acts of Experience,
That need not be ashamed to confess,
They owed almost all unto success:
Or yield they have derived their famous spirit
From Ancestors success, which they inherit.
Successes caused not valor, but from hence,
Their native courage, sprang experience.
Their Mothers victories, got in late fight,
They could not look upon as their own right.
Or since their husbands prospered in Deed
Of arms, think therefore they must need succeed.
Had success only raised their spirits, then
Some few defeats had beaten down again.
They that are bred under the tyranny
Of long, and hard oppression, will be shye
To own their Native-freedom, have no thought
Higher, than to do what they have been taught:
In time are brought to this degenerate sense
To think their reason piece of Impudence.
They have Heroic Spirits, truly great,
Whose mettle loses little by defeat.
If over-powr'd by force, yet can maintain
Their minds so high, that Victors scarce shall gain.
Thus may we find the valiant Amazon,
Conquered, and conquering, to seem all one.
Not that subjection, since first sin began,
Adjudg'd a curse of woman unto man;
Not weakness of her sex, made weaker by
Her liberty to rule but Infantry;
Not banishment from friends, and native s^oil,
Not murder of her husband; not her spoil;
Not inexperience in war that can
Daunt courage of the Amazonian.
These in their first engagement bravely know
The way to fight, and how to overthrow,
Turning the Distaff into Lance: the Wheel
They cast away; get Gorgets made of steel,
Having their minds most stout (as bows were) bent
To make a strange unheard Experiment.
Whether their nature, or condition brought
Them to subjection, and so dreadful thought
Of wars; when they assault the enemy
Think it securest way for life to fly
Not in a Complement; but forced give place,
As if the Asian bounds were but a Chase,
Where they do follow pleasant warlike sport,
And each one carries in her heart a fort.
All other forts they leave, and Champion
By them is fittest to be trod upon.
By providence they seem to have a Charter
To rule over men. The strongest spirit of Tartar,
Was weak to theirs. Now we read of a Quarum.
To put in Maps Insulam foeminarum
Is no great courtesy. It seems they meant
To prove the world but narrow Continent
To their desires. Maragnon banks do pay
Honor to their Names in America.
And the supposed head of Nile will dare
To challenge that they once were seated there.
Euxine looks black at that, supposing thanks
For them, was chiefly due unto his banks.
Where ere they came they made Crowns use another
Phrase; and great Kingdom to obey their Mother.
Of Menalippe.
GReat Hercules for ever famous is
For all his labors, and not less for this
With Menalippe that engaged to fight,
Who could not be matched but by such a Knight.
The Victory with hardship she let go
At last, and glad was he he go it so,
Not by pure valor; then my Author lies,
That gives the greatest part unto surprise.
If most renowned of the Greeks comes here
As chapmen, she will sell them conquest dear.
The Conquerors by Chariot that lead
Their Vassal-Kings might be thus vanquished
With honor too: it is credit more by some
To get a foil, than elsewhere overcome.
Of Penthesile.
PEnthesile brought (with a kind intent
Of helping Priam) her Maid-Regiment
As some affirm, and had she sooner come,
Despairing Greeks with shame had ridden home
On Wooden Horse. They now that dare to tax
Troyes folly, yet do dread the Battle-ax,
Which she invented: heart was fully tried
Of great Achilles Son before she died.
Such brave Virago's not by smoother words
Of Complements, were overcome, but Swords.
The gallant Grecian yonkers, that did Court,
Before they wan their love, fought stoutly for it.
Of Artemisia.
HAlicarnassus Queen her self did show
Fit to command the Archipelago.
While Persians stand at gaze, the Grecians are
Forced to make way for more than Men of War,
Which she conducted; as though she would glory,
And make the Sea part of her Territory.
The Persian-Carpet-Knights with courage cold
Run, to secure themselves, into the Hold:
Giving Achaians leave to understand,
Ships overcharged with such, were poorly manned.
The ink may blush, and Scribes, that are to write
At her stout heart of Oak, their wings for flight.
Xerxes spectator is ashamed to see
The Queens top, and top-gallant-gallantry.
More are the Greeks enraged, that overcome,
And scarce can carry - half the honor home.
Her most renowned Mausoleum could not be
For braveness half such wonder as was she.
What was for honor of her husband meant
Of her great praise is made the Monument.
Of Zenobia.
We Will boast Zenobia in triumph led,
Yet by Aurelian not conquered.
Not having life; nor begging pitteously,
To live not blushing, nor ashamed to dye;
For when her army's broken and command,
She more undaunted, than the Victor stands:
Though outward splendor must be left behind,
She will reserve the greatness of her mind.
Of the Queen of Sheba.
ARabia the Happy boasts of her,
That by her wisdom made it happier;
And from Saboean-land did come upon
Errand, of proving wisest Solomon
With questions hard, she questionless gave much
Assurance, that she was another such.
The greatest Warriers were proved, we see,
By women in the feats of Chivalry.
The wisest mere man in the Holy Writ
Is said to be tried by a woman's wit.
With men in noblest exploits they will compare,
That in the wonders of the world had share.
Are they so equal? We may therefore render
Acts, that are glorious, in the Doubtful Gender.
Of Deborah.
WHen oppressed Israel did sadly moan
Under their losses, which they might not own:
When government was needful to ^ppease
Those, who in restlesness take greatest ease:
When by what Laws command, and Rulers say
People take pattern how to disobey:
When Malefactors need make no defense
For their outrages, but more violence:
Then Deborah is raised; for none so free
From fear, so wise, so stout, so good as she.
Here Widows, Orphans, strangers freely might
Have their cause pleaded, and receive their right
As Soon as richest; for she knew right well
How to give Judgment; but had none to sell.
No tedious demu^rers here; no witty
Cobweb-exceptions, Courts of foolish pity.
For Chancery, no argument she draws
From Topic of the person, but the cause.
They that stood by her could not but invoke
God, when they heard the Oracles she spoke.
Nay bifront Ja^us could not put a face
Upon It, if there to deny her the place.
Barak gives her right hand, is glad to be
Beholding for his branch to her Palm Tree.
She gave first blow in the attempt, and lead
The host, and Jacl knocked nail to the head.
Of Esther.
THe proud Amalekite fate daily at
His Pur Pur, like a Melancholy Cat,
Blood^mad and rageful that straight at his call
The lucky lot did not prepare to fall.
Since Mord^cai to bow refused, he
Seeks by Jews downfall to revenged be.
Thirst of his malice cannot be by blood
Of one man quenched, he can drink a flood
Of tears and go^e: therefore Esther adventures
Though with the hazard of her life, and enters
Into the presence against Law: the Queen
Redeems lives that were purchased for his spleen.
Since he is not tall enough, does still aspire,
^he will advance him forty cubits higher.
Haman will not be a man, yet his fate
With twist does take away the aspirate.
Thus under God the Feast of Purim may
Be ^eckon'd as the Jewish Esther day.
Of Judith.
WHat to distressed, despairing, Israel was
Too much to think; Judith does bring to pass.
Proud Holofernes thought his words so stout,
Enough among the Jews to make a rout.
Wishing them heart to make resistance great
To heighten his courage, and their defeat
To aggravate, she silenceth those boasts,
And at two blows, stoutly beheads an host.
No petty Forts assails, but chief of all,
Their main strength, and soon takes the Capitol.
When to Bethulia she returns, and calls,
There straight arise some statues on the walls.
So great amazing joy in every one
Made them seem part of the wall turned into stone.
So once Medusa's beauty left no vigor
Of men to the beholders, but a Figure.
She feared not living Monster, some do doubt
From the fierce head lest body should grow out
As heads of Hydra from the body; seeing
Dead Tyrant them she scarce can keep from flying.
Bago's with shame does find his Master dead,
And proves a trusty keeper of his head.
Assyrian camp in great confusion stands.
They that want head, have little use of hands.
Women in triumph walk that day like host,
And they have greatest right to rule the roast.
Judith led Van, and she the Olive bore
The other branches as the Dove before.
Of Queen Elizabeth.
WOnder of women, and of Queens, the breath
Of Englands glory, was Elizabeth.
That quenched bonefires, which loud did proclaim
The Popish cruelty with tongues of flame.
To Protestants when she brought liberty
The Friar-Bacons in their grease did fry.
That she deceived their wicked art, and fell
Not within power of their Magic spell,
And Romish Bats afraid of Gospel Light,
As much ashamed, pull out their eyes for spite.
They to their private Masses run, one reads
He knows not what, yet stiffly plyes his beads,
Says what he minds not; but makes a patter
When he poor soul knows nothing of the matter.
By Delver now are English Bibles found,
And brought to light, that were hid under ground.
Now are the clouds dispel'd of that dark night,
Wherein the Word must not be brought to light.
From bondage Protestants are brought, before
They did lie under, promise have of more.
The Pope grows horn-mad, he will disannull
All by (like wicked Holiness) a Bull.
Spain (as most dutiful) the office bore
To be accounted best Son of the Whore,
And did appear with stout Rodomontado
A sudden, great, invincible Armado:
Close linked together: but the powe'rful One
Designed to break them by their Union.
The winds do blow till they are out of breath,
The seas are troubled threatening their death
That crossed them, and with proud intent durst come
Of joining Narrow Seas to Sea of Rome.
By envying command in them they gain
This fort, she will be Lady of the Main.
Their intercepted, laden, ships amount
To their fear, loss, shame, and to her account.
Denmarkian name was not a little bound
To her for riches, glory of its Sound.
Through her sincerity Batavian,
When others lose by foreign aids, did gain.
This was rare instance, for no other end,
To help distressed, but them to befriend:
When we are taught in Machiavellian School,
First give assistance, after take the rule.
French Protestants the bounteous God do bless
With seasonable succors, and success.
No more ingrate, than miserable they,
First disoblige her, then become a prey.
Merchants, that Convoys slight, to Pyracies
Become an easier, and so richer prize:
So silly sheep, when once the Shepherd's gone,
By lurking Wo^ves may soon be fed upon.
When it is too late they know to be more wise,
And learn the treacherous Leaguers cruel Gu^se.
The foreign Lands, that bosoms had, have been
Most joyful there to lay our Merchants in:
That making their discoveries, did pass
Through dreadful Lands of Ice, and S^as of Glass,
And what is strange scarce suffered Terra
Australis to remain In^ognita.
Of Navigation in each point did try
To make a perfect Encyclopedye.
Of Mary Magdalen.
OUr Savior has foretold, the lu^gs of fame
Should still indebted be to Ma^ies name;
That mirror of Gods mercy, once possessed
By many evil spirits, made a blessed
House for the Holy Ghost. The blackest night
Of sinful state turned into glorious light.
Do not upbraid her that her crimes were such:
All was forgiven, and she loved much.
The costly Spicknard which she poured forth
Upon his head, did not come near the worth
Of her great love. To those, who grudged there
At needless waste, Christ was not half so dear.
This humble handmaid judged it most meet
To sit, as a Disciple, at his feet,
And gather up the precious words, that fell
From the mouth of Rabbi Immanuel.
His feet she bathes in fountain of her eyes,
Them with the flaxen of her hairs she dryes.
Her sober sadness he blasphemes that jeers,
From her derives the cheat of Maudlin-tears.
And she as holy women did supply
With purse the humbled Alsufficiency.
And follows him at last, with drowned eyes
And broken heart, beholds him as he dies;
Who at his death, and after was most dear,
His last care first appearance makes appear^
Venus a female Planet so does run
Her course, to wait upon the setting Sun;
And she again gives notice by her bright
Rays, of the coming of the Monarch light.
Of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
FEmales the holy Virgin did advance,
In bringing forth the worlds deliverance,
The blessed Child, of whom it is only said,
Because he could not lie, not credited;
Whose innocence, works, Miracles and all
Made him esteemed a greater Criminal;
Whose ho^test service, and souls anguish great,
We read in Rubric of a bloody sweat;
More deep concerns for man, than those that rise,
And freely spout out of the blood-shot-eyes;
Whose sufferings ineffable impart,
Through pierced side, view of a weeping heart;
Who tasted bitter sour, that we might meet
In greatest troubles, but with bitter sweet.
Methinks at the report of thy Child's fame,
I see worlds wonders wonder, and to blame
Their builders proud, and costly folly, which
When he was made so poor, would make them rich.
When Lum^narie of the day draws near,
The lesser lights cannot for shame appear.
So greatest Wonders at his coming fall,
Own him as Wonder greater much than all.
The stately Pyramids, the Memphian pride,
(...) abashed seek to hide,
(...) of sight and mind; for shame
(...) blusheth into flame.
(...) Pi^my seems to be,
(...) him that is Immensity.
Egyptian Pha^os would officiously
Hold candle to this Wonder passing by:
But that poor watch-light nothing could confer,
To help the brightness of the Morning Star.
Olympic Jupiter like Statue stands,
For empty show, with eyes, ears, mouth and hands.
In thee was Masterpiece of Heaven aid;
Most curious work that ever Heaven made.
Had there gone out tax on the wit of all
Men on this Globe, wisdom Angelica^,
They could have carved with curiosity,
But better shaped piece for Idolatry.
The Father has expressed his Image on
Pure Virgin-wax, and ta'n to Union
With God the second Person; hence our true
Service, and adoration are due.
The Carian boast Ma^soleum dare not call
For any Rights, but silent burial
In rubbish; for its greatest pride can go
For nothing more than Worms S^raglio.
Much greater wonder is the Virgin Tomb,
Where never man was laid before. The womb
That bore him is more glorious; when the ^right
Sun for nine m^ne^hs in Virgo lodged h^s light.
The strong, and stately (...)
Compared to him ^s no defense at all.
He Is wa^, much stronger than one made of st^^e,
Or brass, impregnable salvation.
To take the height of which, requ^res much rather
Than a poor Jacobs Staff, a Jacobs (...).
The Character of an Accomplished and Virtuous Woman.
THy mind is happy, being seat of wit,
More happy since discretion governs it:
The former is the pretty fable, this
Discretion grave the useful Moral is.
As there irrationals do speak what suites
With solid reason, that men turn not brutes:
So here child's taught the riddles to unfold
Of gravity, a stripling to grow old.
It stains not freshness of thy youth to have,
And to deserve the Epithete of grave,
Hated by them, whose bodies now grown cold,
Make them in all respects, but prudence, old:
But much concerns thee, time runs on so fast
With winged feet, and thou no better haste
Can make in judgment, that thy tender age
By Antedate of prudence may be sage.
Leavest them to blush at their idle fears,
That reckon it as Interest in their years,
To seem discreet, but yielding viler rate
To Ladies, that are worn quite out of Date.
Thou think not gravity does then look best,
Exposed when to laughter in a jest,
Or that becoming wit, which does afford
To make the author of it more absurd.
Thou seek'st with grandam-virtues to adorn
Thy self, when youthful vanities are worn
By persons much more aged, to yield strong
Presumption to the world that they are young:
That seem to reckon it as an excess
Either to practice virtue or profess:
Admit into their Ethics modesty
Apocope'd, without a Civil tie:
Serving all wanton modes: thus pievish wag
Spoileth the lace by pulling off the Ta^.
Those, that in too great freedom draw not near
Occasions foul, are judged too severe:
As though plain Modesty deserved no thanks,
Careful, how it approaches nigh the banks
Of foulest baseness: their presumption thinks,
It Is want of resolution fears the brinks.
A vulgar unapproved innocence
Deserving not at all Heroic sense.
They Will have you think, if you have faith enough,
They Are innocent as child new born, although
They tempt the wanton Reveller to try
What guard is kept upon their honesty.
Strength of thy resolution is belied,
If it be thought to be less fortified
Because of caution: rather might it tell,
Against wild storms it is impregnable.
If any, in repute grown outlawed, comes,
Assaults with levity, and beats the drums
Of thy chaste ears, he finds there is no charm
To win thy heart, but make thy virtues arm,
Vileness of his attempts exposed lie
Set out in colors of Vermilion-dye.
That he may see his rudeness, take the shame,
Thou lend'st the Taper of thy modest slame.
When exhalations thick the air do muddy,
So the bright Ruler of the morn looks ruddy.
If highness to debase upon the stage,
And folly mask with an abstemious rage;
If to feed corrupt fancy with the veins
Of ^evity in some Romantic strains;
If lo^ty traversing must be alone
Accounted gallant education;
Thou will take up with grave, and ancient sort
Of b^eeding, and not be less nobler for it.
The Lillyes candor, and the blushing Rose,
A temper neither frolic, nor moiose,
Pleasantness mixed well with gravity,
A grace deportment, ma^ron-like, and free;
The sweetest condescension, not abject,
Or sordid to command, and to affect
Obliging carriage, which admired makes
Rather than feared, as it was it takes,
Not too high, nor familiar, to prevent
Both the extremes of hatred, and contempt
Are thy true glories, not for show, but use,
Need not bear judgment true, or beg excuse.
Let losty Mounters proudly scale the ^kye
With fr^zled, sparkling bravery, and dye.
Let M^t vis with exhalations fed,
Glutted with vapor, be soon famished.
Let Potentares be swollen up big with Titles
In Honors Volumes but the smallest tittles.
Let proud Phantastes much admire his Minion
A ragged, ba^e, and beggarly Opinion.
Thy praise is in thy self, not put to death
By spiteful stopping of another breath.
To thee, without true excellence, it is naught,
Great, and right Honorable, to be thought:
Since it is more to be, than only seem;
To merit glory, than to have esteem.
To appear great to world do not aspire,
But (if to vulgar sight less) to be higher,
Whilst haughtiness fo^dly advancing Crest
Th^'eth her own Fools-Coat the Noblest,
Because it is gaudy: Scripture He aldry
Gives the much better plain Humility.
Thy self-denial is a noble feat,
For greatest Alexander far too great;
Too high for them whose soaring aims were bent
To gain the title of Magnificent.
It Is truly honorable to despise
That which the greatest Monarcl^s idolize.
Ambition lawful is, and the intent
Blessed, in goodness to be excellent;
After good facts performing to Commerce,
And take the high degrees of Eminence.
The touring thoughts of pride, that do advance
Their lofty heads by Gospel Ordinance,
Thou batter'st down. Prayer, fastings do confer
To make thee humble, a self Leveller.
Before thou wast since that thy power to be
Depended on Gods Alsufficiency;
That could produce. Thy futurition stated
Was from the will, and virtue that created.
Beauty, wit, greatness, honor thou wilt confess,
But as they are derived from God, are less
Than nothing in act safely can maintain
Them less than less than Nothing told again:
Nor are nor can be real, but hang on
The judgments greatest Contradiction.
These realliz'd thou thankfully do own,
Because that they are thine, and not thy own;
Thine, as to payment of a grateful mind;
Thine, not to free from duty, but to bind;
So not thine own a worthiness to raise
In self, but what redoundeth to his praise.
In this God must be sole without compare,
Since it is granted, Nothing has no share.
Beauty so many envy, and admire;
Honor few seek to merit, but acquire.
Riches that suffer not the owner sleep;
Health many seek to Court, but few to keep.
Thousand degrees are short of parallel
To Grace, wherein thou strivest to excel
Transcendently becoming humble, so
What most advances thee, still makes thee low,
Thy native vileness truly to confess;
And real greatness makes thee so much less
In the esteem of self, yet on this score
Thy worth and modesty deserve the more.
Thy speeches pithy, solid, give a light
Composed to instruct, and to delight,
Serious, and pleasant, witty, pertinent,
Grave, pat, and proper, fit for each intent,
With pleasure hearer, that may entertain
And recompense with profitable gain.
Much unlike theirs, who troubled with the lask
Or looseness of the tongue relate, and ask,
Not with desire to be informed, or break
Somewhat material to be known, but speak
What savours ill. Let men pretend their fears
How to such lavish tongues they lend their ears,
Pleasant their fancies too in laying ten
To one they never have them back again,
Or not without the wrong of foul abuse.
Thou payest precious earrings for the use
Of some few short-lived Minutes, what is heard
From thee, shall be their pleasure, and reward.
Thy words as they employ so do they whet,
Both exercise attention, and beget,
They satisfy, not cloy. By what is said
Hearer indebted it, as well as paid.
Thy Counsels are resolving Medicines,
Swasions, attractives, reproofs, Anodynes,
Where the discreet, and tender management
Make not the smallest part of Argument.
Whilst vain talk Melancholy does increase;
Instead of helping, adds to the disease,
Lifts up the spirits in transports, withal
By their depression gives the sadder fall.
Good Cordials skilfully compounded hit
The cause, and so alleviate the fit:
So thy well tempered speeches are more sure
Way to give ease, and to effect the cure.
Thy prudent humble meekness best can tame
Anger, when fury would the more inflame.
When overhasty Romans do oppose
The stronger cunning Carthaginian grows,
And more successful, but soon melts away
By greater force of Fabian-delay.
Quitting is stratagem to win the field,
The way at once to overcome, and yield;
Never the base regarding, petty harms
Shall cast disgrace upon thy Coat of Arms.
Thy Victories are not dishonored,
As where the Conqueror is vanquished.
They of true triumph want the greater half,
That conquer other Monarchs, but not self.
You that will have your nature judged by
Laughter at good (some Ladies property)
Come see the ugly face of your offense,
In Mirror of unmoved Patience.
By wrong would you provoke her? That does move
Her to provoke you so much more to love.
Or will you calumn^es cast? Her defense
Is not the like reproach; but Innocence.
In vain contend you with her, whose contest
Is (not to get the better) to be best.
She knows, they who by passion most have won,
Will so much sooner prove to be undone.
They run in debt, that sltrive to give offense
To others, owe the greater recompense,
An undeserved taunt or wicked curse
Can make her virtue not a jot the worse,
What malice casts upon, whilst not within,
Is the reproach of others, not her sin.
Were talk true Judge, the good then only might
Be good by favor, and be bad by spite:
Whilst some do in their needless visits rome,
Till they be greatest strangers to their home;
Gadding as though they to the world were sent
To be employed in what is Impertinent;
As if their birth did privilege by right
Them to cast off the care, and oversight
Of house-concerns: thou keep'st thy wonted ^rack
Through each task of thy painful Zodiac.
Like the bright Champion of the day, that rowls
His flaming eye toward the distant Poles
Arctick Antarctick, vieweth both the Tropicks,
The Seas Tartarian, and Aethiopicks.
Thou art accomplished with quickest sense
In wise forecast, and careful Providence,
With memory fitly to recollect,
And care in all things makes thee circumspect.
Not suffering Medler in thy house to grow
That Is open-headed, nor unuseful slow:
For slothful servants should there be no blame
When idle, lazy thou would force for shame
By thy example them, that wait on thee,
To be affected to good huswifry.
They in their orbs must take their light from thine,
So they are made to serve, as well as shine.
By friends persuasions, or thy fancy caught,
To some prodigious temper art thou matched,
Or married rather, to draw out in care
Thy vexed life with a familiar;
One that proves most unsuitable, whose gall
O'reflowing fills the house with hateful braul.
Thy Physic is not usual by keen
Reproofs, ill-savouring to mend his spleen,
Repress his choler, sweetly to endure
Thy Ethics tell thee is the way to cure.
Where bombards cannot any breaches make,
A milder fiege is found the way, to take.
As Soon the shackles of the Persian King,
Or idle Ceremony of a Ring
Presented by Pope to his Zani, may
Bind Hellespout, oblige rough Adria
To calmness, as sharp quips, loud blustering can
Correct the madness of the chur^^h man.
This piece of rigor, Nabalisme, rage,
If curable, thou'^t break by Saxifrage
Of patience, and discretion. When dint
Of reason cannot, meekness breaks the flin^.
But, if some passion break forth, it is thy strong
Desire, endeavor that it dye when young.
Thou will not be at fruitless pains to nurse
That, which as it grows elder grows w^rse.
Is he with fury charcoal'd, of desire
That softest breath makes him spit sparks of fire.
Thy silence from his rage shall take supply.
Anger, as fire, if it have no air will dye.
If glittering pretenses do'nt abuse
The can dour of thy judgment; but thou choose
With love that is not blind associate,
That may yield double comfort to thy state.
Not Cynical, nor worthless passions sl^ve,
But with a sweet complaysance that is grave,
Whose gentle nature more designs to draw
With most obliging carriage, than to a^e
With stern looks, insolent commands: then you
Cannot but hit the Golden Rule of two
In Matrimonial fellowship, where one
Heart, joy, concern, care, tongue make U^ison.
No emulation, who shall be above
To govern, rule, command, control; but love.
Strive who shall please most, and contention
Is strong on both sides that there may be none.
Thy snares are harmlesly to gain. Each gin
Discreetly by thee laid is but to win.
In joy, success, his sorrows, losses too
Thou challengest for Jointure half as due.
With his content thy cheerfulness will mingle;
Thy person is not, nor are crosses single.
By Catechizing, good instruction
To help fault of the first Transgression,
And sad fruit thence arising to redress
To most things steril: but to barrenness
Thou do endeavor, that those of the earth
May be made happy by a second birth
To holiness; and thus thy prayers, and toil
May be rewarded by a fruitful soil:
With the sincere milk of the Word do nurse
To make them blessings, and take off the curse,
Whereby they growing up afford the gain
Of joy much greater than thy former pain.
So toyling husbandman beholding fate
And curse upon the earth degenerate
Grubs up the shrubs, thorns, briars, and then ploughs,
Harrows, and sowes his seed with sweating brows;
And thus by manifold increase obtains
Against the curse, what will reward his pains.
Midas may wish for golden showers and Mountains,
Atla^tick hortyards and true Crystal fountains,
That all his Roms might bear as precious fleece,
As that which was fetched by the youths of Greece.
His fields were Or, and Argent, naught to breed
But precious money-wort, and silver-weed;
Or pray that all his Cockle Oyster-shells
With precious pearls were filled, and nothing else;
That he may keep his Lent upon each fish,
As rich as that in Polycrates dish.
Thy earnest prayer is a great deal wiser,
Than what obtained would always make a Miser.
Therefore do thou implore the power above,
Thy heart may be good soil for Johns-wort-Love,
Contentment which yields hearts ease, and true hope
Directed unto Christ as Heliotrope;
With resolution which still grows best,
As famous Palm the more it is oppressed,
And sober temper, wherein does consist
More virtue than in precious Amethyst.
As Corals colour's said to sympathize
With the distempered wearer, that thine eyes
May Weather-glasses be, whereby to show,
Whether with Gods Church it be high or low.
Thy Alms are stirring, not to get a Name,
As other people do to do the same;
Turning what is by bounteous Heaven sent,
Not into pity by a complement.
But thy Compassion joined to Gods command
Enlarge thy tender heart, make liberal hand.
An heart without good works, is in true sense,
No part of charity, but a pretense.
Where is ability, the poor have part,
And a large share both in thy goods, and heart.
Many do pamper up themselves in lust,
With dishes, which Apician fancy must
Be tortured for, the Appetite to fill,
Whilst they make Reason basest Manciple.
Yet when the poor are almost famished,
Can nothing more afford than Be ye sed
Have guts, no bowels to receive the cry
And moans of pining hard Necessity.
But what is debt, thy wisdom makes a Loan,
Which lays out for him what is thine own;
Knowing for his that be disposed is just,
Which no way's thine, but only upon trust.
When wanton Venusses do plait their hairs,
With frizled tresses make pernicious snares,
Whilst these Ara^^nes weave their Cobweb thin
Better to catch unwary Gallants in;
Disfigure nature, and deform themselves,
By patching, painting to take lovesome Elves;
With Heliogabalus Monopolize
Adventures of the strangest rarities;
Torment Phantastes brain, till he can find
Out modes, and fashions changing with their mind;
Put the Cameleon to it, and Proteus too
To put on shapes, and colors that are new;
Take Adders hearts to raise their jolly strains;
Drink Viper-wine, till it drink up their brain,
To keep them fresh: By Cleopatra taught,
Swallow ten thousand drachmas at a draught;
Thus vainly giving up into the hand
Of viler Corporal the chief Command,
About the body taking chiefest care,
Make it appear, how idle souls they are,
No pains, no cost is thought too much, that can
Contribute to enrich the inner man
With glorious excellencies, and impart
A^ greater gracefulness unto thy heart.
Thy wise concern is deeper than the skin,
Truly to be all beautiful within.
Thy ornaments are such, as we are told,
Were made the Matrons bravery of old.
If things be duly prized, when they are
The farthest fetched, and dearest bought; how rare
Are they, which from the throne of Heaven sought,
By no less than the blood of God were bought?
If things have value, which do so much please
The eyes of men; how precious then are these,
That take Gods heart, whose approbation
Gives worth unto the things which else have none?
Eastern, and Western Indies, that entomb
So much admired riches in their womb;
The great adventures which were purchased by
The Romish Catholic humanity,
And filled the Spanish coffers, are much less
Than what from Heavens gift thou do possess.
Ten thousand millions, if sum'd up, are small
And nothing, when compared to thine All.
Most precious Diamonds to fight can bring
But dazzled luster, or weak glimmering.
The Queen of Heaven, Constellations bright
Make not the day, but mend the dismal night.
When Heavens Champion does but show his face,
Affrighted darkness soon resigns its place.
Thou art thrice happy, that receivest ray
Of Christ the glorious Sun, that makes thy day.
What did the Learned Heathens once advance
But subtle piece of splendid ignorance?
Led by the Taper of their Reasons light,
That farthing-candle mended but their night,
That had no saving knowledge. Argus's eyes
Less power have, than this one to be wise.
The pleasant picture seems to sport, and play
With wanton glance converted every way,
Or stand before, or turn to either side,
Look at it, and you seem to be espied:
So carnal minds seem great things to espy,
Yet all but with a dead, and painted eye,
Compared to thine, where the most real sight
Proceeds from a clear celestial light.
Dives with delicates was daily fed
Yet he poor soul did want thy daily bread,
Who set at Wisdoms table do enjoy
Dainties, that do refresh, feed, fill, not cloy.
Worldlings like Serpents, or Cameleons, are
Nourished with clogging dust or empty air:
Desire insatiate has painted dishes,
That more inflame the heart with idle wishes.
As riches multiply upon men; so
The dropsy of their greediness does grow,
And vastness of estate does make them scant,
Greater the fullness is, the greater want.
Thy lowliness of mind, does make thee higher;
By want thou art enriched with good desire;
Which makes thee after Living God to pant,
To gain more plentiful estate by want.
The greatest Monarchs would much richer be,
Were they enriched by thy Poverty.
The baser sons of earth do fall upon
Ignoble game, and feed on carrion.
Thy nobler mind aspireth to attain,
Though at expense of losses, more to gain
Of the Angelical, and pleasant food
Most satisfying, and eternal good.
Nor will thy strong desires cease to ascend,
Until enjoyment to hope put an end.
Circumvolution of few sliding hours
In season less benign fade sweetest flowers;
The mighty works of Architecture pay
At length their debt to Nature in decay,
And Hieroglyphick Serpent that sets bounds
To mortals beings with its numerous rounds,
That will have gnawed to pieces in some while
The world, though it were metal hard as file,
Has buried tombs, and monuments shall be
The spoil and triumph of eternity.
Thy ornaments are of celestial mould
By longest tract of time that grow not old,
Not subject to the thief, moth, rust, or waste,
Or to be lessened by the time that is past;
Still shall be fresh, have no relation
To the vile worm or base corruption.
To thee that make it thy care to look
For happiest estate in Doomesday Book,
And waitest for the everlasting bliss,
A Term too short Fee-simple ever is.
Each gate of the heavenly Jerusalem
Is represented by a precious Gem.
How glorious then shall daughter of the King
Appear? whose grace will have eternal spring
And perfect growth; who treading on the Moon,
Shall be completely clothed with the Sun
Of righteousness; to whom Don Phoebus bright
That rules the day, affords but Gloworm light:
When there shall be no shadow, nor decay,
No showers, no clouds, to stain the perfect day.
Here learn you to be wise, whose careless care
Is to sleep, dress, feast, chat, and take the air;
Whose idle work when rarely set upon,
And to do nothing almost are all one;
Whose planetary lives are chiefly spent
In the Exchange of frothy Complement.
With you the ancient virtues are much more
Grown out of fashion than the clothes they wore:
Your shame is to be fixed amongst the Stars,
By vanity of your lewd Jupiters,
That much admire you, to ensnare their eyes,
As do the painted, powd'red Butterflyes
Some little children, and for nothing else
To be admired by Merchants; but your shells
Like scented Panthers that destroy, and please
And poison, as the bright Cantharides.
Why so high born brave Dames? None of you can
Draw out your lives inch longer than the span
Designed. Why swell you big with thoughts of birth?
The Worm's your Sister, and your Mother Earth.
Are you with travel of your Mother grown
Noble? The labor then was not your own
Or does your honor come by being marched?
That light is borrowed from the fool you caught.
Do you your selves by fame, that is common, prize?
That, when the giddy humour's over, dies.
As bubble swollen with empty' air does last
^^me thoughts, not many, longer than the blast.
One breath blows up, and breaks this watery bail,
And half a Minute is its Spring and Fall.
What, is it not enough, some to employ
To Indies most remote, to fetch a toy,
Or precious tr^fle, yet all this to dress,
And to equip your rotten carcasses?
But that the Artist black must run to Hell
To fetch your fortunes, and return to tell?
Shall wandr'ing Gypsies, and that wicked Crew
Of Vagrants, that pretend as if they knew
Future Contingents, have your charity,
And be rewarded for the^r cheating lie?
Whereas the godly Ministers that bear
Affection to your souls scarce gain your ear?
When they declare the woeful state of sin,
And misery you are involved in
By nature, show restored you cannot be
To sight, unless you know you do not see;
And send you to the Son of God, whose bright
Rays to the Saints in Heaven give a light.
They tell you you are dead in sin, and give
This token of their love, to wish you live.
Direct you unto Christ, your life, whereby
You may have health, wealth, and true liberty.
Since you will know the things that are to come,
Out of the Word they read the dreadful Doom
Of all that have no interest in him,
If they continue in their death and sin.
Shall yet a costly patch amount to more
Than what ye ever gave unto the poor?
Shall they that sighing do reprove you, have
No better thanks than Clown, or saw^y Knave?
May your faults acted be, and not be told?
Will you not be persuaded you are old?
Or so shall be e'relong? Why bring you down
The rate of A^e which is a glorious Crown
In righteousness? Would you have death to come
And Complement your Honors to the Tomb?
Or will you bid him stay below? For why,
You are not yet in humor brought to dye.
And to prevent his visit, send to tell,
That you are busy, or not very well.
Death is a Doctor, such you will scarce endure,
That kills all; yet not a few does cure.
Will you like Jezabels your faces paint,
And think withal, that Sergeant grim to daunt
With your imperious looks? In vain ye do'^;
He Will not be scared, but tread you under foot.
Thy body to neglect, thou wilt not endure;
And must thy soul be then a sine Cure?
O foolish thoughts, pains, wishes vain, which are
Not to be holy, humble, meek, but fair!
For shame let not such golden seasons pass
Upon your boards, beds, sports, or looking-glass.
Cut off some minutes toward the concern
Of what the world despises sempitern.
Why look you on Religion as a Dame,
That is too homely, bears not a name
Amongst vain Ranters; with severities
Of mortifying zeal does blear her eyes;
Deforms her visage, and forbids all airs
Of merriment to pine her self with cares,
And dreadful thoughts in a tormented life,
That none but fools would choose her for a Wife,
Gallants will scarce afford Civility,
To serve the Custom of a Cap, and knee.
Her noble quality well understood,
Would show her great, and of the Royal blood.
It Is not below best of most Princely house,
To Court her Ladyship, and to espouse.
So excellent is beauty of this Saint,
It cannot be worse injured than by paint.
Her vast estate is not confined by
The bounds too narrow of Geography.
All the Gold, Silver, Pearls, Fruits this Globe bears
To one of many Jewels that she wears,
Bear no compare in value; if not you,
Yet this the wisest Merchants have found true,
The testimony of good Conscience,
That there has been a thorough sight, and sense
Of odious sin, so powerful as to make
The soul, with hatred, sin and self forsake,
And cleave to Christ, resting on him alone,
With constant holy life reflected on
Through Gods great mercy do afford more true,
Lasting, great, cordial joy than that which you
Conceive to be had by the loosing reins
Of Civil temper, to run into strains
Of jollity, screwed up to highest pin
Of madness, that you may not feel your sin:
Yours is but heartless laughter; for your sinning,
Makes a foul, and but convulsive grinning;
Not unlike the Sardinian herb, whereby
Men only seem to laugh; but surely dye.
You say Gods mercy you rely upon:
Is it good hope, or bold presumption?
Speak out your meaning; and be understood:
Will you be wicked, because God is good?
And is it gratitude, so to abuse
The mercy, which you thankfully should use?
To serve the perfect Being with decays,
And him that is always present, with delays?
At distance pleasures of the earth appear
Greater; grow lesser much, as they draw near.
Their promises shifting delays you find,
Why do you not then serve them in their kind?
Say, this were granted, you might on still run
In vanity to your Declining Sun,
And meet with no arrest to stop career
Of mirth, or cause the sadness of a tear.
What will the end be? Will dry bones, dim eyes,
Decrepit acts, be fit for Sacrifice?
Is it meet, Sin, World, Devil have the prime
Of vigor, beauty, action, strength, and time?
And he that for all mind, heart, might does call
Have most deformed, weakest part of all?
Will you present the first fruits unto sin?
Leave the poor share, and gleanings unto him?
And what, I pray, are offers like to get,
When you are old, but a prolonged Not yet?
Although to act your follies, naught can move
With so much pleasure; Will you cease to love
The vanities you cannot act? What force
Must be required to make a full Divorce?
Is it too much, to be at small expense
Of some few minutes cost in reference
To soul-concerns? when frightful death draws near
To do its work Repentance will be dear.
A true Repentance never is too late:
But true Repentance seldom bears that Date.
What person in her wits, if once begun,
Would prosecute the thing must be undone;
Make work for sorrow, run upon the score;
Strive to have less to pay with, owe the more?
Did the oppressor, or the filcher own
Necessity of Restitution
In his Repent^nce, 'twould do more than brand,
To cure him of the felons in his hand.
Real belief would cause you to prevent
What being done, does call you to repent.
When pious women ready are to give
Account of life, then you will begin to live.
Amendment you resolve on, make that good,
And that you are reformed I Will conclude.
What thou do purpose from a sincere heart,
Not what thou will be shows, but what thou art.
Thus to design, will make thee God advance
Above the world in brightest Circumstance,
And do thou thus the world despise, when it
Advantage has, to gain thy Appetite?
If not, to pleasure thou art but in thrall;
For all pretense, thou love not God at all.
Two ways, that come to one, of saying Nay
To the words Now I Will never, or delay.
Suppose thy mind still same to Heavens call,
Not yet will prove the same, as not at all.
To promise then is gross impertinence,
Forsake thy wicked life, or this pretense.
Behold one, that has swagger'd in the world
With riches, honor; great retinue buried
Into a loathsome prison, there to see
His folly past, and present misery;
And view thy destiny. His higher rate
Of living, makes the sadness of his state:
His former plenty makes his want the more:
If not so rich, he had not been so poor.
His titles that gave splendor to his name,
Remembered now, do but augment his shame.
Thy matchless beauty, whileome which espied
Begat the lovers do^age, and thy pride;
(When nothing thou can find consulting glass,
But ruins only of one form that was)
Will render thee far more despised, and be
The aggravation of deformity.
Affected blemishes, and spottings were
The wicked artifice to make thee fair:
Now wrinkled age will glory in her spoil
To rising beauties making thee a foil.
Wisdom has more trust, and esteem when sage:
And Relics too gain credit by their age:
But thou must be con^emned and forlorn;
Deserving subject for the Gallants scorn;
Not able to bear up against disdain;
Or to redress by turning young again.
Shall I black Mantle borrow of the night,
To wrap thy dismal case in? It Is too slight.
Or midnight-sable-robe, although
Without Moon, Stars? 'Twould not be sad enough.
Nothing man's mind affords so black to tell
The blackest darkness of thy state, but Hell.
Thy soul is solitary wilderness,
A fearful shade of saddest wretchedness.
Thy thoughts are Vultures. Conscience with her sting
Torments thee: Sa^yrs dance, as Scriech-Owls sing.
The pleasant fancies, that refresh thy mind,
Are Fairy Devils, each sad thought black Fiend:
Enjoyment (...) of honor, pleasure, pelf,
Cannot (...) from the dread of self.
How will thou bear Gods wra^h? Men paint not fire
So fai^tly as that fierceness of his ire.
To slight that mercy, do not then presume;
Which, if it may not win thee, will consume.
Let trust in mercy this at least impart
Unto thy Conscience, that thou serious art.
The Satyrist condemns thy vain (I will
To morrow) that will be to morrow still.
To morrow which thou beggedst yesterday,
Is lost, yet without blushing thou can say
To morrow yet: but were it lent, thou would pray
To have the leisure of another day.
As hastening hinder-wheel, does seem in Coach
To promise it will make more near approach
Unto the former; when rolled over and over,
Yet keeps same distance that it did before:
So thou, although thou talkest of to morrow,
That gained, would be at no less need to borrow
A further day: purpose and to amend,
Would keep an equal distance to
The End.

