Good Advice TO ALL THE FREEHOLDERS AND Corporations of ENGLAND, CONCERNING
THE Choice of their REPRESENTATIVES, To Serve in the Ensuing PARLIAMENT.
SINCE it has pleased Almighty God in his All-wise Providence to make this our
present King the Glorious Instrument of delivering this Nation from Popery and
Arbitrary Power; and since His Majesty has been pleased by his Gracious
Proclamation to declare, That for diverse Important and Weighty Considerations,
by and with the Advice of his Privy Council, he hath-Dissolved the present
Parliament; and yet that his Good Subjects may perceive the Confidence He has
in their good Affections, and how desirous He is to meet his People, and have
their Advice in Parliament; He has thereby made known to his said Subjects,
that he has given Directions to the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal, for
the Issuing out of Writs in due Form of Law for the Calling of New Parliament,
to begin and be holden on the 20th. day of March next: It will highly concern
us all, as to our present Interest, and therein the future happiness of our
Posterity, to act at this time with all the Wisdom, Courage, and Integrity we
can.

Our Work is Great very Great, before us; Our Care and Prudence therefore
should be proportionable: We ought by no means to trifle in such an Important
Affair as this. If we miscarry now, it will be our own Fault, and we shall have
none to blame but our Selves.

The King has given us an Opportunity now to show our Selves his Friends, by
choosing such Men as will be Friends to Him, and the true Interest of our
Country; He has put it into our Own hands to make our Selves as happy as we
can wish to be, if we will but be wise in the Choice of our Representatives,
and take care to send up such Members to serve in this Parliament as we can
assure our Selves are,

1st. Good English Men.

2d. Well-affected to the present Government.

3d. And of Ability and Courage faithfully to discharge that Great Trust which
is to be reposed in them.

I shall not trouble you with things of a nice Consideration, but such as are
easy and obvious to every Man's notice; my design is Brevity, but yet I will
not be obscure.

Consider what a powerful Influence a Parliament has upon the Settlement or
Ruin of the Nation, and that both in our Religious, and in our Civilconcerns.

Consider how that in all Ages there have been Ill Men; and you have very good
Reason to be sure that We are not without them now, who being conscious to
themselves of the Ill things they have formely done, will endeavor by all the
Ways and Artifices they can, to thrust themselves into the House, thereby, if
possible, to cover themselves from the Public Justice, which the Nation
requires, and which is One proper Business and Duty of the Parliament to
inflict upon them, Prince of Oringe's Declaratior.
for all their open Violations of Law, and for their Plots and Conspiracies
against the Protestant Religion, and the Lives and Liberties, the Honors and
Estures of the Subject.

I do not speak this out of a Rancorous or Revengeful Spirit, for my Nature is
not so inclined; and, I thank God likewise, that I have received better
Principles from my Education; but (as Every Man is concerned, Every man may be
allowed to speak his own Judgment, and to differ from whom he pleases, provided
he do it with Modesty and due Respect;) I speak it by way of Caution, to
prevent Any of those from becoming now our Lawmakers, who have been so
notoriously known in the Two last Reigns for Law-breakers; I would not by any
means (if I could help it) have Legicides to be turned into Legislators.

But that I may more immediately apply my self to the present Undertaking, give
me leave, (with all imaginable Deference to better Judgments,) to present You
with my Opinion of what sort of Men You ought to choose for your
Representatives, Prince's Declarat.
if you design in earnest to promote the Peace, Honor and Safety of the
Nation, so that there may be no more danger of the Nation's falling at any time
hereafter under Arbitrary Government.

If a considerable Person in our Church could think fit to bestow the following
Compliment upon the late Unfortunate and Abdicated King, I hope I may be
permitted to bestow it with more truth on our present Sovereign, who has
showed himself so Brave and so Great in delivering an Ungrateful Nation, that
the Character he has thereby acquired in the World, will perpetuate his Memory
to all Generations.

Now we live (says he) under the Government of a King, who discovers a Great
and Princely Mind in all his Actions, Dr. Sterling. Sermon. before H. of Commons.
29. May 85. p. 28.
and this secures us of as much happiness as we can expect under any
Government. But it is not merely the wise Conduct of a Prince, but the
Governable Temper of Subjects too, which is necessary to make a Nation Happy:
No Government, neither of God nor Men, can make those happy who will not be
governed.

But let such consider, and duly reflect upon the Powerful Argument St. Paul
urges to persuade us to Subjection and Obedience, viz. Romans 13. There is no
Power but of God: The Powers that be, are Ordained of God. And certainly, says
the same Person in another Treatise, he is no Christian who disputes Obedience
to the Divine Ordinance and Constitution.

Again, 11 Hen. 7. c. 1.
let such consider, that in Hen. 7. time all Subjects were bound by Act of
Parliament to yield to the King for the time being, Faithful Service. and true
Allegiance against every Power and Might reared against him; and that through
the whole Body of the Act that King is called, The Sovereign Lord of the Land,
their Sovereign Lord; and that this Statute has continued unrepealed about 200
years, and has been so long approved by the whole nation and judged well
consistent with the Duty of Allegiance owing to their Lawful Sovereign for the
time being; and therefore I hope we shall all gladly submit to the Rule of His
Scepter, who has appeared as the Champion of Almighty God for the Rescue of
these Kingdoms from the Deplorable Condition to which the Affairs both of
Church and State were reduced, and who has met with such a successful
Providence therein, and is now in the quiet and peaceable possession of the
Throne.

Let such, lastly, consider with themselves the danger of their Obstinacy and
Refractoriness in disowning the Lawfulness of this present Government, or the
Rightful Title of their Sacred Majesty's, (I hope this will concern but a few)
but let them consider, that such a denying of the King de facto's Title to the
Crown, and saying that such a one was not Rightful King, with Motives, Rusn
worth's Collection.
though not impliedly of Action against it, has been adjudged Treason; Ay, and
a compassing of the King's Death too; and how it was so, we find declared in
the Reasons of the Judgment, that such words were spoken with an intent to
withdraw the Affections of the People from the King, and to excite them against
him, that in the end they might rise up against him in mortem and Destructionem
of the King. Several Cases hereof might be produced to show that in all of
them, the Treason was for words only, words by private persons, and in a more
private manner, but once spoken, and no more: But I forbear: I would rather
heal, than exasperate.

Only this Note I would leave to the Consideration of such as have thought it
unlawful to take the New Oaths; that through the whole Series of our Kings it
has often happened, that Ground sufficient has been given to question the
Right of their Succession; and in the Cases of Edward the 2d, and Richard the
2d, the lawfuiness of their Deposition; and yet no scruple ever was made of
taking an Oath of Allegiance to the King, who had possession of the Government:
Nor do I remember, that ever the Bishop of Carlisle refused the Oath of
Allegiance.

But I come now to tell you who I think are the Men that would be fit for you
to fix your thoughts upon for Members to serve you in this approaching
Parliament, and whom you may have very great Reason to reject; and therefore I
desire you seriously to weigh these following Particulars:

1. If you have any regard to God's Providence in giving you so great and
miraculous Deliverance, when (as a late Author has truly observed) you saw your
selves upon the brink of Ruin, your Rights and Liberties Invaded, Last Y ars
Transactions Vindicated, page 3.
your Religion within an Ace of being overturned, your Laws and Constitution
renversed, the whole Scheme of your Ancient Government unhinged, and to
complete your Misery, you saw ne probable way of Escape; I say, if you have any
regard to this stupendous mercy of Divine Providence, take especial care that
you choose such as you know have full Zeal and Affection for him, who under God
has been the Glorious Instrument of your Deliverance; such, who will to the
utmost of their Abilities be ready to express their Gratitude to his Majesty
for so Great and Generous an Vdertaking, which was no less necessary for the
Support of the Protestant Interest in Europe, than for the recovering and
maintaining the Civil Rights and Liberties of these Nations, Lords and Commons
Address to the King. 5. Mar. 89.
so notoriously invaded and undermined; and who will unanimously declare, that
they will stand by and assist their Majesty's with their Lives and Fortunes in
supporting their Alliances abroad, and in defense of the Protestant Religion,
and Laws of the Kingdom.

Such as there will bring their own Recommendations with them; they will come
full fraught with Affections for the Public Good, and will not carry on a
Separate Interest between the King and People, for they know that the Good of
One is the Good of Both; so that the King will think Himself safe in their
Councils, they will be highly honored in his Considence in them; and nothing
can lay so sure a Foundation of a Good Agreement between the King and his
People in Parliament, Kings Answer to the Address.
as such a MUTUAL TRUST.

The Constitution of this Kingdom is the most happy that Humane Prudence can
invent; the Ancient Government is as Temperate as the Climate we live in;
therefore from the sense of the Miserable Desolations which have of late been
made upon almost every thing we accounted dear and valuable to us, we have all
the Motives, and are under all the Obligations that can be, to secure now and
advance the Interest of this most Excellent Constitution.

And who can you think more capable of procuring this Happiness to the Nation,
than such who have a just and due sense of this Wonderful Deliverance, and a
becoming Zeal and Affection for the only Person under Heaven that could, and
has, through the Divine Benignity, wrought this Salvation for us?

He came by his Power to defend Us from our Enemies, and by his Justice to give
Us the Full Enjoyment of our Lates and Liberties, (...) The (...) k^^^'s
Speech, 12. (...) 1689.
and (which is the Inestimable Blessing of all) by his continual care to
maintain the Protestant Religion to us.

These will come with Hearts full charged with Gratitude to him; with sixed
Resolutions to give Him all the Assistances his necessary Engagements may
require; and with Consciences faithful to the Interests of those Counties,
Cities and Boroughs for which they serve; and strict in the due performance of
all their Obligations.

Thus will there be a Blessed harmony between the Head and the Members: These
will with great Wisdom consult how to restore that Happiness which you have
been so long deprived of; and we are assured that the King will concur in every
thing that may procure the Peace and Happiness of the Nation, which so free and
lawful a Parliament shall determine. Prince's Declaration.


Hereby you will be put into so good a Settlement, as will mightily conduce to
the Disappointment of our Enemies both abroad and at home. But if any of you
should be prevailed with upon any pretense whatsoever, to make choice of other
persons, you must not think it strange, if it should be looked upon as a
manifest Testimony of your Disaffection to their present Majesty's.

2dly, That you may the more expect the Blessing of God to attend your Choice,
see that you pitch upon Men of Religious Principles, I mean of the Church of
England as by Law Established; You need not doubt but those will act well for
your Interest, that have the true fear of God and a due sense of Religion in
their Minds; They are the Men that dare not be Distoyal, (as the word truly
signifies) to the King, nor the Government. These are they that will show most
Zeal to maintain the pure Religion of the Church of England. The Montrchy and
the Church will be secure in them. These having a true sense of the Goodness of
Almighty God to themselves in settling such a happy Constitution here, as is mot
agreeable to their own Consciences, will not be without a due sense of the
Right of all Mankind to the Liberty of their Consciences, and therefore will
allow other Men the same freedom, whose Principles are not destructive to the
Peace of the Government.

Says a Great and Reverend Prelate that now is. some nine years since, in a
Sermon he Preached before the Aldermen of London, Some have thought they could
not be esteemed Loyal, if they appeared Devout; Dr. Burne's 30. Jan. 81. page 10
and therefore to purchase the one Character, were willing not only to throw
off, but openly to reproach the other all they could. What ill effects this
has had, how the Nation has been much corrupted by these Maxims, and God
highly offended, is so obvious to every Man's Observation, that I need dwell no
longer on it.

Set not therefore your Choice on any that are Dissolute and Profane; you can
have no solid ground, to believe that such are like to do you good, let their
loud pretenses be what they will of being True to the King and the Church, and
let them damn as they please all others that are not as Irreligious and
Profligate as themselves, for Rogues and Rascals of Commonwealth Principles;
it is no matter what they bawl, I Am sure they are not to be trusted in this
Government.

Dr. F^m^e^'^ Sermon. before the Judges at Gl^uc. Assize 7 Aug. 1681. 1.29, Ibid.
There have been, God knows, (says a very Eminent Divine of our Church) too too
many Debauchees in the Nation, who would be thought Great Champions for the
King and the Church that have done infinite prejudice to both by the mad and
Frantic Expressions of their Zeal; who have done mighty Honor to Fanaticism,
by charging all with it that have not run with them to the same Excess of Riot.

One would think that these, whatsover they pretended, did really design
nothing more than to make both the King and the Church as Friendless as they
were able. Ibid.


I wonder in my heart (says he) what should make any debauched person pretend
the least Zeal for the Church of England, that heretofore would never allow
themselves (they were such hot-spurs) the leisure to think a wise, or sedate
thought.

But a deep sense of true Religion sixeth men to certain Principles, which any
Government or People may safely rely on The Thrones of Princes are established
by Righteousness, and the People will think themselves as happy in a cheerful
Submission to their Government, as they are in its Fundamental Constitution and
laws.

3ly. In the next place it is my Opinion, that you should fix your Eyes upon
such men as you verily believe will labor most to unite the Affections of the
People, for herein does the strength of the Government consist, together with
Religion, and a well-directed Conscience.

A Mutual Trust and Confidence is a great strength in time of Common danger.
When we are distracted in Affections, we shall be distracted in Reason and
Council, and when we are so, then is the time for our Enemies to Letter to a
Bishop, (...) 15.
have their ends of us.

Pick out therefore such Persons to be your Representatives, that are of Large
and Catholic Principles; that will be kind to all Men, pitiful and courteous,
and that will love their Neighbors as Themselves. Dr. Ti^^^^^^'s Sermon. (...)
15.
This is that which is the most real and substantial, the most large and
expensive, the most useful and beneficial, the most humane, and the most divine
Quality of which we are capable, as a very Learned and Reverend Divine has
admirably observed.

Such will tolerate the Tolerable, bear with the Weak, encourage the
Conscientious and restrain none but those who will do whatsoever they can to
restrain all besides themselves.

This would be a Door opened for all Protestants to enter into a mutual good
understanding one with another, and to concur together in the preserving of
their Religion, so that it would not be possible for the Papists hereafter to
compass any of their wicked Ends against them.

4thly. Next to these, let me advise you to make choice of such as be Men of
Temper and Moderation. We are all sure, that the Enemies of Moderation have
been the Enemies of our Government and Peace, which is built upon it, and kept
together by it.

A Moderation of Elements and Humors makes the best Constitution of B^dies;
Moderation of Passions gives the best Temper of Soul, keeping the Midst between
Excess and Defect.

Consider, The Moderate Man stands in no Man's way that climbs for Preferment,
envies no Man in it, justles no Man out of it; he modestly refuses what others
ambitiously seek, and soberly uses what others abuse: Ambition makes him
neither Head of a Faction, nor Emulation to follow a Party.

Bestow your Votes on such as I now persuade you to; for they are the most
likely to remove all the Unhappy Causes of Discord and Division from among us,
and are the fittest Men in the World to set things right that are amiss, and to
keep things right that are so; and by their calm and sober Councils to settle
these Kingdoms upon the sure and lasting Foundations of Peace and Happiness to
this and future Generations.

5thly, Choose Men of Plentiful Substance and Estate; the greater Stake they
have in the Hedge of their own, the more careful they will be to preserve
yours: Whereas Indigent Persons, that possibly may be recommended to you by
those who are your Secret Enemies, will lie under a Powerful Temptation of
Sacrificing You and the Nation, to gain their own private Ends upon both.

But when, I say, you ought to choose the Rich and the Wealthy, my meaning is
not, that any one who is so, is a proper Object of your Choice; but, where you
can, that you should fix upon Persons of Credit and Reputation in the places of
their Birth, or long Habitation, and where their Fortunes lie: For you must
needs think that These whom you know, (where they are to be found) will be more
tender of the Common good and welfare of their Friends, Relations and
Neighbors, than Strangers creeping in at the back Doors of vast Expense and
Purchase to gratify their own Ambition.

Those that show themselves so profusely liberal in treating your Corporations,
you have great reason to suspect of having some sinister Ends and Designs upon
you. For is it likely that They who buy your Votes so dearly, will not
endeavor to sell your Liberties with interest to themselves?

Such sort of Ambitus, by the Calpurnian Law among the Romans was punished by
heavy Fine on the Canvasser; besides that, he was afterward rendered incapable
of being Elected into a Senator's place. And the same Law was also after that
ratified by the Senate in the Consulship of Tullius and Antonius. And by the
Tullian Law the Commonaly themselves offending in that point, were also most
severely punished, beside that, the Canvassers were to suffer Ten years
Exilement.

But if Needy Corporations will sell their Rights, and surrender the Fortress
of wholesome Liberties to Philip of Macedon's laden Mules, they must, as Esau
did, then blame their own Hunger, after the amiable Pottage.

6ly. Choose Men of competent year, these will not easily be imposed upon to
hurt you; they will consider all Circumstances, and weigh every thing
impartially, and will thoroughly understand the project of Bills, before they
consent to have them Laws, and will not be over-forward to give up that
Property and Liberty, which your Ancestors have so strongly secured to you by
wise and provident Laws, and purchased with so much Blood and Treasure. But if
you should choose Raw Saplings, green Heads, Unexperienced Children, the World
will judge of you as they once did of the Grecians, that you your selves were
either always Children, or are now become so. Will you entrust those with your
Lives, Liberties, Estates and Religion, whom the Law will not trust to dispose
of any thing they have of their own? Will you enable such to give away all the
Securities you enjoy as Englishmen, whose Bond in the account of the Law will
not be taken for Forty shillings? It is in it self an unbecoming thing, that
they should have any power of laying Taxes upon other Men, who cannot lay
themselves under any Obligations to their Creditors, by reason of their
Minority.

In Q. Eliz. time (as Sir Rob. Naunton, Master of the Court of Wards, Sir
Robert Naunton's Fragments Regalia, page 13.
observes in his Account of her Times and Favorites,) says he, I do not find
that the House was at any time weakened and pestered with the Admission of too
many Young Heads, as it has been of later times, which remembers me of
Recorder Martin's Speech about the Tenth of our late Sovereign Lord King James.
(viz. 1st.) when there were Accounts taken of 40. Gentlemen, not above 20. and
some not exceeding 16; which moved him to say, that it was the ancient Custom
for Old Men to make Laws for Young ones, but that he saw the Case altered, Vid.
Mr. Prynn's Minor, no Senator.
and that there were Children Elected unto the Great Council of the Kingdom,
which came to invade and invert Nature, and to Enact Laws to govern their
Fathers.

7thly, Choose such as you are sure will steadfastly adhere to the Ancient and
most Excellent Constitution of this Kingdom, who will neither be for turning
the Government into a Commonwealth, nor for advancing the Monarchy (as of
late) into a French Tyranny: By the One we shall have nothing but Faction and
Sedition, Tumults, Licentiousness, and all Confusion; and by the other nothing
but Force, a Violation of all Laws, Dragoons and Standing mercenary Armies, and
every thing else carried on by Absolute, Despotical, Unbounded Will and
Pleasure. But we have sufficiently found already the mischievous effects of
both these extremes, so as I hope we shall never run into the like again; since
that would be a Total Subversion of the Fundamental Laws and Laudable
Establishments of this Kingdom, which has made this Nation so many Years both
Famous and Happy, to a great degree of Envy.

8thly, Make it your great Care to Elect such as you know will do all that lies
in their power to redress your Grievances, and to assert and maintain your
undoubted Rights; and call to Account those, Kings Speech 1908. 89.
who (as the King has most admirably expressed it) have so visibly discovered
their Designs of destroying your Religion and Liberties.

That these have been manifestly invaded, you all will readily own; that a High
Commission Ecclesiastical has been set up contrary to most express Laws; that
a Power of Dispensing and Suspending of Laws, without Consent of Parliament,
has been openly declared in Westminster Hall, as a Right belonging to the
Crown; that Seven Reverend Bishops were committed and prosecuted as heinous
Criminals, only for offering to the late King an Humble Petition, in terms full
of Dutiful Respect, and not exceeding the Number limited by Law; Prince's
Declatat.
that the Charters of most of those Towns that have a Right to be Represented
by their Burgesses in Parliament have been either unwarily surrendered, or
seized on; and (to omit several other things) that undue Return of Juries have
been made by illegal Sheriffs, and a great deal of Blood has been shed in many
places of the Kingdom by Judges governed by the Direction from Above, and not
by their own Consdiences, against all the Rules and Forms of Law, you cannot
for shame deny, since the Redemption of You from these intolerable Grievances
was the Cause of His present Majesty's Espousing your Interest, as he was
earnestly solicited by a great many Lords, Prince of O. Declaration.
both Spiritual and Temporal, and by many Gentlemen and Subjects of all Ranks:
therefore is it not your Interest to choose now such Men to represent you in
Parliament, as will with a true, brave, and noble English Resolution endeavor
to prevent such great and insufferable Oppressions for the future, Establish
your just and ancient Rights, so as none may dare to invade them hereafter, and
bring to public Justice some of the greatest, longest, and most Notorious
Offenders?

I am not for promoting you to glut your Revenge upon all those Bold Contemners
of our Law; but certainly to make a few Victims for the Atonement of so much (I
had like to have said) irreparable Mischief as was committed, and so much
Innocent Blood as was poured out in the two last Reigns, would be for the
Honor of an English Parliament, and a great Justification both of the King and
Kingdom.

I have but one word more to leave with you, and that is concerning your
Elections, 2. Instit. 169. 4. Instit. 10.
where I pray you to remember, that it is an Ancient Law and Liberty of
England, that Elections should be freely and indifferently made,
notwithstanding any Prayer or Commandment to the contrary. 1. Sine prece,
without any Prayer or Gift; and sine praecepto, without Commandment of the King
by Writ, or otherwise, or of any other. You are Freemen, act not as though you
were bound: Let neither Force, nor Menaces, nor Malice frame you to make
Election of Men unworthy, or not Eligible.

Take this Conclusion with you which His Highness the Prince of Orange, our now
present Sovereign, (whom God Almighty long preserve amongst us) delivered in
his Declaration, That according to the Constitution of the English Government,
and Immemorial Custom, all Elections of Parliament Men ought to be made with an
Entire Liberty, without any sort of Force, or the requiring the Electors to
choose such Persons as shall be named, to them; and the Persons thus freely
Elected, ought to give their Opinions freely upon all Matters that are brought
before them, having the Good of the Nation ever before their Eyes, and
following in all things the Dictates of their Conscience.

And thus I wish you happy Success in your Elections, and a Blessed Issue upon
the Unanimous Councils of your REPRESENTATIVES.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the Old Bailey,
1690.


