To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of the Cit^^ of London, the Right
worshipful the Aldermen his brethren, and the Commons in Common Council
Assembled.
The humble Petition of many thousand well affected inhabita^^^ in and about
the said City.
Showing,
THat your Petitioners understanding that diverse worthy peacable and fa^^^full
Christians in our Israel endeavoring to prepare for Christ a godly, lea(...)
and numerous Ministry; now in our great need have chosen certain faithful ^
which they call their Trustees for the propagation of the Gospel, especially
(...) the sending to and maintaining at the Universities hopeful poor
Scholars, (...) have promised under their hands unto the said Trustees, diverse
considerable (...) of money to be paid upon demand, or by forbearing one meals
meat in a week, and giving to them the value thereof, or both, to be employed
as aforesaid, without any intent to reckon with them, because they judged that
their said Trustees like those mentioned, 2 Kings 12.15. would deal
faithfully, yet their said Trustees of their one accord, have requested one
Common Council man in every Ward of London, to come as often as they can, and
to sit with them, and to be eye and ear witnesses of their actions, and once
in a year out of the said Trustees own books to audit their accounts, and to
declare in Common Council, how they shall find the same.

And also that the said Trustees, in like manner have resolved to pass the
said poor Scholars, through a probationary College here in London.

And have requested one Minister in every Presbytery, or Classis of the
province of London, to examine the said poor Scholars maturity or ripnesse,
before they go to the Universities, and to provide them good Tutors there.

And your petitioners having perused too little books, the one entitled,
Motives, to persuade people to abstain from one meals meat in a week etc.
The other Motives grounded upon the Word of God, etc. As also a Paper
entitled. A good Motion, all which are hereunto annexed.

And your Peritioners being convinced by the said Motives, or by their own
reasons, that it is their Duties to encourage the said Trustees, and to assist
them in the excellent works mentioned in the said books, namely the
replenishing of Cambridge and Oxford with Scholars, as full as they can hold,
yea and laying the foundation of another University here in London, (if it may
be also) because they perceive their is not sufficient College room in both
our Universities to hold Scholars enough to furnish all our occasions.

Your Petitioners humbly pray your speedy and serious perusal of the said
books, and paper, and if you shall also approve both the said works persuaded
unto in the same, your encouraging likewise of the said Trustees, and
furthering of their endeavors herein, as shall seem best unto your wisdoms.

And your petitioners shall daily pray etc.
A good Motion.
IF the rich will deal their Bread to the Hungry, as Isaiah 58.7. by
forbearing one Meals Meat in a week, and giving the value of it but for one
year to maintain the Children of the poor: and the poor do the like to
maintain their own Children; the rich may be re-imbursed in one year
(without any doubt of Sacrilege) the four hundred thousand pounds lent upon
the assurance of the Bishops Temporalities (which will be six years sooner
then all the rich are likely by a doubted course to get in their Moneys) the
Children of the poor may have the whole revenue of the Bishops Temporalities
to breed them up in Learning. A glorious University may be founded in London,
every Bishops House in the Countries be employed as Eaton College, Victuals
become cheaper, spiritual and corporal Famine be avoided: And all these (in
reason) be certainly effected without expense of one half penny.

For if the value of one Meal in a week in each Parish (one with another)
amounts but to twenty shillings) there being almost ten thousand Parishes in
England) and ten thousand pound weekly amounts to five hundred thousand
pounds in one year; then in one year the four hundred thousand pounds will
be re-imbursed with an overplus. And God, the Rich, the Poor (yea all) be well
pleased.


