The CHRISTIAN SODALITY, OR Catholic Hive of Bees Sucking The Honey of the
CHURCHES Prayers from the Blossoms of the Word of God, blown out of the
Epistles and Gospels of the Divine Service throughout the year.

Collected by the Puny Be of all the Hive, not worthy to be named otherwise
than by these Elements of his Name, F. P.

Divided into three Tomes, whereof this the first Tome only upon the Sundays.
And that subdivided into three Parts.

The First From Advent to Lent, The Second From Lent to Whitsontide, The Third
From Whitsontide to Advent.
That of one mind, with one mouth, you may glorify God, and the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 15. Verse. 6. Printed in the year of our Lord MDCLII.

To the Honorable Walter Mountague Esquire all health and happiness.
SIR,
IT might argue I did acquiesce too much to flesh and blood, should I dedicate
this book to any of my Kindred: and least it seem presumption in me to
consecrate it unto you; I must beseech you to believe it is none of mine: You
know I have a gallant Master for this self-denial, who said, His Doctrine was
not His: which yet none could lay claim unto besides his sacred self. How
justly then may I profess this book is not mine own? being all of it (upon the
matter) either Holy Churches Prayers, or Holy Text, or Holy Fathers Expositions
on the same? And (as such) it is rather your Defense, than any ways in need of
your Protection: Now least you should reply, I give it then unjustly as mine
own to you, and more unjustly beg your Patronage thereof, as of a stolen
Treasure; I must confess it is indeed a pious theft, but such an one, as the
thief may take at noone day from the Coffers of the Church without a
Sacrifice, without a blush, though all the world were lookers on; and such, as
you may safely both receive, and Patronize, with as small remorse, as men do
Honey brought unto the Hives, which openly the Bees have stolen from the
mellifluous flowers of other men's Gardens, as I have done the sweet Connection
that I found between the Churches Prayers, and Text of Holy Writ; when I assay
to show the self-same Spirit annimates them all, and makes them speak one sense
in diverse Languages or Dialects.

And this sympathy between the parts of Holy Churches service is what I here
present to you, as my observation, rather than my work, for had it not been
there before, I could not now have found it out, if yet I may not rather fear
I loose it, when I look to find it, by making it appear less than it is, for
want of being able to show it to the full. But I will not tell you by how many
titles I entitle this to you, least I force the Lillyes of your modesty, to
change complexion with the Roses of your other Virtues, or least I seem to
flatter you, who are not to be flattered: and therefore I shall rather silence
my obligations to you, than betray the secrets of your bounties, which your
left cannot accuse your right hand of, although they both are stealing merit,
whilst they give their Alms in ample manner, unknown to one another, as he
well advised, who knew the best way how to make benevolences meritorious; nor
shall I boast your more than ordinary favors showred upon me other ways, as
ties to make me give you these my labors: abstracting therefore from all
self-relation, and looking only on the nature of this book, I find not any
man more fit to Patronize it, than your self, because as it associates all the
CHRISTIANS of the universe into one SODALITIE, so you, that are Eminent in
making every man your own, will be the greatest help to this Association,
which I have founded on the Word of God, and Prayers of Holy Church; two
subjects that I know not any one more versed in than you, witness the
excellent store of both, which your Missive and your Misscelania do afford;
wherein you show your self not only to have the Scripture lodged within your
heart, but even the genuine sense thereof ingrafted in your understanding, as
appears by your admirable Explications of the Texts, and Applications of them
to the purpose that you cite them for, which as it was a motive for me to
imitate you in, so in justice it obliges me to consecrate this book to you,
whose whole design is either Notion, or the use of the Holy Text.

Again, Sir, I look upon you as a man designed to some thing more than yet
the World is privy to, for your Pauline Conversion, makes me think you are the
Vessel of Election which our Nation may one day hope to see, as overflowing as
I know you are now full of Eminent Perfections, this I profess I do not mind
you of, to puff you up with self-conceit, (for of your self it is with you as
with the rest of men, made up of nothing but corruption and infirmity) but to
humble you rather, to see how much of Grace does shine upon the dunghill of
Humane Nature, while your Conversion from infidelity works in you an aversion
from all singularity, and renders you a man partial to none, beneficial to
all that know you, even unto those that are above you to, who fare the better
for your virtues, while their Temporalls are raised from the spiritual
foundations you have laid. Thus from the Court unto the Cart, from the Prince
unto, the Beggar God has adapted you to all his Holy Ends; and therefore I
that aim at Unanimity in this Sodality, at Unity in our Community, (let me
attest for this the Motto of my Book Saint Paul's words to the Romans, CHAP.
15. Verse. 6.) have made a right address; when I petition you to Patronize my
Labors in aggregating this SODALITIE, who are one man most acceptable to all
for your Equality, or rather Equanimity to every one; as if you were Omnibus
omnia factus. And seriously, Sir, I do honor you most for the impartiality of
your affections, for that you are not biassed so as to run one way, but can
(and do) plie unto the mark of loving all in him, whom all must love, which
way soever you are thrown, upon request of this or that body, Rich or Poor,
Clarke or Layman, Secular or Regular Priest; so much, that I believe, if I had
failed of this my duty in choosing you for Patron of my Book, I had been
chidden for mistaking in my choice of him, whom all men would have voted for,
as well as I, the design of this SODALITY, and your simpathie to that design
considered. Please therefore I beseech you, Sir, to Patronize these labors of
your humble Servant, who am all your own; and who beg your Patronage of this
first Tome for one reason more than I have here expressed, or then is known, as
yet, to any but my self, which you will well approve of, when you see to whom
the next Tome shall be consecrated, as this is now to you by him that rests,

Honorable Sir, Your hugely devoted, thrice humble, and most commanded
servant. F. P.

APPROBATIO
IN sign hoc opus, cui Titulus (Sodalitas Christiana, etc.) Tribus partibus
comprehensum diligenter perlegi, in quo nihil Fidei, aut Pietati Catholicae
adversum invenio, quinimo est opus doctissimum, and Authore dignum, necnon
varia Eruditione adeo refertum ut Verbi Dei Praecones, Auditores and Factores,
facile addiscent unde dies praesertim Dominicos cum Christiana devotione
impendant: Et ex foelici etiam Sacrorum Textuum, and precum Leiturgicarum mutua
adaptatione harmoniam ad Coelestia allicientem, abunde experientur. Dignissimum
proinde judico ut in publicum prodeat.

Dabam in Collegio nostro Sancto Bonaventurae Sacro, Duaci hoc 16 die Decembris
milessimo sexcentissimo quinquagessimo primo. Fr. Fran. a S. Clara. S. Th.
Professor Emeritus, ac Provinciae Minister.

The Approbation.
HAving diligently read and considered all the three Parts of this First Tome
of the Christian Sodality, Composed by F. P. And finding it not only to have
nothing in it dissonant to Faith or Christian Piety, but on the contrary, all
things so apposite for the increasing of each, as speaks the Author a great
Master of both, I cannot but judge it worthy to see the public light, whereby
many may be both enlightened and inflamed to know and acknowledge the Head of
this Sodality, and so be incorporated: which is (as I suppose) the Authors
ambition.

Given the 5th. of January 1652. by Henry Metham Ancient Bachelour and
Professor of Divinity.

The Approbation.
I Have diligently perused and read over all the Three Parts of the Christian
Sodality composed by F. P. wherein I find nothing contrary to Faith or Piety,
but all things speaking the Author learned and elegant. The Method and Design
of the whole Work, is excellent, the Illustrations all (though new and beaten
out by the Authors meditations) yet most accute and happy; The Explications all
most grave, and solid; The Applications all most Pious and Patheticall. The
Prayers for each respective Sunday, all most propper and apposite. Be it
therefore Printed, as exceeding profitable both to Priest and People.

Given at Paris this first of Januaary, 1652. old style John Lancaster
Professor of Divinity. Theolegall of England. And Censurer of Books.

The first Part Of the FIRST TOME.

Errata.
In the Epistle Dedicatorie.
PAge. 3. line, 1. For Sacrifice, read Sacrilege.

In the Preface.
Pa: 4. l. ult. add, so, (...) here imports a contraposition without an
opposition. p. 6. l. 14. for we r. me. ibid. l. 24. for we r. me. p. 25. l. 5.
for ought we, r. we ought. p. 28. l. 24. for adopt, r. adapt.

In the Book.
Numb. 19. l. 18. r. gave it to the Jews. n. 21. l. 9. r. he makes us. n. 45.
l. 28. r. is in. n. 43. l. 16. r. personality. n. 47. l. 18. r. respect. n. 50.
l. 9. r. premizing. n. ib. l. 24. r. those. n. 51. l. 4. r. Tetrarch. n. 72. l.
35. r. appearing. n. 86. l. 1. r modestly. n. 105. l. 16. r. act. n. 109. l. 4.
r. our. n. 112. l. 5. r. apostolate. n. 114. l. 7. r. recalling. ib. l. 16. r.
infirmity. n. 122. l. 24. r. least one. n. 124. l. 8. r. pashing. n. 142. l. 1.
r. no obligation. n. 145. l. 15. r. love is. n. 153. l. 7. r. one another. n.
161. l. 27. r. faylings are. n. ib. l. 28. r. as such. n. 162. l. 1. r.
explication. n. 170. l. 6. r. as if. n. 174. l. 28. r. that is to say. n. 176.
l. 31. r. that to glory. n. 189. l. 5. r. of the rock n. 192. l. 23. r. that
dilate. n. 194. l. 11. r. ought. n. 199. l. 26. for of our r. our. n. 201. l 2
r. others. n. 225. l. 16. add, To tempt Job in another kind for another end. n.
226. l. 30. r. administer. n. 235. l. 30. r. the Text. n. 245. l. 9. r. Arcana.
n. 248. l. 2. r. but. n. 250. l. 9. r. when. n. 253. l. 29. r. creatures. n.
256. l. 10. r. not the so much. n. 262. l. 20. for an r. a. n. 266. l. 18. r. O
that we. n. 269. for Tome r. Part.

In the Prayers.
On second Sund. after Advent r. raise. on third Sund. af. Adv. r. grace of
thy. on forth Sund. af. Epiph. r. grant.

In Post Communions.
In the third Sunday after Epiphany, for adopt, r. adapt.

THE Key of the work, BY WAY OF PREFACE. TO ALL CHRISTIAN READERS.
WHen I first thought of writing for the Press, I was over-prest with a
multitude of difficulties, as well about the Subject, as about the Method; and
I could never be persuaded to set Pen to Paper, before I had armed my self
against the common obstacle in all Writers ways, That Books have their Fates
from the Capacities of their Readers. For I concluded 'twas a labor lost to
Write, and to be laid aside, as either not understood, or not pleasing to the
Reader. So I resolved either to Write what might call the Reader aside, to make
him understand himself, as well as me, or else to spare my own labor of
writing. And because I knew no Subject had power enough to command the Reader,
but that which was of Divine Authority, therefore I made choice of Holy Writ,
and of the Churches Prayers to write upon: And finding nothing so common over
all the world, as a little Book, consisting of these two subjects, called the
Primmer, as being the Prime, the first, or Principle office of a Lay-Christian:
whereby he makes a demonstration of his daily bounden duty toward Almighty
God, in that little abstract of the Breviary, which is the Priest his larger
Office: I conceived nothing so worthy of my pains, as to render that little
Book intelligible, sweet, and easy to the People, which I perceived was rather
said by rote, than understood: Not that I believe this Primmer was published at
first by holy Churches Order, without a better Gloss than I can hope to make
upon it now, but that I conceive devouring time has eaten out a world of Pious
Works, that were in being in the Primitive Church, and amongst the rest, some
exposition of the Primmer made, or by word of mouth from the Preachers in their
Sermons, or in their private exhortations by way of Catechism, or else
expounded in some book on purpose, written to that end, as I write this. For I
cannot think our Pious, and our Prudent Mother, holy Church, would issue out a
book of daily Duty, as far above the peoples reach, as Heaven is from Earth,
unless the Antiphons, Versicles, Responsories, Prayers, Hymns, Lessons, and
Psalms thereof, were made some way or other intelligible to the common world
thus bid to pray.

Since therefore now I found no exposition of the Primmer extant, and yet
encountered with the Book in every bodies Pocket, in many men's Hands, in most
men's Mouths, that understood not what they said, in saying it, and thence grew
bold to undervalue it, to call it dry and barren Prayer, in respect of other
Books, (especially the Manuell) consisting indeed of many Prayers derived from
the Primmer, but more abounding with a greater number made by private persons,
Pious enough, no doubt, yet not of such avowed authority, as those who made the
Primmer Prayers. Hence it was I thought no subject fitter to be written on,
than that which should at once expound the holy Writ, and Churches Prayers,
with all the other parts thereof contained in the Primmer, both being so
profound, and so mysterious as they are.

Know therefore, Christian Reader, first, The Antiphons are ever such, as have
report unto the present time, or season of the year they are made proper to by
holy Church: Know secondly, they ever are some part of holy Writ, appointed by
the like Authority; or for Epistle, or for Gospel of the Day: Yet to know this
is not enough, unless you further know the meaning of the word it self, that
an Antiphon imports as much as a pre-toning of a Tune to follow, not unlike the
Birds recording in the winter time, the tunes they chirp, and sing aloud in the
summer to the praise of their Creator.

And hence it is the Chorists, or masters of the Quire, where holy Office is
ever sung in open Churches, that allow this happy liberty, come up unto the
Canon, who begins the Psalm, and in a low Tone give the Tune to him, who takes
it thus, then sings aloud, and leads the Quire after him all singing out the
Psalm in loudest voice, which was Antiphonized as above, pre-toned I mean,
recorded, or pre-tuned by the Chorists first of all.

Now that you see these Antiphons end here with a Versicle, and Responsory (as
they do in every Primmer) this argues all the Prayers, and other parts of holy
Churches Service that do follow, are exercises as well of Neighbourly, as of
Love Divine, and that no jar ought to intercede in tempo all affairs between
those who are tied up to a harmony, and concordancy in the spiritual duty of
good Christians, whilst we must be ever ready to answer with a Responsory, him
that begins with a Versicle to incite us to priase Almighty God, and to give a
testimony we are at peace with one another, before we dare presume to make our
joint petition to the Heavenly Majesty for our own, and our neighbors
necessities in the following Prayer: But of this more anon, when we shall say
who first prefixed the Antiphons before the Psalms and Prayers.

Please, gentle Reader, only here to know, that hence it was I took the Rise
of writing in the Method I observe throughout this Book: For since I found the
self-same Antiphons that here you have in English to be in all the Primmers of
the world, in all the several languages that say this holy Office every day,
even in the Breviaries of the Priests, I did conclude those Antiphons were as
Pretonings to the tune of the Mystical music of the holy Church that was to
follow, then, when such an Antiphon was read, or to speak more plainly, these
Antiphons did seem to point out what the Duty was that then we should be at.
Namely, that all the Children of the Church should put in execution the
practice of that Doctrine, which the Preacher then delivered in the Pulpits,
when, or that Antiphon, or else some other part of holy Writ, in that days
service, was the Preachers Text.

And that we might do this the better, we thought the following Prayer was
fitly given to petition grace to do it: Hence I inferred those Prayers must
needs extend to more than yet the word Collecta, or Collect, did import; for
that betokens only the collection of the peoples suffrages put into the mouth
of the officiating Priest, in his own, and their behalfs, and begging Grace,
that what the Preachers tell them is their present duty, they may execute
Religiously.

But further yet, we thought this Prayer, this Collect (following such an
Antiphon, and being the open music which every Christian was to make that day
in the ears of the Heavenly Majesty, while their hearts were to sing what their
lips did say) must also keep the Tune of that Antiphon; speak I mean to God, in
the same sense, and be as an Epitome, or Abstract of the holy Text, from whence
that Antiphon was taken; must be in fine a kind of sum, or Quintessence of
all the Preaching parts of that days Service, and must from thence assume the
name of Collect, as if collecting up in few lines the larger Lessons of the
holy Text, both in the Epistle and Gospel of that day. This I confess seemed
hugely consonant to reason, and if it could be made appear, would render sure
the Prayers of holy Church extremely proper to the Times and Days they were
appointed for, extremely reverential, and extremely grateful to the People. To
see thereby the sweet connection in all the parts of holy Churches Service.
This, this Beloved, is the hard attempt of all the following Book, wherein how
happy I shall be, I know not yet, before I hear you say, you see it is in some
proportion done. By the Illustrations of the Prayers; showing how they allude
unto (how they exhaust indeed) the holy Texts both of the Epistle, and Gospel
of the Day. By the Explications of the Sacred Texts showing how piously safe
they are, when rightly understood, how dangerous when heretically wrested to a
contrary sense than in themselves they bear. And by the Applications, not only
showing us how to apply the whole Service of the day to our instructions; but
how to apply indeed our selves to God, by a godliness of life made sweet and
easy to us by the said Applications.

Now because this sweet connection of Parts in holy Service, is a Jewel
rendering the Church extremely Beautiful in the sight of her sacred Spouse,
even ravishing the eyes of Men and Angels; therefore I shall desire the Reader
not to huddle ore this Book, as reading it for Recreation, but purely for
Devotion, which yet will recreate the more, by how much the less thereof is
read at once: by how much the oftener the Reader turns to see, and to compare
the Parts reporting unto one another, which generally they do, when in the
Print you see the letter to vary, the Character to change, for ever then, the
changed letter in the Gloss is part of either Prayer, or holy Text, to which
it does report, and whereunto the Reader shall do well to turn, before he do
proceed to further Lecture, that so comparing one place to another, he may see
the simpathy between the parts compared; and seeing this may praise Almighty
God in the beauty of his beautiful Spouse, the holy Church, whose very daily
service is a kind of picture of her loveliness in the sight of his Heavenly
Majesty. I do not undertake to say that all the Churches Prayers are of so
deep a sense, as to exhaust the Epistles and Gospels of that day, whereon they
are appointed to be said; but this I do infer to be avouchable of that
peculiar Prayer which here is set immediately after the Antiphon, Responsory,
and Versicle of each respective Sunday, which is ever the first Prayer in the
Divine Service; and which the Priest does always say with an address unto the
People, turning about to them, and saying, Dominus vobiscum, Our Lord be with
you, (meaning in your hearts) that there you may sing forth his Praises which
my lips are now going to pronounce in your names, and in your behalfs.

True it is, I have at the end of every part of this first Tome, set out a
Trinity of Prayers appropriated each to their respective days, which I advise
all those of this Sodality to say three times a day, morning, noon, and night:
whereof this Prayer we call the Collect (for the Reasons above) is the first.

The second is, that Prayer which is called the Secret, being the very same the
Priest then says, when he has turned himself unto the People, saying, Orate
Fratres, etc. Brethren, Pray that my Sacrifice, and yours, may be acceptable
to God the Father Almighty. And this he does immediately after he has made the
Oblation or Offertory of the bread and wine, which he is presently to
consecrate into the body and blood of Christ, as his own and the peoples
Sacrifice: Not that it is therefore called the Secret, because the people
should not be privy to it, being (as they are) remarkably concerned therein,
but that it represents the nature of our offerings to God, to be rather hearty,
than heard of; rather private, then public, (so far forth as they are ours)
though it is most true that (as the Priests) they are to be made in open
Churches upon open Altars; yet with this respect, that silence shall convey
them to the heavenly Majesty, rather than noise, and so the Prayer that offers
them, is (for this reason among others) said softly by the Priest, and thence
is called the secret: Whereas the Collects they are said aloud.

And however true it be, that in the old Law, the Priest went out of the
Peoples sight from the sanctum (or Holy) into the sanctum sanctorum, (the holy
of holiest) for the Reasons alleged in the Exposition of the two first Verses
on the Epistle upon Passion Sunday, in the second part of this First Tome, yet
in the new Law (which did abrogate the Ceremonies of the old) Holy Church has
held it sufficient to maintain the Analogy between the sacrifices of both the
Laws, that the Priests of the new (remaining still in the sight of the People)
shall go at least out of their hearing, by saying some Prayers secretly (though
still in the Peoples behalf) as if they were composing the controversies
between grace and nature, or mediating between God and his sinful creatures by
way of sacrifice, the most powerful of all mediations imaginable. And hence it
is to let the People know at least this secret Prayer is said in their names by
the Priest (in testimony of their offering up both by, and with him, the
present sacrifice) that I advise them jointly with the Priest to say the
self-same secret to the self-same end, that prayer importing over an actual
oblation or offering to God.

The third Prayer which is called the Post-Communion, I therefore also publish
here in the end of this Book, because it imports the peoples thanksgiving
after the Communion, thereby to show, that whereas then the Priest has
received actually (in his own and their behalf) so they have also received in
Vote, in wish, or desire, that they were also worthy to have actually received,
and this being a spiritual communion at the least, I desire all the devotes of
our sodality in thanks thereof, to say this third prayer also with the Priest,
because immediately before his saying it, he turns about, and makes his
application to the people, as above; by Dominus vobiscum (Our Lord be with
you.) And thus it is evident, these Prayers are very proper for the People,
which are never said by the Priest, but with address to them.

Now if any ask the Reason why I recommend this Trinity of Prayers to be said
by our Sodality three times a day, truly it is because the sacrifice being a
service to the sacred Trinity, wherein God is acknowledged to have the sole
command of life and death in his creatures, therefore in honor of the three
sacred Persons of the Blessed Trinity, I recommend this triple Repetition of
this Trinity of Prayers, as also further, that thereby our sodality may partake
of all the sacrifices which are daily made throughout the world, not but that
the morning is the proper time of this Homage, but because it is ever day in
some part of the earth, when it is night with another, and so by our saying
these Prayers even at night, we join in sacrifice to God with those who say the
same prayers at the self-same time by day.

I could animate our Sodality farther yet to this Devotion, by telling them
what indulgences they may gain by this, (not that these are purchased by money,
as is objected by our adversaries but given gratis) namely, 15. days Pardon
from Purgatory pains for every time they say any one of the Churches Prayers,
those I mean that are with public authority avowed by our holy Mother (to say
nothing now of fifty days indulgence, for every time they say their Primmer
office, which is not granted to their Manual Prayers) but I suffice my self
with this, that it is the best of all Devotions in the world, to praise the
Blessed Trinity, and even those that love to pray to Saints, must know, they do
it best while with their holy Patrons they adore the Universal Patron of all
the Saints, The sacred, and undivided Trinity.

To conclude, in saying this Trinity of Prayers, they do not only jointly
pray with the visible, but also with the invisible Priest, our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, who even now in Heaven daily says the selfsame Prayers, as often
as the Priest officiating, says them here on Earth; because our Priests are
but the Isntrumental Ministers of Sacrifice, the Principal is our Savior
Jesus Christ himself; who in memory of his once Bloody Sacrifice, offers up
daily an unbloudy one, unto his Heavenly Father, and so makes that to be (with
God) a Renovation (in a Mystical way) of his bitter Death and Passion, which
is (with us) a daily Commemoration thereof; for which purpose see the Secret,
on the ninth Sunday after Pentecost, in the book of Prayers below.

See further, Molina, in his Golden work of Priesthood, where he cites a
Torrent of Fathers, to avow this verity. And for avowment of Jesus Christ,
Vocally Praying, even in Heaven for us, (by way, at least of claiming what he
has already merited in our behalfs.) See Cornelius a Lapide upon Saint Paul,
Romans 8. ver. 34. who backs himself in this with a mighty authority of Fathers:
so it is no weak assertion, I hope, of mine, nor any ill-grounded recommends,
being thus supported.

O Beloved, what an ineffable dignity does this set upon these Prayers? What an
Emolument may we bring to our selves by saying them in such society? What a
vast Treasure of devotion shall we find wrapped up in them? In fine, what a
supine negligence shall it be in us not to avail our selves of this devotion?
which (without envy) I may say is such, as none (that is vocal) can equal
it, and which yet I have aimed to contrive into so short a method, as shall not
hinder us from any other pious exercises whatsoever, only let me beg this
favor of our Sodality to rank this way of prayer in the number of those
duties toward Almighty God, whereof it is truly said, Mat. 23. ver. 23. Haec
oportet facere: These things we ought to do: which yet shall nothing clash
with what follows truly averrable of other Devotions to, Et illa non omittere,
Those we need not omit, for using these. Not that I affirm we must of necessity
say this Trinity of Prayer which here I have suggested, (to deserve the Title
of good Christians; or of Trinitarians, as some from hence may call us) but
that I mean we must prefer the public prayers of holy Church, before all
others whatsoever.

And truly since the first of these three Prayers will by this Book, appear to
be an Abstract both of the Epistle and Gospel of the day, rather than I shall
attribute this devotion to my own Invention; I will conceive it was the
pristine practice of the Church, because the very nature of the Piety is such,
as seems to draw its source from the better fountains of devotion, than any I
can lay claim unto, namely the zeals of the Ancient Fathers of the Church: True
it is, I can not positively say it was so, but thus much I need not scruple to
avouch, That as the Epistles and Gospels are the express Doctrine of our
blessed Savior (or of his Apostles, as where S. Paul says, Non Dominus, sed
ego, Not our Lord, but I, etc. 1 Cor. Chap. 7. (so the Churches public
Prayers, are the special Dictates of the Holy Ghost, that is to say, the
avowed suggestions of that Holy Spirit, (which avowment our private prayers do
want) though whether the blessed spirit were resolved, The holy Fathers (who
made these Public Prayers) should (with reflection) frame them suiteable to
this Design which I now draw them to, that is, more than I dare venture to
affirm: but certainly that holy Spirit did suggest unto the Pastors of the
Church a style so proper, and so deep withal, as might sound the lowest
bottom of the Sea of holy Writ, and so exhaust even the abstrusest sense
thereof; which whether I have always done I know not, but I believe, the
meanest understanding will perceive, I often make the Collect express the
substance of the whole Epistle and Gospel of the day, and where I come not home
to this, it is rather that I see it not, than that the Prayer extends no
further, or suits no better unto this Design; suffice it now the door is open,
that stronger-sighted souls may see much farther into the Paradise of this
Devotion than I have done, and show the world much rarer fruit therein. To me
the Honor is too much, that I have made a great Attempt, which is to render
that Book sweet and easy, wherein we may presume, the Holy Ghost directed the
Composers of it, for the public use of the Layety: the Primmer I mean, whose
Prayers, I hope, henceforward will be found, as sweet as they are sound, and
not so hard, as to be laid aside, for either barren, or too deep to be
understood by the common People.

The Hymmes whereof, I conceive, are lately made so smooth, so eloquent, and
yet so easy too, (in the Manuell lately printed at Saint Omers) that every
one, who can but read the English Tongue, will find them very pleasing.

The Lessons I shall explicate in my second Tome of this Christian Sodality,
(which I intend to Publish next, following the like method as here I hold in
this) upon all the Feasts of our Lord, as also upon those Festivals of his ever
Blessed Mother the Virgin Mary (those especially which allude to any Mystery of
our Redemption.) As to the particular Feasts of other Saints, I shall spare the
labor to write upon them in this method, but shall recommend them for daily
Garnishing, or Sawces, to the Dishes, added now and then (as they occur) to
the constant Table of the Churches Sundays and weekly food, out of the
Epistles and Gospels of the Season.

First, Because the Prayers we use to Saints are chiefly addressed to God, by the
merits of his sacred Son, as in the close of every Prayer appears, ending
still, Through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Secondly, Because the particular honor we give to Saints, must never
interrupt the general duty we owe to God, at all times, and upon all occasions.

Thirdly, Because I find these Prayers have rather a Report to the Martyrologe
(or Stories of Saints lives and deaths) than to the Epistle and Gospel of the
day, in regard one and the same Epistle and Gospel is common to diverse Saints;
yet we may piously believe those Saints (whom then we serve) have served God in
their life time, by being eminent in such perfections as the Epistles and
Gospels, read upon their Feasts, do recommend unto us all. Nevertheless, I
shall, in my second Tome, set out the Communion of Saints, in such order, as I
intend to do the Feasts of our Lord, and of his sacred Mother, that by this
means the Layety may see (in general at least) the several Degrees of
Saintity in Holy Church, as those of Angels, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors,
Virgins, and Widows; whence they may easily distinguish the particular
Proportion of every particular Saint (as his or her Feast occurres) in that
line of Perfection which the common Glass of Saintity shall represent.

As for the like regard, I intend lastly in my second ^ome to add the Communion
of Vigils, the Embers, and Rogation Days, in this self-same method as these
above, because my third ^ome else of Lent, will be too long, if set forth after
this manner, there being six and thirty feriall Days in Lent, besides the
Sundays, already published in this first Tome: and every day has as well a
particular Antiphon and Prayer, as a particular Epistle and Gospel, proper to
it self, whereof diverse are very long, besides those four long Gospels of the
four Evangelists, read all at length in Holy week, which will swell this third
Tome to a mighty bulk, being done in this method, where every verse is
particularly gloss'd, and by this means, I shall render as much Scripture
easy to the people, as will occur in the flux of the whole year, which is
the chiefest motive I have to give my self the labor of this last laborious
Tome; and but for this, I had indeed spared my pains therein, the rather,
because there are already extant admirable Entertainments for Lent, excellently
well written by Father Causin, and rarely well translated, by Sir Bazill Brook,
into our mother Tongue, which I do heartily recommend to those of this
Sodality, as well for ever, as until my third Tome shall come out, according
to the method of this now published already: whereunto I have here prefixed a
larger Preface than ordinary, because I will excuse the labor of any other
Preface to the following Tomes.

As for the Psalms (which are indeed the hardest part of all the Primmer) I
hope the Table, that I shall adjoyn to the end of this Preface, will prove a
Key to open every Lock of this our David's Psalter, and to make us thus far,
at least, to understand the Psalms, as to know the Royal Prophets Drift
therein; for as Saint Hilary well observes in the latter end of his Prologue to
his Exposition upon the Psalms, that Book is like a City, full of stately
Buildings, divided each into their several partiments, to which do open Doors
distinct, and every Door still opened by a special Key peculiar to it self;
(hear, to this purpose, this reverend Fathers words, as you have heard his
sense.) We must (says he) use a diligent and deliberate judgment upon the
Exposition of every Psalm, that we may know by what Key to open the genuine
sense thereof. Now the learned Priests of our Nation, who have translated the
whole Bible into English (fixed on this authority of Saint Hilary) having
undertaken to assign to every Psalm its proper Key, I shall advise the Devotes
of this Sodality, to take special notice of those Keys; and if upon this
suggestion they do not cause their Primmers to be printed with some mark of
such a Key, as those Priests above have assigned proper for every Psalm; at
least, I shall wish them to get some charitable friend with a Pen, to mark
their Books with some one of these Keys (which are but Ten in all) alluding to
the Ten-string'd Harp of holy David, and for their more easy doing this (as
also that their Books may not be blemished with the mark) these following
figures; 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. may suffice to denotate the Keys
aforesaid; so that as soon as e're the eye perceives the Figure over the
Psamle, the understanding knows to which of the Davidike Keys that Psalm was
set.

And consequently, if the mind be fixed in praising God according to the sense
of such a Key, although some of the words do surpass the understanding of the
Readers, yet they shall find their Souls delighted to be praising God in that
same sense which David made that Psalm to praise him in, and where the Verses
now and then may vary from that sense, yet they will ever fall into some other
of the Nine, so this variation will be as little distraction to Souls praying
thus, as in Cromatick Airs, a Discord (neatly taken) is from spoiling of the
Music, which indeed it betters by that Art, when flats and sharps are finely
woven in a song, and taken sweetly up from one another.

This I speak from my own experience, as well as that of others (even Religious
women) who have found exceeding comfort by this means, when I have told them
how to say their Latin Office with Devotion, though they did not understand
the language; because by help of such a Figure, which I marked their Books with,
they lifted up their Hearts to God and praised his Heavenly Majesty, in the
very proper sense of David all the while they sung their Office in the Quire.
So that I do not venture to suggest a doubtful thing in this particular,
because I have had experience of it in many, who at first hearing thought it a
thing incredible.

Now having thus prosecuted in this Preface the Method of this present Tome,
and told the whole design of both the other two that are to come, wherein all
the parts of the Primmer will be rendered easy to the People. I do not doubt
but I shall quickly understand this Primmer will from henceforth be esteemed a
very Paradise of Prayers; of best, most sollid, and most sweet Devotion, and by
being daily said, will render us a Sodality of understanding Saints, united as
well in Hearts-affections, as in Voice and Prayer; whilst the Lay People
reading their Primmers, read the best Praying part of all the holy Sacrifice,
and service of the Day. And in so Praying (as this Christian Sodality advises)
is supplied the want of Preaching too, because in these short Prayers once
rightly understood, (as by their Glosses here they are Illustrated) they have
as much as all the Pastors themselves are able to Preach, while their very
Prayers abstract the Preaching parts of holy Churches Services. Much as your
spirits do the sweetness of the Rose, they are extracted from, and carry it
about, as I have aimed to do the sense of both Epistle and Gospel of the day
in the Spirit of the Prayer. And truly the best way I had to show their longer
senses were abstracted into shorter Prayers, was to strike the stone of
difficulty which I found therein, upon the harder steel of constant Meditation
on that very subject, and by this means the Spirits of a sweet Connection issued
out: such as you see like sparks of Piety to run along on that dry Reed of
Illustration which I have made by way of Paraphrase upon the Prayers, if I call
it the loosest Tynder of discourse, perhaps it is a phrase of strength enough
for that weak sense I write.

But lest I be misunderstood, I shall advertise here the Christian Reader that
I take the latitude of all sorts of allusions between the parts of holy
Churches services contenting my self to find in any sense a Sympathy of Parts,
be it Literal, Allegorical, Moral, or Anagogicall, which are the four
Celebrated Senses that the Expositours rely upon in the explanation of the holy
Text. The true meaning of which Senses, are in these following Verses declared,
Litera Gesta docet, quid Credas Allegoria,
Moralis quid Agas, quo tendas Anagogia.
Which is to say, the Literal Sense, tells the Fact that is past; the
Allegorical, what we must believe, the Moral what ought we to do; and the
Anagogicall to what end we do it; namely, to bring our Souls to Heaven by so
doing.

Thus we see four several noted ways how one speech may allude unto another;
how what is Literally spoke in the Scripture, may be figuratively understood.
Now if I shall be obliged further, to recur unto the several ways, whereby
one thing may be contained in another: for example, Formally, Virtually, or
Eminentially, I hope I shall not be esteemed to strain a Sense too hard, since
nothing is more common in the Schools. And truly, for compassing so great (I
may modestly say so rich) a Design, I see no common Privilege allowed to
others, that can be held too great for me in particular. But lest the common
Reader should be lost in this discourse, that begs a School-prerogative, I
shall crave leave of the more learned, to give unto the less intelligent,
examples of those three several ways how one thing is included in another.

As formally when the included does denominate the includer. So we say
whiteness is in a wall that is white, because whiteness is the form which gives
the wall that denomination. Virtually, when effects are included in their
causes, as the Son in his Father, as the greatest Tree, or fairest fruit in the
little seed thereof. Eminentially, when the creatures are contained in the
Creator, which last kind is the most excellent way of any thing being contained
in another; because the creature is more perfect in the Creator, then any
effect is in the virtuall cause thereof, or any form in the subject which it
denominates: Or then indeed the creature is in it self, where we find a world
of imperfections; though in God there can be none at all: so to be eminentially
contained in a thing, is a more noble and excellent way of being included, then
either virtually, or formally to be contained is. And thus (now and then) we
shall find the Word of God to be (as it were) eminentially contained in the
Churches prayers, because in them the Holy Ghost seems to communicate himself,
most like himself, most spiritually of all, when by the spirit of prayer, he
opens the sense of the letter in the holy Writ: And no marvel since our
Savior left his own sacred Word to the Exposition of the Holy Ghost, who was
sent on purpose to teach the world all truth upon all occasions of debate about
the meaning of the Text. For as Christ is the word of his eternal Father; so
the Scripture is the word of Christ; and so the prayers of Holy Church, are the
word of the Holy Ghost, setting an eminentiall ground of harmonious music unto
the daily descant of the Epistles and Gospels of the day; since we see the
Antiphons (commonly taken thence) are still prefixed before the Prayer, to show
how one reports unto the other.

Now if in this First Tome it happens here and there, that some one Sundays
work be longer then another, yet there is not any so long, which may not with
much ease be read in seven days, and studied diligently to, thence to make
the benefit of reading, by a little meditation upon every Verse. Nor have I
suffered some of those Sundays to pass much shorter then the rest, (namely,
those in the third Part of this Tome) both because that Part alone, contains
almost half the Sundays in the year, as also because I did there indeed begin
this work in that brief way, which afterward I did enlarge, because I was
loath to lose so much sweetness of devotion, as the larger Exposition of the
Text affords. And if any part shall prove less pleasant then other, let me
beseech the Reader to consider, That as in Preachers, there are three signal
Faculties, whereof any one renders the owner excellent. Namely, To teach, To
move, To delight. So it is in Books, for these are all well written wherein
some one at least of those three faculties throughout the Book appears; either
that of teaching what is true and solid Doctrine, That of moving to amendment
of our lives, or that of delighting us with a sweet delivery of what is
written: whether it be by the eloquence of language, or by the quaintness of
conceit, in which the Writer does express his mind, it imports not much; and
albeit I cannot boast of happiness in any one of these three faculties, yet I
will hope to have taken such advantage in the contriving of this Book, that
what is any where wanting in me, will be supplied by the Authority of Texts,
both out of Holy Writ, and out of the Expositors upon the same.

Thus having run over the parts of the Primmer whereunto I aim to adopt the
whole work of these three Tomes intended thereupon; I shall now desire the
Reader to take such an account as I am able to give him of the Parts of this my
present Book, consisting of Antiphons, Versicles, Responsories, Prayers,
Epistles, and Gospels, as for the Illustrations, and Applications, (they being
wholly mine) the little that is already said thereof above, is more then
enough, unless any thing I can do were more considerable. The Explications
being all of them in substance (though not in words) the Fathers gloss upon
the holy Text, have their worth and authority in themselves, more then I can
add unto them: Only I desire the Reader to know, I rather chose Cornelius a
Lapide, then any other Expositor, both because he has written largely upon all
the Books of Holy Writ, which do occur in the Churches Service throughout the
year, and because his Morals are more for my pious purpose, then the other more
literal Glosses would have been, of more speculative Authors; though withal
he falls not short of the literal sense where it is requisite to follow it.

First therefore as to the Antiphons; True it is, they are now and then taken
from some other Part of Holy Writ, then commonly they use to be; As for
example, That on the first Sunday of Advent, is out of S. Luke, Cap, 1. v. 30.
whereas the Epistle of that days service is taken from S. Paul Romans 13. And
the Gospel from S. Luke, cap. 21. but the reason is, that in this Antiphon the
Church reports to the mystery of the Incarnation, which must needs precede that
of our Saviors Birth, so here respect unto the Time or Season, has prevailed
for omitting the usual way of ordering the Antiphons before the Prayer; and
for the same reason, the Anthiphon also on the Third Sunday of Advent varies in
this manner to, being taken out of Saint Luke, cap. 1. v. 41. whereas the
Gospel on that day, is out of S. John cap. 1. v. 19. and so the prayer is
answerable thereunto: Thus for respect unto the Persons praying in those days
(as now the Church would have us do). The Antiphon on the fourth Sunday of
Advent, alludes much to the ancient Patriarchs and Prophets manner of calling
upon the Messiah to come away, after so long an expectation of him, as four
thousand years together; hence that Antiphon is then taken as it were out of
those ancient Patriarchs mouths, rather then from the Epistle or Gospel of the
day, and therefore it is always one of the seven great Os, or exclamatory
prayers of the holy Prophets, groaning and crying out with an impatience of
delay in the Messiah (our B. Savior) being born.

And these are the only Three Antiphons in all the year that are not taken out
of the Epistles and Gospels of the Divine Service proper to their day. As for
the Antiphon, on Palm Sunday, though it be not in that Gospel wihch I have
here inserted in this Book, yet is it out of the true Gospel of the Day; and
the reason why I did presume to alter that days Gospel in this Tome, is
because I intend (God willing) to explicate the four long Gospels of the
Passion (that are read in holy Week) in my third Tome as was said above, in
regard they will do better altogether then apart. Besides, the Gospel I have
here inserted, though it be not directly upon the Passion, (as that of Palm
Sunday is) yet it reports unto it, and is as it were the very mouth to that Red
Sea: so not incongruously placed here, but suiting very well both with the true
Epistle, and Prayer of that day, and is besides the very Gospel read in
Blessing of the Palms. But further (as to this particular of Antiphons) the
Reader may be pleased to understand, that many times the words of these
Antiphons are rather the sense of Holy Church, than the absolute letter of the
Text, yet so, as part (if not all) is ever taken according to the letter it
self: and again, whereas I cite one verse only for such Antiphons, as many
times run through sundry verses, this is done but for brevity sake, since the
diligent Reader will easily trace it out in his perusal of the Text it self.
Nor must our Adversaries presume to tax the Church with corruption of the Text
in some of her Antiphons, because she does not always profess, to deliver the
ipsissime letter, but only the sense thereof: which is a privilege, no
dutiful Child can deny a pious Mother, who as she is the Spouse of Christ,
has absolute authority, to order the devotion of her Children according to her
own pleasure and piety.

True it is, I cannot retrive who set the order of the Antiphons before the
Prayers, but this we find in the Bull of Pius Quintus before the Breviaries,
that as the Council of Trent referred the ordering of the Breviary to his said
Holiness, so he, consulting some Fathers of that Council (and other the best
Antiquaries in Rome) did let forth the Breviary as now we have it, according to
the Records in the Vatican, containing all the Traditions of the Primitive
Church, for order of the Public Prayers, and consequently the Antiphons in the
Primmer (which are these we now treat of) being the same with those of the
Breviary, were undeniably the same which now they are. And what ever we may say
of these Antiphons in particular, at least we shall find Saint Ambrose (a
celebrated Father, and Doctor of the Church) to have been the Institutor of
that Piety to sing (in the Quier) an Antiphon before the beginning of every
Canonical Hour in the Priest his Office, grounded on the Vision which Saint
Ignatius (the third successor to Saint Peter in his chair of Antioch) had, of
Angels thus Antiphonising, and then alternatively singing sweetly one after
another, as now the Divine Office is sung in the Quier, over all the Catholic
Church. And for this reason sure the Lay People have their Antiphons out of the
Epistles and Gospels, to show their work of Prayer which follows immediately,
is grounded on the charity of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in whom they
are to Love, to Pray, to do for each other as they would do for themselves.

And hence we may piously presume the Versicle and Responsory following every
Antiphon, is to incite the Church Militant, to answer the Angels of the Church
Triumphant, inciting us to Pray, and praise our Lord with them, especially by
such a Prayer, as does not only exhaust the Epistle and Gospel of the Day, but
accompanies withal the Praying and the Preaching Priest amongst us, the Angels
and the Saints above us; nay, the Mediating Jesus, Praying then, and thus, to
his Heavenly Father in our behalfs, as was said above.

Forasmuch as concerns the Epistles and Gospels themselves, I have not dared
to alter them in the least tittle, out of a Reverentiall regard unto the
Reverend and Learned Translators of the Bible into English, though in many
places, perhaps, if the same men were now alive, they would themselves render
the Language (here and there) more grateful, especially to curious Ears, and
yet keep as exact a sense of the Learned Languages, of the Original Tongues,
as now they have done, which yet I dare not be so bold to do.

The suiting of these Epistles and Gospels, as now the Church has ordered
them, was the work of Saint Hierome, commanded so to do by Saint Damasus Pope,
and Confessor, Anno. Dom. 367. and this may suffice for a sufficient gloss
upon the respective parts of this Book, and why it is framed in this Method.

Now the reason, why I entitle it the Christian Sodality, is, because I would
by that Name invite every Christian to be a member of it, and to make
profession of this Practice of Piety, which is grounded on the Word of God, and
on the public Prayers of Holy Church, which certainly were not made without a
deep design, if yet that were any other than what I have guessed at, who shall
be glad to hear of a better, for I am nothing wedded to my own conceit herein:
I shall not presume to give any Rules at all to our Sodality, though I do
humbly suggest the saying, Thrice a day the Trinity of Prayers in the end of
every Part of this first Tome, for the Reasons above, and for this one more
which I shall add, because by a reverent rehearsal thereof, they shall even
kiss, as it were in little, the Picture of our Blessed Lord, drawn out of the
full Proportion it has in the Epistles and Gospels of the Day; as also by
their weekly reading each respective Sundays work belonging to the week, they
shall make themselves, in a short space, perfect masters of so much Scripture,
and be able, not only to sum it up in their daily Prayers, but to season their
discourse with it throughout the week, throughout the year, from year to year,
indeed throughout their lives.

Now that they may more zealously do this, I shall desire them to believe, the
first Founder of this Sodality was Jesus Christ, the Confirmer of it the Holy
Ghost, the first professed Member the B. Virgin, Mary Keeping all the words of
her sacred Son within her heart, and listing with her self the twelve Apostles,
all the Disciples, and Friends of our Lord; Saint Mary Magdalene, with her
Sister Martha, and the other two Mary's celebrated for their zeal to Jesus
Christ, and so making up the Primitiae, or first Fruits, and Members of this
same Sodality, which every Christian is inrowl'd a happy Member of at the Holy
Font; nor can he be dismembered or cast out of this Sodality (but by deserving
excommunication) unless he first renounce his Christianity, and cast off Jesus
Christ, by turning Infidel, Heathen, Atheist, Turk, or Jew. As for designing
our Sodality into this method of Prayer, (abstracting all the other Parts of
Holy Churches Services) I am so far from the vanity of making it my Work,
that I can only say, it is my Observation, and must give the honor of it to
the Prefect of the Sodality his Holiness, for no other single Person can
challenge that Privilege of prescribing the Forms of public Prayers unto the
Universal Church; though in truth we must by Name, attribute the first
Collection of these Prayers unto Gelasius the first Pope of that Name, in the
year of our Lord 482. and the stating them into the order we now have them in,
throughout the year, unto Saint Gregory the first, most worthy called the Great
for his remarkable Saintity, in the year 590. who, in his Vol^me entitled of
Sacraments (meaning of Mysteries, for it seems he found these Prayers to be
most profoundly mysterious indeed, as now I here endeavor to declare
throughout my Book) has added some more Prayers to what Gelasius made, and
has compacted them altogether, as into a Magazine of the Churches Piety,
whereunto, by Decree of two several Councels, namely, the second Milevitan,
and the third Carthaginian (held in Saint Agustines time or thereabouts) it was
forbid to add any more, unless they were approved by a General Council, or
at least some National one of Bishops: See the 12th Canon in the first
Council above. It has pleased us (say the Fathers) that the Prayers, and
divine Services which shall be approved of in this Council, be celebrated by
all, and that no other be used in the Church; unless such as shall by the most
prudent men be made, or are approved by the Synod, least any thing contrary to
Faith, or through ignorance, or less then due study be composed.

These Authorities I cite not so much to vaunt my own design, as to avouch I am
not worthy to be Father of it, otherwise then by Observation, as above I said;
but thence I am bold indeed to commend the Devotion unto our Sodality as a
practice of the most solid Piety imaginable.

And here I must crave leave to mind the Reader that it will very little avail
a man to be of this Christian Sodality, unless he make himself worthy of it by
his saintitie, which he shall soonest arive unto, by making the Scripture his
study (as was before desired) and by taking it often in the Cordial of Holy
Churches prayers, when he does not swallow the greater parts of it all at once,
by reading much thereof, expounded as he has it here; for this will always
be to feed on heavenly food, such as can never breed heretical diseases in the
body of our Sodality, but must needs give saving nourishment to all our souls,
and make us, feeding here a while on these sweet honey Combs of Grace within
our holy Hive, feast for all etetnity, on the better fruits of glory with all
the holy Company of this Sodality in Heaven.

To conclude, I shall desire the Reader to know my aim in this Book was not to
set out any thing absolvtely new, but something very necessary for the Praying
people, and exceeding useful for the preaching Pastor; since as the one will
have matter enough of Piety from hence, so the other will have ground enough
for ampliation, and to dilate himself upon a short warning by way of
exhortation, to the People, though he be destitute of other Books to help
himself; and had it not been that I held my self obliged to repair (by other
men) my own omissions in this kind, out of a multitude of diversions other
ways; as also that I stand more strictly bound (of late) to help the people
then formerly I was, (my superiors best know why and how) truly I should have
shaken off (I fear) the labor of this laborious work, whereby I shall not yet
be covetous of any other honor, then to be doorkeeper unto this Sodality, and
to subscribe my self, the most unworthy member of it

F. P.

HEre follows a Table directing how to apply each Psalm to the proper Key,
or genuine sense thereof; which I take out of the proemiall Annotations to the
second Tome of the holy Bible, as it is translated by the Reverend Priests of
the College of Doway, beginning with the book of Psalms. And though perhaps
some Psalms may seem as proper to other Keys, as unto those they have
assigned, yet I give so much to their Authority, that till some greater
countermand it, this may be more safely relied upon then any other, and
therefore I recommend this way, as the best that yet is found out, for rendering
the book of Plalmes intelligible in some measure to the Common people; and very
useful to the Pastors of the Church, who may perhaps more safely rely upon
these Senses, than any private Judgment of their own, because these men were
versed in the Learned Languages, and made it their study to apply each Psalm
to a right Key, according to such rules, as are by them laid down in these
Proemialls for that purpose: Now these Keys they reduce to Ten in number,
which are as follow.

1. God in him-himself. THe First is of God, as he is in himself, Trine in
Persons, and One in Essence, and of his Divine Attributes. 2. God Creating. The
Second is of Gods Works in his Creatures, as of the Creation, and Conservation
of the whole World. 3. God governing by providence. The Third is of the Divine
Providence, especially toward Man, in protecting, and rewarding the Just, and
permitting, and punishing the Evil. 4. God by Moses leading the Hebrews out of
Egypt into Canaan. The Fourth is of the peculiar calling of the Hebrew people,
their beginning in Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, their mavelous increase in
Egypt, their diverse estates, many admirable, and miraculous things done
amongst them, with their ingratitude, rejection, and reprobation. 5. God
Redeemer of Mankind. The Fifth, and principal Key, is of our Redeemer Jesus
Christ, and of his Incarnation, Nativity, Life and Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, and Glory, all prophetically foretold. 6. Christ erecting his
Church. The Sixth is of the Conversion of the Gentiles, or of the Catholic
Church of Christ, ever visible in her Pastors, Sacraments, and Sacrifice of
the holy Altar, and propagated over all the world. 7. Faith and good Works. The
Seventh is of Faith, and good Works, which is the true manner of Christians
serving God. 8. The proper acts of David. The Eighth is of David's own Works,
and of Gods singular benefits toward him, for which he renders thanks, and
Divine Praises, as also of his recounting his enemies, dangers and afflictions
of mind and body; namely, by Saul, Absolon, and others, in which cases he
humbly beseeches Gods protection; and further, he expresses himself a perfect
Image, and pattern of a sincere, and hearty-penitent, bewailing, confessing,
and punishing his own sins. 9. Death, Judgment. The Nineth is of Death, and
Judgment, the End, and Renovation of this World, with the general
Resurrection. 10. Heaven, Hell. The Tenth, and last, is of Heaven and Hell,
according as every one deserves in this Life.
NOw in the Table following, These Columns that are marked with ^ the denote
the number of the Psalms: Those that are marked with the * declare the numbers
of the Keys, whereunto every Psalm is appropriated, and in what sense it ought
to be understood, according to the meaning of the Royal Prophet David.

^ * 1 7 2 6 3 8 4 7 5 9 6 7 7 8 8 5 9 3 10 3 11 6 12 7 13 5 14 10 15 5 16 3 17
8 18 6 19 7 20 5 21 5 22 7 23 5 24 7 25 8 26 3 27 8 28 6 29 8 30 7 31 7 32 2 33
3 34 5 35 3 36 7 37 7 38 3 39 5 40 5 41 10 42 1 43 4 44 6 45 6 46 6 47 6 48 7
49 9 50 7 51 8 52 9 53 7 54 3 55 8 56 8 57 3 58 8 59 8 60 5 61 7 62 8 63 7 64 6
65 6 66 6 67 6 68 5 69 8 70 7 71 5 72 9 73 7 74 9 75 3 76 4 77 4 78 6 79 5 80 7
81 7 82 6 83 10 84 5 85 7 86 6 87 7 88 6 89 2 90 3 91 2 92 6 93 10 94 5 95 5 96
9 97 6 98 5 99 1 100 7 101 7 102 7 103 2 104 4 105 4 106 3 107 8 108 5 109 5
110 6 111 7 112 3 113 4 114 7 115 5 116 6 117 6 118 7 119 7 120 3 121 10 122 7
123 3 124 3 125 7 126 3 127 7 128 6 129 7 130 7 131 5 132 7 133 1 134 1 135 2
136 4 137 7 138 3 139 10 140 6 141 8 142 7 143 8 144 1 145 3 146 2 147 6 148 2
149 6 150 1

FINIS.
THE Christian Sodality.
On the first Sunday of Advent.
The Antiphon, LUKE 1. v. 30. FEar not Mary, for thou have found grace with our
Lord; Behold, thou shall conceive, and shall bring forth a Son.

Verse. Drop dew ye Heavens from above, and let the clouds rain down the Just.

Resp. Be the earth opened, and let it bud forth a Savior.


The Prayer.
ROwse up, we beseech Thee (O Lord) thy power, and come away, that from the
eminent dangers of our sins (thou protecting) we may deserve to be freed, and
(thou delivering us) we may be saved.

The Illustration of the Prayer.
SHould a Turk or Heathen ask me what report this Prayer has to the Epistle
and Gospel of the day, (there being scarce one word of either in it) I should
not wonder at him; but did a Christian ask me such a question, I should pity
him, as either not well Catechized, or at least as not reflecting on what he
has been taught: for example, that past Mysteries are by Holy Church
presentiated unto us, as now actually flowing: namely, that Advent represents
the time when the Blessed Virgin Mary was near to her delivery of her Sacred
Son, the Messiah, (our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ) into this world; and for
respect unto this time, the Antiphon of this day is taken out of the 1. of
Saint Luke, not out of the 21. as the Gospel is, because that 1. Chapter puts
us in mind of the time which this Prayer reports unto: so does the Versicle
and Responsory; and so does the last Antiphon of Advent, being one of the great
Os, as we call them, importing the exclamations used by the holy Patriarchs in
their Prayers, calling upon our Saviors Birth as near at hand; and
consequently the Prayers of Advent must be adapted to the times past, to the
voices of the Ancient Patriarchs and Prophets, looking up to Heaven, with their
Predecessors, and their own wearied eyes, for four thousand years together;
all crying out, as if they durst not believe their own eyes, but would awake,
as it were the sleeping God, that had so long left the world under the lash of
a Triple Tyranny, which they did groan beneath, of Death, Sin, and Damnation;
and speaking (by the dictate of the holy Ghost) like men to God, as if there
were more or less of power in his Omnipotency; beseeching him to hasten away
with all his Rowsed power; and by his protecting grace, to free them from the
eminent dangers they were in, that had slept so many years in the night and
trance of sin, (that is to say, in the guilt thereof:) and next, to deliver
them from all future punishment due unto them for that guilt, by a saving
sentence in the latter day of Doom: and so (briefly) praying to be secured from
all dangers they were liable unto, either of Guilt, or pain of Sin: He, I say,
that looks upon the present Prayer with this reflection (which is but due unto
it) will soon perceive the connection it has (by beseeching God to Rowse up his
power, and come away) to the Epistle specifying the greatest roots of Sin, from
the guilt whereof we desire protection and freedom, by the coming of Christ,
the source and fountain of all Grace: and to the Gospel, telling us we are then
before all the world finally, truly, and most absolutely delivered from the due
penalty of Sin, (which is eternal damnation) when the Devil, and all his
accursed crew shall see us called at the latter day of Doom unto an everlasting
Bliss, and Glory, by the happy sentence of Salvation passed upon us: For though
we are protected here, and (by the Grace of God) set free from the guilt of
Sin, yet we are then most properly delivered from all danger of punishment for
the same, when we are declared (which God grant) at the latter day (maugre the
Devils malice) to be saved Souls. But that all this may more clearly appear,
see both the letters of the Texts, in Epistle and Gospel, with the Expositours
senses thereupon suitable to this Illustration of the Prayer as above; and then
confess there is more depth of sense and spirit in the Churches Prayers, (being
all dictates of the holy Ghost) than at first sight men will imagine, or
(without deep meditation) ever find out, and believe.

The Epistle, ROMANS 13.
11. ANd knowing the season, that it is now the hour for us to rise from sl^ep;
for now our salvation is nearer than when we believed.

12. The night is past, and the day is at hand; let us therefore cast off the
works of Darkness, and put on the Armor of Light.

13. As in the day, let us walk honestly; not in Banquettings and Drunkenesse,
not in Chamberings and Impudicities, not in Contention and Emulation.

14. But put ye on our Lord Jesus Christ.


The Explication.
11. THe Apostle, in the immediate Verse before had told them, That the fullness
of the Law was Love; and supposing them thereby prepared to fulfill the same,
by loving one another, he now adds the convenience of the season, and happiness
of the present hour to encourage them to perfection: But we must note he
applies his speech both to the Jews and Gentiles in this place; to the former,
alluding unto the time when they did only believe the Messiah was to come,
whom now they can see with their own corporal eyes; to the latter, that their
time is now come also, of awaking from the sleep of infidelity, and of their
other enormious sins, being the Redeemer of all mankind was actually come;
though even the Jews also, after Christ's Birth, were fast enough asleep in
their infidelity, (most of them) and so were capable of this speech to them,
even in that sense too.

12. By the night, is here meant the time before Christ's coming, made dark as
night with infidelity: By the day, the time after our Saviors Birth, rendered
bright as day with the light of the Gospel: the works of darkness are Sin,
because they shut out the light of grace from our Souls: the Armor of Light
are acts of Virtue, works of Grace; and in these words Saint Paul minds us,
that our life is here a spiritual warfare, since we know Armor is necessary
for Warriors; though the Greek Text imports by Armor of Light, a kind of
habit proper to the day; and this is not inconsistent with the other sense
above, for Armor is a kind of habit too.

13. This Verse seems to begin with prosecuting the last sense in the former;
as if it were indecent to appear in the day without our Armor of Light, as
above: but if it be taken as independent thereof, it imports not; for the sense
is full in it self: A^ in the day of Grace, as in the day of the illuminating
Gospel, let us walk honestly; that is, modestly, converse religiously, and show
our selves to be children of Light by our works, shining to the edification of
our neighbor, and glory of God. Not any more in Banquettings and Drunkenness,
feastings and excesses of Wines: These you know are works of the Flesh, not of
the Spirit, or the Grace of God; by Chamber-works the Apostle means here
plainly Fornication, by Impudicities, more petulant, and wanton actions of
Lust, even in public, such as indeed may be well called carnal impudencies.
Not in Contention; not striving for vainglory, and popular applause; whence
follows the forbidden Emulation, which is an envy at our neighbors greater
good, or esteem, than our own: See therefore here, three of the capital Sins
so represented unto us, as by all means to be avoided, Gluttony, Lechery, Envy;
all being acts and deeds of darkness, not fit to appear in the day light of the
Gospel, which now shines bright among us.

14. By putting on Christ, is here meant, being dressed up in such Virtues, as
may make us appear Christians, men clad in the Livery, the Sanctity of our Lord
and Master, Jesus Christ: and so abundant the Apostle, in this phrase, bids our
Virtues be, that they may hang as full Garments all over us; for this
difference there is betwixt carrying, and putting on of clothes; that when
carried, they are cumbersome, and not adorning; when put on, they are light,
and becoming: So to carry Virtue only wrapped up in the speculation of it is no
way graceful, but to unfold it by the practice thereof, this becomes a good
Christian, and this is truly to put on Christ; not only to study, and
speculate, but to practice Virtue.

The Application.
1. THe two first Verses of this Epistle are wholly and clearly describing the
effects of the Incarnation, and do exhort to a due Christian comportment at
such a season: That is, now to prepare our selves for our Deification: since
therefore God became man, that man might become God: I have said ye are Gods,
and all sons of the Highest, Psalm. 82. v. 6.

2. The third Verse tells us how unsuitable all Sin must needs be at this
season, (though indeed it cannot be allowable at any time) but especially how
unseasonable these three deadly Sins now are, which here the Apostle specifies
(and under them forbids us all the rest) Gluttony, Lechery, Envy. For nothing
sooner starves a Soul to death, than a gluttonous pampering of the Body:
nothing more odious to our God incarnate, than to pollute that humane nature
which Jesus could not endure to take upon him, but in the sacred womb of his
unpolluted Virgin Mother. Nothing so unseasonable at this season of love, as
for a Christian to envy Christ in his neighbor, just now when he coming to
save us, commands us to love each other, as he loves us all.

3. The last Verse gives us an armor of Proof against all danger of sin
whatsoever: for as Jesus, by taking our sins upon himself, did redeem us; so
we, by putting on his Virtues, may deserve to be saved; that is to say, we may
be capable of Salvation, for other desert we have not of our selves, than a
mere capacity of Heaven, through the merits of our Saviors death and passion
applied to us, cooperating toward that which we cannot operate, our own
Salvations: since it is the only participation of his merits, that makes us
fit to receive his rewards, for those we call our meritorious actions; such as
Saint Augustine required, saying, He that made thee without thee, will not save
thee without thee. Yet the same Doctor, lest we should presume too much upon
our selves, says also, When God rewards man's works, he crowns his own Gifts;
for even our cooperation (whereby we merit) is the special Gift of God.

Which we Petition in the Prayer above, most aptly set to the Tune of this
Epistle.

The Gospel, LUKE 21. ver. 25. etc.
25. ANd there shall be signs in the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars; and
upon the Earth distress of Nations, for the confusion of the sound of the Sea,
and Waves.

26. Men withering for fear, and expectation what shall come upon the whole
world, for the powers of Heaven shall be moved.

27. And then they shall see the Son of Man coming in a cloud, with great power
and majesty.

28. But when these things shall begin to come to pass, look up, and lift up
your heads, for your redemption is at hand.

29. And he spoke to them a similitude; see the figtree, and all trees.

30. When they now bud forth fruit out of themselves, you know that Summer is
nigh.

31. So you also, when you shall these see things come to pass, know that the
Kingdom of God is nigh.

32. Amen, I say to you, that this generation shall not pass till all be done.

33. Heaven and Earth shall pass, but my Words shall not pass.


The Explication.
25. THese Signs appearing in the Sun, Moon, and Stars, argue they shall not
perish, but remain, set to another Series, or order of being, than they were,
before such Signs in them shall portend the dismal day of Judgment. And
indeed how can there be other than a sad distress on earth amongst all the
Nations thereof, upon the confusion of sound that will then be in the boiling
Sea, and Waves, which by the general conflagration (fire falling from Heaven)
shall be far more agitated, than ever by any storm, or tempest; these commonly
happening but in some part of the Sea, whereas this disturbance shall arise
from the very bottom of the channel, and so make the Surges much more horrid,
than when they are caused by the most boisterous winds, (ploughing up only the
even surface of the waters;) but here (probably) the very Sands, Stones, and
Rocks, will all boil up from the deep, roaring like Thunder in the ears of all
Nations whatsoever. And we may guess at the confusion of this sound, when it
shall be heard (and known) distinct from that of the general summons given by
the Angels in the sound of Trumpets, breaking even the deepest sleep of death,
awaking, and raising dead men from their graves.

26. It is indeed an usual effect of fear to make men pine away, and look like
withering plants, (nor is man other than a rational plant, if well considered
in all his parts) and though here the cause of pining seem to be the sadness of
man's expectation, what shall become not only of himself, but of the whole
world besides; yet what follows, tells us, this expectation is but an effect
of the powers of Heaven, being moved; that is, removed from us, by having their
usual influence into earthly creatures obstructed; for so we now depend upon
their influencies, that we see the least, or shortest eclipse of either Sun or
Moon, is sensibly felt in all the creatures of the earth, by some present, or
future disturbance to their well-being; insomuch, that should the Sun but miss
to make his annual, or diurnall revolution, all the plants upon the earth
would wither immediately, and cause a famine over the whole universe; so
absolutely necessary is the Suns heat to the cold earthy nature that is
cherisht by it.

27. This verse will literally occur in the 24. Sunday after Pentecost, and
shall be there expounded.

28. We are here told, the confusion of this dismal day shall not be void of
comfort to the just at least, while they are all advised to hold up their heads
to Heaven, in hope to receive the fruit of their redemption; for when the
Apostle tells them their redemption is at hand, he means the fruits thereof,
since we all know the work of our redemption was the past passion of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ: and it will be here with the just, (thus looking up
to Heaven) as with the holy Patriarchs and Prophets it formerly was, when with
the like action Isai. c. 38. v. 14. tells us, His eyes were weary with looking
daily (for many years together) up on high, in hope to see the promised Messiah
come from thence: Thus will it fare with the just, at the time when these
fore-running signs portend the second coming of our Savior in the nature of a
Judge, sharing out to every Just, the fruits of his Redemption, Glory, and
salvation, which then was said to be at hand, because all time is but a moment,
or instant to eternity.

29. The gloss above, is made good by this verse following, which likens the
general Judgment (of the just) unto the spring, in respect of the then
promised fruits of their labors unto all the husbandmen upon the earth; only
what Analogy St. Matthew, chap. 21. makes between the fig tree, and this day of
Doom; St. Luke does make between that, and all other trees or plants
whatsoever: since as every springing plant (first, or last) brings forth some
fruit or other, and therewith some seed to conserve the kind or species of the
plant; so every Christian soul, that has but the least vegetation of grace
within her (bringing forth thence some spiritual fruit) may hope to reap (in
time) the seed of her salvation by it; and therefore with reason should look up
to Heaven, though Hell do seem to meet it, when all things are in this
confusion.

The 30, 31, 32, and 33 Verses following in this Gospel, are in a manner
verbatim the same with the close of the last Sundays gospel in this book, and
so being there largely expounded, need here no further exposition.

The Application.
1. THerefore holy Church to day joins a Gospel of Judgment to an Epistle of
the Incarnation, to let us see we cannot at a less rate than the hazard of a
most rigorous Judgment omit to celebrate the holy time of Advent, by
acknowledging the second coming of Christ, shall be to punish those eternally
in the next world, who have not made him a Religious welcome into this.

2. And because our holy Mother found we were not apt to do our Christian
duties purely out of love to God, therefore having given us, at least that
motive first in this days Epistle, She adds now the other of holy Fear, which
the memory of the day of Judgment needs must striks into us. O let us now, by
frequent acts of holy Fear, prevent the danger of our then despair: yes, now
while every minute of Repentance is able to purchase an eternal recompense:
Let us, I say, now do that which then in vain we shall wish to have done, if we
now omit to do it.

3. But happy they who shall prevent the latter fear with a present love, by
making the whole doctrine of this day the rule of their practice; by so
securing Man-God to be their friend, that they need not fear God-man to be
their Judge; and doubtless that is holy Churches aim to day, whilst to prevent
Christ calling us to a fearful (indeed a dreadful) Judgment, She calls on
him to a cheerful Incarnation.

Praying as above, by the Protection of his grace, to be freed from all dangers
here; and by the deliverance of a happy sentence, to be finally saved there.

On the second Sunday of Advent.
The Antiphon, MAT. 11. ver. 3. ARt thou he that art to come, or look we for
another? Go, and report to John what you have seen; the Blind see, the Dead
rise again, to the Poor the Gospel is preached.

Verse. Drop, etc. as before, page 1.

Resp. Be the Earth, etc.


The Prayer.
RAise up our hearts, O Lord, toward preparing the ways of thine only
begotten Son, that by his coming amongst us, we may deserve to serve thee with
purifyed souls.

The Illustration.
IN the last Sundays Prayer we besought Almighty God to rowse up his own
power, and come away to those that had four thousand years expected him; now to
day we beseech his Divine Majesty to raise up our hearts toward him, left our
but lately opened eyes from the sleep of sin do close again, if our raised
hearts affections do not keep them open; for lumpish hearts are many times the
cause of sleeping eyes: and indeed what hearts so lumpish as those that are
addicted unto lumps of flesh, to carnal, and terrene desires, which, as they
ever draw us downward, so must they of necessity make us dronish, and drowsy,
in the service of Almighty God: this day therefore finding the danger of a
sinful effect, we deprecate the cause thereof, we pray to be rid of the
lumpishness of our hearts, and that we may have them vigilant, active,
vigorous, raised, and rowsed up by Almighty God, to high, and Heavenly
thoughts: Such as may prepare the way for Jesus Christ to come amongst us, that
by his coming we may deserve to serve Almighty God with purified Souls. How
purified? By loving him, and so deserving to be his Fathers Servants in a high
degree indeed, as forerunners to his Sacred Son, as Baptists, as Angels sent
before his face to prepare his ways, and consequently as men; than whom
greater did never arise amongst the sons of women. Blessed God! to what a
height of perfection does holy Church invite her Children to day? being but on
Sunday last raised from their dead sleep, their trance of Sin? and yet no
marvel; for Christianity is in truth, the summity or top of all perfection;
and of all Christians we know the Catholic to be Top, and Top-gallant; that is
to say, the highest of men; which consequently so purifies their Souls, as they
become at least, the lowest of Angels; since in true morality, the highest of
the inferior, arrives to the perfection of the lowest of his Superiors:
whence we read of Saint John Baptist, That he was an Angel sent before the face
of Jesus Christ to prepare his ways, Luke 7. ver. 27.

Now lest this discourse seem but gratuite, and to have little, or no
connection to the whole service of the day, however we find it genuine enough,
perhaps, unto the Prayer: see what Lessons of Purity and sanctity of Souls the
Epistle gives us, insisting altogether upon the highest of Sanctity, mutual
peace and charity, such as made the two most discordant people in the world,
united perfectly in one, the Jew and Gentile, who, before they were in Christ
united, and had their hearts raised up to heavenly affections, detested one
another; but once meeting both in the love of one God, they became in Christ
one Thing, one Body, of that undivided Church, which has the only Son of God
to be the head thereof, our Savior Jesus Christ. Nay, see further, how this
days Gospel makes of humane Souls, (thus raised up by mutual love, by having
all one God, and believing equally in the doctrine of his sacred Son)
Baptistick Saints, and consequently spirits Angelical, whilst what is read to
day of Saint John Baptist, is spoken to us, as either being (or invited to be)
like him, forerunners to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, voices crying out
in the desert of this world, prepare the ways of our Lord. O Christians! O
Catholics at least! remember we are now in holy Advent, a time set out apart
to prepare us for a worthy receiving of our Savior at his Nativity into this
world; be it therefore spent, as Saint John Baptist did employ his days, in
penance, fasting, praying, in purifying of our Souls, in raising mortal man
up to the purity, immortality, and sanctity of Angels; so shall we pray, as all
our Pastors preach to day, which is, I hope, a sufficient adjusting of this
days Prayer unto the following Epistle and Gospel of the day, bidding us with
one mind, and one mouth glorify God; which then we do, when our practice and
our Prayer is answerable to what our Pastors teach, and preach unto us.

The Epistle, ROMANS 15. ver. 4. etc.
4. What things soever have been written, to our learning they are written:
that by the patience and consolation of the Scriptures, we may have hope.

5. And the God of patience, and of comfort, give you to be of one mind toward
one another, according to Jesus Christ.

6. That of one mind, with one mouth, you may glorify God, and the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

7. For the which cause receive one another; as Christ also has received you
unto the honor of God.

8. For I say Christ Jesus to have been Minister of the Circumcision for the
verity of God, to confirm the promises of the Fathers.

9. But the Gentiles to honor God for his mercy, as it is written, Therefore
will I confess to Thee, in the Gentiles, O Lord, and will sing to thy name.

10. And again he says, Rejoice ye Gentiles with his people.

11. And again, Praise all ye Gentiles, our Lord, and magnify him all ye
people.

12. And again, Isaiah says, There shall be the root of Jesse; and he that
shall rise up to rule the Gentiles, in him the Gentiles shall hope.

13. And the God of hope replenish you with all joy and peace in believing;
that you may abound in hope, and in the virtue of the holy Ghost.


The Explication.
4. SAint Paul alludes here to what was written in the old Law, and makes it
all wholly and entirely, to have been a lessen for our instruction, at least,
though not a rule to our actions, since the abrogation of it: and if he say
thus of the abrogated Law, much more ought we to receive and read (for our
instructions) all th^^ is written in the new Law, which shall remain to the
worlds end unaltered. But he applies this speech particularly now to what he
said in the immediate verse before, citing the Prophet David's words, Psalm. 68.
The curses of those that curse Thee have fallen upon me, making Christ speak
these words, as taking upon his own person the Curses and Sins of the people
committed against his Heavenly Father; to restore to God, as it were, his lost
honor, (if we may so say) by assuming these Curses to himself: as also (by his
suffering) to appease the Divine wrath: and in this sense he applies his speech
to the Romans, that they might convert to their instructions, and comfort,
this which (in their behalf) our Savior took upon himself, namely, the guilt
and burden of the Gentiles Sins, as well as those of the Jews, so to
ingratiate them also to his heavenly Father. By the patience and consolation of
the ^criptures, meant, the patience they teach us, in their singular examples
thereof, and the comfort they bring us, in letting us see we may (by following
the said examples) hope for the like rewards which now the Saints in Heaven
have; for so the last words of this verse import.

5. The Apostle calls him the God of patience, and of comfort, because he is
infinitely patient, infinitely comforting; and because his Virtues are not (as
in Man) his Ornaments, but his Essence; so that he is patience it self, comfort
it self, and more, if we could more express. Then we are most properly of one
mind one toward another, when we wish, and do as well to others, as to our
selves. According to Christ; as Christ was to us, and as he gave us command to
be, saying, Love one another, as I have loved you. This is indeed absolute
perfection, and this is the true Badge of a perfect Christian.

6. That of one mind, with one mouth, etc. Then we do truly glorify God, when
we conform our selves in all things to his holy Will; and this we can not all
do, unless all our minds be one, (as he is in us all) to that one effect of
glorifying him: so when one pretends God is glorified thus, and another will
not have it so, but in a way clean contrary, then we are not of one mind, nor
do we speak forth his praises with one mouth: which yet we do, when out of
several mouths we express one and the same will, and way to praise Almighty
God. The Apostle seems to insert the glorifying God, and the Father of Jesus
Christ under two several notions, to let us see, that as Christ was man, he
was also truly the Son of God, because as the second Person had in Heaven a
Father without a Mother, so in Earth Christ had a Mother without any Father,
save only God in Heaven.

7. For the which cause; that is, to show you are all of one mind, etc.
receive, help, and cherish one another, being Christians, (or in order that you
may be so) as Christ has received you (that were Gentiles) unto the honor of
God, to the same Church with his native and chosen People the Jews; and (of
all several nations) made up one joint honor and glory to the Divine Majesty.

8. True it is, Christ was sent by his Heavenly Father with Commission (as it
were) unto the Jews only, and therefore he did live and die amongst them, to
verify those promises which God had made them in Abraham, and the Prophets;
for as the law was only given unto, and kept among the Jews, so the promises
and predictions of that law did only appertain to them, and were (necessarily)
to be made good amongst them, as indeed most exactly they were by Christ, and
this in virtue of Commission from his Heavenly Father: For which cause he is
called here Minister of the Circumcision, (though he abrogated that law) in
regard he did all his life time administer to the circumcised his labors and
pains, by Teaching, Preaching, Curing, and infinite other ways serving the
Jews in order to their Redemption; and this directly, and principally to prove
the veracity of God, who had promised to send the Jews a Messiah, that should
do this, and by doing this, he was truly, and properly, their Minister.

9. But not to the Gentiles so, because he came to them for mercy only, and
ultroneously; to show his goodness was not limited to the bounds of his
Commission to the Jews, but might (and did) mercifully extend it self also to
the Gentiles, thereby to amplify the honor and glory of God, in doing more
than could be expected of him, and that to a people, who had no promise, nor
any hope thereof. Though it was not only foreseen that Christ would do this
act of ultroneous grace and mercy, but foretold by the royal Prophet, Psalm.
17. ver. 50 as follows in this nineth verse of the Epistle.

10. And as ( Deuteronomy. 32. ver. 43.) The Prophet says of the Gentiles, Rejoice ye
Gentiles with his People; that is, with the People of God, with the Jews, for
your Conversion also; and sing forth praise to God for his mercy showed to you
therein.

11. Here it is declared, that not only some few Nations of the Gentiles, but
even all of them shall be first or last made partakers of these mercies, and
thereby are bound to praise our Lord.

12. By the root of Jesse, is here meant a Branch of that root, namely, Christ
Jesus, the son of David, and of Jesse, as Isaias says in another place, There
shall spring a rod from the root of Jesse, Isai. 11. ver. 1. which Rod is Jesus
descended as above: and yet with reason enough Christ is called the root of
Iesse too; for though as man, he was but a branch of David, (his root) yet as
God, he was the root of David, his Creature: again, David was rather his Seed;
than his Root, because he had not from David to be Redeemer of the World, but
was himself the Root of David's, and all Mankinds redemption, and sprouting
forth (as from the Root of goodness in himself) branches of Grace and Glory to
David, and all those whom he was graciously pleased to predestinate for Heirs
to God, and Coheires to himself in his Heavenly Kingdom: The hope of which
Kingdom he has mercifully given as well to the Gentiles, as faithfully by
promise he gave to the Jews.

13. The Apostle here calls him the God of Hope, as above, Verse 5. he did call
him the God of Peace and Comfort; and prays he will replenish them with all
Joy, and peace; as who should say, both Jew and Gentile, setting aside former
distances, now are to Joy in this, that they are made one in Christ Jesus, and
therefore must live in peace together, as the members of a natural Body, since
they are become Members of Christ, his Mystical Body: that by so living, they
may both abound in hope of one reward, enough for both, the Kingdom of Heaven;
and this through the Virtue, that is, Charity, or the Grace of the holy Ghost,
wherein he also prays they may both abound.

The Application.
1. IF what is here written be to our Instruction, it is to make us be the
Saints we are not yet; it is to facilitate the way, by showing us how the Jew
and Gentile were both Saincted by Christianity. The Roots whereof are the three
Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, which indeed do briefly sum
up this whole Epistle in the last Verse thereof, and are given us as the best
preparatives to make way for Jesus into our Hearts. Faith we see made Jew and
Gentile both one Church. O may it grow to such an excellence in us, to abolish
Heresy from Christianity; and because it is a special gift of God, let it be
our daily Prayer that he will give it unto all the World, Turk, Heathen, Pagan,
Jew.

2. Hope keeps together those that Faith uniteth, and, like an Ancre in a
storm, secures the Ship of Christ in highest seas of Persecution. May then the
Hope of future mercy enable us to undergo our present Misery; may the example
of the Saints before us encourage us to be like patterns unto our Posterity, as
they have been to us, that were our Predecessors.

3. Charity makes operative both our Faith, and Hope, sends the Believer with
the hazard of his life to propagate the Faith of Christ throughout the World,
and directs our present actions to such a rectitude of their intentions, as may
secure a future possession of their Hopes. So without Charity in vain we Hope,
in vain men do believe; and are rather nominall, than real Christians; such
as cry out at the latter day, Lord, Lord, and shall hear him say, I know you
not, while you profess belief in Jesus Christ, and offer daily sacrifice to
the Devil; while you pretend a hope of Heaven, and do such actions as can
only merit Hell; while you call one another brethren in Christ, and bear a
mutual hatred greater than the Gentile bore the Jew; for want of those
Heart-raising virtues this Epistle recommends, and bids us

Pray as above, that by the frequent acts thereof, we may both prepare the way
of Christ, and be able, by his coming into our Hearts, to serve him with
purified Souls. So by h^^ coming to us, makes us deserve to go to him. Take
therefore our desert here, and every where, as in the last Sundays prayer it
was explicated, so shall it never be mistaken.

The Gospel, MAT. 11. ver. 2. etc.
2. ANd when John had heard in Prison the Works of Christ, sending two of his
Disciples, he said to him,

3. Art thou he that art to come, or look we for another?

4. And Jesus making answer, said to them, Go, and report to John what you
have heard, and seen.

5. The Blind see, the Lame walk, the Lepers are made clean, the Deaf hear, the
Dead rise again, to the Poor the Gospel is preached.

6. And blessed is he that shall not be scandalized in me.

7. And when they went their way, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes of
John, what went you out into the Desert to see? a Reed shaken with the wind?

8. But what went you out to see? a man clothed in soft Garments? Behold, they
that are clothed in soft Garments, are in Kings houses.

9. But what went you out to see? a Prophet? yea, I tell you, and more than a
Prophet.

10, For this is he of whom it is written, Behold, I send mine Angel before
thy face, which shall prepare thy way before Thee, Mal. 3. v. 1.


The Explication.
2. IT was from his own Disciples he heard the Stories of Christ's admirable
works, whilst he was in prison, for reprehending Herod about his unlawful
marriage with Herodias his Brothers wife: and so he sends two of the same
Disciples to Christ, that they might see with their own eyes the wonders of his
Works, and thereby leave the fond opinion they had of John, his being a greater
man than Jesus. This was done in the two and thirtieth year of our Savior,
which was the second of his Preaching; and Saint John did this purposely to
confirm his Disciples in the belief of Jesus, being indeed the great Messiah
that was expected: lest when John was dead, (as soon after it happened) they
might remain in doubt of that truth, which was no less importing, than their
Souls salvation; namely, that Christ was the true Messiah, and John but his
forerunner.

3. Saint John did not bid them ask this question as a thing he doubted of, for
he had, before this Baptized Jesus, and often given many great testimonies of
his being the Messiah; but only finding he could not persuade his Disciples to
that truth, he now sends them to have it made undoubted unto them; not so much
by the words, as by the prodigious works of Christ: Though Saint John asks the
question in his own, not in his disciples names, to show his greater skill in
curing his Disciples disease, by seeming himself to be sick of the same,
according to that of Saint Paul, Who is weak, and I am not weak? 2 Cor. 11.
ver. 29. Again, the Disciples durst not perhaps have been so bold with Christ,
had not their Master given them leave to ask this question in his Name.

4. Lo, the answer, answerable unto expectation, not in words, but works:
Christ tells them not, that he is the Messiah, but bids them go back, and tell
John what they had heard and seen, knowing full well, that John from thence
would prove unto them, he was the man they asked after, the God-man, the great
Messiah: besides, Christ, by this way of answering, took off from himself all
note of vanity, and gave a high example of humble modesty, by declining to
speak his own praises, though not to do the works whereby God was praised, by
the affirmation of the truth without a word; and therefore Christ before them
did actually do many Miracles, which Saint Luke (c. 7. ver. 21.) recounts even
such as Esaias, c. 35. v, 5. and c. 61 v. 1. had foretold were to be the
undoubted signs of the true Messiah; which done, he bids John's Disciples Go
back, and tell him what they had heard and seen; as who should say, what they
did see, was done purposely to give them satisfaction to their question, which
yet they did not receive as satisfactory, till John made it so unto them, the
more to testify the truth.

5. These were the very signs which Isaias (in the places above cited) gave of
the true Messiah. By the poor are here understood, chiefly those who are poor
in Spirit, that is, voluntarily such, esteeming all worldly wealth as trash,
and coveting no riches but those of grace and glory: I say, chiefly such,
because among the poor whom Christ preached unto, his Apostles were the chief,
who were truly poor in spirit, by leaving the little all they had to follow
Christ; and these were they whom he took most pains to instruct; Note here what
an honor it is to be preacher to the poor, when it was given as a mark to
prove Christ was God, so must it needs be a mark to prove that those who now
do it, are children of God inspired thereto by their heavenly father.

6. It is hugely remarkable, that our Savior after such prodigious miracles,
closes with saying, Blessed is he that is not scandalized in me, rather he
might have said, Happy are they who stand in Admiration, (indeed in Adoration)
of me: but it wants not depth of mystery, that he says the contrary, because
his poor and abject manner of life was nothing suitable to his splendid works;
and for this reason he says, Happy are they who are not taken off from the
belief of my Deity, by the beholding the vility of my humanity. But his
meaning was deeper yet, namely, to answer thereby even unto the thoughts of
John's Disciples, which he knew, though they durst not speak them; for they
were staggered to behold so mean a man, (as his apparel, and outward person
spoke him) working so many mir^cles; hence they resolved, first to make report
unto John what they had seen, and then to frame their Judgments as he should
advise them: Now to this thought our Savior applied these words: Happy, who
are not scandalized in me.

7. Not till they went away, because he knew John's Disciples had too good an
opinion of their Master, as thinking him to be the Messiah; so to have praised
him before their faces, had been both to flatter the Master, and pervert the
Disciples into a belief, their Error was a Truth: On the other side since the
people had their eyes wholly upon Christ, (to exercise his own humility, and to
render them better informed of John the Baptist than it seems they were) he
falls into John's praises to the multitude, by asking t^em, What they went out
to see, when they ran after John into the desert? Did you go to see a Reed
tossed too and fro with every wind? Or do you think John such? That he who
had first preached my praises to the people, now he was in prison, had changed
his opinion of me? and so sends this doubtful question to me? No, he is still
the same constant man, he is not blown like a Reed out of his former belief,
by the blast of Herod's breath committing him to prison.

8. Our Savior prosecutes his design in the former verse of rectifying the
people in their judgments about S. John, by asking them whether they thought
John a man flexible in his mind, as those are who daily vary their apparel,
and pamper up themselves in the most changeable of vices, a Mollities or
softness of nature, yielding and altering it self at every least impression
made upon it? Or went you out to see a man in Kings houses? that is, of Kings
Houses, a Courtier, variable as the wind, turning and winding his opinion, as
they do their habits, who follow the fashions of the Court? No, John if in the
desert, clad in hair, feeding little, praying much, and thence constant in his
opinion, what ere you think to the contrary, by his Disciples coming from him
to me with the question as abov^.

9. And least they should think they stood sufficiently informed of John the
Baptist his merits by believing him a Prophet, our Savior asks even that
question, as if it were below St. John's titles to be a Prophet, and so Christ
said, he is more than a Prophet. Why? be cause Prophets only foretell future
things, but John both told the people the Messiah was suddenly to come, and had
besides the honor to show him to them, as well as to tell them of him: So he
was truly a Prophet, and more than a Prophet.

10. And that they may see how much more, he tells them John is an Angel among
men, and affirms the Prophecy of Malachy cited in this verse, to be verified
of the Baptist, to show thereby, that as God formerly spoke to the People but
by the mouths of Men, who did foretell them he was to come, and save the
world; yet now that he was actually come himself, he sends more than man, an
Angel of men at least, John the Baptist, both to prepare his way, and to point
him out to the people with his finger, saying, Lo here he is, that has been
long expected, the great Messiah, the Man-God, Christ Jesus, whose shoo-strings
I am not worthy to untie, though you esteem me his equal, nay, some of you
value me above him too.

The Application.
1. WHat our Savior in the Baptist did commend, holy Church to us now
recommends, His Fortitude, his Austerity, and his Angelical Purity: We shall
profess the first by not only standing the shock of open persecution, but
that also of the inward war our senses make perpetually against our Reason:
if we shall rather choose to die, than to commit the least sin against
Almighty God; for thus we show the fortitude of Grace, while we repel the
assaults of Nature.

2. The second we shall then be perfect in, when we persuade our selves
eternal felicity cannot be bought too dear by any our temporal austerity; and
when we cease to flatter one another, that mortification is not necessary,
unless to expiate enormious sins. Alas fond souls! why then did Jesus? why
his Blessed Mother? why the holy Baptist use Austerity of life? they had no
sins to purge away by penance; no, they for our example were austere, and to
declare that temporal pleasures are commonly the causes of eternal
punishments.

3. The third is, as the way unto our Journies end; for since by Angels we are
only once removed from God, either we must approach him by the purity
Angelical, or be for ever separated from him with the spirits Diabolical.

For prevention whereof, and for obtaining the Baptistick virtues, we fitly
pray to day as above.

On the third Sunday of Advent.
The Antiphon, LUKE 1. ver. 41. BLessed art thou, Mary, who did believe our
Lord: These things shall be perfected in Thee, which were spoken to thee by our
Lord.

Verse. Drop, etc. as before, page 1.

Resp. Be the Earth, etc.


The Prayer.
LEnd, we beseech thee, O Lord, thine ear unto our Prayers, and enlighten the
darkness of our mind with the grace of thy Visitation.

The Illustration.
SEe how like himself the holy Ghost makes us pray to day, when Spiritually
altogether this Prayer alludes unto the other Service of the day; for literally
there is no connection at all between the Epistle, Gospel, and this days
Prayer, but Spiritually they suite exceeding well together. And first, as
relating to the time of Advent, alluding to that immediately before the real
Birth of Christ, wherein the holy Patriarchs and Prophets prayed, as we have
heard in the two foregoing Sundays; but with this addition, that still the
nearer we come to the Feast of Christmas, the nearer the Prayers represent
Christ unto us, and now indeed so near, as if upon the summons of two Prayers
only gone before, Christ were come already so far on his way from Heaven to
Earth, that we may now even whisper in his ear, (as this Prayer seems to do)
begging the Loan of his Ears unto us in his transient carreer, as if each of
us were forced to stop him on his way for some Emolumentall occasion particular
to our selves, while we say, Lend, we beseech thee, O Lord, thine ear to our
Prayers; or as if our guilty Consciences persuaded us he might be still as deaf
to us (though at hand, according to the Epistle) as he had been to all the
world beside for four thousand years together, and therefore we are now taught
humbly to round him in the Ear; and, as it were, with a fervorous zeal, to run
like Lacquies after him, begging the favor of a private whisper as he goes,
and that merely to tell him our case is worse than others, that his general
Grace of Visitation to the whole world, will hardly be enough for us, unless he
please particularly to enlighten the darkness of our mind with the
(particular) grace of his special Visitation to us, though it be by an
application only of his Ear to our particular suite, as he runs posting
through the desert of common sin, where we (more sadly each than other) may
piously believe we lie ensnared, and want a little glimmering of Grace (more
than ordinary) to inlighten us, that we may first seeing, lament, and then
lamenting, expiate our selves of all our sins whatsoever against the blessed
time of his Nativity: and indeed the best way to avail our selves of the
annual Feasts (especially those which are mysteries of our redemption) is to
presentiate the same as now actually flowing, and first being arrived to our
knowledges: for so shall our souls be raised unto a piety suitable to the
thing, as well as to the time that puts it into our minds: And what Christian
is there so obdurate, so stony-hearted, as if he could every year persuade
himself (which holy Church exhorts us to, both by our Pastors and our Prayers)
that things were then in doing, which he knows are done, and that himself were
an actor in each Scean, in each Feast or Mystery represented, would not relent
and soften toward his God, who like a melted Goodness came to pour out
himself amongst us.

This, this beloved, were the part of good Christians, to pray now in this
sense, to run like Lacquies (nay like shadows) near up to the new Incarnate
God, who being in himself an Inaccessable light, was fain to eclipse his Glory
in the cloud of humane Nature; that so within the shadow of his shade-yeilding
body, we might approach unto him, and whisper our necessities in his sacred
Ears, who now as man, will hear us, however as God, the whole world seemed to
cry out in vain to him for 4000. years together.

Say then, Beloved, this Prayer to day, with this religious Duty, this
All-ghostly sense dictated unto us by the holy Ghost, and we soon shall see the
effect it works in us, toward rendering us the perfect Christians, that this
days Epistle exhorts us to be, Joyful, modest, resigned, thankful, and
peaceful, even to the surpassing the understanding; nay more, enlightened
Angels running before the face of Jesus Christ to his Crib, where born, he will
immediately dispense in ample manner the special Grace of his visitation to us
all, that thus (like Baptists as the Gospel to day exhorts) shall now prepare
his ways before him to the future Feast of his Nativity. And thus we see both
Epistle and Gospel of this day, though not literally, yet Mystically (if not
as it were eminentially too) included in this Prayer above.

The Epistle, PHIL. 4. ver. 4. etc.
4. Rejoice in our Lord always; again, I say, Rejoice ye.

5 Let your modesty be known to all men; our Lord is nigh.

6. Be nothing careful; but in every thing by Prayer and supplication let your
Petitions be known with God.

7. And the peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and
intelligences in Christ Jesus.


The Explication.
4. TO Rejoice, that they were Christians, and had the happiness of true Faith,
true Hope, true Charity: This the Apostle meant by rejoicing in our Lord, in
his holy gifts of Spirit bestowed upon them, not that he had made them noble,
rich, or great Persons, but religious Christians: for this he bids them always
rejoice in our Lord; again, and again rejoice: And when he said always, he
meant as well in affliction, as in prosperity, because to zealous Souls no
humane trouble ought to be disturbing, so long as they have the comfort of a
good Cause, and a good Conscience too.

5. Modesty is a virtue giving a mean to all the actions of a man, and
therefore that we might see Christianity sets all things in order both with the
inward, and outward man; the Apostle exhorts the Philippians to give a proof of
their perfection in Christianity by their Modesty; and by such a modesty, as
might be known to all men; such a modesty, as puts a graceful blush upon all
their actions, lest any one might see the infirmity of man in him, who was
become more than man, by being a true and perfect Christian; and therefore S.
Paul tells us here, we should stand upon a modest guard, because our Lord, who
is to be our Judge, is nigh, and has his eyes upon us, as needs he must, when
he gives us the concourse of his Divine Assistance toward our each thought and
deed: but our Lords being nigh, may now in Advent, be applied to the Nativity
of our Savior; and for this purpose holy Church appoints that place of
Scripture to be read to day, though literally the Text alludes to the latter
day of Doom.

6. By Care is here meant Anxiety or trouble of mind, not that he prohibits a
diligence, a due regard to do what is on our parts to be done, but beyond that
he will not have us go; he forbids us all anxious solicitude, and recommends
a perfect resignation of our selves, to the will and pleasure of Almighty God.
And though he bids us have a care to pray upon all occasions, as well of
Prosperity, as of Adversity: yet he allows not any sollicitous care in us
about the effect of our Prayer, whether we obtain our requests, or not, made
unto God by Prayer, but will have us leave that freely to his Divine Majesty;
for indeed Beggars (who want all things) must not choose what supply they will
first receive, but humbly accept of whatsoever is given; and if denied, they
may ask again, but never must be troubled when they are refused: nor is our
Prayer to God, other than an expression of our despicable beggary, and exigence
of all necessaries, both for Body and Soul, and since from him we receive all
our supplies (what hand soever it be that gives relief) to him must our Prayer,
to him our Supplication, to him our thanks; and (for his sake) to those that
are his Messengers, his Ministers of help unto us, and then we glorify him,
when we thank them, by whom he hands his Blessings to us.

7. By the peace of God we may here understand, either that increated peace,
which is God himself, whereof peaceable creatures participate, or the peace
which Christ made between God and Man, by his passion appeasing the Divine
Wrath, or the peace which we make among our selves, when we forgive each other
our Offenses; or the peace we have within our selves of a quiet Conscience; for
all, and every one of these, are truly called the Peace of God: And yet when
the Apostle says, That peace which passes all understanding; he seems to
incline to the first and last acception of Peace; for as that surpasses the
understanding of Angels; so this is indeed past all humane understanding to
know, how unquiet man can attain the happiness of that peace, which a quiet
conscience affords him, since it calmes all the tempests of outward persecution
and trouble, and makes a man by the equality of his mind, equally to bear all
unequalls whatsoever can befall him, keeping our hearts (our wills) and our
Intelligences (our understandings) still sixth upon Almighty God, still adhering
unto him, and united to his sacred Son, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

The Application.
1. IN the first Verse of this Epistle we are taught how to comport our selves
toward God, Always rejoicing in him, to bear even the afflictions of this
world with a contented mind. So Saint Paul Romans 5. We glory even in our
tribulations, and glory we cannot in any thing that gives us not content, that
does not joy our hearts; for the momentary tribulations of this world (born
with patience) secure us of eternal consolations in the next. Whence the same
Apostle, Cor. 6. says, As it were sad, yet always rejoicing, because in our
patient suffering we serve and glorify The God of all consolation.

2. In the second Verse see how we are to demean our selves toward our
neighbor, Modestly ever, because our Lord is nigh. As who should say, we can
never look upon our Neighbor, but as on our fellow servant holding up the
hanging to let our common Master in to us, that follows him purposely to see
how we demean our selves to one another; which must needs be Modestly in his
presence. And when is he absent, who always is between us? always indeed
within us? An excellent close tie to humane modesty; ever to behave our selves
as in the Presence chamber of his Heavenly Majesty.

3. What follows in this Epistle, is to teach us our behavior toward our
selves. That is to say, reflecting on our own infirmity, to be ever asking
health of Soul and Body, ever praying to God in all our exigences, not loosing
our labor to ask relief or comfort from one another, who are all invellopt in
a mass of common misery: so the surest way to find comfort, is to cast our
care away, and to resign our selves to God, to beg of him alone what ere we
lack. For if we have his open car, him present with us, all is well; all at
peace with God and Man.

Whence it is we beg to day as above, that hearing our Prayers, he will
graciously visit our hearts, and by so doing inlighten them in these Triple
Duties aforesaid, as fit preparatives in Advent, for the approaching Nativity
of our Lord.

The Gospel, JOHN 1. ver. 19. etc.
19. THe Jews sent from Jerusalem Priests and Levites, that they should ask
him, Who art thou?

20. And he confessed, and did not deny: and he confessed, that I am not Christ.

21. And they asked him what then? art thou Elias? and he said I am not. Art
thou the Prophet, and he answered, No.

22. They said therefore unto him, who art thou? that we may give an answer to
them that sent us? what say thou of thy self?

23. He said, I am a voice of one crying in the Desert, make straight the way
of our Lord, as Isaiah the Prophet said.

24. And they that were sent were of the Pharisees.

25. And they asked him, and said to him, why then do thou Baptize, if thou
be not Christ, nor Elias, nor the Prophet?

26. John answered them, saying, I baptize in water: but there has stood in
the midst of you, whom you know not.

27. The same is he that shall come after me, that is made before me, whose
latchet of his shoe I am not worthy to unloose.

28. These things were done in Bethania beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing.


The Explication.
19. THey did ask this of the Baptist, after he had baptized Christ, and given
testimony to the world, that Jesus was the Messiah, whereas the people looking
on John the Baptists austerity and sanctity of life, held him rather to have
been the Messiah, or at least a more eminent Prophet than Jesus Christ. Now,
because the other Evangelists told us, what testimony the Baptist gave of
Christ before he did Baptize him, therefore Saint John Evangelist omits it in
his Gospel, which indeed he wrote chiefly to supply what the rest had omitted;
and since this opinion the world had of John the Baptist to be the Messiah, was
near the time, when the Law told them their Messiah was to come, they send the
Priests of the Law, the Ministers of their Synagouge to know the Truth; and to
ask particularly about it, that afterward they might satisfy the world:
hence coming to John the Baptist, they, the Priests and Levites a^k him, Who
art thou? and asking this juridically, he was of necessity to give them answer:
not that they asked whose Son he was, for they all knew him to be the son of
Zachary the Priest, and so consequently a Priest too; but their desire was to
know, what his office was, besides his dignity, seeing him teach, preach,
baptize, and do more than ever any man had done before him: and however this
question savoured of malice (in some) to Christ, and therefore they would
rather have John to be the Messiah than Jesus, yet in others it argued malice
to John, and these resolved to blame him, if he undertook more than his
Commission; so they ask him, Who he was, but undoubtedly it was by divine
Ordinance too they were moved to ask this question, that thereby the verity of
Christ's being the true Messiah might appear, not only, by our Saviors own
works, but also by John's confession.

20. By this answer it seems they asked John, not only Who art thou? but also,
Whether thou art Christ? So when we read, he confessed, we must understand, it
was the naked truth he did confess, when he said, he was not Christ, and gave
them to understand, this dignity and office did not belong to him, but only to
our Savior.

21. They proceed then to ask if he were Elias, because they knew Elias was
reserved to be the forerunner of Christ, according to the prophecy of
Malachy, Chap. 4 v. 5. and knowing the time of the Messiah was at hand, they
thought John to be Elias, as being ignorant that Malachy his prophecy reports
to Christ his second coming in the day of Judgment, when Elias indeed shall
come before him, as now in his first coming John the Baptist did, which yet
these Priests might have known, because the same Prophet Malachy foretold,
Christ should have a forerunner to his first, as well as to his last coming;
meaning Elias for one, John the Baptist for the other; So John denying himself
to be Elias said most true, and yet did not deny but himself was foretold by
Malachy, to be Christ his forerunner, though his humility would not give him
leave to confess so much when they asked, Art thou the Prophet? and he
answered, No, he meant not such a Prophet, as deserved that name above all
others, and to be styled eminently The Prophet, since in this nature, Christ
only was his own, and his eternal Fathers Prophet also, who revealed unto us
the mysteries of the Deity, and of true Religion: Besides, since the proper
office of a Prophet is to foretell things to come, and that John the Baptist
was properly sent to point out Christ already come, even with his finger, as
well as with his tongue, therefore he might very well, (humbly and yet truly
too) deny himself to be a Prophet.

22, 23. Here they pressing him hard, and declaring they came by lawful
Commission to do so to, and stood bound to carry back his answer, lo they
have it with all humility and truth together; because there is nothing less
than a voice, and nothing more certain, than that he was by the Prophet Isaias
foretold to be the man, who by his preaching and sanctity of life, should give
example to the world, that the ways of God are holy, and so that he was sent
before to tell the world: Christians ways are those of God; and must be such
as the Baptist had begun, and as Christ had perfectly trod out before them, to
make them straight.

24. It is particularly noted, those who came thus to interrogate S. John were
Pharisees, because they pretended to more than ordinary knowledge in the
Scriptures; and having read there, that the Messiah was to baptize, which was
not foretold of any other Prophet, hence they ask as follows.

25. Why then do thou baptize, if thou be neither Christ, nor Elias, nor the
Prophet? and by this Interrogatory, they thought to have confounded him; So it
argues beside the Commission they had to ask, Who he was, they added this
Question out of their own malice to him, and out of Ostentation, to show the
people they were well read in the Scriptures.

26. To this John replies by distinguishing betwixt his own and Christ's
Baptism, telling the people he does but Baptize in water, (Christ shall baptize
in Spirit) for thus the rest of the Evangelists make the Baptist answer, and
therefore S. John omits that; So the Baptist professes his Baptism is only in
water, as a sign or Figure of Christ's Baptism, which shall be in Spirit to
remission of sins, which this of John's was not, but only by his Baptism he
exhorted people to penance and tears for sin, not that sin was thereby
remitted. But there is one in the midst of you, whom ye know not, (Jesus
Christ,) who daily converseth with you, and yet you do not take notice of him
to be the true Messiah, whom you enquire after so earnestly; as who should say,
leave your curious questions, do but use your own eyes, look but earnestly
upon Jesus, and you shall soon by his works, perceive he is the man you seek
for.

27. The Baptist says, Christ shall come after him, because he shall preach
when John is dead; by saying, Christ was made before him, he both alludes to
the eternal generation of Jesus in the decree divine, and to the perpetual
prelation or preference both of doctrine and sanctity, wherein Christ was many
degrees before the Baptist, in so much as he does not esteem himself worthy to
untie our Saviors shoes, which in the esteem of man is the meanest office
that can be imagined, because we commonly stoop as low as earth to perform it.

28. This Bethanie is not that where Martha and Lazarus treated our Savior,
but is distinguished from it, as much in the mystery of the name, as in the
distance of the place; for that Bethania signifies the house of humility, This
the house of Ships, or, The place of passage, namely, where the people of
Israel passed over the River Jordan, going out of Egypt into the land of
promise, and there Christ was baptized by John, where also John commonly
baptized all others, to show the Figurative Baptism did declare the
transmigration in the true Baptism from Sin to Grace; and so was like that
passage of the Israelites from Egypt into the land of promise, from a
wretched, to a prosperous condition.

The Application.
1. WHat so deplorable as to have eyes, and not to see the shining Sun? This
blindness of the Jews is what to day the Gospel represents. They knew the
Tokens of the true Messiah well enough; they knew those were not verified in
the Baptist; and as well they knew them all made good in Jesus Christ; yet
seem to doubt, O wilful Caecity!

2. What shall we think, to see the Christian blinder than the Jew; the
Catholics perverser than the Heretics; and as we read, Tim. 1. Confessing
they knew God, yet denying him in their Works: By doing such things as give
themselves the Lie: Whence holy David says, Iniquity belyes herself. And this
so often as Christians in Profession, are Infidels in Practice.

3. But see a greater blindness yet in these, who will defend their Vices to be
Virtues; and even glory in their own Iniquities. Say then beloved, was it not
high time to seek an Eyebright out to cure this Caecity of Souls, rebuked, in
being represented, Whilst we pray as above to day, for illumination of Grace,
to disperse the dismal darkness of corrupted Nature?

On the fourth Sunday of Advent.
The Antiphon. O Emmanuel, our King and Lawgiver, the expectation of Nations,
and the Savior of them, come to save us O Lord our God.

Verse. Drop dew, etc.

Resp. Be the earth, etc.


NOte this O Emmanuel, or some one of the seven great Os (variable as the
Sunday falls out on days more or less before Christmas Day) is always the
Antiphon on this Sunday: And these Os shall be explicated in the other Tome of
this work, when every day that has a several Prayer and Gospel, shall be set
out as these Sundays were: suffice it now to reflect, that this O, this
exclaiming voice argues the manner of crying out in the old Patriarchs and
Prophets, for the coming away of the so long expected Messiah.

The Prayer.
O Lord we beseech thee, raise up thy power, and with thy mighty virtue come
away to our succor, that by the help of thy grace, what our sins retard, the
indulgence of thy propitiation may Accelerate.

The Illustration.
LOok in what Style the Church began her Advent-Prayers, she ends them with the
same, as if Omnipotency had not power enough, and could be raised to greater,
by being rowsed, or stirred up: for though it be not needful, yet we may
lawfully, and laudably enough speak in this language to Almighty God, who
magnifies (to us at least) his power, by acknowledging our want of it to be so
great, as if it needed re-inforcement to do the work of our Redemption; an act
as far above the Angels natural reach, as it was beyond our hopes or merits,
had it not been mercifully promised without desert in Man: for when Angels see
the Sun of Justice clad in the clouds of our Iniquity, they were amazed, and
saw that God had found a means to add, as it were, to his Omnipotency, by
partaking of humane Impotency, and by raising our weakness (in his sacred
person) to an ability above Angelical capacity; he seemed indeed to rowse, or
stir up his own Omnipotency to a Super-omnipotency, to an act greater than it
had ere before extended to, namely to pardoning of Sin, a thing the Angels
never were acquainted with; for though Man were redeemed, yet the Devils were
for all eternity condemned upon the guilt of their one only sin: Nor is it a
lessening of the phrase, to ask the succor of Gods mighty virtue, though it be
in truth Almighty; for all we can add to God, is rather diminution, than
addition to his perfection, which consists in simplicity; so that in him
Power and Omnipotency, Might, and Almightiness is all one Thing, because his
Attributes are his Essence; each of them Infin^^e, and all of them together
making his Infinity no greater than it is in any one alone: if yet we may use
that freedom to speak of multiplicity, where (pesonality excepted) simplicity
makes up all perfection, as in God it does: But having in this language courted
down Almighty God from Heaven, lest we grow vainglorious by the honor of his
approach; see how the rest of this days Prayer does humble us, while in the
following words we give this reason for our calling God to our Succors, with
all his mustred forces, That by the help of his Grace (added to us, cooperating
with the same) what our sins retarded (that is to say, our own redemption was
by our own sins retarded for 4000. years together) the Indulgence of his
propitiation may accelerate.

It was indeed, a huge indulgence in Almighty God to make his sacred Son a
propitiation for our sins; and more, to hasten him away for this purpose, since
forty thousand years had been too short a time to have expected so much mercy,
as is now accelerated, by the indulgence of his propitiation, which would not
give him leave to stay above 4000. years away. And by this close of the Prayer,
we virtually include the whole Epistle and Gospel of the day, while we beg the
help of Gods Grace to accelerate unto us the benefit of the Indulgent
propitiation, that Christ his Birthday brings to every pious Christian: which
benefit, lest our sins retard, see how the Church prepares both Priest and
People to a due regard against them, by the counsel given to both in the
Epistle, and by exhorting both to be Baptistick Saints in the Gospel of the
Day, to be preparers of the way of Christ, Angels of Men, running this holy
Advent before his face, to sanctify our own, and our neighbors ways, unto
the Crib, where Christ on Christmas Day is mystically born again, as often as
Christians celebrate the Feast of his Nativity; so says Saint Leo in his
nineth Sermon upon that Feast, (and the like is of all others) We do not so
much recall the past, as we behold the present Feast of our Saviors Birth, so
often as it comes about by Annual revolution.

The Epistle, 1 COR 4. ver. 1. etc.
1. SO let man esteem of us as the Ministers of Christ, and the dispensers of
the Mysteries of God

2. Here now is required among the dispensers, that a man be found faithful.

3. But to me it is a thing of least account, to be judged of you, or of Man's
day; but I judge not my self neither.

4. For I am not guilty in Conscience of any thing; but I am not justified
herein: but he that judges me, is our Lord.

5. Therefore judge not before the time, until our Lord do come, who also
will lighten the hidden things of darkness; and will manifest the counsels of
the hearts, and then the praise shall be to every Man of God.


The Explication.
1. THe Apostle seems here to bid Man esteem of him (and his Associates in the
Apostolate) as if they were not men, but Ministers of Christ, for as much as
they did the Offices of God, by being dispensers of his Mysteries; and indeed
that is most true, for though to be a Steward, or master of a Family under any
temporal Lord, and to dispense, and dispose of his Lords Moneys and Goods, be
not to execute an office above man, in regard all the goods and moneys in the
Stewards hands are temporal things, and the properties of nothing above a
humane creature; yet to be Steward of the House of God, and to have the
dispensing of such goods as are Spiritual, and cannot be the properties of any
temporal Lord, certainly this renders a man (though not in nature more than
Man) yet by Office hugely more than an Angel: for though we read of them, that
they are, Heb. 1.14. Ministering Spirits in the House, or Church of God, both
triumphant, militant, and patient; yet we never read that they were styled the
dispensing spirits of Gods hidden Mysteries; which yet, as the Apostles were,
so must their suuccessours, the Priests of holy Church be too, and consequently
are not in the execution of that Spiritual Office to be looked on, or esteemed
as men, but as Ministers of a higher nature, as persons indeed more than
Angelical, since they have an Office and Power above Angels; namely, to
forgive Sins, and to dispense, or dispose of Gods several Graces, by the
conduit of holy Sacraments, Pipes, made on purpose (by our Savior Jesus
Christ) to convey unto our barren Souls the fertilizing waters of heavenly
grace; and these pipes are so put into the hands of Priests, as they can turn
the cock at pleasure, give, or retain this holy grace, as they judge fit, to
administer a Sacrament, or suspend a Sinner from the benefit thereof. But we
must further note the Apostle here, as he speaks in general to all Christians,
and bids them esteem Priests above men by reason of their office, so he speaks
particularly to the Corinthians in order to their main contention, which was to
make a difference betwixt the Dispensers of these Mysteries* as if Baptism (for
example) received from one, were of more value, than if they were baptized by
another, or as if the Ministers of Baptism were the Authors of grace, and so
they who received it at a more holy man's hands, received more, than if the
conferror thereof were less holy; to both these effects the Apostle speaks,
correcting the Corinthians error in them both, that is, for thinking the
Administrator of a Sacrament to be the Author of grace therein conferred, or
that grace was more abundantly conferred, according as the Administrators
thereof were more or less holy.

2 This alludes to the vanity of the Corinthians, who were men so curious, that
they judged of their Preachers as they found them, more wise, more grave, more
eloquent in their Sermons or Catechisms than others, and particularly they
adhered much to Apollo, because they held him more eloquent than S. Paul,
whereas the same Apostle here tells them, they must not regard in the
Dispensers of Gods word, the Rhetoric, language, or eloquence of the
preachers, but above all their fidelity, or being faithful, that is, to have
them tell the true sense and meaning of Christ Jesus, to have them give rather
sound, than flourishing doctrine, least while they put too much force in words,
they lose the vigor of the Spirit, which is, and ought to be the life of a
Sermon, and least they seek by the Ostentation of their languages, rather their
own, than the glory of God, or preach themselves, not Christ: Whereas S. Paul
tells them here, fidelity is the principal part of a preacher, that is, to
preach the Word of God, and not the word of man, to preach spirit rather than
language, to move the soul to Acts of love, rather than the ear to delight of
Eloquence.

3. This Verse prosecutes the sense of the former, telling them plainly he did
not regard their fond judgments, that esteemed men by their glib tongues,
rather than by their virtuous spirits; for it is indeed Unction, (a special
gift of the Holy Ghost) that renders a Preacher most profitable to souls, and
so most accomplished in his preaching, whence the Apostle, knowing what he said
was pure spirit, told them he did not regard their censures of him, as if he
were defective in his duty of preaching, and what he says to them in this
kind, he affirms the like in respe and of all men by his following words,
wherein he makes no account of man's day, that is, of humane judgment in a
point of Spirit; for thus the day of man is often taken, as by Jeremiah it was,
Chap. 17. v. 16. when being derided by the people, who contemned his
Prophecies, he cried out, Thou know O Lord, I desire not the days (the
applause) of men, nor regard their judgments of me; Suffice it, I have
delivered unto them what thou have to me revealed: So in this sense S. Paul
here cares not for the judgment of the Corinthians, whether they like his
preaching or not, but is content that he tells them the genuine sense of his
Lord and Master, Christ Jesus; and yet least he may by this speech seem
arrogant, See how he takes off all suspicion of vanity in himself by what
follows, saying, Though I am not troubled, O Corinthians, at what you think or
judge of me, yet neither am I so vain as to presume I am without fault, and so
I neither will nor dare to judge my self, this place might dissuade Heretics
from presuming they are certain of their future salvation, and of their being
here in the state of grace, if themselves think so, assuredly S. Paul might
better justify himself, and yet we see he does not, indeed he dares not do it.

4. While in this next verse he says, though I am not guilty particularly of
any infidelity, vanity, or ostentation in preaching, (for still he prosecutes
that sense, which yet generally may be understood of any sin,) nevertheless I
am not justified therein he will not justify himself,) but he that judges me
is our Lord, and to him I must leave it to judge, who not only sees and knows
all hearts, but perfectly knows them too, that is, sees further and clearer
into all men's hearts, than any one man can see into his own.

5. Here the Apostle referrs not only his own judgment of himself, and of his
Ministry, but even the judgments of all men whatsoever to the latter day of
Doom; for then (and not till then) Our Lord shall come, and inlighten the
hidden things of darkness, by laying all things open, and this not only (as
some Heretics will have it) whether we believe right or wrong, but also
whether we do good or bad deeds according to our Faith: For so by the
plurality of hidden things here mentioned to be revealed then, is clearly meant
in those words of the Apostle; insomuch that Heretics fondly pretend unto a
certainty of their rectitude in Faith, more than they can do unto a rectitude
in their works, and therefore flatter themselves, that be their works (the
counsels of their hearts) what they will, yet since it is by Faith men are
justified, and since they pretend to know certainly, that they do rightly
believe, they therefore scruple not to s^cure themselves of salvation, be their
lives never so bad, being their Faith, as they say, (to their certain
knowledge) is right: For the Holy Ghost has taught us a contrary doctrine to
this presumption in Ecclesiastes Chap. 9. v. 1. A man knows not whether he be
worthy of love or hatred. So Prove. 20.9. Who can say, my heart is clean? So Job
9 21. If I be simple or Innocent, yet my soul knows it not. So Jer. 17. v.
9. Wicked is the heart of man, and inscrutable, unless to God alone: To
conclude, the sentence of Judgment shall not only pass upon our Faith,
whether that be right or wrong, but upon our works, the Counsels of our hearts,
for every one shall in that day receive according to his works: and Luke 20. we
receive what our works deserve; and in the mean time till the day of general
judgment come, the Apostle forbids to judge each other, since neither he, nor
any man can securely and rightly judge himself, but then look who has done and
deserved well, the praise shall be to every one of God, though mistaking men
have judged those perhaps worthy of blame, whom God shall declare to be
praiseworthy, because he finds them to have been faithful to the Ministry or
trust which he reposed in them: So here we see from first to last, St Paul his
true sense in this place is upon fidelity in the dispensers of the Mysteries of
God, and declares, that no man but God can judge in that particular, as being
an office not appertaining to men, but to God himself, and unto him alone: I
must here advertise you, that the Apostle in the next Verse declares that he
uses his own, and Apollo's name but figuratively, thereby to represent to the
Christians their faults, in pretending to have one more light of grace than
another, or to be one better able than another to understand the Scriptures,
showing it is a thing they ought as little to presume of in themselves, as to
censure whether he or Apollo did more faithfully perform the trust of God
reposed in them, by their ministry of dispensators of his Mysteries.

The Application.
1. THe closing Advent season claims a due regard in this days service, so
the prayer begins, alluding unto that, and ends besides with the accustomary
reference to the Epistle of the day. How like the outcries of the ancient
Prophets is the style of Holy Churches prayer to day. They cried out thus, O
Wisdom! O Adonai! O Root of Jesse! O Key of David! O Rising Sun! O King of
Nations! O Emmanuel, etc. Come and save us, thou that art our Lord God. And we,
promising all these exclamations, pray as above. O Lord we beseech thee, raise
up thy power, and with thy mighty virtue, come away to our succor, etc.
meaning all the power, and all the Virtue included in those Attributes of
Wisdom, Adonai, King, and Savior, which the Prophets gave him as above.

2. And least our sins do chase away the coming Jesus, see this Epistle points
us to the Priests of holy Church, as to the Ministers of Christ, and dispensers
of the Mysteries of God, Meaning of the Holy Sacraments, that blot out sin, and
give us grace to bid our Savior welcome.

3. Hence we conclude, the Pastors and the People are admonished to buckle to
their several Devoirs to day, these in administering, these in receiving of the
Holy Sacraments, and yet each having done his duty, neither to presume he has
done well enough, but both referring of themselve to God his Judgments for the
future, and expecting his mercies for the present, And to pray as Holy Church
above appoints, That our sins do not retard the coming of his mercy toward
us.

The Gospel, Luke 3. ver. 1. etc.
1 ANd in the fifteenth year of the Empire of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate
being governor of Jewrie, and Herod being Tetrarch of Galilee, and Philip his
brother Thtrarch of Iturea, and the Country of Trachonitis, and Lysanias
Tetrarch of Abilina.

2. Under the High Priests Annas and Caiphas, the word of our Lord was made
upon John the son of Zachary in the desert.

3. And he came into all the country of Jordan, preaching the Baptism of
penance unto remission of sins, as it is written in the Book of the sayings of
Isaiah the Prophet.

4. A voice of one crying in the Desert: prepare the way of our Lord, make
straight his paths.

5. Every valley shall be filled: and every mountain and hill shall be made
low, and crooked things shall become straight: and rough ways plain:

6. And all flesh shall see the salvation of God.


The Explication.
1. BY Tetrarch we are here to understand a Commander of the fourth part of the
kingdom of Pale^^ina, equally divided by the Roman Emperors into four
Provinces, and those committed to the care of four chief Commanders called
Tetrarchs. The reason, why the Evangelist is here so exact as to specify
Tiberius the Roman Emperor, and all the four temporal Commanders under him of
^alestina, divided, as above, into four Provinces, as also the spiritual
Commanders, which were the High Priests of Jerusalem, at the time of John the
Baptists preaching and pointing out our Savior Jesus Christ to be the Messiah
or Redeemer of all mankind, was because the verity of our Saviors birth,
death, and passion, should be left to after ages, as a truth so abundantly
testified, that never any doubt should be rationally made thereof, since all
that are here named, had some remarkable hand in the passages of our Saviors
life and death; as namely Tiberius the Emperor, who was so taken with the
reports of our Saviors singular sanctity of life and miracles, that he
contended mainly to have him placed among the Roman gods, but failed in the
attempt (by divine Ordinance) because it had been an Indignity for him that was
the only true God of all the world to have obtained an after-place among the
Idols and false gods of the Romans; Pilate as having condemned Christ to be
crucified. Herod Antipas, for having unjustly committed to prison John the
Baptist the forerunner of Christ, because he reprehended him for marrying
Herodias, wife to his brother Philip; so these two brothers are brought in upon
one account. Lastly Lysanias, because he about that time did endeavor to
recover the Kingdom of Judea for Antigonus, in casting out Hircanus, made King
thereof by the Roman Emperor, and Herod for backing Hircanus against Lysanias
in the quarrel as above, was by Augustus Caesar, and Anthony his colleague
preferred to the crown of Judea, with the exclusion of the said Hircanus from
that crown; these four principal Commanders, being men famous in the world at
that time, and having all notice of our Saviors prodigious miracles, they are
recorded as Testimonies beyond all exception of the truth thereof.

2. As also were the two Priests, Annas and Caithas' whereof the latter was
then (and all the three years of our Saviors preaching) High Priest, before
whom he was first convented, after he had been by Judas betrayed into the hands
of the Jews, that conspired his death; and it is here specially remarked, that
in the conjunction of these above named circumstances, the word of our Lord
(the divine Command) fell upon John the Baptist, Son to Zachary, in the desert,
that he should preach the coming of our Savior, and baptize in water, to show
that he was the forerunner of him, who afterward was to baptize in spirit,
Christ Jesus, but whether this command, this word of God, came to the Baptist
by some Angel (or an express Messenger from heaven) or only by an internal
Inspiration to John himself so to do, is not certain; neither is it much
material, since either way gave Authority enough, as appeared by Christ so
solemnly avowing him afterward.

3, 4. Besides, the coming of John the Baptist into the Country of Jordan, was
foretold, we see, by the Prophet Isaias, as in these three following verses
does clearly appear: By his preaching the baptism of penance unto remission
of sins, is not understood, that remission of sins was had by John's, but
should be had by Christ his baptism: So John did only by preaching penance
dispose to the receiving remission of sins, which was given by the baptism of
Christ for original, and by the Sacrament of Confession for all actual sin;
and John for this preaching is called, a voice of one crying in the desert. etc.

5. Note this Verse as spoken now by John the Baptist, is not so much
prophetical of what shall be done hereafter, as exhorting to what is fit for
the present to do, since he came to prepare the way for Christ, rather than to
foretell what should be done by him, or by us after him; so this Future tense
is here to be understood as a command, or counsel in the Present tense, as if
he should say, Let every valley be filled, every hill made level, etc. So to
even the way for the King of Heavens coming, since upon Kings approaches such
preparations are usually made, to show the duties and zeals of Subjects, laying
themselves, and all they have level at the feet of their Sovereign, whence by
Valley here understand, the dejected; by Mountain, or Hill, the proud Soul; by
Crooked, understand wicked; by Rough, stubborn; by Plain, gentle Souls; and
then take the Moral thus: That if we will show our selves loyal, and loving
subjects to Christ, and prepare his ways for him, as John the Baptist
exhorts, we must raise up our dejected and suppress our proud thoughts, we
must streighten our crooked, and even our rough ways, by confessing our sins,
so to make him see he shall not come amongst rebellious, and refractory
subjects, but find us ready to conform, or ply our selves always, and to all
purposes (by his holy Grace) according to his sacred will and pleasure.

6. The genuine sense of this last Verse is also, by the same trope of the
future, to make an exhortation to us in the Present tense, as if the
Evangelist, or the Prophet Isaias, spoke now in the Baptists name, and let all
flesh; that is, every man see, not only with the eyes of his Soul, or
understanding, but with those of his Body, the Salvation of God; namely, the
Messiah, God and Man, our Savior Jesus Christ, either in his Person living, in
the Sacrament of the Altar, or on his Throne of Judgment at the latter day; or
as he is now in the midst of you, that do not take notice of him; see, I tell
you, I am his forerunner, sent before him to point him out unto you, and that
done, to recede, that you may not longer be diverted from looking toward
himself, by deceiving your selves (as you do) to think I am the Messiah: No, I
must be diminished, (cut off) and set out of your way, (though upon another
seeming pretense; namely, Herodias her malice to me, for speaking against her
unlawful Marriage, age, but indeed) to give way that Christ may be exalted in
yours, and in all the worlds esteem, as it is fit, and absolutely necessary it
should be, according as I tell you, John 3. ver. 30. He must increase, and I be
diminished: Note, though now, as these words of the Prophet Isaias are above
explicated in the Present tense, for the reasons alleged, yet they were fitly
spoken in the future (and prophetically too) by Isaias, when he foretold what
John should say to us in the present tense at his coming: or else Isaias might
begin with the Baptists voice, to say of him prophetically, I am the voice of
one crying in the Wilderness, prepare the ways of our Lord. Though if in this
future tense we allow even the Baptist also to speak, it will not be unproper
to him; for however, his principle Office be that of forerunner, or pointer out
of our Savior, to be the long expected Messiah, come at last, and now standing
in the midst of them, yet he may (in a secondary respect) be allowed the Title
and Office of a Prophet also, telling us for the future what will follow, if we
believe in Christ, and cast our cares upon him; namely, that all shall go well
with us, both in the outward, and inward man, since our Savior avowes him to
be a Prophet, though not only such, but more, his Forerunner, his humane
Angel, going before the face of his Divine Humanity, to tell us, that this
Man-Divine, Christ Jesus, was true God, as well as Man, who came to redeem, and
save the whole world.

The Application
1. AS the Epistle, so the Gospel to, bids us prepare the way for Jesus his
Nativity, alluded to all over, but clearly mentioned in the close of the
Gospel, while the Forerunner of our Lord is set before our eyes to day giving
Instructions how to demean our selves in the Sacrament of Confession, whereunto
the Baptism of Penance unto Remission of Sins, preached by the Baptist, here
alludes.

2. How that Confession shall be rightly made, is told in the penultime, or
last Verse but one of the Gospel, do as the Exposition of it bids, and it
will be rightly done, at least prepare for it now, that you may perform it
well at Christmas.

3. Now that we may do this; see if the holy Church could frame a fitter
Prayer than what She says to day? If not, Then say it as above, and so confess
there is an admirable Harmony between the Preaching, and the Praying parts of
holy Churches services.

On Sunday within the Octaves of the Nativity.
The Antiphon, LUKE 1. ver. 25. THe Child Jesus did profit in age and wisdom
before God and Man.

Verse. The word became Flesh, Allelujah.

Resp. And dwelt in us, Alleluja.


NOte this Antiphon above, being much to the same purpose with the 40. Verse of
this Chapter, (which is the last in this days Gospel) I do not change it,
though differing a little from that, because I find it thus appointed by the
Church.

The Prayer.
OMnipotent, Sempiternall God, direct our actions in thy good pleasure, that in
the Name of thy Beloved Son, we may deserve to abound in Good Works.

The Illustration.
HOly Church has hitherto taught us in our Prayers to Court down God from
Heaven; and now he is come unto us little in Appearance, great in Power, an
Infant amongst men; see how this day our Prayer make Infants of us too, such as
know not which way to turn, but are glad to beg directions of Almighty God,
that our Actions may be done according to his will and pleasure; or rather,
that his holy will may be our actions; for so the words of the Prayer import,
when we beg, that God will direct our actions in his good pleasure; as who
should say, if he so please they shall be well done; nor can we indeed please
him in our doings, if he do not please to do well in us: For our actions are
more his, than our own, insomuch, that when we love God, or please him, he
rather loves, and pleases himself in us, than that we of our selves can love,
or please his Divine Majesty, by any thing we are able to do. And thus we see,
how with our newborn Jesus, we pray like Infants, unable to help our selves:
and for this purpose both the Epistle and Gospel of the day run upon infantile
actions; the former showing us that men by Adoption of Grace, became newborn
Babes of God, who were before ancient slaves of the Devil; and telling us
further, how infants must be nurtured, and tutoured up even by their own
servants, as long as they are under age: The latter relating how our infant
Jesus was this day presented to his Heavenly Father in the Temple, as the first
grateful present humane nature durst make a tender of to his offended Majesty,
in hope thereby to appease his wrath: and so confident we are, that this will
be a present appeasing, as well as pleasing, that we have no sooner offered him
up to his Heavenly Father then we grow bold, not only in the name of this his
beloved you, to beg we may do well, but presume to hope that in his Name we
may even deserve to abound in good works; and with good reason, because we
acknowledge this infant of Time to be coequal, and coeternal God with his
Eternal Father, and consequently what we do in his Name, since it is more
principally done by him than us, may merit the reputation of being abundantly
well done; and thus we doing it also, may deserve to abound in good Works; even
such as shall not want the happiness of a plentiful reward of grace in this
life, and of glory in the next. But so that all our desert or merit must be
still in his Name, as the Prayer professes, inconsequence to what was said
upon the close of the two first Prayers in this Book.

The Epistle, GAL. 4. ver. 1. etc.
1. ANd I say, as long as the Heir is a little one, he differs nothing from a
Servant, although he be Lord of all.

2. But is under Tutors, and Governors, until the time limited of the Father.

3. So we also, when we were little ones, were serving under the elements of
the World.

4. But when the fullness of time came, God sent his Son, made of a Woman, made
under the Law,

5. That he might redeem them that were under the Law, that they might receive
the Adoption of Sons.

6. And because you are Sons, God has sent the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts crying, Abba Father.

7. Therefore now he is not a servant, but a a son, and if a son, an heir also
by God.


The Explication.
1. ST. Paul had in the precedent Chapter told the Galathians, that the old Law
of the Jews; was a Paedagogue (or Usher rather) to the new Law of Christ, and
so was to cease when the new Law came: This doctrine he follows now here
closely, saying, The Jews that were the chosen people of God, his first
begotten, as it were, and so his heirs, were by all the help of their Laws but
as little ones in the sight of God, that is, as children or infants wanting
maturity of years, and ripeness of judgment to govern themselves, and thus
were nothing different from servants, because they were commanded absolutely by
the Patriarchs and Prophets (being themselves servants of God, though masters
of the people) who were indeed Lords of all Gods graces and favors; since no
nation shared thereof beside the Jews.

2. The Apostle follows his example, and proves there is no difference between
a Lord under the command of Tutors and Governors, and a mere servant, since
this Lord or heir is not (all the while of his Minority) to rule and command,
but to obey his stewards and governors, who are then the Fathers, and shall
after be their young Pupills servants too, and this time in those days of the
old Law, lasted till the heir was twenty five years of age.

3. The Apostle here applies this argument to himself formerly of the Jewish
Religon, and consequently an infant, or little one, in the line of those that
are Gods true servants, namely Christians; serving God only under the Alphabet
of a religious Law, that is under the letter or Elements of the world, which
were the old Law, (all the rule men had to serve God by) and then, says the
Apostle, we were like little ones, young lords and masters by birthright of
our Judaism, yet nothing different from servants, since we had that Law, but as
an Usher to bring us up, and deliver us over to another, much better indeed, a
most perfect Law of Grace, whereunto the old Law was a mere type or figure, a
mere Element or Alphabet of a true Law. Note by the Elements of the world are
here understood the letter of the law given to the men of the world, in those
at least, who were the select thereof, the Jews, for if the world were here
taken for other than the men thereof, the Elements of the natural world were
to be understood earth, air, water, and fire, but since by the world is meant
the people thereof, therefore Element here, stands for the letter of the old
(ceremonial and servile) Law, whence the Apostle here uses the word of
serving very aptly, for there are three servings in this word related unto: The
First, that of heathens serving their Idols as their Gods: The second, that of
the Jews serving God by their impure creatures ordered unto Gods service: The
last that of Christians serving God by pure creatures, not by Idols, nor by
bloody sacrifices, but by such as in Sacraments are sanctified, and so are
more than Jewish Elements of sanctity, as the Rhemists Annotations have at
large expressed, though true it is, many by the elements here understand, also
the festival and solemn days, months, and years, which the Jews very
superstitiously observed, and made themselves indeed, not only servants
thereof, but even slaves unto them, and this, because in the tenth verse of
this Chapter, S. Paul mentions their formalities upon these days, months,
times, and years.

4. By the fullness of time is here literally understood, that time when Christ
by the authority of his Father, sending him for that purpose, came to abrogate
the servile law of the Jews, and to deliver us a more filial law of love,
liberty, and grace; for then was the time of the old law filled up, when it was
no longer to remain, when we were no more to be under the Ushers and Tutors of
Religion, but under Christ himself, the true Lord and master of the whole, (and
specially of the Christian) world. That the Son of God sent unto us, is here
said to be made of a woman wants not a deep sense, namely to show he was not
begotten, nor conceived of his fathers seed, but was made and framed wholly out
of the pure substance and blood of his blessed mother, the Virgin Mary; where
we are to note the word woman in this place does not signify any commixture or
corruption, which does accompany the loss of virginity, when maids pass from
their virginal purity, to the impurer state of corrupted woman, but woman here
signifies directly the sex, or female kind of man, and so in that sense is
competent even to a virgin, who is also of the female Sex: again he was said to
be made of a woman, to declare the falsity of the Valentinian and Anabaptistick
heresies, teaching Christ to have been made of some aeriall, and not of an
earthly substance, as if he had brought his body (ready made in the heavens)
out of some aeriall combinations, into the womb of the virgin, and had not
received his flesh from her; whereas the true Christian doctrine teaches; he
was flesh of her flesh, and bone of her bones; He is further said to be made
under the Law, not that by right he was subject thereunto (even as man) because
his person was divine, by the union of his two natures, making but one only
sacred and divine person, so called from his principal, his divine nature, but
that indeed he was pleased to subject himself to the law, though of right he
were above it, and thus he vouchsafed also to undergo (voluntarily) the law of
circumcision, rather to take it honorably away, than to subject us to so
dishonorable a slavery, as that of the Old Law was.

5. This Verse reports to the former, and makes that to be the cause why Christ
subjected himself to the Law of servitude, namely, because by his so doing, he
might redeem those who truly were under the servile Law, and that by this
Redemption we might all receive the Adoption of Sons; and by a new filiation
become the children of Grace; nay, even Heirs of God, and Coheires of Christ,
who were formerly bastards and slaves of the Devil: whence Saint Bernard says
well upon this place, Therefore God became Man, that Man might become God: And
we must further note here, that this our happy Adoption (which is made by the
means of Grace) does not only give us right to the Inheritance of God, but to
a participation even of the Divine Nature it self; according to S. Paul, Romans
8. ver. 15. where it was said, we became [True Sons of God by the holy Ghost]
communicating himself unto us, and so making us true Children of Christ, God
and Man; if any doubt of this truth, let him read what Cornelius a Lapide
excellently proves to this purpose, upon the place of Saint Paul his Epistle
above cited; and what will be said more to this purpose on the eighth Sunday
after Pentecost in this Book. We are lastly to note, that not only the just,
who are now under the Law of Grace, but even those just who were under the Law
of Moses, were also the Adopted Sons of God; however, the Apostle calls them
here Servants, and not Sons; First, because, though they were the true Sons of
God, yet they were not in the state of liberty competent unto such Children;
Secondly, because they had not their right to this inheritance, or f^liation by
virtue of the Law, under which they lived, but by a special prerogative of
Grace, and Faith infused into them, of Christ his being to come; and so they
were rather belonging to the Old, than to the New Law. Thirdly, because in that
state they were in, they did want the fruit of Adoption, because when they dyed
Just, yet they could not partake of Heaven, the now immediate reward of such
blessed Souls as they were, in regard Christ had not opened the gates thereof
to mortals by his first entering into Heaven, as was fit he should, since all
others were to follow upon his Title, not upon their own; Lastly, because
Christ, by exempting us from the servitude of the Old Law, gave us the right of
claim to the Spirit of Adoption, which was that of the New Law, taught by
Christ, and affirmed by the holy Ghost.

6. This Verse clearly shows the truth of the Doctrine above delivered, since
to declare we were partakers of the Divine Filiation, God sent us the Spirit of
his Son Divine, the holy Ghost, as who should say, it is a true sign we are
partakers of the Divine Nature, because we have the Divine Spirit in us; though
this Spirit does rather show we are the Sons of God, than make us such as the
Sign shows the thing to be there, where the Sign of the thing is: for indeed
we are the Children of God by the merits of Christ his passion; since the true
Adoptive cause, the root of our filiation is the Son of God his Incarnation,
for thence we become God, because God became Man; so the grace of the holy
Ghost, (or his Spirit abounding in us) is rather the sign, than the cause of
our Adoption or filiation, since our adoption is by Christ, and the proof
thereof is by his holy Spirit abiding in us; not that this spirit of the holy
Ghost is an empty sign; but that besides the sign, it is of our filiation to
God, it is also the same God with the Father, and the Son, really and truly
sanctifying of us, and uniting himself unto us by his holy Grace, as well as he
unites us to the actual participation of our Saviors Passion, at the same
instant, when he gives us his Grace, and thereby teaches us to cry Abba
Father; that is to say, O Heavenly Father, look upon us as thy Children, being
made so by the passion of thy Son, and declared to be so by the coming of the
holy Ghost amongst us into our hearts, inabling them with a loud pious
affection (though sometimes their lips move not) to cry unto thee in that
filial voice, which ever opens the ears of thy mercy toward us, and makes
thee often ask us (as thou did silent Moses thus internally, and silently
crying to thee) What do you cry unto me for? Exodus 14. ver. 15. my dearest
Children, what do you want? it is but ask, and have.

7. Here is a Graecisme, or Greek transition from the Second person to the
Third, as who should say, what I speak of you, O Galatians adopted, as above,
the like I say of all third Persons, even any Gentile so adopted; that be he of
what Nation he will, if he can truly cry Abba Father; he is not a Servant, but
a Son of God, and if a Son, he is an Heir also by God, that is by Christ,
who is the Son of God. O happy Children of this Heavenly Father, who makes all
his issue equal Heirs, and leaves not younger children to the mercy of their
Elder brothers for their Patrimony, but gives all his whole estate in Heavenly
Glory, and by that, himself for their Patrimony: whence Saint Austine says
well, Thou have created us, O Lord, to, and for thy self, and our heart is at
no rest until it have the happiness to rest in thee; nothing less than thy
self can satiate us, and this satiety we enjoy, when thy glory appears in us,
and places us in thee.

The Application.
1. LEarn all ye Monarchs of the Times, to know this Text forbids you Lord it
here, as if you were not under Age. The Kingdoms you command, you then usurp,
when you deny obedience to the Church; Christ is the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords: he is the Father of all Christians, who has made no servant Tutour to
command us, but his Sacred Spouse, the holy Church, so long as here we live.

2. Learn all ye proudest men to stoop to the degree of little ones again; now
you behold your ancient God become a Child of Man, to make you Men, children of
Almighty God.

3. Learn ye, that glory to write man to Nature, to be but Babes yet to Grace;
let not Christ remain alone an Infant; be every Christian at the least an
Innocent to keep him company, while holy Church recounts his Cradle-dayes, And
Prays, that as children (unable to do manly acts our selves) we may be
directed in the pleasure of our Heavenly Father, by doing nothing but in the
Name of his only Son; who knows best what will please him, and make us
deserve well at his Holy Hands, by abounding in good Works.

The Gospel, LUKE 2. ver. 33. etc.
33. ANd his Father and Mother were marvelling upon those things which were
spoken concerning him.

34. And Simeon blessed him, and said to Mary his Mother, Behold, this is set
unto the ruin, and unto the resurrection of many in Israel, and for a sign
which shall be contradicted.

35. And thine own soul shall a sword pierce, that out of many hearts
cogitations may be revealed.

36. And there was Anne a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the Tribe of
Aser, she was far stricken in days, and had lived with a Husband seven years
from her Virginity.

37. And she was a widow until eighty and four years, who departed not from
the Temple, by fasting and prayers, serving night and day.

38. And she at the same hour, suddenly coming in, Confessed to our Lord; and
spoke of him to all that expected the redemption of Israel.

39. And after they had wholly done all things according to the Law of our
Lord, they returned into Galilee, into their City Nazareth.

40. And the Child grew, and waxed strong; full of wisdom, and the grace of God
was in him.


The Explication.
33. NOte here, Saint Joseph is not called Christ his Father, as Nurses
husbands are called Foster-fathers to the children whom their wives give suck
unto, though they never did beget those children; but further, and yet more
really, because Jesus was the true, and natural Child of the Blessed Virgin
Mary, being joined in real Wedlock with Saint Joseph, though she never did
accompany her husband in the Marriage bed; so his paternity was more than
nutritious, and yet less than natural, because Jesus was only the Son of
Joseph, married to the Virgin Mary, but never having knowledge of her Body, and
therefore he is called the putative, or esteemed Father of Christ, for all he
never did beget him, merely because his wife did truly bear him, and was his
natural Mother, though by a means supernatural, to wit, the over-shadowing
of the holy Ghost. These his Parents are here said to be marvelling, not that
they were perhaps (at least the Blessed Virgin was not) ignorant of what they
now marvelled at, but that the transcendency of the things they were thinking
of, and hearing, did renew in their minds, the memory of the Miracle, so often
as they thought upon them; yet some think even the Blessed Virgin, though she
did know our Savior was to be the Redeemer of the Jews, did not perhaps know
he was to be so to the Gentiles; the which Simeon did here prophecy: and
further, that he was to be a Ruin (to some) a Resurrection to many in Israel,
and a sign which should be contradicted.

34. We are to note, Simeons Blessing here, was rather to the Parents of Jesus,
than to him their child, because it had been too great a boldness for him to
bless whom he (by Revelation) knew to be his Savior, and his God. The reason
why Simeon addressed his speech to Mary, was, because she was really and truly
the natural mother of our blessed Lord, and Joseph was but his reputed father.
That it is equally said, Christ was set unto the ruin, and unto the
resurrection of many in Israel, does not argue it was equally meant, for he
was the ruin of the incredulous by accident only, but he was by decree the
resurrection of all that believe in him, and obey his Law, and their own
incredulity who believed not was their direct ruin, he was but indirectly the
cause thereof.

By the sign which shall be contradicted some understand the person of Christ,
who was not only the mark of their detracting tongues, but even of their
tormenting hands, when they aimed at him by the stripes they gave him in his
whipying at the Pillar, and by the wounds they made in his blessed body hanging
on the Cross: Others by the sign here understand the cross of Christ, whereof
S. Paul says there were many enemies, and so this cross is the sign of their
malice, who by contemning it, contemn the fruit of salvation, that grew
thereon, Jesus Christ himself: but the best and most genuine sense seems to be,
that by the sign of contradiction should be here meant his prodigious
generation of a mother in earth without a father, (and of a virgin mother)
which many pretend (as yet) to be impossible, and so contradict this undoubted
truth: By this sign also is meant the wonderful miracles of his life, the
strange effects of his doctrine converting all the world, yet contradicted by
those that will not be converted by them; and thus as the incredulity of the
Jews and Infidels is a contradiction to the Faith of Christ, in like manner the
wicked lives of sinful Christians are open contradictions to his Laws, and to
the secret impulses of his holy graces.

35 By the sword here some will understand the spirit of prophecy given to the
B. Virgin, whereby she knew as well the ill affections of the Jews to her son,
as the good ones of Christians toward him; yet this can (at most) be but the
mystical sense: Others will have it, that the B. Virgin dyed a Martyr by the
sword, which nevertheless is against all History: The literal therefore and
genuine sense is, That the sword of torment which killed Christ, was to his
holy mother a sword of sorrow, wounding her very heart, insomuch that had it
not been healed with he comfort she received by conformity to Gods will, it
had been her real death; and we read often in holy Writ, that the
contradiction of detracting tongues is called a sword of persecution. Their
tongue is a sharp sword, Psalm. 63. v. 4 They have sharpened their tongues like
swords, Psalm. 104.8 and the sword of Christ his torments was twofold; One of
his persecutours tongues, The other of their stripes, nails, and spear,
peirci^^^ his side which were so sharp a sword of sorrow to the blessed Virgin,
that the Doctors of the Church hold her for more than a Martyr, actually dying
for Christ; but it is hard to know the true sense of what follows in this
Verse, That this sword of sorrow pierced the mothers soul; That out of many
hearts cogitations might be revealed in her sacred Son, for so the words seem
to import; which yet is verified thus, that while some of the Jews did before
privately machinate Christ's death, others among them pretended they looked for
the Messiah, but finding Christ come in an humble way, they scorned him, and so
both these joining, attempted at last to be his ruin, which then proved a true
sword piercing his mothers soul, when they revealed the persidiousnesse of
their own false hearts, that had the one, often before wished, but (for fear of
the Jews) durst not attempt his death; the other pretended to honor him, but
when they found his humility suited not with their pride, they plotted (and
actually procured) his death, and as in that they peirced his mothers soul, so
they revealed the iniquity of their own cogitations, and to this sense Simeon
seems here prophetically to have spoken.

36. Anne was celebrated for the known gift she also had of prophecy, whereof
v 38. we shall read anon; so she did foretell much of Christ: She is called
Anne (which signifies Grace,) And her Father Phanuel, (signifying the Face of
God) is here named, to she that her grace of prophecy, as well as that of her
justification came from God: Her Tribe is here set down to denotate her
nature, that was peaceable, pleasing, wealthy, long-living, and the like;
besides Aser signifies Blessed; all these remarks of her are to show the
dignity of this Prophetess, who was appointed for one to give testimony of
Christ: her virginity is here remarked, because it was three ways very
notable: First her maiden, next her conjugall, and lastly, her viduall
virginity, (for so her chastity is here called) to show it was in her more
than ordinary: by living with her husband ^^^en years from her virginity, is
understood seven years (...) show was marriageable, which was then held at
fifteen years of age; for children are not properly called virgins till they
arrive to the ripeness of years fitting for marriage; so falling widow at two
and twenty years of age, it was much she lived in that Viduall virginity,
until she was as in this next Verse is said,

37. Eighty four years of age, as some say, but of pure widdowhood, as S.
Ambrose will have it, who makes her in all a hundred and six years old,
dwelling continually in the Temple, that is, not departing thence, but spending
most of her time there, and seldom going home, but to refresh at meals, never
any whither else, for other diversion from her prayers; yet some think her
very abode was, if not in, yet at least joining to the Temple, (as many
Anchoresses and some Chanonesses now do) spending her time both night and day
in fasting, watching, and prayer, and perpetually serving God, so we see
fasting in those days of the Synagogue, was an usual service to God, and is
not (as Heretics now say) held so only in our Church.

38. Here we may note a kind of harmonious Quire, kept in the Temple at that
time between Simeon and Anne, since after him she took up the Province of
prophecy, and therein confessed, that is, praised God, by revealing his sacred
Son to be the Messiah.

39. The things here done according to the Law were the purification of the
Mother, and the presentation of her son Jesus in the Temple, which rites
performed with the ornament of these Prophesies attending on them, The B.
virgin with her Spouse and Son returned to Nazareth in Galilee, where they
lived until they fled to Egypt, upon the slaughter of the Infants, and whether
they returned after they heard Herod was dead, and there bred up Jesus, but we
must imagine the time between this Purification, and their flight into Egypt,
being near two months, which was from February to Easter (for then were the
Innocents butchered) all spent in preparing their little necessaries for this
flight, as their Ass, and small burden of clothing, or the like.

40. The child's growth here mentioned was corporal, as also was his strength,
namely, that of his limbs, for he was as perfect in his internals at the first
instant of his Incarnation, as at the last minute of his life: his fullness also
of wisdom here mentioned, was the external proof upon all occasions of his
actions, that his internal wisdom was full from the first hour of his
conception, and so his actions externally appeared such, as argued him to be
internally full of all that wisdom, which was due unto him, who was called
the Wisdom of his eternal Father: By Grace, is here understood the favor
and protection of his heavenly Father, which was always found to be special
over him, for in him here imports over him, so this grace was not that
internally in him, but that externally over him, which his heavenly Father
showed toward him; yet the outward grace appeared in his actions might be an
argument of his own divine grace which was in him also, and gave a beauty to
all his outward comportments.

The Application.
WE shall then best present Jesus to his heavenly Father as his B. mother did
to day when we are able to present our selves to God like new born Infants,
coveting the milk of our mothers Breast. That is to say, the Recovery of all
those gifts, virtues, and graces which were in holy Baptism bestowed upon us;
and this is a benefit Grace gives above Nature, that though men can never be by
Nature little ones again; yet by grace they may become as Innocent as new
Baptized Infants: O let us then to day endeavor so to be, when it is so proper
to endeavor it.

2. Let us be content when men despise us, now that we hear the son of God
become the sign of Contradiction: While his preaching was called seducing,
while his sobriety was styled drunkenness, while his Deity was termed Devil.
O what man can lay claim to his Integrity! and who can then be troubled to be
contradicted for Gods sake, when God became the very sign of Contradiction for
his love to Man?

3. Look every state of man upon the Patterns laid to day before your eyes.
Look Infants, on the Infant Jesus. Look youths and Virgins on the B. Virgin
Mary. Look married people on the Virgins Spouse. Look Widows on the Prophetess
S. Anne, the praying Widow. Look aged man upon old Simeon. And look to him
again ye Clerks, ye Regulars, ye Priests, the men of Holy Orders. See of
these several degrees so many Saints, and be ye such as they, So shall ye
abound in those good works we pray to day may be done by us, according to the
pleasure of Almighty God, in the name of his sacred Son.

Within Octaves of the Epiphany.
The Antiphon, LUKE 2. ver. 48, 49. Son, why have thou so done to us? behold
thy Father and I sorrowing, did seek thee.

What is it that you sought me? did you not know, that I must be about those
things that are my Fathers.

Verse. The Kings of Tharsis and of the Isles shall offer gifts.

Resp. The Kings of Arabia and Saba shall bring presents.


The Prayer.
WE beseech thee, O Lord, prosecute with heavenly piety the desires of thy
supplyant people, that they may both see what is by them to be done, and be
able to perform what they see they are to do.

The Illustration.
WE were taught by the last Sundays Prayer, to beseech Almighty God to set
our actions right, and by the Gnomon of his own blessed will to point them out
their way, to direct them in their motion. Now we are further taught to beg,
that even our desires propending us to action, may not only be begun, but
prosecuted with heavenly piety, least good beginnings have an evil ending, if
not prosecuted with the same holy Spirit that began them first; and lest humane
piety prove but a blind guide, we petition the heavenly to lead us on, that so
we may clearly see what is by us to be done, and seeing what it is, may be able
to perform our duty both to God and man: yes, beloved, This is the clear and
genuine sense of the Prayer above; but how to adjust the present time to the
Epistle and Gospel of the day, will not perhaps easily appear, unless we do
reflect upon the Feast of the Epiphany at present, flowing in the Octaves
thereof, and consequently requiring, that whilst in this Feast our Blessed
Savior was pleased to appear, as well to Gentiles as to Jews, in a word to all
the world, our general prayer should be, that we may at the same time, appear
to him such supplyants, as he most delights in, namely, such as beg, he will
vouchsafe to show us, as well his pleasure as his person, by prosecuting with
heavenly piety, not only all our actions, but even our desires; for then we
shall see him as clearly indeed, as in the thick fog of this sinful world, he
can be seen by humane eyes, when his heavenly piety begins and prosecutes all
our desires; when through the glass of his heavenly piety, we shall discern,
what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God, whereunto the Epistle
this day exhorts us to conform our selves both in body and mind, not only in
our own, but in our neighbors occasions too; helping them as readily, as our
own hands would help our hungry mouths to meat. And if we will take the
Gospel, as it must report to us, we shall see it set to the same tune as we
pray to do: for what is the result of all the Gospel, but in a word to tell
us, Heavenly piety must be the square of all our actions: Did not lost Jesus
tell his sorrowing Parents this in terms, when they had found him out again,
and began to expostulate his loss, asking them, if they knew not he was bound
to be employed in those things which were his Fathers will? his heavenly
Fathers will he meant, for it was not his earthly Parents will to have him
lost. If then, beloved, we see the piety of the B. Virgin Mother of God was
short of that which must be our guide, how can we hope with less than heavenly
piety, to render our actions, our desires, grateful to his divine Majesty. And
who can now complain, there wants connection in this Prayer unto the other
service of the day? if any do, let him see how (to comply with the heavenly
piety of his Eternal Father.) Jesus was Thirty years together subject to his
Temporal Mother, and then we shall soon find out a way how to sweeten the sour
of our humane actions, by having no desire to any of them less than heavenly,
nor to do them with less than heavenly piety.

The Epistle, ROMANS 12. ver. 1. etc.
1. I Beseech you therefore, Brethren, by the mercy of God, that you exhibit
your bodies a living host, holy, pleasing God, your reasonable service.

2. And be not conformed to this world; but he reformed in the newness of your
mind, that you may prove what the good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God
is.

3. For I say, by the grace that is given me, to all that are among you, not to
be more wise than behooveth to be wise, but to be wise unto sobriety, to every
one, as God has divided the measure of Faith.

4. For as in one body we have many members, but all the members have not one
action.

5. So we being many are one body in Christ, and each one another members.


The Explication.
1. THe Apostle had in his former Chapter told them much of the mercies of
Almighty God, and showed them how though the wicked were justly condemned, yet
even the Blessed were most mercifully saved; hence by that mercy so much
inculcated immediately before, he now conjures them, that as they had now
received from him the rule of Faith, so they would frame their manners, their
actions, and lives according to that rule: see what is said of this Rule in the
next Sundays Epistle, Romans 12. v. 6. But to the present Text wherein the
Apostle here beseeches them by the mercy so much above recommended, to live
good lives answerable to their rule of Faith, and to exhibit their bodies (by
action) as well as their souls (by Faith) a living host to God. There are many
who loose the literal sense of this place, by contenting themselves with the
diverse (and those excellent) mystical meanings thereof: as first, by saying
our bodies are living, when our lives are virtuous; Secondly, when we are
charitable because charity is the life of all virtues. Thirdly, when we have
received the Sacrament of Christ his Body and Blood, but in very deed the
literal allusion here is to the ancient bloody Sacrifices both of Jews and
Gentiles made of beasts dead bodies, whereunto the daily unbloudy Sacrifice of
the Evangelicall Lamb is diametrically opposite, first of the living Body and
blood of Christ, next of living, chastized, but not mortified bodies of
Christians, being, as the Apostle advises, offered up to the service of
Almighty God, since such chastizements leave the bodies living by a natural
life: again, they live by the spiritual life of good works, done in obedience
to their souls command for so operating: besides by corporal mortification or
penance, the body is made truly a living host, because it is mortified alive
by becoming subject to the command of the Spirit, for all mortification is a
kind of living death, whilst it makes the body dye to concupiscence, and live
to grace: but these our bodies must further be holy Sacrifices, that is to say,
employed in holy, not profane or impure works, not worshipping Idols, (as the
Gentiles did) but God, as befits good Christians, not polluting their bodies
with unchaste actions, but keeping them pure and undefiled, for this purity is
by the Apostle (1 Cor. 7) called sanctity, and is such indeed. Again, this
bodily host must be pleasing to God, for it may be living and holy in it self,
and yet not pleasing to God, if the offerer be displeasing, since many there
are who fast, go in pilgrimage to holy places, do other corporal pennances,
and yet not rectifying together their souls obliquities, their passions of the
mind are nothing pleasing to God. Lastly, he concludes, exhorting that our
offerings to God be seasoned with the salt of wisdom, that is, be always a
reasonable service, not fond, childish, curious, indiscreet, or singular, but
such as we may ever render a reasonable account of even to God, who will not
allow of indiscretions for reasons; though indeed the Apostle here alludes to
the irrational offerings among the Gentiles, who made their Idols their Gods,
and dedicated their services to Stocks and Stones; whereas he would have
Christians be more reasonable, and instead of dead beasts, to offer their
living bodies jointly with the acts of their believing, hoping, and loving
souls, to be a perpetual Sacrifice or service to God all their life time, and
thus the whole creature will become not a corporal, not an irrational, but a
spiritual and reasonable Sacrifice.

2. The Apostle has pleased to make a disjunctive recommends of this entire
creature in way of Sacrifice to God, while in the former verse he insisted
chiefly on the corporal part of the creature, which we are, and so advised how
to render our bodies a living Sacrifice to God, but in this verse he tells us
how to render our better part, the soul of man, an acceptable oblation to the
divine Majesty, and since Christian perfection consists as well in declining
evil, as in doing good, therefore this verse begins with removing evil out of
our way, that so we may do good, which the Apostle understands, when he bids
us take heed we do not conform our actions to the course of this
unconformable world; and this we shall perform by avoiding the evil that we
see in men; for we shall then best show, that we do not conform unto sinful
men, when we fly their company, and avoid such actions as renders them sinners;
and having thus followed the negative part of this counsel, we are the better
prepared to put the positive part thereof in execution: for by not conforming
to the world, we (whose bodies are made up of the old worldly metal) shall be
reformed in the newness of our minds by setting them henceforward on heavenly,
which heretofore were employed wholly upon earthly cogitations: so the Apostle,
by bidding us not conform to this world, did not mean to forbid us making use
of it, but not to figure our selves like unto it, that is, not to become vain,
proud, idle, and the like, as the world is, for so we make our selves figures
of this world, or variable as worldlings are; whereas the Apostle desires us to
avoid becoming mutable or transitory figures, and wishes us to become
persisting forms rather, which are of a permanent nature, namely, spiritual
forms of Saints, not worldly figures of men: and here reformation imports in
truth Transformation, that is Transition, or passing out of the old figure of
Sinners, into the new form of Saints, and besides, St. Paul recommends the
form of newness unto us, to show he desires not so much our innovation as our
reformation, that is, not to have us become new creatures in nature, but
reformed ones in grace, such as by newness of the Spirit cast off the
Antiquity of flesh and blood; or such as by new grace reform old nature; for
Antiquity in the holy Story of man reports to old Adam, to original sin,
sickness, and death, the effects thereof, but newness relates to Christ
renewing the decay of old Adam in us, by the spritely or youthful grace of
God; and this newness of mind the Apostle requires, as a means to know and
prove, what the good, acceptable, and perfect will of God is; for by proof is
here meant experimental knowledge of the aforesaid wills, and without this
newness we can have no notion thereof; for the old man in us makes us sensible
of nothing at all, that reports in the least to God, all the means we have to
come unto this knowledge of his will is, by reforming our selves in the
newness of our Spirit, that so we may know the will of a Spirit, and not
remain in the ignorance of an unknowing body, or corporal man, who knows
nothing at all of God: The best acception of this place is, when by will we
understand the things willed, or desired, as who should say, the good will of
God is that which makes us desire to do in all things what is good at least,
his acceptable will is that which causes us to do what is yet better, his
perfect will is that which moves us to do (to our powers) what we judge ever
to be best: But we are to note the Apostle here speaks of the will of sign,
precept, or counsel, which God has given us to do good by, or rather to be
our rule of knowing when we do well, but not of the will of his absolute
divine pleasure, for that is so necessary, as nothing can be done against it,
that is to say, nothing can be done otherwise, than as God is pleased it shall
be; but the Apostle here thus explicates himself about these three Wills,
describing the good will, from the 3d to the 6th verse of this Chapter, to
consist in being soberly wise, and to proceed according to the measure of grace
given us by God, each in our calling: The acceptable he describes from the 9th
verse to the 16th verse, making that to consist in a sincere cordial affection
in a servent, strong, and liberal love to our neighbors. The perfect from the
16th verse to the end of the Chapter, he says consists in a perfect love,
mixed with so much humility, as makes us condescend to love even our enemies,
and do good to them, though they requite us again with ill offices done to us.

3. St Paul here professes his knowledge of spiritual things not to be
otherwise in him, then by the special grace of God, given him to know thus
much as he does, yet it is most probable be alluded to the particular grace of
his Apostolate, which gave him the science to distinguish spirits, and that he
professes to do in these three gradations of the will divine, which here he
makes, and if in this place we understand grace for power given unto him to
instruct them by office as he was an Apostle, it might (so taken) be no
wrested sense: By bidding us not to be more wise than becomes, he advises
mediocrity in all proceedings, and disswades from excess or extremes in any
kind; since even at the extremity of virtue, vice attends; or he may forbid
curiosities in points of Faith, such as brinke upon heresy, when they are too
far strained: Or lastly, he may forbid in these words, pride and vain glory, or
self-conceit in men, of their own ablities, when they value themselves at a
higher rate than others do, or then indeed they can deserve: For this is to be
wiser than they ought, this is not to be soberly, but impudently wise. He
says further, That every one should proceed according as God has divided the
measure of Faith, that is to say, according as God has given his several
gifts for imbellishment unto the true Faith of Christ, or as graces thereunto
belonging, but so as they must be gratis given, and as certain Testimonies of
the true Faith: Such were the gifts of tongues, of prophecy, of discretion of
Spirits, of Interpretation of Scripture, of teaching, of ministry, and the
like 1 Cor. 12. v. 10. and while any one had received these gratuit gifts, as
measures of his Faith, or as Testimonies that he was a true Christian, the
Apostle advises him to rest there, and not to undertake teaching, if he were
but gifted to the ministry, nor discernment of spirits, if he had only the
gift of tongues, and so of the rest.

4, 5. These two next Verses illustrate this to be the genuine sense of the
former measure of Faith, by the analogy between the members of a natural and
a mystical body; for as in the natural body it were absurd, if the hand
should undertake to speak, or the tongue to reach, what meat the body expected
the hand to bring unto the mouth, so were it for one member of the mystical
body to execute the office and function of another, as for the Clark to teach,
and the Doctor to play the Clarks part, since these are spiritually tied
together for several spiritual uses and operations, as the members of the
natural body are corporally tied, to make one entire thing consisting of
several members: and the spiritual tie or union of the Mystical members are
interiourly invisible, as Faith and Grace, exteriourly visible, as the
Sacraments of holy Church; for by these the whole body mystical is compacted
and set together unto Christ, their (now) invisible, and to the Pope, S. Peter's
successor, their (now) visible Head, and as no corporal member only serves
it self, but is a fellow servants both with, and to the other members of the
natural body: for example, the hand serves the mouth with meats, the mouth the
stomach, the stomach digests all into nutriment for the whole body: So every
Christian must be a servant, not only to Christ the Head, but even to every
soul, that (beleiving in Christ) is a member of his Mystical body, the
Church, as well as we; and this were to be perfect members unto Christ, when
we were ready to serve one another, in order to his service, to Gods honor and
glory, this were to follow the Apostles counsel close, of being members to one
another, that is, serving one another particular necessities, as well as those
of our common body, the Church, united to Christ her Head.

The Application.
1. NO marvel if last sundays Infants be to day required, to offer up their
Reasonable services to Almighty God; for as Faith elevateth Reason, so Hope and
Charity subject the will to it. Thus these Baptismal virtues make of children
men, hence the Graces of the Holy Ghost brook no delay, but make an Infant
Christian, as soon the Masculine sacrifice, as he is able to be the
Sacrificant: O Happy Christianity!

2. And it is great reason that new creatures should operate according to the
newness of their Being. Since therefore we are all by Baptism newly made to be
children of God, who were born slaves of the Devil, it is but reason we
embrace the Apostles counsel here, and live reformed according to the newness
of our mind, who have new Beings given us, such as propend to a conformity unto
the will of God, and renounce all self-will for ever. As then that Renunciation
was made last Sunday, so this Conformation must be made from this day forward.

3. Now least we should err in this Conformity, the close of this Epistle
tells us how to escape that Error, by a sweet subordination unto one another;
such as may make up the mystical body of Christ (which Christians are) as
perfect, as our natural bodies be, whose every member is subordinate unto the
Head, whilst they remain subservient to one another, and the Head commands
them. Learn therefore subject Christians to be dutiful to your superiors,
Learn Commandants to live your selves, obedient to the great Commander of us
all,

And that we may learn these Lessons, let us pray as above.

The Gospel, Luke 2. ver. 42. etc.
42. ANd when he was twelve years old, they going up into Jerusalem, according
to the custom of the Festival day,

43. And having ended the days, when they returned, the child Jesus remained
in Jerusalem: and his parents knew it not.

44. And thinking that he was in the company, they came a days journey, and
sought him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance.

45. And not finding him, they returned into Jerusalem seeking him:

46. And it came to pass after three days, they found him in the Temple,
sitting in the midst of the Doctors, hearing them, and asking them.

47. And all were astonished that heard him, upon his wisdom and answers.

48. And seeing him, they wondered, and his mother said to him, Son, Why have
thou so done to us? Behold, thy Father and I sorrowing did seek Thee.

49. And he said unto them, what is it that you sought me? did you not know,
that I must be about those things which are my Fathers?

50. And they understood not the word, that he spoke unto them.

51. And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject to them.
And his mother kept all these words in her heart.

52. And Jesus proceeded in wisdom and age, and grace with God and men.


The Explication.
42. THe twelve years of the child's age are here specified to show, that Jesus
(who was not only Doctor of the heavenly chair, but even the wisdom it self
of his heavenly Father) lost no time in taking hold of all opportunities
offered unto him, to show how great a zeal he came withal from heaven to teach
and play the Doctors part on earth, so, as at the twelfth year of age,
childhood expires and youth begins in us to spell man at least, if not to write
it wholly, Jesus who was as wise an Infant, as a youth, would not before the
years of discretion assume unto himself the office of a Teacher, but so soon as
by course of nature he was held among men capable of discourse and judgment,
then he mixed himself mostestly amongst the Doctors in the Temple, to show he
came not thither to play the boy, as children at that age do, but the man,
as soon as men would look upon him; for such, who knew no more of him than what
they saw, They, who are here said to go up into Jerusalem, according to the
custom of the Festival Day (which was that of the Jewish Easter, or Pascha)
were Jesus, Mary, and Joseph, the child's Mother and Father, as also with them
we may presume there went diverse others of their allies and kindred, as the
custom was for friends to go in troops together to this celebrated Feast,
once a year from all neighboring Countries, that being the Metropolis, or head
City of the Jews, where the grand Synagogue was held.

43. The days that are here mentioned to be ended, were those seven days
which they held continually solemn, as now the Catholic Church does the
Octaves of the greatest Feasts in the year, consisting of eight solemn days,
to show, that as by seven of those days, we consecrate all time to God, as
well that of work, as that of rest, so by the eighth day we offer up unto him
here all the eternity, wherein we hope to rest with him in glory, after we have
ended our laborious time upon earth; and by this we give testimony, that the
Evangelicall Law is much more perfect than the Jewish, in regard we labor here
in hope of eternal rest, and this by the prescript of our law, whereas the Law
of the Jews was only temporary, and so prescribed order for no further than
the time they lived here upon earth, which whole time was mystically
represented by their Feast of seven day s continuance, and ours has one day
more, to show that we hope for a blessed Eternity after time is gone: Here then
the Story tells us, the Parents of Jesus returned to Nazareth, after the seven
days of this solemnity were ended, which yet was more than others spent in the
celebrating this festivity; for none were tied to be there all the days
thereof, it being sufficient that they appeared once upon any one of the seven
Festival days; but as the Devotion of this humane Trinity of Saints, Jesus,
Mary, and Joseph, was greater than that of others; so they spent the whole time
of this Festivity in continual Prayer and Devotion; which time being ended,
and Jesus having asked leave of his Parents to go visit some of his kindred,
whilst they were getting things ready to return home again, it was through God
Almighties permission, that he by this slight gat loose from his Parents,
making a very short stay with those he went to see, nor did he make a false
pretense, though he concealed the other truth of his further meaning, partly
out of humility, to cover his devotion, which lead him to a longer stay in the
Temple, partly to let his parents see, that however they were holy Saints, yet
they were not exempt from the infirmities of humane nature, and so, (though not
sinning therein) were short of that home-care they ought to have had, of
keeping Jesus always in their own eyes, as thinking him safe enough for so
short a time amongst his kindred? hence it was, they knew not that their charge
stayed behind them in Jerusalem.

44, 45. So thinking he had been with his kindred, where they presumed at night
to find him, but missing of him, they returned a days journey back full of
trouble, and yet were carried on with the comfort of hope to find him in
Jerusalem, at some of his kindreds houses, whither they had given him leave to
go. Some will say, the Blessed Virgin was afraid her Son had lost himself,
though she knew him to be God, for since she saw him cover his Deity, and
proceed as a child in other things, those of this opinion will have her to
conceive he might (to conceal his Divinity the better) being gone from them,
seem to miss his right way, as children usually do in such cases out of their
friends or parents sights: but others make her fear more rational, that do
think it was grounded upon a doubt, lest her temporal Son might, by order of
his heavenly Father, leave her, and choose to live elsewhere, which did a
little trouble even her resigned motherly heart, as much as nature might work
upon grace without sin, and this perhaps might be the very truth of their after
declared sorrow (verse 48.) for having lost him.

46. After Three days, is here spoken in the same sense as Saint Luke, verse
21. said, after eight days were gone Jesus was circumcised, meaning in the
morning of the eight day, but then begun; The like is of Christ his
resurrection, after Three days, that is to say, the first minute of the third
day: So after Three days here imports, on the morning of the third day; The
first being understood of the night they missed him at the Inn, a days
journey from Jerusalem; The second of the day spent in their return to the
City, and the third, when (after they had first called at their friends houses
in the Town as they passed through it, and missing him there) they went to the
Temple, whether to pray and make Acts of resignation for his loss, or in hope
to find him there, we know not, but if we allow a mixture of both, it may stand
with good proportion to the strife betwixt nature and grace in this world: Be
it how it will, they found him in the Temple, on the third day in the morning,
and there Sitting in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing what they did say,
and asking what they could say to his Interrogatories, not such as discovered
his Deity, yet deeper than could be expected from his youthful years: but we
are here to note, that upon all occasions of distress, the Temple is to be
our refuge, as being the proper House of God, who is not to be supposed absent
from thence at any time, because no other place is so fit for his Divine
presence, and therefore though he be every where, in some kind or other, yet
he is always, to all effects and purposes, there. His asking the Doctors,
was all about the praedictions of the Messiah, citing to them places to this
effect, even to their admiration, he being a child; as that now the Scepter was
passed from the Jews, that is, from Judah to Herod an alien born. That the time
of Daniels seventy weeks was expired, Dan. 9.24. and all the other Oracles of
the Prophets about the coming of the Messiah: all which were notions above the
reach of a child; and therefore the Doctors knowing all to be true that he
asked, stood in admiration of him, and delighted in his company. And though
Jesus be here said to ask rather than to teach, yet Origin says well, It
flows from the same fountain of wisdom, to ask pertinently, and teach
profoundly; for a Question rightly asked often rectifies a formerly erroneous
judgment.

47. Whence we see in this Verse it is said, They all were astonished at his
wisdom, and the prudence of his answers, namely, to such questions as he gave
them occasion to ask him; and from hence they said among themselves, Who is
this child like to be when he writes man, that is already thus versed in holy
Writ? in deepest points of erudition, though we all know him to be a poor
Carpenters son, and one whose parents poverty cannot give him the Education of
the Schools?

48. They were his parents of whom it is here said, They wondered seeing him:
Set a child amongst the Doctors, grateful and acceptable to them all: What his
mother seems here to say unto him in a chiding manner, was not so, but in a
reverentiall way of admiration, as who should say; Sweet child! why have thou
so done, to leave us, and not tell us of it, these are mysteries beyond my poor
capacity, that ask to instruct my self, not to rebuke thee, who art (though my
child) yet withal my God. And for this reason it is probable, she asked this
question privately, not before the company who might conceive it a
reprehension. Again, see her modesty, who was the sole parent of Jesus, yet she
prefers Joseph before her self, saying, Thy Father and I sorrowing did seek
Thee. Morally thus, we may apply this place to be a rule to our souls seeking
out grace lost by sin, or even with grace venially offending God, First, going
to the Church, there searching into our faults, then finding them, weeping to
say, O my God, Why have thou served me thus? why have thou withdrawn thy self
from me, and permitted me to fall into thy offense? all the amends I can make,
is to say, I have sought thee out lamenting my loss of Thee, Sweet Jesu, grant
me, whilst I live never more to lose the blessed comfort of thy sacred sight
and presence; thus or to this effect may we Morallize upon this place.

49. These words of our Savior were not spoken in a reprehensive, but rather
in a re-minding way, as who should say, do you not remember that I am to be
employed in those things which are my Fathers pleasure: Here he shows them,
since it was revealed to them, he was God as well as man, they ought not to
wonder, (as they had done) what was become of him, because they knew, as God he
could not be lost; and that as God he was not to ask their leave for his
actions; since some of them were to be such as did neither depend on their
wills, nor on their powers to enable him thereunto: And these actions the Greek
Divines tell us are properly Theandrick, that is to say, in one word Divehumane
actions, or those of God become man; and for this cause he says to his earthly
Parents, Do you not know, that I am to be employed in my heavenly Fathers
will? Or that the actions which are proper to me as God and man, as Messiah and
Redeemer of the world, must be regulated according to his pleasure, who is my
only Father, since as from him I took my Divine Nature; so in order to him, I
am to direct those actions which have their force and source from Deity, though
they seem performed by humanity: And we have a kind of similitude of such
actions even amongst pure creatures: for however a King be in the line of
nature subject to his mother, yet in the line of government he is her
superior and sovereign; much after this sort was it with Christ in this
occasion; as this action tended to the execution of his Function, it had no
dependence on his mother, however in other actions he were subject unto her,
and for proof thereof, he went from this very action to the practice of his
subjection, as is said in the 51. verse following.

50. It was no marvel they understood not this manner of speech, for however
it was revealed to them, that Jesus was God and man, sent to save the world,
yet how and in what sort he was to work out man's salvation, they did not
understand, neither durst they be so curious as to ask him.

51. But when they perceived it was his holy pleasure to go home with them, and
there be subject unto ^^^a, they went home with him, or rather the Text seems
to say, He lead them the way home to Nazareth, saying And he went down with
them out of the Temple, that is to say, he lead them down, for sure they durst
as ill lead him the way, as they durst ask him any further question, how he was
to proceed in his grand work of humane Redemption. Note, his subjection was
according to his humane nature, not his divine, and even that was an ultroneous
or voluntary (indeed a mere gratuite) subjection too; for albeit as he was his
mothers natural son, she had a right in nature to a superiority over his
humane nature, yet in regard the Hypostaticall union made of his two Natures
but one person, and that this person was as properly God as man, he stood as
much exempted from all subjection to his mother (even as man) as he was from
Caesar, Herod, Pilate, or any Magistrate upon the face of the earth; and yet to
show us that obedience was a chief virtue in Christian perfection, and happily
the hardest to be performed by humane creatures, therefore he spent thirty
years in the practice of this subjection, of this obedience to his Parents, and
only Three in an absolute way, independent of them, and indeed to obey
Superiors, is in them to obey God, who has placed them over us: So though S.
Luke say no more of Christ's actions from this time to his thirtieth year of
age, yet in this little he has said much, That God should be subject to his
own creatures, to teach them subjection to their Creator; and that it is here
said, His mother kept all his words in her heart, does not argue S. Joseph was
negligent or forgetful thereof, but that his trade employed much of his mind,
whereas the Blessed Virgin made it her whole employment to hear and practice
the Doctrine of her Saviour-Sonne.

52. This Progress of Jesus in Wisdom, Age, and Grace, is to be understood,
as was explicated the last Sunday, verse. 40. of this same Chapter; only for
further Illustration, we may conceive this Progress extrinsecall, to be like
that of the Suns light, from the rising, to the Noontide sun, still seeming to
us greater and greater, yet in it self all one in the luminous body whence it
comes, though made less by a greater distance at rising, than when it is
nearer to us at noonday, or by the diversity of reflection, for from both it
varies; but diverse ways grace in Christ differs from grace in us; For example,
as it is to him natural, being God, and Connaturall, by reason of the
Hypostaticall Union between God and man in Christ: To us it is ever
supernatural, as it renders us grateful, or rather restores us to grace by
taking away Original and Actual sin; whereas in him it has none of these
Effects, but flows from his Person as light from the Sun: Again, as our Grace
is private and particular, his common to us all; as in us it increases by good
works, but in him it being still full, cannot increase; But the close of this
Verse seems hardest; yet is it easy, if rightly understood, that is, if we
conceive our doing well in the sight of men, is a like increasing in Gods eye,
as we increase before men in perfection: Nor is it enough to do well privately
toward God, but we must do publicly so too, both before God and man, to
please one, and to edify the other.

The Application.
1. THis Gospel first teaches all Parents by example of the blessed Virgin
Mary, and of S. Joseph to breed up all their children in the fear of God, to
teach them their prayers, to see them go to Church on Sundays and Holy Days,
at least to cause them to be present at Divine Service, at Sermons,
Catechisms, or Exhortations, thereby to be instructed in their Faith and Rules
of Christian perfection

2. It also teaches all children due obedience to their Natural Parents, and
all Christians religious subjection to our Holy Mother the Catholic Church,
while we read of the child Jesus that he was subject unto them: Namely, to his
putative Father St. Joseph, and to his Natural Mother the Blessed Virgin Mary,
and as we read of little else in all the Story of our Saviors Infancy, nor
indeed till he came to the age of thirty years, so we may rest content, that
this Lesson alone well learned (and well practiced) is sufficient to make us
the Infantil, and youthful Saints that God desires to have us.

3 It lastly teaches us, That where Gods honor is concerned, there Flesh and
Blood is not to be regarded, while our Savior excused his slipping from his
natural Mother to obey the commands of his supernatural Father,

For thus to do is to put the Will of God in execution, according as we pray
above we may.

The Antiphon, JOHN 2. ver. 3. THe Wine failing, Jesus commanded the Water-pots
to be filled with water, which was turned into Wine.

Verse. Let my prayer, O Lord, be addressed:

Resp. Even as Incense in thy sight.


The Prayer.
Almighty everlasting God, who do moderate at once heavenly and earthly
Things, hear clemently the prayers of thy people, and grant us thy peace in our
Times.

The Illustration.
IF upon any day in the year we can think it possible to fail of connection
between the Epistle, Gospel, and the Prayer, it is like to be to day: for when
we come to seek a key to unlock the hidden Treasure of harmony, between this
Prayer and the other parts of this days Service, we shall hardly find it in
any member or word of the Prayer, where yet (if at all) it must be found. For
example, the first clause of the Prayer seems only courtship to Almighty God,
telling him he moderates at once heavenly and earthly things. The second clause
does but beg of him, that he will hear clemently the prayers of his people. The
last (which is all we can esteem petitionary) asks indeed the grace of peace to
us in our Times; but in all the Epistle, and Gospel too, we find not the least
touch upon peace, and so may doubt whether the design can hold, of finding a
sympathy between the Prayer, Epistle, and Gospel: Nevertheless, if we cast our
eyes upon the miracle done this day, we shall thence retrive that sweet
connection we are at a seeming loss of; and shall conclude, the key we want to
open this connection, lies hidden in the preamble of this Prayer, in the very
courtship we use, when we call upon God, as moderating at once heavenly and
earthly Things, that is, making the earthly obedient to his will, when he
pleases to have them suitable to those that are heavenly Things: Thus water by
the heavenly will of God became this day wine, thus all the material parts of
this days service became (as it were) immateriall, that is to say, spiritual:
Thus the Temporal gifts mentioned in the Epistle, of Prophecy, Ministry,
Teaching, Exhorting, Ruling, Mercy, Love, Joy, Hope, Patience, Prayer, Alms,
Hospitality, Unanimity, and Humility, are made spiritual, in being ordained to
a spiritual end, by conformity in us earthly creatures to the will of our
Creator, which is effected by virtue of that moderation God has set between
heaven and earth; when he so moderates humane minds and actions, as they become
subservient to his heavenly will: Thus carnal pleasure between man and wife is
in them limited by Gods holy grace, moderating the excess and intemperance in
that pleasure, which indeed carnal men commit, but spiritual men avoid, God
moderating fleshly appetites in them, so as they shall not entrench upon
spiritual duties, but give way to serving God, though with abridgement of
their own delights: and this is done, when Saint Paul's counsel is followed,
Let those that have wives be as if they had none, 1 Cor. c. 7. v. 29. (when God
Almighties service so requires) as when attending first to prayer, they
afterward return to the same corporal pleasure they forsook, to pray; and
this is called a spiritual continence, even in the bed of incontinency, not as
that term imports sin, but as it argues less perfection than virginity; or
absolute containing from all corporal commixture: but further and more
prodigiously yet this miraculous moderation between heavenly and earthly Things
is seen, when married people have liberty allowed them for their due and
seasonable mutual pleasures with one another, and yet withal at the same
instant they have a limit set them, beyond which they must not pass, but like
to flowing Seas must ebb just at their own bounds, and fall to the low water
of a non-temptation toward any other carnal pleasure, than between
themselves. Here, I say, (if ever more eminently than other) it does appear,
God moderates heavenly and earthly Things at once; for here is a kind of
continual miracle betw^en man and wife, when Saint Paul's counsel is followed
as above; and since the Story of this days Gospel runs upon a marriage, and
the Prayer concludes with begging peace, here is the grant of that petition,
when man and wife (thus moderated) live happily together, not defrauding one
another: here is further that peace granted to all sorts of Christians, when
they apply the Temporal gifts recited in the Epistle to spiritual, to
heavenly ends, and when in the prayer we say, Grant us thy peace in our days,
it is no less than the peace of that God, who at once moderates heavenly and
earthly things, which we demand.

Now if any would dive further into that peace, let them look back to the
seventh verse in the Epistle on the Third Sunday of Advent, and to the
Explication thereof: There they shall see, how ravishing, how plentiful a
peace it is: And having thus wrought out our design of connection here, where it
was so seeming hard at first, but now to flowing from every part, like honey
from the Combs of this days Epistle and Gospel, upon the bread of the Prayer,
let us never despair of as good success all the year along: nor can there be a
sweeter Prayer than this thus glossed, and in this sense reiterated, as often
as we find reluctance in us between nature and grace: For then thus to call
upon God, as moderatour between heaven and earth, is to quell all rebellion of
nature against grace, which God grant we may do by praying as above.

The Epistle, ROMANS 12. ver. 6. etc.
6. ANd having gifts, according to the grace that is given us, different,
either prophecy, according to the rule of Faith.

7. Or ministry, in ministering, or he that teaches in doctrine.

8. He that exhorts in exhorting, he that gives in simplicity, he that
rules in carfulness, he that shows mercy in cheerfulness.

9. Love without simulation, hating evil, cleaving to good.

10. Loving the charity of the Brotherhood one toward another, with honor
preventing one another.

11. In carfulness not sloathfull, in spirit fervent, serving our Lord.

12. Rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation, instant in prayer.

13. Communicating to the necessities of the Saints, pursuing hospitality.

14. Bless them that persecute you, Bless and Curse not.

15. To rejoice with them that rejoice, to weep with them that weep.

16. Being of one mind one toward another, not minding high things, but
consenting to the humble,


The Explication.
IN regard there was reference made to this place on Sunday last concerning the
rule of Faith, therefore we shall here take hold of the last part of this verse
first, and having premised what is peculiarly necessary upon this which is
hugely controversiall, we shall then proceed in our wonted manner for
expounding the rest of the Text. We are therefore here to note, That by the
Rule of Faith is not understood, only the Apostles Creed, branched into twelve
Articles, as we have received it from age to age, but a set Form of life
delivered by word of mouth unto the People by the Apostles, who had first held
Counsels about it amongst themselves, and stood resolved, all their teaching
should be conformable thereunto. And this Rule is not (as Heretics will have
it) the holy Scripture written by the Apostles, for this Rule was made long
before any Scripture was written, and it was never delivered abroad but by word
of mouth in their preaching and exhortations: so it is properly called, the
Apostolical Tradition, which is yet, even unto this very day, the Rule of
Faith to the whole Catholic Church, to the Decrees of all Councels, to the
sense or exposition of the holy Scriptures, and consequently Scripture cannot
be (as Heretics pretend) the sole Rule of Faith, though true it is, there must
be nothing (nor is there any thing at all) in holy Writ contrary to this Rule,
or Apostolical Tradition; which was much larger than the written Word, and
therefore it ever was (and still is) even to the sacred Word, a kind of Rule or
Test to try it by, since before the Apostles issued out their written books of
Scripture, those books were examined by this Rule of Faith, which was framed by
common consent of the whole number or College of Apostles; whereas all of them
did not write, nay, two only of the twelve were Evangelists, or Writers of the
Gospels, for Saint Mark and Saint Luke (the other two Evangelists) were not
dignified with the style of Apostolate, though they were all Preachers of the
Gospel, according still to this Rule of Faith kept close amongst themselves:
And indeed the Evangelists writ their Gospels rather upon Emergencies than upon
any design or command they had from Christ so to do; but incountring with
Heresies, they did beat them down, not only by preaching, but even by writing,
as since the Doctors and Fathers of the Church have done in all ages: yet this
difference there is between the Apostles and the Fathers writings, that the
former are more magisteriall, more oracular, more authoritative than the
latter; for however we attribute much to any one Father, yet if another Father
write contrary, we regulate our selves then by the consent of Fathers, whereas
it is not so in any of the Evangelists writings, or any Canonical part of
Scripture, every book, every chapter, every sentence, every word, every letter
thereof is sacred, and of uncontrouled, undoubted, indeed of sacred Authority,
both by reason of the Authors prerogative Apostolate, and of the special
instinct they had from the Holy Ghost to write upon such occasions as to them
occurred.

Now to our usual gloss upon the Text: In these Three first verses of the
Epistle, the Apostle enumerates the gifts proper to Churchmen, according to
this rule of Faith. From the ninth verse forwards he recounts what even the
lay people ought to beg of God for the embellishment or measure of Faith,
according to the rule thereof, concerning all faithful Believers whatsoever,
and though many take prophecy for a common gift, bestowed as well upon the
Laics as upon Ecclesiastical persons, yet in this place the Apostle takes it
strictly, as appertaining to their prophetic, by which is understood, their
preaching and teaching Function.

6. For we read in holy Writ, where the Ministry or Diaconate was set apart by
the Apostles, as hindering them from teaching and preaching, and conferred on
Deacons assigned specially for that purpose: Non est equum, It is not reason
(say the Apostles, Acts 6. v. 2) that we leave the word of God, and serve
Tables. Consider therefore, Brethren, seven men of you of good Testimony, full
of the Holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this Business; But we
will be instant in prayer and the ministry of the word. The like division is
made 1 Timothy 3. where under the name of Bishops he includes Pastors and Priests
too; under the name of Deacons he includes all Church Officers below them too:
So under the style of prophecies, he includes two sorts of Priests, Apostles
and Bishops, as also Pastors and Preachers, which are Priests, and those that
by office take care of souls, and that of Deacons we shall likewise see divided
anon.

Note here by faith, is not only understood an absolute Article of faith, but
a perfect understanding the sense of the divine word, be it written, or
delivered from the Apostles by word of mouth; and this Faith is that which is
recounted as a gratuit or free gift of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. v. 9 To
another is given Faith in the same spirit; so he says here, the Apostles and
others had the gift of prophecy, as a measure of their Faith, that is, to
explicate the sacred word, according to the rule of faith: so none could use
this gift, to vent any their own brainsick fictions, but only thereby to
illustrate the rule of Faith left unto the Church by Jesus Christ, and
conserved as a sacred Tradition amongst the Apostles whilst they lived, and so
handed over from age to age unto the Church, until the worlds end. S Ambrose
will have this gift of prophecy, or (as the Apostle here means) of Teaching,
to be such as renders the Preacher able to deliver high mysteries of Faith,
according to the measure of every true Christians capacity or understanding;
and indeed prophecy is here taken properly for a gift of teaching, according to
the exact rule of Faith, even when the deepest Mysteries are agitated, or the
hardest places of Scripture are controverted: Now by this, and what we said
last Sunday, when the third verse of this 12th Chapter to the Romans was
expounded, we see the difference between the measure and the rule of Faith.

7. By Ministry is here understood as above, the Diaconat, either as it
imports the office it self, or the execution thereof, as shall be more at large
expressed in the next verse: Suffice it here to know the office is taken for an
external duty of charity; and that as well corporal as spiritual, whereas
Doctorat or prophecy, imported only the spiritual exhibition of charity by
Teaching, Preaching, or the like: but the gift of Prophecy or Doctorate has
two branches: The one is of strict, solid, and Magisterial doctrine, according
to the measure and rule of Faith, a gift not imparted to every man, but rarely
to some few, and that is here insisted upon only, The other is, of exhorting as
follows:

8. This seems a gift that allows a liberty to the Preacher of persuading to
truth by any lawful art, or means of Rhetoric and eloquence, to draw the
hearer to a content, (as well as a consent) of what is delivered; So that this
exhortation is properly that which Pastors are to mix with their
administration of the Sacraments, and doctrinall points in their Sermons, that
the people may thereby be raised up as well to Acts of Love perfecting their
will, as to Knowledge perfecting their understanding: And in this place the
Apostle advises all men thus gifted to make use thereof according to the
measure and rule of faith, not to bury such their talents without profiting
others thereby, since here is a reduplication importing an actual use of this
Talent, saying, He that exhorts, in exhorting let him use his talent: As who
should say, He that is gifted to exhortation, let him make actual use of that
gift: But we are further to note, in this Verse the Apostle explicates clearly
the office of a Deacon, or Diaconate, which is Tripartite: The First is, that
of Alms; The next, that of Government: The third, that of Hospitality for
tending sick persons: To the perfection of Alms, he requires Simplicity, such
as gives purely for charity, without self-interest, and gives liberally upon
all occasions of exigence, not reserving for the future, when there is a
present want, but confiding in Gods providence for what is to come without any
sinister end, such as theirs is, who give alms to tempt the poor to sin. But
chiefly this Simplicity consists in a contradistinction against duplicity or
fraud, and against distinction of persons, as some use to do, giving rather to
one than another in equal necessity, out of a partiality of respect to this
body rather than to that, as to an allie or acquaintance, before a stranger, a
good or an ill natured man, or the like; which is against true Simplicity: for
God is no accepter of persons, Acts 10.38. To the perfection of government, the
Apostle requires carefulness, solicitude, and vigilance, and this to external
and temporal government, for that of Internal and Spiritual, is the Pastors,
not the Deacons office, which office chiefly belongs indeed to Archdeacons, for
though his personal care be mixed with the spiritual Regimen of his
Parishioners, yet it is his office to see his Deacons carefully administer this
Temporal government, wherein he does employ them. The perfection of attending
the Sick, or Hospitalls, or of showing mercy, consists in alacrity of Spirit,
in cheerfulness, that thereby they may ove^come their own Tedium or weariness
in so laborious an office, and (by the cheerfulness of their own looks)
exhilarate and comfort those who are sick and comfortless, and that (by the
affability of their words) they may encourage the sick to believe they are not
displeased with the unpleasing attendants on diseases, such as are nastie
smells, horrid spectacles of their sores, or the like, and so more confidently
to beg their helping hands, according to that of the Wiseman in Ecclus. 35. v.
11. In all thy gifts to others, let thy countenance be cheerful, and all this
to Churchmen hitherto.

9. See how the Apostle begins the Lay-mans gift of Ministry, with a
recommendation to him of dilection or love of his neighbor, as the principal
virtue that must render his ministry acceptable to God and man: Such dilection
as S. John (Epist. 1. Chap. 3. v. 18.) mentions, saying; Let us not love in
words only, nor in language, but in deed, and in truth, which place will be
explicated at large on the Sunday within the Octaves of Corpus Christi;
Whereunto is here added a hatred of evil in those we love, and a special
adhesion or cleaving to their good example, if any such be given by them; for
so far shall we advance in embracing virtue, as we proceed in the detestation
or hatred of vice.

10. As naturally Brothers love one another, so all Christians being brothers
in Christ (their common Father) the Apostle here requires the love that
intercedes between them (though of a supernatural order) should follow the
rule of brotherly love which is natural; but when he exhorts to a mutual
preventing one another in this fraternall dilection, the^e he elevat s the
course of nature, which is dull, and raises it to that of Grace, which is
quick and nimble, brooking no delays, not expecting to be first obliged, but
obliging before we receive any other obligation thereunto, than what our
Christian duty recommendeth to us, indeed commands us to use, as for point of
love: Though as for preventing each other with honor, that being an Art of
Heroic perfection, it is here only counseled, and not commanded.

11. Here Governors are exhorted to a carefulness, to a sedulitie or diligence
in their offices, least by their sloth, any under their charge perish, and to
be boiling, as it were with a fervor of Spirit and devotion toward acts of
charity; not simpering or standing still, as if the fire of love in their souls
were quite extinguished, and did not propend them to rise upon all occasions
administered of doing good to others day or night: The marks of this fervor are
first, that our minds be wholly attent to the good action in hand, next, that
we covet the doing it, as much as any other can desire to have it done: Lastly,
that we continue constant in such actions, and do not flaccess or grow weary
of well doing: and this must be with regard to God, as if in serving man, we
served God in man, for else our service might be servile and not filial,
performed more for fear than love, serving time rather than eternity, whereas
if we make it a part of our duty to God, that we serve man, then it will be
boiling, and fervent, as it ought, because it rises from a supernatural heat,
or motive, more active than any natural one can be.

12. The hope that must cause our rejoyceing to be accomplished, ought to be
that of the Heavenly joys; for the higher we make the expectation of our
reward, the more alacrity shall we have in doing well, and therefore Christian
joy ought to be of a higher strain, than any the present, or future emoluments
of this world can suggest into us; but such should be our joy, and hopes, as
the Prophet David speaks of Psalm, 4. ver. 10. calling it a singular puesto
that we are placed in; or an expectation of singular hopes, not ordinarily (or
ever indeed) here arrived unto, but laid up for us in the magazine of Heaven,
where the least of all rewards are infinite; and besides unattainable, if our
joy here at any time be such, as may not hope for eternal joys to accompany
the same: but if such then our vain wordlly joys, or felicities (all of them
that are truly vain) would be laid aside, and we should rather content our
selves with patient suffering, which the Apostle recommends, after he had taken
away in his former words all vain joys, than with shaking these sufferings
off, to seek contents or comforts from this world, which we could not hope to
enjoy in the next; but making it our joy to suffer, and bringing that suffering
to the perfection of an incessant, or instant Prayer, by referring all our
actions to Gods Honor and Glory; for in so doing, we shall follow close the
counsel here given us in this Verse of persisting in Prayer; and the like
given by Saint Paul, 1 These. 5. ver. 17. Pray without intermission; and of
Saint Luke, commanding such Prayer, chap. 18. ver. 1. while he said, we must
always pray.

13. Some understand this place as meant by praying for our own, or our
neighbors necessities, and in so praying, availing our selves and our
neighbors of the Saints intercessions; so as by the necessities of Saints are
meant here their memories of us, which we do want: Thus Saint Ambrose, thus
Origin, thus Saint Hierom, all after the Greek text, who take memory here in a
double sense; first, as to avail our selves of our remembering the Saints
examples given us here, and the reward of glory given to them in Haven, to
incite our selves to the like sanctity in hope of the like reward: secondly, as
we avail our selves of their remembering us, while we implore their aid by
making memory of them in our services, as in the Canon of the Mass is daily
done; In these words, Communicating, and revering the memory of the Blessed
Virgin Mary, of the holy Apostles, Saint Peter, and Saint Paul etc yet the more
literal sense is that of the Latin Text, alluding to our relieving others
here, or in Purgatory in their necessity; the one by Prayer, the other by
Alms: and these as Saints, we are bid Communicate unto, or relieve; that is,
as presuming they are so, rather than judging them to be Sinners, because their
name at least of Christians is Holy, what ere their Lives are so by
Communicating is here meant exchanging our works of Mercy, for their works of
Merit, who are in want: Pursuing hospitality, that is to say, rather hunting
after occasions to do good, than flying of them, or indeed expecting them,
till they be cast into our laps; for though then to relieve is good, yet to
search out the poor, and to carry them our Alms, is much better.

14. By Blessing those who Persecute us, is here understood praying for them,
that God will turn their hearts, which yet is not so much a precept, as a
Counsel; much less are we to curse them, or to wish the like persecution may
befall them, as they bring to us, for we are under precept bound not to do
this latter, though the former were a counsel only.

15. This Verse teaches us how to make our neighbors, his good, or evil, to
be our own, by rejoyceing at his prosperity as at our own, and lamenting his
affliction, or weeping thereat, as if our selves were under the same lash: For
thus we should show our selves to be perfect Christians, and indeed, where
these common bowels are not, there Gods particular spirit is wanting: and this
joy, as it is understood to be rather of our neighbors spiritual, than
temporal good; so is our sorrow to be more for his sin, (whereby he loses
grace) than for any his temporal loss whatsoever:

16. There is much labor to know the true meaning of the unanimity, or being
of one mind, which is here recommended; for some (and those not unaptly) will
have it to be an advise Apostolical for every man, humbly to depose his own
opinion in things that are not sin, or apparent falsities in natural truths,
or at least not resist other men's opinions in like cases out of animosity, to
defend our own, as holding our selves wiser than our neighbors, or more
learned, which is no part of Christian perfection, for that teaches us to
undervalue our selves rather, and to prefer all others before us, both in
Virtue and Learning. Saint Chrysostom explicates this place, as exhorting us
to measure our selves by our neighbors, rather than to reduce them to our
defective proportions: but Origin (and he indeed in this place better than any)
will have the sense of it to be thus; that is, wishing to your neighbor in all
things, as to your self, and averting from him, what you would not have fall
upon your own head: and here we are to note, that as from the nineth Verse to
the twelfth, the Apostle told us, what Christian dilection was, so from thence,
to this place, he proceeds to tell us, how that Love is advanced, or promoted;
first, by hope of eternal Glory; next, by patience in Adversity; then by
incessant Prayers: further, by Hospitality to all persons, Friends or Foes;
chiefly, by this his last advice of Unanimity, in the senses above said: for as
the first and chief Christian Virtue is Charity, so the next is Humility; and
with that here the Apostle closes this present verse, forbidding us to vaunt
our own knowledges or abilities, but rather to agree, and acquiess to the
opinions of those, who are reputed, perhaps less able, or less virtuous than
your selves; this is indeed a true sign of humility, and this is perhaps the
literal sense of the Apostle, counselling us to consent unto the humble, that
is, even to those who are below us in the indowments either of nature, or of
grace.

The Application.
1. IT is now fit to descend unto particular instructions, after the general
grounds laid in last Sundays Epistle for conformity to Gods holy Will, and for
subordination to each other as members of the same Mystical Body of Christ.
See how to day each member is taught his particular Duty. The Priest in the
three first Verses of this Epistle.

2. The Layman in the five next Verses is also taught to walk according to his
own vocation, in order both to God, and his neighbor.

3. And least we should think our Enemies were not our Neighbors too, see how
the Apostle commands us to love them also, to pray for their conversion; to
Bless, and not to Cruse them; to rejoice at their Prosperity, to condole with
their Lamentings. For to do this to Friends, is humane, but to perform it
toward our Enemies, is a work Divine, and shows it is done in us by Gods holy
Grace.

Which we petition in the Prayer above, beging peace in our Times, as the
effect of a sweet moderation between the Heavenly, and Earthly compounds that
we are. The Gospel, JOHN 2. ver. 1. etc.
1. ANd the third day there was a Marriage made in Cana of Galilee; and the
Mother of Jesus was there.

2. And Jesus also was called, and his Disciples to the Marriage.

3. And the Wine failing, the Mother of Jesus says to him, They have no Wine.

4. And Jesus says to her, What is to me, and thee Woman? my hour comes not
yet.

5. His Mother says to the Ministers, whatsoever he shall say to you, do ye.

6. And there were set there, six water-pots of stone, according to the
purification of the Jews, holding every one two or three measures.

7. Jesus said to them, Fill the water-pots with water, and they filled them up
to the top.

8. And Jesus says to them, Draw now, and carry to the chief Steward, and they
carried it.

9. After the chief Steward tasted the Water made Wine, and knew not whence it
was, but the Ministers knew, that had drawn the Water; the chief Steward
calls the Bridegroom.

10. And says to him, Every man first sets the good Wine, and when they
have well drunk, then that which is worse, but thou have kept the good Wine
until now.

11. This beginning of Miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee; and he manifested
his glory, and his Disciples believed in him.


The Explication.
1. THe third day here made mention of, is the third day after Jesus had begun
to aggregate his College of Apostles, which S. John tells us of in the person
of Philip, Chap. 1. v. 43. preparatorily called by Christ unto the Apostolate,
after Peter, and Andrew, James, and John had bin called to the same
preparatively too, but not yet absolutely, as will be said anon, and these
callings were as soon as Christ had ended his forty days Fast in the Desert,
was baptized, and pointed out by John the Baptist for the Messiah, in order
whereunto the said Baptist sent his own Disciples to Jesus with intention to
prefer them to a better master; and Andrew by name was one thus sent, and
thus preparatively called by Christ: So this third day here mentioned by S.
John Evangelist, is that which followed three days after Philip was thus
called, for that was the last time mentioned by this Evangelist, in all he
says from that first Chapter hitherto; this third day therefore alludes, to
that of Philips vocation to the Apostolate, only three days before, to show
both how speedily our Savior went about his work, when once he began it, and
how he had his Disciples to the wedding, that by the miracle he wrought
thereat, they might be confirmed in their Faith of his being the Messiah, the
Son of God: and this Wedding most probably was that of S. Simon, one of the
twelve Apostles, though some think it was S. John Evangelists, because S.
Augustine speaking of him, says, Our Lord called John, from the fluctuating
time of marriage, which yet may as well be interpreted from his marriageable
age, for that indeed is the fluctuating time of man, when he ebbs and flows in
carnal desires, according to emergencies of temptations, more importune at
that age than at any other time of his life: and truly S. John seems to have
been the favorite of Christ, rather by reason of his singular love to
chastity, than for any thing else, so it is likely he never thought of
marriage, whence it is more probably conjectured that this was S. Simons
wedding, who upon the miracle wrought thereat, of turning water into wine, left
his wife (by consent) and became an Apostle, if yet he might not afterward be
called to the Apostolate, though married, as S. Peter was. The place of this
wedding is said to be in Cana of Galilee, to show it was not that other Cana of
Sidonis, which also was in Galilee, within the Tribe of Aser, whereas this was
within the Tribe of Zebulon, three days journey only from Nazareth, lying in
lower Galilee and the other in the higher, out of which latter place it was
that the daughter of the Chananaean came, whom our Savior afterward
dispossessed of the Devil, pitifully tormenting her, Matthew. 15. v. 22. And it
stands with reason, this should be the wedding of Simon (Nephew to the mother
of Jesus, by marriage at least) for he was the son of Cleophas, a Chananaean,
brother to Joseph the husband of the B. Virgin Mary, since the text seems to
say, Jesus his mother was the principal guest, and that for her sake, Jesus
was also called with his Disciples

2. As Cousin-Germane to the Bridegroom S. Simon, but with special providence
of God: First, to honor his kinsman with his presence; next to countenance the
Nuptials of poor people, for these were no other, that had but little wine to
make good cheer withal, since upon the fail thereof, Christ miraculously made
more, as here the Gospel tells us: Lastly, that by this miracle he might confirm
his Apostles in the belief of his being the Messiah, which wrought so far upon
them, as it is credible St. Simon left his Spouse to follow Christ, though by
the presence of Christ at his wedding, the Sacrament of Matrimony was highly
honored, and made a sacred mystery of the union between Christ and his
Church, to beat down the Tatian and Marcion Heresies, holding it unlawful to
marry, and by this example we find it not unfitting for Priests to be at
Weddings modestly celebrated, to put them in mind, the bond of wedlock is a
sacred thing, and ought to be knit up with souls affecting God (even in that
state) above the world: As for the Disciples here present, they were only four
at most, namely Peter, Andrew, and Phillip, not as yet purposely called to the
Apostolate, though in the Chapter above S. John says, Christ bade Peter follow
him, because this was only a preparation to his after calling, since from this
Wedding Peter went to his trade again, and was from thence purposely called by
Christ upon his mount with the rest of the Apostles numbered up in the 6. of S.
Luke v. 14, 15, 16 though it is likely, Nathaniel a great devote, of Christ,
was also here, because Philip had with much zeal brought him to Christ, as we
said, Ioh. 1. v. 47. who commended him for a true Israelite, in whom there was
no guile nor fraud, and the other Disciple not named, who went with Andrew to
Christ from John the Baptist.

3. This Verse shows Simon was a poor man, since he could not provide wine
enough for his wedding, whereupon the B. Virgin his Aunt, moved with the touch
of humane honor, to see her kinsmans Nuptials disparaged for want of Wine, and
knowing her sons power, that as God, he could do all things, as also believing
his Time of showing himself to be God, was, if not come, yet at hand, presumed
to anticipate the time, out of this humane respect, by desiring him to prove
his Deity upon this occasion, of working his first miracle at her request, to
honor her husbands kindred; and yet see how modestly she makes this motion, by
only telling him openly, They have no Wine, as knowing he understood the rest
of her meaning without more words.

4, These are not words of rebuke to the B. Virgin, as some conceive, but
rather of recalling her memory, and bidding her reflect, whither it be a thing
for flesh and blood to command, or indeed expect, that God, for humane ends,
should show his power of working a miracle sooner than of his own pleasure he
had decreed, as it seems this was sooner; since Christ tells his Mother, his
hour was not yet come of declaring himself to be the Messiah but in regard he
found there was a piety mixed with this humane respect of the Virgin, he
dispenses with the concomitant infirmty of humane nature, as long as there is
a motive directly calling upon his Deity, which is that of piety: whence some
will have it, that Christ only expected till all the Wine was quite gone, to
the end the miracle might be more manifest, when the after plenty of Wine
should flow from the total privation thereof. And in this sense neither was
the B. Virgin much preproperous, nor Christ at all anteverting or preventing
the time prefixed for the manifesting of his Deity; since immediately after,
this last cup of Wine was gone, and then the B. Virgin knowing happily by his
all-reavealing aspect what would follow.

5. She says to the Servants, Do whatseover he shall say to you without
dispute, for his word is sufficient to effect, what ere he pleases to have
done.

6. The reason why special mention is made here, of water-pots of Stone is,
because what was to be filled out of them might be manifestly known to be
nothing but water, since Wine was never put into such great vessels, especially
at such poor peoples feasts as these, so finding those water-pots to run Wine,
the miracle might appear the greater and more manifest. Though besides this,
the Text tells us here of the custom among the Jews, to have great Jarrs of
water always ready, in case they had touched any unclean meat, at the Table,
to wash their hands immediately; and for this respect it is said, These pots
were according to the purification of the Jews: and these were vessels of such
bulk, as probably six of them, containing each four gallons or thereabouts,
held as much as a large vessel of Wine, to show the miracle the more
undoubted, that such a quantity should be afforded them so suddenly, who had
not one drop left before.

7. It seems therefore, though these great vessels of water were brought in,
they were not filled, but had each of them some quantity within them, wherefore
Christ to take away all color of deceit, first bids all those vessels to be
filled full of water up to the top, that so each person in the room might see
the certainty of the miracle, and the liberality of God, when he pleases to
open his bounteous hand unto us.

8. This done, Jesus bids them draw of the vessels full of water a cup full,
and carry it to the chief Steward of the feast, because he could best tell,
whether or not he had provided that plenty, and such rare Wine, as those pots
full of water did afford. For it was the Jewish custom ever to have some
modimperatour or prefect of good order at such feasts, so Christ gave him the
respect of first tasting this cup of grace; and the presence of such a prefect
makes the company of Jesus and his Mother more avowable at the feast, since
where a prefect of good order was, there could be no suspicion at all of the
least excess or disorder.

9. This verse shows us, the modimperatour having found Wine come in, more
than he had appointed, and knowing none durst provide any besides himself,
unless by chance the Bridegroom took the privilege so to do (which yet was
not usual) presently calls to him, saying to this effect.

10. This is beyond the ordinary course two ways, first, that you have more
Wine than I was privy too; next, that you have reserved to the last your best
Wine, for this is singular good, much better than what we had before. And yet
the b^st is always first served in, that in case of want, worse may suffice at
the latter end, when the taste (being glutted before) is not so able to
distinguish the difference: yet this was so superlatively rare, as even to
those Palates (formerly glutted in a manner) it did taste extraordinarily well,
indeed to admiration, nor was it strange, since the works of God are ever
perfect.

11. Many doubt wheither or no this were the first miracle that Christ wrought,
willing to believe diverse former which he did in his youth, though in regard
Gelasius the Pope has condemned a fictitious book published by Heretics,
entitled, The miraculous infancy of Jesus, and full of inventions of their
own, it is not improbable this was the first he did after his Baptism, with
any purpose to be noted for the Messiah. By the manifestation of his Glory
here, is understood the showing of his power, wherein he was glorified, and for
which cause the Disciples are here said to believe him to be the true Messiah,
and the true ^amb of God, who (as John the Baptist had told them) was come to
take away the sins of the world: and this miracle he chose to work at a
marriage, as alluding thereby to the solemnity he made this day of his own
wedding between his Divine and humane nature, since now he was resolved to
discover himself to be as well God as man; whence this was done mystically on
the Third day after he was published by the Baptist, to show now the Third
state of the world was begun; The first being hat under the Law of Nature, The
second that under the Law of Moses, and this, that under the Law of Grace:
besides, the miracle was done in the Gentiles Cana, to show Christ came to call
all Nations, it was also done in Cana of Galilee, as importing the
transmigration of possession, that is amongst Christian people, who are the
possession of Christ, as bought by his blood, and therefore are to pass yet
from earth to heaven their better and final possession; The Wine he so
abundantly gave, imports the doctrine of Christ, and his holy grace inebriating
the souls of the Faithful.

The Application.
1. LEarn Husbands hence to love your Wives as Christ does love his Church;
learn Wives to obey your Husbands as the Church obeys her Head our Savior
Jesus Christ, since marriage is a Sacrament representing the union between
Christ and his holy Spouse.

2. Learn married people hence to moderate excesses both at bed and board, for
neither Jesus nor his Blessed Mother can behold excess, and they (to faintifie
your marriage) must be there.

3. Learn Parents hence to breed your Children, rather to supply the Angels
rooms in Heaven, than for to be your own Successors here on Earth; thus will
the waters of humane infirmity be turned into Wine of Christian perfection, by
grace moderating natures exorbitances, and making peace between two fatal
enemies the spirit and the flesh.

As the Prayer to day petitions. On the Third Sunday after the EPIPHANIE.
The Antiphon, MATH. 8. ver. 2. O Lord, if thou will, thou can cleanse me,
and Jesus said, I will, Be thou cleansed.

Verse. Let my prayer, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
OMnipotent eternal God, look, we beseech thee, propitiously on our infirmity,
and extend to our protection the right hand of thy Majesty.

The Illustration.
IT is remarkable to see how negatively Saint Paul in this days Epistle minds
us of being sinners, when positively he exhorts us to be Saints with the
Romans; for what greater sign, that the Apostle found a world of infirmities
in the Romans, than that he stirs them up so much to Virtues contrary to the
vices they abound in; and thus the Epistle insisting all upon virtues, is well
adapted to the Gospel, running all upon infirmities, mystically representing
vices: for what else does the corporal leprosy of the Leper, or the
paraliticall disease of the Centurions boy purport, than the like scurvy latent
diseases of sin in our Souls, to those which were apparent in these two bodies?
Whence it was but fitting this days Prayer should beg to have the same right
hand of God extended over us, which was the cure of these temporal diseases,
types of our spiritual infirmities: nor can we hope this will be done, unless
God of his infinite goodness be propitious to us, and therefore we beseech him
in the Prayer, first to look propitiously on our infirmities, and then to
extend (to our protection) the right hand of his majesty; that is to say, all
his power, as if our vice required no less than an infinite virtue to cure it;
our weakness, no less than all Heavens forces to protect us. And since both the
Leper, and Paralitick, saying this Prayer (in effect) obtained corporal cure
thereby; why should we doubt of Spiritual cure, if we say with like Faith,
like Hope, like Love, the same Prayer to day: and truly, to say it with less,
were a confusion to Christianity, that Jews and Gentiles should exceed us in
fervor of Piety: besides, we have yet an easier task, than they, in hand, for
their demands were no less than to have a Miracle wrought upon them, by a
Physical cure, without a Physical cause, (unless we shall say, the touch of
Christ's hand was a Physical cure for all diseases) whereas we only demand a
favor, not a miracle, a little Grace to blot out a great deal of Sin; and
though it be a greater effect to remit sin of the Soul, than to cure diseases
of the Body; yet this will not be miraculous, as the other was, and
consequently, if we ask a favor with like zeal, as they did beg a Miracle,
surely we may hope to have it, and truly not to ask it, is not only not to
deserve it, but to confound our selves, knowing it is but Ask and Have, with so
good, so puissant, so merciful a God. And thus we see again, there is a deeper
sense latent in the Prayers of holy Church, than lazy Souls (that will not
meditate it out) can easily retrive; but once found out, must needs prove
hugely consonant unto the Epistle and Gospel of the day, since holy Church
gives us this Prayer for an abstract of her doctrine in the Pulpit, that so we
may unanimously, and with one mouth honor God, and (whom he sent) our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

The Epistle, ROMANS 12. ver. 17. etc.
17. TO no man rendering evil for evil: providing good things not only before
God, but before Man.

18. If it may be, as much as in you, holding peace with all men.

19. Not revenging your selves, my dearest, but give place unto wrath, for it
is written, Revenge to me: I will reward, says our Lord.

20. But if thine enemy hunger, give him meat: if he thirst, give him drink;
for doing this, thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head.

21. Be not overcome of evil; but overcome in good, the evil.


The Explication.
17. THis Epistle begins with the end of the seventeenth Verse, the beginning
being explicated in the last Sundays Epistle; nor is there any thing of moment
can be said more, than the Text it self speaks, dissuading us to render evil
for evil, but exhorting to provide as much good as we can to all men: which
Saint Bernard explicates, as alluding to conversation, and counselling it may
be good, both in the sight of God, and Man, saying, We owe our Consciences to
God, our Fame to Man, though perhaps this may be an addition of perfection to
the former part of the Counsel, as who should say, we were not only to avoid
rendering evil for evil; but rather instead of so doing, to repay an ill turn
done unto us with a good deed done by us, to those that do us hurt

18. And to that purpose the next Verse alludes, saying, If it may be; for
perhaps all the good we can do, will not gain upon our enemeis, at least we
must endeavor on our part there be no defect, but that (if possible) we be at
peace with all men, as we desire God to be in peace with us, and not to wage
against us the war of his wrath and fury, since we offend him hourly, and
that infinitely more, than any enemy we have can offend us.

19. The Latin phrase is not defending your selves, but because commonly the
defense of Man against Man is made by way of Revenge, therefore here the
Apostles sense is extended thereunto, as if what resistance we may make under
the moderation of an unblamed defense must be sure to savor nothing of
Revenge, if we will hold the integrity of a good Christians reputation: but
instead of Revenging, give place to wrath; that is, as some will have it, to
the Divine Wrath, which is provoked in God against all those that do injury to
any one of his creatures, as Princes take the wrong done to their Ministers for
affronts to them, and so revenge the same; others say, to be silent, to depart,
when you are exasperated, is to give place to wrath. The last and best meaning
is, if your enemy begin to be angry, oppose him not, but let him go on till his
anger be over; and this, as it is truly to give way or place to wrath; so
oftentimes it is the means to appease the fury of the Enemy, who (if resisted)
might increase in fury, whereas not being opposed, he cools within himself; and
so there is double way given, both by the receiver of a wrong, and by him that
through the patience of the injured, surceaseth to do further injury, by his
further wrath: and this way is suitable to that of our Savior, saying, Luke 10.
v. 29. If any strike your right cheek, turn him your left, rather than strike
him again: So this place thus given to wrath imports as much as a pardon given
to our neighbors offense against us, as we hope for pardon of our offenses
against God: For thus we shall give way, that the injurious words, passing
through our humane ears into our Christian hearts, and there buried in the
bowels of brotherly affection, may die, and be no more remembered, than if they
never had been heard by us, or spoken by our enemy: and lest we should say, if
neither I, nor any friend else revenge my wrongs, I shall never live in quiet;
therefore the Apostle (knowing this was an objection obvious against him) adds
presently what is written, Deuteronomy. 32. v. 35. Revenge to me. I will reward; as
who should say, Be not, O Christians, sollicitous how to redeem your vexation
for injuries, unless you revenge them, be it your part to receive all wrong
patiently, and leave it to God to right you; let him revenge your quarrels, he
both can, as omnipotent, and will, as just, infallibly revenge your wrongs,
rather we should pity those who fall into the hands of the living God; for
that is terrible, as the Scripture says, Heb. 10.3^. and wish they had not
done us wrong, to pull upon themselves so great a revenge.

20 Contrariwise, If thine enemy hunger, give him meat, etc. which is advised,
Prove. 25. v. 21. as if we should like loving mothers feed our enemies, as our
children, and the manner here expressed is like to that indeed, which mothers
or nurses use to little ones, first giving them a bit of meat, then a little
drink, and so continue till the child covet no longer feeding; and in very
truth the fury of an enemy menacing our ruin, is a kind of reducing himself
from the state of a man, to that of a little child void of reason, stamping and
staring for anger without cause, since no man will anger a child. This phrase
of the Proverbs, heaping coals of fire upon our enemies heads is variously
explicated; some think our patience to an implacable enemy makes him guilty of
hell fire, but this cannot stand with a sound sense, if our patience be to any
such end, though perhaps rather than be provoked our selves to impatience, we
may permit our enemy to incur that danger, and so permissively cast coals of
eternal fire upon his head: The second sense therefore is better, of those
that say, our patience causing an enemies blush is a kind of firing him with
his own passions of fury, and shame together; but best of all they explicate
this place who say, we cast coals of charity upon an enemies head by our
patient bearing his injuries, and requiting them with courtesies, for every
such courtesy is a fire-coal of perfect love and charity, which commonly will
inkindle in our enemy a retaliation of the like love to us, and so his anger
may become to him a happy fault, by our outdoing his evil with our good; and
this fire is rather to be cast on our enemies head than elsewhere, because as
from the brain arise his fancies to all his passions, so the remedy is best
applied to the part diseased.

21. By evil is here understood injury, which is esteemed as evil, done unto
the party injured; we may also understand it to be our own impatience, and
presume the Apostle advises us not to be overcome by it; for in very deed, no
man is hurt, but by himself, as St. Chrysostom well observes, and by hurt he
understands injuries. So that if any man offending us make us complain, be sad,
or impatient, it is not his power that casts us down, but our own impatience
trips up our heels, and pushing us against the ground, shows our own weakness
gave us the fall or hurt, and not our adversaries strength: for had we been
patient, we had cast him on his back, whereas now we fall on our own faces, to
hide the blush of our complaining weakness who should (like men,) resist
manfully the violence of our own passion over us; which being inward, hurts
deeper than any outward blow can do of our greatest enemy: And shame it were
for Christians to be overcome in perfection by the heathen Aristotle, who 4
Ethic. c. 3. teaches his Scholars, That it is a sign of Magnanimity to forget
Injuries; for (says he) as it is a mark of a weak stomach, not to be able to
digest hard meat, so it is of a pusillanimous soul not to be able to endure a
harsh word; rather let us follow S. Paul, concluding this Epistle with
exhorting us to overcome evil with good, whereof Lycurgus gives an excellent
Example, who apprehending an unruly boy, that had with a stone put out one of
Lycurgus his eyes, and carrying him thence, instructs and breeds him up to good
manners, then restores him to the unruly people, saying, Behold the boy whom I
received from you injurious and unmannerly, now I restore him to you civilized
and popular, that is, fit to be made a Member of this well governed Common
Wealth, and then we best perform this Counsel, when by receiving patiently the
injury, we convert the heart of the injurer; for thus we overcome him, while
our patience cures his passion, while our virtue kills his vice, and makes him
virtuous, that aimed to make us vicious, by his provoking us to impatience. Now
to conclude this Epistle, we may observe the intent of the Apostle, has been
to show us in very remarkable particulars, what he had from the second Verse of
this Epistle to the very end thereof, recommended unto us; namely, the good,
pleasing, and perfect will of God, for by performing all these Counsels given
from that second verse to this last of the Chapter, we shall not only know,
but even do the will and pleasure of his Divine Majesty.

The Application.
1. IT is usual with all Masters to repeat hard Lessons to their Scholars, so
to make impressions of them in their understandings, our Holy Mother for that
purpose does resume to day the doctrine she began last Sunday of loving
enemies.

2. And least we should delude our selves with humane arguments against a
Lesson so divine, we are forbid to flatter our selves that it can be prudence
in us to argue with the Holy Ghost, as if it were not to revenge, but to
prevent the second mischief by our taking vengeance for the first.

3. See how S. Paul concludes the clean contrary, Be not overcome by evil,
that is to say, what your enemies injury to you could not do, let not your
own revenge on him effect upon your self, for then he over comes you not by the
blow he gave you, but by the wound you give your self in seeking to revenge
what God but permitted him to do, and what he commands you to suffer, that so
you may overcome your enemies evil of Injury, by your own good of Patience, O
how fitly does the Church to day petition in the prayer a cure of her
left handed infirmity, by the extension of Gods right-handed Majesty or virtue
over her,

The Gospel, MAT. 8. ver. 1. etc.
1. ANd when he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him.

2. And behold, a Leper came and adored him, saying, Lord, if thou will, thou
can make me clean.

3. And Jesus stretching forth his hand, touched him, saying, I will. Be thou
made clean, and forthwith his leprosy was made clean.

4. And Jesus says to him, See thou tell no body; but go show thy self to the
Priest, and offer the gift which Moses commanded for a testimony to them.

5. And when he was entered into Capernaum, there came to him a Centurion,
beseeching him, and saying,

6 Lord, my Boy lies at home sick of the Palsy, and is sore tormented.

7. And Jesus says to him, I will come, and cure him.

8. And the Centurion making answer, said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou
should enter under my roof: but only say the word, and my Boy shall be
healed.

9. For I also am a man subject to Authority, having under me Soldiers: and I
say to this, Go, and he goes: and to another, Come, and he comes: and to my
Servant, Do this, and he does it.

10. And Jesus hearing this, marvelled: and said to them that followed him,
Amen, I say to you, I have not found so great Faith in Israel.

11. And I say to you, that many shall come from the East and West, and shall
sit down with Abraham and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven.

12. But the children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into the exterior
darkness: there shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth.

13. And Jesus said to the Centurion, Go: and as thou have believed, be it
done unto thee. And the Boy was healed in the same hour.


The Explication.
1. THe Mountain he came down from, is that whereon he began his Sermon, which
Saint Matthew relates from the fifth Chapter, to the Eighth, and now brings our
Savior, by his Miracles in the Valleys, confirming the Doctrine he had
preached on the mountain, which some will have to be the mount Olivet; but
others (more probably) the mount Thabor: yet most likely it was a Mount known
by the name of our Saviors Mount, whereon he used much to be, either choosing
his Apostles out of many other of his Disciples, or Preaching, or Praying, it
being within three miles of Caphernaum, where he wrought many Miracles, looking
down upon the Sea of Galilee, and adjacent to the City of Bethsaida, a place of
a gallant prospect, round about it, seeing many Countries and Towns. And
hither he being often wont to come privately by himself, to spend there whole
nights in Prayer, it may very well be called Jesus his Mount, by a kind of
excellency, as sufficiently to be known by that name, when there is no
distinction added to remark any other Mountain by, as here there is not: and so
we may here take the Mountain, to import as much as Jesus his Mount, specially
frequented by him, and celebrated abundantly, by so sacred a resort thereunto.
The great Multitudes that are here said to follow him, were those present at
his Sermon upon this Mount; so taken therewith, as they could not forsake him,
but followed him (many of them) up and down all the Country, conversing either
with himself, with his Disciples, or with some that had been cured by him; and
so never wanting employment of delight unto them.

2. Many doubt whether this cure of the Leper be the same which Saint Mark
recounts, Chap. 1. ver. 40. and Saint Luke, Chap. 5. ver. 12 for by them it
seems this Miracle was not done immediately after Christ descended from the
Mount, nor in the Valley near it, because Saint Luke says it was done in a
certain City; besides, they recount other Miracles before this, consequent to
Christ his coming down from the mountain aforesaid, yet because Saint Matthew
seems the most exact for the series, or order of his Sacred History, therefore
we may rather think the others stood not so precisely upon the order, but
satisfied themselves to tell what was done by Christ, first or last. Again,
Saint Luke may be understood to mean without the City, though he say the cure
was done in a certain City, because it was a cure upon a Citizen, whose disease
being a Leprosy did force him out of the Town, according to the custom of all
such foul diseased persons, to avoid the danger of infecting others; so it
being done on, or in the Citizen, S. Luke may call it a cure done in the City,
whereunto the Leper did belong; and such speeches are frequent, for men often
say, we had a strange cure wrought here in our City, such a man for example
cured thus and thus, though happily the party might be carried out of Town to
his Physician or Surgeon; so we see a way clear enough to avoid
contradiction amongst the Evangelists, however their Stories may seem now and
then not to jumpe exactly in all particulars as for example, they all three
agree in their several expressions of this Lepers coming to Christ for cure;
for whereas S. Mark tells us he came bending his knees, and S. Luke says
falling on his face: This Adoration S Matthew brings him in with, is the
conclusion of both those postures, as who should say, he kneeling down first,
then falling prostrate on his face adored Jesus, as that great God, from whom
he begged his cure, knowing his disease was more contagious than any man could
heal, and by this manner of speech assuring himself it was in the power of
Christ, while he said unto him, If thou will, thou can cleanse me of this
scurfie Leprosy, in which words, though he showed his own desire of cure, yet
withal he declared his resignation to the divine will, saying, If thou will,
thou can make, etc. as who should say, Gods power is equal to his will, and
if thou will not, thy holy will be done, for thou know better what to will
for me, than I do for my self, wherefore, O Lord, as thy holy will is, be it
done with me, but I desire no other power at least to cure me, than thy
sacred will: Now that this was the meaning of the Lepers words, the next Verse
shows.

3. For behold no sooner had this creature resigned himself perfectly to the
will of his Creator, showing therein be did love God above all things (even
himself included) then, (in testimony of that truth, saying to those who love
God, all things cooperate for their good) he was cured by Christ stretching
forth his purest hand upon the impure petitioner, and saying, I will cure thee,
since thou say so truly, that my will is adequate unto my power: Be thou
therefore made clean of thy corporal impurity, as by Faith I see thou art of
thy spiritual infidelity: But here we are to observe Christ touched the Leper;
which, as it was a prevarication of the Mosaic Law, Levit. 13. so it showed
the abrogation thereof lay in the power of Christ, who came to give a more
perfect Law unto the People of God. Again, this touch was in sign of
Benevolence; lastly, it was happily an application of right actives to passives
for effecting the cure, since the very corporal touch of Christ his sacred
hand, was of force to cure all diseases: but the method of Christ's words
deserves here a special remark: for while he says I will, he confutes the
heresy of Photinus, denying Christ to be God, and to have for the proof of his
omnipotence, his omnivolence; that is to say, all things as subject to his
Will, as to his Power; as also he confutes the Arrian heresy denying Christ to
have power of himself, or to be God equal to his Father in power, and so
obliged to command rather in his Fathers name, than in his own: whereas here he
commands the cure as from himself, and in virtue of his own absolute power
saying. Be thou made clean: wherefore this place must not be read, as some
conceive, saying, I will cure thee: no, but I will: Be thou cured, as who
should say, since thou desire no greater power than my will; lo I will, what
thou desire; and therefore thus I command thy disease to leave thee. Be thou
cleansed.

L^stly, he confutes the Manichaean Heresy, teaching Christ to have no real,
but only some fantastical body, which he disproves by the real, and
perceptible touch he gave the Leper, while by means of that physical, or
sensible touch, he was pleased to cure him: besides Saint Hierome well observes
this answer held the style of the request, for the Leper had used the same
Phrase, saying, If thou will, thou can; so Christ replies to both, saying he
will, and showing, he can, while he commands it to be done, as was desired; and
that (as the text says) immediately; for the effect of Gods will, is the work
or deed, he will have to be done; and so there needs no medium, where the will
and power are both equal, and identified, as in God all Attributes are,
according to that of holy David, Psalm. 148. ver. 5. He said the word, and all
things were thereby made.

4. This was not so much a command to him, as an example to others how to
conceal, and not to vaunt their own glory, when they do any thing that is
notably praiseworthy; while he sends him to the Priest, he fulfils the Law.
Levit. 14. commanding all in such cases to get the testimony of the Priests for
their cures; so here he shows he will not abrogate the whole Law of Moses, or
the moral part of it, although he did abrogate the servile Ceremonial part
thereof. It was indeed the custom upon such cures, to offer up two Turtles, or
two young Pigeons at least: This he bids him do, for regard to the letter of
the Law, but mystically sends him to the Priest to show himself; that is, to
teach us we must show our Consciences, our Sins to the Priest, which sins are
many times the causes of our corporal diseases; and yet with this difference,
that the Mosaic Priest could only declare the cure, whereas the Evangelicall
Priest effects, or works it, by absolving actually from ^in; Go therefore,
says the Text, show thy self to the Priest, and offer up thy gift, that as
thereby they may see thou art cured, so they may testify the same to the
world: the reason why he was bid, Go to the Priest in the singular number, and
why it was said do this in testimony to them in the plural, was in regard
there came always one officiating Priest by turns, and he (for that time) was
called the Chief Priest, that is, the then officiating Priest; but what was
done by him, was to be made known to all the rest of his company, who were in
their turns to officiate as well as he: Now we are here to note a Triple
Testimony meant in this place; The first is, that of the Leper to the Priest,
showing his body sound unto him, and in sign thereof giving up his offering:
The second was, the Lustration or Lotion of the Priest applied to the party
cured, testifying thereby he was capable of being admitted into the company of
others, as a sound man, who had now been washed by the Priest with the legal
Lustration, or expiation of water, taking off the ceremony of his Legal
irregularity by reason of the Leprosy: The last and chief Testimony which
Christ alludes unto here, was that of the miracle done upon this Leper, who was
to show the Priest, by telling of him how he was cured, That Christ was the
Messiah, and by this means he gave indeed testimony to the Priest of that
Deity in Jesus, which had wrought this cure upon him.

5. This is the second Miracle which Christ wrought in confirmation of his
doctrine upon the mount as abovesaid, and no marvel the Leper was the first,
because he was a Jew, but the Centurion was a Gentile, a Commander or captain
of an hundred men belonging to the Roman Militia, yet whether he were himself a
Roman or a Spaniard some doubt; ^uffice it, he was a Heathen converted by this
miracle upon his son principally, but formerly much attracted by the reports of
other our Saviors Miracles; so we see here he comes strong in Faith, even to
Christ's own admiration; some say this man's son was that Oppius (a Centurion
also) who having the command of the Military forces that attended at the
crucifying of our Savior, was then (and not before) converted to the Faith of
Christ, seeing what prodigious signs were at that time in the heavens, and upon
the face of the earth. Note this miracle was done at our Saviors entrance into
Capernaum, that City where he chose to do many signal wonders; but we are
to observe that S. Luke recounts this passage otherwise, as saying, the
Centurion sent first his servants, then his friends; both which consist with
his after going in person, upon Christ's coming into the town, and upon his
child's near approaching unto death; though some explicate this place, as if it
imported only that the Centurion went to meet him, not personally, but as S.
Luke says) by mediation of his friends, yet less probably; in regard the
personal faith of this Centurion is that which makes the whole story
remarkable. Again, whether this were the Centurions son or servant is not
certain; S. Luke calling him servant, this Evangelist son to the Centurion or
boy, who was (though a servant) dear at least as a son, for so were many of the
servants in those days esteemed of by their masters, and provided for as their
own children; but this makes no^ much to the purpose; certain it is that both
the Evangelists tell the undoubted truth of the same Miracle; be their
circumstances differing or not, it imports but little: Hence we may solve the
seeming contradiction of S. Lukes telling us the Centurion sent for Christ to
come to his house about this cure, and of Saint Matthews saying here, he only
required his word, not his presence, as holding himself not worthy of so much
honor, for both may stand in a divided sense; that is, first inviting him by
the Jews his own Countrymen, to do a Gentile that honor, but after coming in
person, and saying, O Lord I am not worthy (being a Gentile) that thou (the
most Blessed among the Jews) should do me so much honor, seeing we
Gentiles are held an unclean people, not worthy the company of thy select and
chosen Natives the Jews.

6. As to the Paralytick or sick chi^d ill tormented with his disease, we are
to know, There are two sorts of Paralyticks, some are such as run not danger of
death, but may hope for cure, as those, where the resolution of the nerves is
but in part of the body, taking away sense and motion in some part only;
others desperate of all humane help, and such was this boys case, whereby the
miracle appeared to be the greater, and the more undoubted, for here was a
total resolution of the nerves, accompanied with a Convulsion, leaving the
whole body almost quite insensible and unmovable of it self.

7. It seems Christ was well satisfied of this Centurions Faith, when
immediately upon his demand, he promised to go and cure his sick child.

8. Be this saying of the Centurion, Courtship, or real agnition of his
unworthiness, it boots not, certain it is, h^ had reason to say as much in
civility being a Gentile, seeing our Savior (a Jew) come near his house and
offer to go in, but much more certain it is by the whole context of the
following Gospel, that he did believe Jesus was able to cure as well at a
distance, as by personal touch. Note this temporal comportment of the
Centurion, is an excellent pattern for us, of the like spiritual behavior,
when we receive Jesus not only into our house, but even into our souls in the
B. Sacrament, each of us to cry out then, O Lord, I am not worthy, etc.

9. See here how really the Centurion argued against Christ's giving himself the
trouble of going to his boy in person, and believed his power was abundantly
sufficient without his presence, when he not only bids him spare his labor,
but instanceth how himself being a man under Authority, (so says the Text,)
but means a man of power and command, was able (in virtue of his power,) to do
as much as if he applied his person to the action: Though withal the Centurion
calls himself a man of power, over his little troop, and under power of his
head Commander both at once, and therefore uses an argument from the lesser to
the greater, as saying, if I (of a slight command) can do much by virtue of
this power, what may thou, O Christ, by thy command, who have perfect, and
absolute power over Heaven and Earth, and art under no command as I am? who can
deny but this style was used purposely for our moral instruction; that hearing
this, we should remember (if at any time we have command ov^r others) yet we
are commanded our selves by many more above us; and again, to advertise us,
that the Soul shall then best command the Body, when she her self moves not,
but as commanded by God, and moved by his holy grace. And if she rebel against
God, no marvel the body requoiles against her, as in Adam, and his race was,
and still is apparent.

10. Since Admiration, or Wonder, is an effect of ignorance, and Christ, as
being God, was omniscient, and had in perfection all the three Sciences that
could render him perfectly knowing, as man, namely Beatificall, Infused, and
Experimental; certain it is, his Admiration here could not be a proper
wondering, at what he seems to make exceeding strange of, as by professing, he
had not found so great faith in Israel; rather indeed to excite, and stir up
others to admiration, and imitation of the like, than that he was, or could be
seized on by the surprisall of any new notion accruing unto him, which he had
not before: So Saint Austine says well, These operations in Christ were rather
signs of his actions upon others, than of his passions from them, of his
teaching us, not of his being taught himself by any thing that could happen
unto him, new or strange: and what follows, is to be taken strictly, as spoken
to those common people, who were then present, for else it could not be meant
of all others, or spoken to them that were absent: For example, when he said to
those that followed him, I have not found so great Faith in Israel; meaning,
among such as you are, that now behold the Faith of this Centurion; for
certainly he knew the Faith of his blessed Mother, of Abraham, of Moses, and of
John the Baptist, was greater yet, than this of the said Centurion, so highly
commended, so much admired by our Savior.

11. This following Verse illustrates the latter end of the former, in the
sense as above; for here Christ gives Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as presidents
for singular Faith, rewarded with eternal glory in the Kingdom of Heaven, and
says, Many shall come from East and West, meaning from all corners of the
world, and share with Abraham, etc. in the like reward for their like Faith: so
here our Savior alludes to the calling of the Gentiles unto the Faith of
Christ, and gives for their encouragement, this encomiastick, or superlative
praise of the Centurion, for the first fruits of the Gentiles vocation, or
believing in Christ Jesus, the adoration of three Kings, arguing not so much
Faith as the Profession did; so what he said to his followers in the Verse
above, may (by adjoynder of this unto it) be conceived as if Christ had said,
he never found so great Faith in any Gentile, whom he had met with amongst the
Israelites, as he found in this Centurion: for the three Kings were not
Israelites, admit their adoration could argue like Faith in them.

12. He pursues the incitement to like Faith of this Centurion, saying, Those
Gentiles, who believe as he did, shall succeed in the Kingdom of Glory, to be
dis-inherited Heirs thereof; namely, the Israelites, or Jews, whom he calls
the Children of the Kingdom in two regards; first, because as descended from
the loins of Abraham they were heirs to his promised earthly kingdom of
Judea; next, as for the same reason, they were heirs to the Heavenly Kingdom
of glory likewise promised to his issue in like Faith to his: as who should
say, the foreign Gentiles shall inherit the two Crowns, whereunto the Jews
were born heirs by Promise; and this by reason the said G^ntiles shall receive
the faith of Abraham, which the Jews had deserted, and apostatized from. So as
the Gentiles shall be saved in reward of their Faith, and the Jews damned in
punishment of their incredulity; which damnation, or hell, is here called
outward darkness; as often els^where in holy Writ it is, because hell, as it is
the most remote part from Heaven, so is it the darkest and outmost, in respect
of the inhabitants in Glory, whose Beatitude consisting in their beholding the
inward light of the Deity, by means of the outward light of Glory, argues the
damnation of the wicked consists in their being deprived of all light, either
of Glory, or of God, and consequently are outcasts from Heaven, wallowing in
the deep hell of outward darkness. And as by this darkness is understood their
pain of damnation, or pain of loss, consisting in an absolute privation of the
sight or light of God, and consequenly of all light; so by weeping, or gnashing
of teeth, is understood their pain of sense, best expressed by those terms,
which always betoken sorrow and horror.

13. Christ concludes, giving the Centurion all he asks, in reward of his
Faith; so curing his Boy at a distance, in virtue of his sole Word, as was
observed, that just when Christ spoke those words, Be it to thee, as thou
believe, then the child was well recovered: hence we are to learn, that
according to the firmness of our Faith, we may measure the greatness of our
hope in God: and mystically we may apply this passage of the Centurion to our
selves, who are commanders of our senses and powers, which make up a spiritual
Militia in this life; Job 7. if therefore any of these languish, or grow
otherwise diseased, let us make our addresses by our Friends (the Saints in
Heaven, and Good men on Earth) to God, beseeching him to cure that sick sense
or faculty, which is in danger to let in upon us the death of Sin; and look
with what Faith, with what Hope, with what Love, we make our applications to
Almighty God either by our selves, or others, we may rest assured, our help
shall be answerable thereunto.

The Application.
1. CHrist cures the Leper to Day, by a touch of his sacred Hand, to show he
had cured the leprosy of sin in all humane nature, by touching it with his
nature Divine, in the mystery of his Incarnation.

2. Being entreated, he cures the Centurions son; by saying, I will come and
cure him: however, by the humility and faith of the Centurion, he was not
suffered to go, but desired by his Word to do it at a distance. This argues
the power of Christ to be as operative as his Person; and that by his Power
given to Priests, he cures all humble, and believing Souls in the Sacrament of
Penance, as he did the Centurion, whose corporal infirmity was here but a
figure of Sin-sick-souls.

3. O happy Christians, who have, against all humane diseases a Cure Divine:
The touch of all the three Persons of the sacred Trinity in the Blessed
Sacrament of the holy Altar; and the touch of all their Omnipotent Powers in
the Sacrament of Confession.

See now, Beloved, how aptly we do pray to Day, to have the Right Hand of the
Divine Majesty extended over our infirmity, when the Preachers tell us, by the
touch of the Deity we are cured of all Diseases. On the fourth Sunday after the
EPIPHANY.
The Antiphon, MAT. 8. ver. 25. O Lord, save us, we perish. Command and cause,
O God, tranquillity.

Verse. Let my prayer, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
O God, who know us to be set in so great dangers, that we cannot (through
humane frailty) subsist, grant unto us health of mind and body, that what we
suffer for our Sins, (thou helping us) we may overcome.

The Illustration.
THe last Sundays Prayer exhibited the horror of sin unto us, under the
notion of diseases; This of dangers which we find so great, and wherein we are
so openly set, that ( humane frailty considered) we are not able to subsist:
And therefore against these extrinsecall dangers, we beg of God this day (as an
intrinsecall Protectrice) health at least of body and of mind, that since in
punishment for our sins, we must suffer to be thus exposed to dangers, we may
be able (Gods holy grace assisting us) to overcome them, This may suffice to
render unto every soul the sense of this delicious prayer, what remains will be
to show how apposite it is to the Epistle and Gospel of the day; which Two are
generally allowed to have a pious report to one another, and consequently, if
the prayer be set to the tune of either, it must agree with both, by the
undeniable rule of Schools, When any two things are one and the same with a
third, they must both be so with one another; but here the Prayer agrees
clearly enough with the Gospel, therefore it cannot be discordant to the
Epistle, and indeed what more pat to the Gospel, relating th Apostles dangers
in a tempest at Sea, than this prayer altogether deprecating dangers,? so the
difficulty will be to make a harmony between the Epistle and it, wherein there
is no syllable of danger openly expressed, and yet (upon reflection) we shall
find regard enough to danger therein, for first the grand Pellitorie, the most
potent repeller of all dangers meets us in the Van of this Epistle; Love,
whereof S. Paul says, It is the chaser of all fears out of doors, and
consequently must needs be free from all dangers, which ever enforce fears
upon us, timorous Leverets of corrupted nature: but further see a prohibition
palpable in our eyes in the next Verse of this Epistle, Thou shall not commit
Adultery (and prohibitions are ever opposites to dangers) indeed preventers of
them; so it is a sign the Epistle has regard enough to those dangers which the
Prayer deprecates; but the last verse comes home to this sense, telling us, The
love of our neighbor works no evil, that is no danger, for evils are the
greatest of all other dangers; therefore love is the best buckler against
dangers, in regard it is the fullness of the Law, which is never made but to
prevent the dangers we incur by the prevarication thereof: For to the Just
there is no Law put, 1 Timothy 1.9. And thus we see from first to last a total
exhausting of the Epistle and Gospel by the admirable Piety of this days
Prayer.

The Epistle, ROMANS 13. verse. 8. etc.
8. OWe no man any thing: but that you love one another: For he that loves his
neighbor, has fulfilled the Law.

9. For Thou shall not commit advoutry, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not
steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou shall not covet, and if there be
any other Commandment; it is comprised in this word, Thou shall love thy
neighbor, as thy self.

10. The Love of thy neighbor works no evil: Love therefore is the fullness
of the Law.


The Explication.
8. SOme misunderstand this place, as if it did argue obligation to pay the
debt of Love, but that all other debts were with all speed to be paid: whereas
in very truth the sense of this place is quite otherwise, and imports as much,
as if the Apostle had said, what other debts soever you are able to discharge,
yet never esteem your self quit from the debt of Love, which you must always
owe unto your neighbor, though you clear all other accounts, debts, or scores
with him; because when this debt in part is paid, it inflames the reckoning for
the part behind, just as fire, being bl^wn, or made use of, does more and more
enkindle, whereas if raked up in the ashes, it soon dies: So the more we use
charity, the more we enkindle and increase it: therefore the Apostle says
well, that we can never be out of this debt to our neighbor, since if we pay
him the Love we owe unto him for this day, to morrow we shall find our debt of
Love inflamed, and and grown greater by the very agitation of that divine fire,
which is the mutual Love of one another. To which purpose S. Augustine (Epist.
62. ad Coelestin) has an excellent saying: SEMPER DEBEO CHARITATEM, QUAE SOLA,
etc. Love I must always owe, which of all debts, though paid, yet still keeps
a man in bonds. And again, CHARITATEM LIBENS REDDO, etc. I do willingly pay
Love, and as willingly take it in payment: it is a thing, which when received,
I count not my self fully satisfied, nor when I repay it, discharged. Hence we
may see how absurdly the Anabaptists, and Trinitarians Heresy exploded by this
Text all debts of Justice, and only required the debt of Love to stand due for
if Charity oblige to do ultroneous and voluntary good deeds, how much more to
do Justice? but so perfect a payment of all debts is commanded by this place,
as we see the Apostle says, Who loves his neighbor fulfilleth the Law,
because we cannot love him, but we must love God for himself, and man for God's
sake, as we love our selves.

9. And to confute further the Heresy above mentioned, see how this whole verse
insists upon Acts of Justice to our neighbor, rooted in the commanded Love to
them aforesaid: Whence some conceive the Apostle alludes only to the law of
the Second Table, because here is no mention of any one of the three precepts
belonging to the First Table, importing our duty to God; but S. Austin
contends, that the love of man (being but subordinate to the love of God, 1
John, 4. v. 7.) imports and includes both, grounded on those words of S. John,
Children love one another, repeated over and over again to his friends, and
being asked why he did so, he replied, because it is the Precept of our Lord,
and if this alone be done, it is sufficient. For our love to God and man, is
like the lines drawn from the Center to their Circumference, be the Center God,
the Circle man, the Lines our affections, see then how they flow between these
two extremes, the more they approach to the Circle, the wider they are; but as
they recede from the Circle, the closer they go, till at last they are all
concentred in one point, Almighty God; and so made one heart and one soul
amongst our selves; hence we see, that all the motion our affections have from
man to God, grows still more and more vigorous and more perfect: So S. Austine
concludes, DILIGE, ET FAC QUOD VIS. Love, and do what thou please. (Tract. 7.
in Epist. 1. S. John.) whereas the Apostle says, if there be any other precept
(meaning of the Second Table) for of the three belonging to the First Table,
and that of honoring our parents, (the first precept of the Second Table) he
had spoken before at large, under the title of Superior powers, Princes and
others, ending that subject in these words, To whom honor honor: for that
command is in these words Honor thy Father and Mother, under which title are
included, Elders, Betters, Superiors, especially Princes, spoken of at large
from the first verse of this Chapter to the end of the seventh, ending as
above, to whom honor, honor: I say whereas the Apostle says, if there be any
other Precept, it is included in this word, Love your neighbor as your self,
we are to note the Precept of love to our neighbor is bipartite, as divided
into two branches, the first whereof is affirmative, grounded on these words of
S. Matthew. Chap. 6. What you will have others do to you, do you the same to
them. The second negative, in that of Tobit, Chap. 4. v. 16. What you hate to
have another do to you, see you never do that to another: not that this
Precept commands an equality, but only a similitude of love to your neighbor,
with that you bear to your self, that is to say, as all you desire is honest,
good, delectable to your self, so desire the like to your neighbor, not in
equal proportion but in exact similitude, distaste him not, hurt him not, rob
him not, as you desire he should not, distaste, hurt, nor rob you: so the
allusion is to similitude not to equality.

10. The reason of this is because the object of our love being good, the
effect thereof must be good also; for as none can love evil for evils sake,
so none can love good for evils sake, because true love both makes good the
end and medium of its operation: as who should say, do I finally aim at good,
then good must be the medium leading thereunto; so it being good to love our
neighbor, the operation of this good love, cannot be a bad thing. Therefore
the Apostle concludes, The fulness of the Law is Love, that is to say, if we
love, we fulfill the Law: or as Tolet says, The scope or end of the Law is
Love, or as S. Augustine, because love forces a man to fulfill the Law, hence
we see, Faith alone suffices not to satisfy the Law without Acts of Love; how
absurd is it then to say as heretics do, the Commandments are impossible to
be kept, when by only love they are all fulfilled: not that so perfect a love
can here be hoped for, as shall exempt us from venial sins against the Law,
(since such is only reserved for the next world, and performed in the state of
Bliss) but that we may forbear mortal sin, even in this life, if we but love
our neighbor, as our selves, and God (appretiatively at least) above all
things, that is to say, not so well to love any thing, but still to resolve we
will rather leave to love it, than for its sake cease to love God; and surely
thus all good Christians do appretiatively Love God above all things.

The Application.
1. WEll is Love said to be the fulness of the Law, because the Law commands
us nothing else but that we love So to love it to prevent the danger of the
Law, which is never broken but under pain of penalty. Wherefore as last Sunday
bids us fly sin as a disease, this bids us fly it as a danger.

2. Well is the danger of the Law expressed in these negative Commandments,
for prohibition is the best prevention of a mischief. Hence we say, forewarned
and armed against all danger whatsoever, as new we are especialyl against the
dangerous temptations unto what is here prohibited.

3. Well does S. Paul conclude as he began, exhorting us to love, because love
works no evil, now amongst evils, danger is not the least: and only not to
love, is hugely dangerous, since we are taught 1 John, 3. verse. 14. and 1 Cor.
16. v. 21. that he who loves not, remains in death, in the death of that sin
he commits against the Law for lack of loving God above all things, and his
neighbor as himself.

Say now the Payer above, and see how suitable it is to this Epistle

The Gospel, MAT. 8. v. 23. etc.
23. ANd when he entered into the boat, his disciples followed him.

24. And lo a great tempest arose in the sea, so that the boat was covered
with waves, but he slept.

25. And they came to him, and raised him, saying, Lord, save us, we perish.

26. And he says to them, why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Then
rising up he commanded the winds and the sea, and there ensued a great calm.

27. Moreover the men marvelled, saying, what an one is this, for the winds
and the sea obey him.


The Explication.
23. IT was his usual custom to preach in a boat a little off from the
shore, but here it seems he took boat to avoid the multitude of people that
followed him, and so both to fly popular applause, and to give occasion to
this following miracle, he took boat, and put to Sea with his Disciples.

24. Probably our Savior himself raised this Tempest purposely. First to show
he was Lord of all the world, both sea and land, the figure of which passage S.
John in his Apoc. Chap. 10. v. 2. recounts, telling how an Angel set his right
foot upon the Sea, and thereby commanded it at pleasure. Secondly, to inure his
Disciples to tribulation, as well at sea as land. Thirdly to confirm his
Disciples in their Faith of him, and some others besides in the company; and
these may be all true real causes of the tempest, but figuratively we may
believe this Tempest to have been raised to show the future persecution of the
Church of Christ, and of a devout soul in temptation, and how as by his
permission it comes, so by his power it shall pass away, even when it seems
most severe, and when Almighty God seems, as it were asleep, and not to regard
it, till by the joint prayer of the Church he be wakened, and made propitious:
For Seneca himself says, A man's life without temptation seems like a dead Sea,
so called, for the stillness thereof, as if there were no life in the water of
it: and indeed as in a storm at sea, the best man aboard is set at helm to
ste^r the Ship, which in a calm is left to the guidance many times of the most
unskillful Mariner, and as in Tempests all the sails are stricken instantly,
to s^cure the ship from being run under water by the over-swollen sails; so in
Temptations we seek the best advice, and thereby are minded to abate of our
usual pride, or over-filled fails of pleasure, and counseled to strike those
sails, to lessen our deligh^s, and carry lower sails: Again as in storms men
put to sea, lest they be pails't in pieces against the rocks about the shoars:
so when Temptations arise, we launch into the deep sea of Gods protection, from
the rocks that lie upon all the shoares of this worldly sea; and the reasons of
Christ's sleeping, were to show the security God is in, though all the world
seem to lie at stake of immediate hazard; to make the miracle appear the
greater, when all the ship was in a fright of being cast away, to declare there
could be no fear in the mind of a just man, Prove 12. Whatsoever happens to a
just man, he shall not be afflicted, he calmeth all the storms of her
afflictions.

25. Strange goodness of Almighty God! that what is here told us as a rule, how
to behave our selves in all our ^roubles, should be literally a rebuke to the
Apostles, as afterwar^s it appears, when Christ tells them they wanted faith,
whilst they fear their own ruin, who had him for a pledge of their security:
since he being in the Boat, they could not perish; and indeed though the
miracle had not in that case appeared, yet their merit had been greater, if
their faith had been such, as not to have awaked and raised our Savior, but to
have confided in his power, as well whilst he was sleeping, as if he were awake.

26. This Verse shows the former to be rightly understood in the sense as
above, for here they stand corrected merely upon that account of diffidence or
incredulity, and though both S Mark and S. Luke speak of this rebuke given them
after the ^empest was allayed, yet S. Matthew making a more methodicall
Narration of our Saviors life in all his sacred History, seems (with reason)
to premise this reprehension, as preceding the calming of the winds and Sea,
because it was fit, Christ should first quell the storm of infidelity in their
souls, that so whilst upon his rebuke they resumed courage and confidence,
they might by their Acts of Faith merit this miracle, which he wrought in
recompense thereof, and indeed nothing moves God more powerfully toward the
working a miracle, than the firmness of our faith, mixed with a confiding hope,
that he for his own honor and glory (not for our ends) will do in all
occasions of difficulty that which is best and most pleasing to his divine
Majesty, though it cannot else be done, unless he work a miracle to effect it:
nor is there any more efficacious remedy in all disturbances, than a firm hope
in Almighty God, for as S. Bernard says well, ( Ser. 6. in Psalm.) it is
written, He will help those who have hoped in him, as it seems his Disciples
upon his chiding did, while after it the Evangelist here says, and then Jesus
rising (as who should say, he had chid them lying still, for all their hasty
calling of him up) commanded the winds and Sea, and presently there insued a
great calm, both which made the Miracle the greater, for never is the water
still upon a sudden, though the wind do cease; but here it seems as soon as
Christ had laid the one, he flats the other, and so takes off the danger of the
boat sinking by the waves of the sea, beating into it, as before it did, when
we lead the ship was almost covered with waves, but we may here note that the
command, which Christ is by S. Matthew said to lay upon the winds and sea, is
by S. Mark called a threat, by S. Luke a check, as who should say, he spoke to
both these inanimate creatures, as to his living servants, to show, that in
Gods sight no creature wants life, nor can the deaf want ears to hear the
least voice of Almighty God, or blind lack eyes to see the slightest cast of
his sacred looks upon them; and indeed the tempest was declared to be greater
by the command of Christ laid upon the rebellious Elements of winds and sea,
rather than by the importunity of the Disciples calling for help, since it
argues high disorder in the servants, when the masters ordinary words suffice
not without the authority of his absolute command to order his family, and what
else is the whole world, but a number of almighty Gods household servants.

27. By the men are here understood both the sailors and others, who with the
Apostles had slipped into the boat, when Christ went off the shore, some out of
curiosity, others out of zeal; for certainly though the reprehension Christ
gave, was chiefly to the Apostles, who had taken the boldness (being his
acquaintance) to wake him; yet the Evangelist must needs mean others and not
them, when he speaks in a style below their dignity, saying, the men marvelled,
for as Origin observes very well, the Scripture Phrase (when it alludes to
them) uses always the distinctive sign either of the Apostles or Disciples of
our Lord, for reverence both to the master, and the servants; yet S. Hierom
says, if any will have it, that even they were meant by these men admiring at
this miracle, it must be as a style given them rather in punishment of their
incredulity, than otherwise, as if that fault had deprived them of their better
style, and ranked them amongst the vulgar sort of misbelieving men. S. Hieromes
words are these, If any will contend the Apostles were meant by these men, we
must say they were so called, because they did not yet know the power of our
Savior; and certainly if they were ignorant of it, they did not believe it, so
they deserved not, (in this conjunction of things) the superlative style or
dignity of the Apostolate: but in very truth the following words show by these
men the Evangelist meant the mariners and strangers to Christ, that were in
the ship, whilst he makes them say. What a man is this, that the winds and sea
obey him? This was a language not likely to come out of the Apostles mouths,
even in the admiring sense of the words, admit we take them not in the
Interrogatory meaning thereof only; For had the Apostles made this admiration
in words, surely they would have been so civil, as to say, how happy are we,
that serve a master, who is of such admirable power? but to say, What an one,
or, What a man is this, who has such power over winds and seas, is rather the
language of a rude stranger, than of a civil friend, or dutiful servant, and
consequently could not probably be meant of the Apostles by the Evangelist.

The Application.
1. AS by the storm at sea, we are minded of the many dangers sin has brought
upon us, so by the check Christ gave to his Apostles, we are taught in dangers
to recurr to Faith in him, who never fails to succor firm believers in their
greatest tribulations.

2. As in storms your Marrin^^s cast ve^-board their heaviest lading and
commodities to save the ship from sinking, so in affliction at the least, we
shall do well to lighten the vessels of our soul^, by casting overboard those
heavy burdens of most grievous sins, which many times in calmnesse of our
minds we dare to carry with us.

3. We may piously presume our Savior never sleeps, but unto souls remiss, and
then does wake again immediately, when they affrighted at the danger they are in
by the least close of his all-seeing eyes I do call upon him for his succor
by their instant prayer, Such as the Church to day does use, to teach us how to
pray in time of Danger.

On the Fifth Sunday after the EPIPHANIE.
The Antiphon, MAT. 13. ver. 30. GAther first the darnell, and bind it together
in bundles to be burnt, but the wheat gather into my barn, says our Lord.

Verse. Let my prayer, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
Keep, we beseech the, O Lord, thy family in continual piety, that resting on
the only hope of heavenly grace, it may ever (by thy protection) be defended.

The Illustration.
SEe how this day we are taught to pray, as in the Epistle and Gospel we are
taught to do, to live all together as one family of God in continual piety,
resting on the only hope of heavenly grace for our protection and defense.
Yes, thus to day we pray, and to this purpose holy Church does this day preach,
for the whole Epistle is upon uniting us all in one affection toward another,
and exhorting us, that whatsoever we do in word or work, all things be done in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And the Gospel commanding in the Parable of
Corn and Cockle, that even under pretense of good and bad, we make no
separation amongst our selves, but live and continue lovingly together, leaving
it to God the master of the family to sever what he likes not, from that which
pleases his divine majesty: and this to show how perfectly we must be all as
one amongst our selves, all in continual piety, all resting on the hope of
heavenly grace, all relying upon God to protect and defend us, not squaring out
our own courses, but resting in that which is appointed us by the Master of our
family: And see while in this prayer Holy Church calls us all one family, we
ought to live in peace with all the world, and not to graspe from our
neighbor, as if he and we were of two houses, but to esteem him as a
domesticke with us, as one that ears at the same table of Christ, who feeds
us, commonly with heavenly grace, and oftentimes with his own sacred body and
blood, the fountain of grace it self. O could we once come to do, as in this
prayer we beg we may, what an united family of Christians should we be? How of
diverse members should we grow into one perfect body? each proportioned to the
will and pleasure of our head Christ Jesus: How ill do we then fall into
divisions, as if our hands would cut off our arms about disputes of diverse
Interests, whereas all our relation is to one master, all our hope of
preferment must come from him, and that hope must be radicated in the
proportion of such heavenly grace, as he pleases to give us: so if in him our
hopes be rightly fixed, they will bring us all to one happy end, he in whom w^
hope protecting and defending us, so much the better, by how much the more our
hope in him is the firmer, and by how much the less we are solcitous, who
neither can do, nor with so well unto our selves, as God does for us.

The Epistle, COL. 3. ver. 12. etc.
12. PVt ye on therefore, as the Elect of God, holy and beloved, the bowels of
mercy, benignity, humility, modesty, patience.

13 Supporting one another, and pardoning one another, if any have a quarrel
against any man, as also our Lord has pardoned us, so you also.

14. But above all these things have Charity, which is the band of perfection.

15 And let the peace of Christ exult in your hearts, wherein also you are
called in one body: and be thankful.

16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you abundantly, in all wisdom: teaching
and admonishing your own selves, with psalms, hymns, and spiritual Canticles,
in grace singing in your hearts to God.

17. All whatsoever you do in word or work, all things in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, giving thanks to God and the Father by him.


The Explication.
12. THE Apostle began this Chapter with telling the Colossians, that as they
were dead in Christ, whilst Christ dyed for them, so if they meant to rise with
Christ from the grave of their sin, they must look upward, and seek from hence
forward such things as were to be found in heaven, not what was common upon
earth, as before they had done: and when he had bid them Cast off the old man,
Colos 3. verse. 9. now in this verse he begins to tell them, how to vest
themselves anew with ornaments fit for the spiritual and inward man: and that
they may do this with more alacrity, the Apostle bids them do it under the
confidence, that they are now the elect and chosen of God, his holy and beloved
people, m^de so by the lavacrum or cleansing of his sacred blood shed for them,
and least they might doubt of this, he had in the immediate verses before told
them they were now in Christ a new creature, that though formerly the Jews
were the only favorites and chosen people of God, yet in Christ both Jews
and Gentiles, Slave or Freeman all were alike, if they did all equally believe
in Jesus the Messiah and Savior of them all, who had chosen them, not only to
Grace, but to Glory: and this encouragement premised, he bids them now put on
the bowels of mercy, benignity, humility, modesty, patience, Virtues not heard
of among the Jews who had hardened their hearts against God, who had inhumanely
butchered his sacred Son, who proudly aimed at nothing but worldly pomp, who
immodestly reviled Jesus to his face, who like furies would have stoned, and at
last tore in pieces their Lord and Savior: so far they were from patient
hearing him tell them Truth: not were the Gentiles, or Barbarians men of any
Virtue at all, but either superstitious, or savage people: so these Colossians
being people of no better extract by nature, he had need tell them, what
Bowels, what affections of heart they were (by Grace at least) to have, what
inward Virtues, what outward deportment.

13. As for example, supporting one another, a thing unheard of by those, who
aimed at nothing more than to supplant their neighbor, and to re^r their own
monuments upon another ruin. As for pardoning, it was esteemed folly by them,
who thought revenge the sweetest thing in nature: and as for our Lord God, they
so little knew him, that his pardoning nature was no motive to their
vindicative dispositions; which yet Christians that know God, and believe that
(in his sacred Son) he has pardoned the offenses of the whole world, cannot
pretend, but must (as taught by him) or pardon others, or not hope for pardon
of their own sins.

14. But above all, that is to say, it suffices not for a Christian to forgive
an enemy, but he must also love him too: for Charity is the band of perfection,
not only the life of every Virtue, but the link that chaineth them together,
and binds them all up in one bundle, to make a present of them to Almighty God,
as of so many particulars necessary to make one accomplished Soul: nay, not only
binding up all virtues together in one man, but also uniting all men together,
as making so many members to integrate one Mystical Body of Christ his holy
Church: so that no one Virtue can subsist alone without the help of another to
support it: For instance, modesty is lost, unless patience help to bear it self
modestly against those who are injurious; again, Patience cannot subsist
without Humility, inabling us to bear patiently the proud comportment of
others, and their provocations to impatience; and the like is of all Virtues
whatsoever; for we shall find no one can stand alone, without it lean upon
another; but this is singular in Charity, that she is not necessary, as a
particular support to any single Virtue, but is further the common Soul, or
life unto them all, insomuch, that without Charity, there can be no Virtue at
all in any Soul: For as Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 13. If I have Faith to remove
Mountains, if I speak with the tongues of Angels, and have no Charity, I am
become as sounding Brass, and a tinkling Cymb^ll: making a noise, but no
Harmony nor Music, in the hearing of Almighty God: and here the same Apostle
calls Charity the band of all Virtues, thereby to show us we are but loose
Christians, unless tied up together in the Band of Charity, whereby we are made
to love God above all things, and our neighbor as our selves; and in so doing,
are by this Band of perfection rendered perfect Christians, Chosen, holy, and
Beloved children of Christ Jesus.

15. Out of this mutual love follows an effect of peace. which is here
recommende^ to us, in no less degree than it was in our Saviors own heart,
even that (similitudinarily, not identically) which Christ had with the Jews,
when on the Cross he besought his Father to be at peace with his enemies; that
peace, and no less, the Apost e desires, should exult (he would say abound) in
our hearts too: his meaning is, we should rather recede, from our own rights,
than seek to recover them by losing the peace, and quiet of our mind, or then
be at variance with any body whatsoever: to which purpose Cardinal Bellarmine
had an excellent axiom which he was known by, saying often upon occasions of
disputes, or odds between party and party, One ounce of Peace is worth a whole
pound of Victory: and this Cardinal was not alone of this opinion, for Saint
Austine sure taught it him, in his twelfth Sermon upon this verse of the
Apostle, where he speaks thus, I will not have with whom to strive; it is much
more desirable to have no enemy, than to overcome him. But the Apostles sense
in this place is yet deeper, for he so recommends peace unto us, as he leaves
it for the commandant in our Hearts, the ruler of them, and of all our actions,
indeed the crown of them; besides, as who should say, what ere you do, see it
be peaceably done; see you may, after it is past, say you have thereby made no
breach of peace, either in your own, or your neighbors mind; but that you go
toward God, hand in hand with all the world, rather following them (who si^
not) than by breaking from them, though upon your own, perhaps better design,
cause a disturbance amongst others And indeed if we be at any time necessitated
to a war; the Christian and real end thereof being peace, argues how much this
Virtue is requisite to abound in every pious Soul. And eace is here called
Christ his Virtue, because it was the special gift he brought from Heaven;
when the Angel told us his nativity brought Glory to God above, and peace to
men of good minds upon earth, Luke 2 ver. 1^. and at his parting, he left it
himself, as a legacy amongst us, saying immediately before his ascension up to
Heaven, John 14. ver 27. My peace I leave with you, my peace I give to you: and
for this reason the Apostle says, We are all called by Christ in one Body;
that is, made up peaceable members one with another of his own sacred and
Mystical Body, the holy Church: Be therefore thankful is the close of this
Verse, to show it is a benefit infinitely obliging Christians to receive (by
Grace) so admirable a gift as peace amongst us, that are made up (by nature) of
many contradictions, not only external, but internal also: though there want
not, that instead of thankful, expound this place as to import, being
gracious, or pleasing to each other, for so are all peaceable men acceptable to
everybody wheresoever they come; and truly, however the Rhemists translate it
Thankful, yet the expositours (especially Saint Heirome) incline to think
gracious to be the more genuine sense of the Apostle in this place.

16. True it is, by the Word of Christ, is here meant as well the written, as
the preached Word of God, but in regard ignorant persons are more apt to
misconstrue, than rightly to understand the written Word; therefore holy Church
is sparing to give leave to read the Bible, and liberal to advise us to hear
it Preached, or explicated by the Priests. But if it please God, we have it
once expounded unto us, that we may understand it in a safe and sound sense,
then not to read it, will be a fault, whereas till then to read it, may prove a
danger to us: and in very truth one reason why I have undertaken to set forth
this book, was to give the Lay People a little liberty in reading, at least all
the Epistles and Gospels throughout the Sundays of the year, when they were
laid open to them in a safe sense, such as might (nay, must needs) edisie, and
can no ways offend, or cause dangers to the reader: so to read, and possess
themselves of thus much Scripture, as is here delivered in the flux of a year
unto then, must needs be highly commendable, and hugely profitable unto every
one that reads, and makes it their study, indeed their Prayer from one end of
the year to the other; for so shall they have abundance, or store enough of
Scripture for them to be able inwardly to abound withal, and to confer
wisely thereupon with one another, nay, even to teach themselves, if the Priest
fail to do it, how to square their actions according to the Word of God, the
Law of Christ, the instinct of the holy Ghost, and the rule of his immediate
substitutes, the Pastors of holy Church, whose preaching may be more ample,
but must not be to other sense, than what they find delivered to be the true
meaning of the holy Scriptures: so shall they be ever in grace, singing, etc.
that is in thanksgiving to God, for having received thus much of his holy Word
expounded to them in their own native tongue, and rendering him much more thanks
for having left so much more of the Gospel, as they have not here expounded,
full of the same delightful and solid substance, conducing to their Souls
salvation: and even this thankfulness of their hearts is the singing here
mentioned, for out of their abundant gratitude they will be always praising
God with some discourses of this nature, which will sound in the ears of our
heavenly Lord, as so many Hymns, Psalms, and Canticles of praise unto his
Divine Majesty.

17. And consequently will beget in us a habit of doing, as this last verse
exhorts us to do, namely directing all our words and actions to the honor
and glory of God the Father Creating us, God the Son Redeeming us, and God the
holy Ghost Sanctifying us, and commanding that we remember our acquaintance
with the sacred and undivided Trinity came unto us by the means of the second
Person thereof, wherefore in recognizance of that infinite obligation to the
second Person, which was Christ Jesus, all our thoughts, words, and deeds; all
our prayers and praisings of this great God, shall then be most acceptable,
when they fall from our lips, or flow from our hands imbellished with this
adorning memory of being said and done in the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord,
which is partly a Precept, and partly a Counsel; and certainly it is a
negative precept, that is to say, it forbids us now to call upon God in the
name of Moses, or of his Angels, or of his Saints directly, as in former times
the Jews did, saying, Let not our Lord speak to us lest we die; no, let Moses
speak, whereas now we are bound to say, Let not Moses, but Christ speak to us;
nor let the Angels or Saints be our immediate recourse, but be Christ the
principal refuge we have; and if by Saints or Angels we help our selves, be it
as they are more in favor to intercede for us, than our selves are; but so as
still by them we aim at Christ for our Assistant, for our Redeemer, for our
Savior, so as by his, not by their Merits we hope to be saved, though by their
intercessions, rather than our own, we may hope of Christ to be heard. And thus
from the negative precept as above, we come to find it as well a positive, or
affirmative command, as it is a counsel to direct all our thoughts, words and
deeds to Christ, as to our last end of those Actions, which must first in his
Grace have beginning: This, I say, is an habitual precept, however it may be
but an actual Counsel; that is to say, in general, all we think, say, or do,
must (to be meritorious) be virtually at least directed to God, by the merits
of Christ our Lord, his Son: But we are not under precept bound actually to
make this application of all we say, or do, for to this we are only
counseled; and it is indeed the best counsel we can, or give, or take, if at
every thought, word, or deed; we make attend an act of directing it to our last
end, our souls Salvation, through the merits of Christ Jesus; which God of his
infinite goodness grant we may do, by a sweet custom of so doing, not by a
scrupulous perturbation of mind, if we fail therein; for nothing so certain as
that we shall fail and then to afflict our Souls otherwise, than by endeavor
to mend next time, is so far from Virtue, that it is a very dangerous vice of
scruple, as if it were in our powers not to be failing men; or as if God were a
Tyrant, and would expect under pain of Sin from us, that which he only
counsels, but commands not; so our failings is rather Infirmities, than Sins;
and at such we ought rather, with the Apostle, to glory in them, than to be
troubled at them, 2 Cor. 12. ver. 15 God forbid (says he) I should glory but
in my own Infirmities; that is, to see how in the midst of them he was still
supported and assisted by the grace of God, always enabling him (to endeavor
at least) to do all things to Gods Glory, as the same Apostle exhorted the
Corinthians to do, in his first Epistle to them, chap. 10. ver. 31. and as we
may laudably endeavor all our life time to do, but must never be afflicted to
find our selves fail of doing it, since it is rather a counsel, than a
precept; and so to fail in this, is rather infirmity, than sin, as I said
above; and which I choose to repeat, because I would have it fixed in the
memory of all scrupulous Souls, for their comforts, and their Ghostly Fathers
ease, whom they often tire with their needless scruples in such trifles as
these, for want of rightly stating the duty of a Christian to themselves.

The Application.
1. LAst Sundays service told us of the dangers we were in, this points us out
our best defense in dangers. To body our selves, and take up our Mansions in
the Bowels of Christ Jesus: for so we do, by being our selves merciful to
others, as he has been to us, as if the sharpest sword against an enemy, were
to have pity, or mercy on him.

2. Now, we are bid above all, to love him too (for to pardon him is not
enough) and to be in Peace with him, if we expect our selves to be members of
the same Mystical Body, whereof he is a member, (though our enemy.) and since
it is apparent out of this days Text, that by Peace with one another, we are
united members to our common Head Christ Jesus, we must by this peace exulting
in our hearts, defend our selves and others from the common enemy.

3. Then shall we declare this Peace to be in our Hearts, when the Word of God
is always in our mouths, when we are singing forth the praises of our Lord,
to show we glory in no other General, than Jesus Christ, we need no other
weapon than his holy Word, no other shield than his prote^ting Grace against
our greatest enemies.

And therefore we pray to Day, as bodyed all in one Family, etc. The Gospel,
MAT. 13. ver. 24. etc.
24. ANother Parable he proposed unto them, saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is
resembled to a man that sowed good seed in his field.

25. But when men were asleep, his enemy came and over-sowed cockle among the
wheat, and went his way.

26. And when the blade was shot up, and had brought forth fruit, then appeared
also the Cockle.

27. And the servants of the good man of the house coming, said to him, Sir,
did not thou sow good seed in the field? whence then has it Cockle?

28. And he said to them, The Enemy-man has done this. And the servants said
to him, will thou, we go and gather it up.

29. And he said, No; lest perhaps gathering up the cockle, you may root up the
wheat also together with it.

30. Suffer both to grow until the harvest, and in the time of harvest, I will
say to the reapers, Gather up first the Cockle, and bind it into bundles to
burn, but the Wheat gather ye into my barn.


The Application.
24 THis thirteenth Chapter is wholly parabolicall, and this other is the
second parable insisting wholly upon cockle by stealth sowed over the Wheat,
after the husbandman had sowed his field with good seed, where note, the whole
Parable alludes to the whole thing done, not to the particular doer; since if
so, the kingdom of heaven must not have bin likened to the man sowing, but to
the King of heaven, which Kingdom in this place seems to be the Church of
Christ, as if by the sanctity thereof he did reign in continual glory: and
here Christ makes himself the man sowing in his field, that is to say, in this
world, which is all one field of God, the seed is the word of the eternal
Father to his children, the Church of Christ, and therefore this Word is called
good seed, because it fructifies both to grace in this life, and to glory in
the next.

25. By the men being asleep, are here meant the Pastors of Gods Church, being
out of the Pulpit, or out of sight of their people, and parishioners, or else
our own remissness in virtue, which is a kind of sleep, in that school where
waking is alway^s necessary, insomuch, that even when we sleep, our hearts or
souls must wake, lest we be surprised by the never sleeping enemy, who lies at
watch perpetually to devour us: And the enemy mentioned in this place is indeed
the common enemy to God and man, the Devil, whose Cockle over-sowed amongst
the wheat of Christian doctrine is either Heresy of Doctrine, or errors of
life: The first he sows, when he makes us wrest Scriptures to our private
sense, contrary to the Churches exposition. The second, when he tempts us to
do contrary to the rule of our actions set down by the Word of God, and by his
Preachers of that word unto us. And his going away when this is done, is his
leaving us corrupted both in doctrine and manners, as if we had not received
our taints in both from him, but were by our selves forsooth assured, we were
in the right: Note by cockle or zizania, as the Scriptures call it, is
understood here, heresy or infidelity, in respect of true Faith, as also vice
and sin in respect of true virtue: so that under cockle is meant all impure
grain or weeds that mix with corn, and choke it in the growth, or growing with
it, make it unsavory, and by the ill mixture thereof, intoxicate the brain
with a vertiginous dizziness, as heresy and sin do the soul of man, and
indeed Christ in this place alludes to the Scribes and Pharisees corrupting
with their false Doctrine those to whom he had taught the truth, persuading
them he was a drunkard, because he went to a wedding, and turned water into
Wine; and a blasphemer, because he abrogated the Law of Moses, and made himself
more than Abraham, namely the Son of God.

26. The reason why this Cockle was not to be distinguished from the wheat,
till both were grown up ready to pullulate into their several fruits, was
because all plants in their first blade are green alike, and most grains of
corn are of like blade, at least if they differ in blade, they are not
therefore weeds, but may be good corn, though thus differing, yet when they
come to fructify, then they are discerned and seen to be good or bad according
to that of our Savior, Matthew. 7.16. By their fruits ye shall know them, who
are good men, and who bad.

27. This Verse alludes to the Pastors of Gods Church, complaining, that
whilst they sow his seed of truth in the pulpits, they find more cockle than
corn, when they come to reap their harvest, that is to say, if not more
Heretics than Catholics, at least more sinners than Saints; but here it may
not be amiss for these Pastors to reflect, whether they do indeed sow the same
seed, as Christ their master sowed, whether they do preach the same holy and
saving doctrine, or admit they do this, yet by a further disquisition, they
must see, whether or no, they have sown the seed of example, or holy manners,
as well as of true doctrine, for if not, they will be answere^ not to have sown
good seed, since exemplarity of life is equally expected to fall from the hand
of the Churche^ seeds-man as well as solidity of doctrine.

28 The enemy man here imports the devil; and by this answer there is a w^rd
of comfort given to the Pastors, while our Savior says, there may be weeds
or cockle in the field of holy Church, though there were never so good seed
sown both of doctrine and of life by the Husbandmen, the Preachers thereof, and
this by the Devil always ploughing up a n^w, some parcels of this field by
temptations or fluctuations in men's minds, or by scattering his ^oul seed of
sin over the ground newly sown with doctrine and virtue, since it is not in the
Pastors powers to prevent all evil, though they themselves be never so good,
or shall never so well comply with their duties both in doctrine and manners,
as also he tells them, they are not presently to pluck up ill weeds, as soon as
they appear, but

29. As in this Verse appears, Let them grow up both together, corn and weeds,
lest whilst you pluck up the weeds, you loosen the root of the corn growing
near ununto it, and so make it die for want of settled rooting; since there is
not so much malice in bad men, but there is more grace in the good, or at least
a little good is able to overcome a great deal of bad, because it proceeds from
a more p^werful agent, grace exceeding nature in activity; and this was well
observed by S. Augustine saying, upon the first verse of the 54. Psalm, Do not
think that evil men are gratis permitted in this world, and that God cannot
work good out of them since every wicked man therefore lives, that either
himself may be corrected, or that by him the good man may be exercised; either
in patience, if the sinner disturb him, or in giving him example of virtue to
follow. To the like purpose speaks S. Gregory (Hom. 35. in Evang.) upon these
words of S. Luke, Chap. 21. v. 9. When you hear of wars and seditions, (be not
troubled at such evils,) because (says he) many evils must here fore-run,
that they may put us in mind of evils without end, and so make us avoid
Temporary lest we plunge our selves into eternal evils, confiding in his that
we serve a God, who al^ne is able to cull good out of evil.

30. Hence therefore the Master bids his men, let the weeds grow up with the
corn until harvest, let the bad men live together with the good, till the day
of judgment, which is the true harvest indeed, that brings home the whole crop
of nature, (rectified by grace) into the barn of glory: We are here to note
that though formerly the word of God were called the seed or good wheat, yet
here the just are called by the same name, as if the cause we^e ^xpressed by
the effect, for Saints are indeed the fruitful effects of the Gospel, the holy
word of God. On the other side, sinners are the ill seed, or cockle in this
place specified, and by the Reapers we may account are here meant the Angels,
that are to summon all the world to Judgment, and in that summons to sever the
cockle from the corn, the wicked from the just, binding up these in bundles, as
so many piles of fuel for hellfire, and ranging those as stacks of corn fit
to be made bread of life, for the heavenly Table of Almighty God.

The Application.
1. SInce it is by his protecting Grace we must hope whilst we are asleep to
be defended from the enemy, who then does machinate our mischief, let it be
our parts while we are awake, not to sow any cockle our selves of ill manners
(if not of false doctrine) in the field of our souls, for then no marvel if
while we sleep, this ill seed (sown by us) grow up and choke the good corn
sowed in our hearts by the seeds-men of holy Church, the Pastors of our souls.

2. Since we are not able to avoid the alternate rest of night, after a
toylesome day, let us at least in the day time stand upon a close guard, and be
sure not to sleep, that is, not to loose the presence of Almighty God, and fall
into the trance of transitory pleasures, such as pash us in pieces against the
Rocks of sin, and under pretense of yielding us a present momentary d^light,
purchase us eternal torments.

3. Since we cannot tell (even when we do best) whether we deserve love or
hatred, we have great reason to fear, lest we may be separated at the latter
day from the blessed, as Cockle, sit for nothing but hell fire, and out of that
religious fear, let us work out our salvation with trembling, by planting in
our souls the roots and seeds of virtues, and for better doing it, Let us pray
to day with Holy Church as above, to be secured from the danger of damnation,
by our sole hope in the protecting and saving grace of Jesus Christ our Lord.

On the sixth Sunday after the EPIPHANY.
The Antiphon, MAT. 13. ver. 33. THE kingdom of heaven is like to leaven,
which a woman took, and hid in three measures of meal, until the whole was
leavened.

Verse. Let my prayer, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
GRant, we beseech thee Almighty God, that, always meditating those things
which are reasonable, we may both in our words and deeds, do what is pleasing
unto Thee

The Illustration.
I Have met with some prodigious wits of both sexes, who conferring with me
about this my design, when it was in hand, would laughing say, I might
perhaps, as well adjust this Prayer to the Epistle and Gospel of the day, as I
should be able to persuade them it was other than a mere paradox; and if it
were possible for men always to meditate upon reasonable things, considering
how irrationally all the world was commonly distracted: so (as friends) they
advised me, if I would go on, to change at least this Prayer, and put some
other in the place of it, less paradoxicall in it self, and more suiteable
than this could be, either to the Epistle or Gospel of the day, which they read
over and over before they spent this judgment upon me and my design: To these
I answered pleasantly (as me thought they spoke to me) though I perceived they
were serious too, That if they observed the Gospel, it was all Parabolicall,
and therefore admit that were true they said, it was not unsuiteable on this
day to have a Prayer Paradoxicall; since Parables and Paradoxes were of near
alliance: but further let me now ask all the world if it be not reasonable, the
Church should pray most fervently for that which is most hard to do? as it
seems men account it the hardest thing in the world always to meditate on
reasonable things: and yet the harder this is to do, the more necessary it is
to pray for grace at least to enable us thereunto: since even ^hese prodigious
wits would think a man unmannerly, that should tell them th y were irrational
souls at any time; and yet what difference there is between being irrational,
and thinking and doing for the most part unreasonable things, I do not well
know: sure I am reason always dictates to do well, and as sure I am, that a
sin is an irrational act, as it is certainly a thing ill done: nay, if I
had said, every sin were so far forth against nature, as it is against
reason, I think I should not exceed verity in that assertion; and since all
that men do like men, they premeditate, therefore with reason we pray this day
(least our actions should prove unnatural that our meditations or thoughts
should be rational, for none other are connaturall to men, as men, though often
they creep upon us, and so render our actions more bestiall than rational,
more unnatural than natural. To conclude, though many of our actions pass
among men as rational, which yet are not so indeed, therefore we pray to day,
that really they may be so, since God is not deceiveable as man is, and since
no unreasonable thought or deed can pass with him for reason, or be pleasing
to him: see then if it be not very fitting to pray that corrupted Nature, may
(by Grace) be elevated to the operations suiting Nature in her best rectitude,
when even so, she is crooked enough in the sight of God, who is Rectitude
Essential. But least, while we condescend to satisfy curiosity, we forget our
maine design, let us see how this Prayer suits indeed with the other parts of
this days service, which with the Epistle it seems to do, whilst
petitioning Reason to be the guide of all our actions, it puts us in mind of a
rational persisting to do well, since by Gods grace we are called with the
Thessalonians to the profession of the same faith, which this days Epistle
from first to last exhorts them to continue in, maugre the intervening
persecutions, that may divert them from it; And look what was then said to them
for perseverance both in faith and good works, is also to day by holy Church
applied to us in this Prayer, that beggs us grace ever to think, and
consequently always to do well, that is, reasonable things, because none else
can be pleasing to Almighty God. It remains only to show how this Prayer does
also exhaust the Gospel; whereunto, it is the better suiting, if it be (as some
wits will have it) paradoxicall, since that is wholly parabolicall, yet
nothing less rational, than is the prayer, petitioning reason in all we think
or do: for who can deny but the little mustard seed of Gods holy word is
hugely rational? or who can say, but the deeper it falls into the earthly
hearts of men, the faster root it takes, grows the stronger up, and brings the
riper fruit, because as well, the reason of it, as the grace is hugely
convincing. Again, who can deny but the leaven of the same word hidden in our
Souls shall with reason operate upon the whole mass of our bodies, and give
them a taste thereof, harsh perhaps to the corrupted pallats of worldly men,
but delitious to the relish of God and his holy Angels, who delight to taste of
such leavened loaves, as we call sower, when they esteem them sweet: and such
are Converts from the Court, who are (by the leaven of Gods holy word) become
Princes to Heaven, though seeming Clownes to Earth. Thus mystically have we
adjusted the parabolicall Gospel to the paradoxicall Prayer of this day, if
wits will have it to be a paradox, that men should always meditate on rational
things, which yet when they do not, they cease to be men; I will not say, what
might follow, that they become beasts.

The Epistle, 1 THESE. 1. v. 2. etc.
2. WE give thanks to God always for all you: making a memory of you in our
prayers without intermission.

3. Mindful of the work of your Faith and labor, and of the Charity, and of
the enduring of the hope of our Lord Jesus Christ, before God and our Father.

4. Knowing, Brethren beloved of God, your Election.

5. That our Gospel has not been to you in word only, but in power and the
holy Ghost, and in much fulness, as you know what manner of men we have been
among you for your sakes.

6. And you became followers of us and of our Lord: receiving the word in much
tribulation, with joy of the holy Ghost.

7. So that ye were made a pattern to all that believe in Macedonia, and in
Achaia.

8. For from you was bruited the word of our Lord: not only in Macedonia and
in Achaia, but in every place, your faith which is to Godward is proceeded, so
that it is not necessary for us to speak any thing.

9. For they themselves report of us, what manner of entering we had to you:
and how you turned to God from Idols, to serve the living and true God.

10. And to expect his Son from heaven (whom he raised up from the dead)
Jesus, who has delivered us from the wrath to come.


The Explication.
2. THe Apostle speaks not here in the plural number of himself, as Princes,
and great Persons, but in a quite contrary way derogates from himself, rather
by attributing his own writings jointly to other his associates, and
companions, as namely; here he does in the first verse of this Epi^^le specify
both Sylvanus and Timothy, as if he had no more share in this, than they; and
as if, what ere he writ, they did sugg^st, or dictate to him, as much thereof
as came from his own much deeper Spirit: an excellent example for all Writers
to fellow, and attribute their works to their helpers in them, rather than to
themselves alone; besides. Sylvanus being Bishop of the Thessalonians, there
was great reason for the Apostle to consult him in all his proceedings amongst
his own Diocesans: In their own Bishops name therefore, and in his companions,
who went the circuit with him, (Saint Timothy whom he had made Bishop of
Ephesus) the Apostle says, We give thanks to God for the Conversion of you
Thessalonians, in our incessant Prayers for your preservation in the Faith of
Christ, and that by your example others may receive the like Faith, and be
alike converted.

3. Here (as in almost all other places of holy Writ) we are to note the
Apostle joins good Works with Faith, to make it recommendable, and availing;
lest Heretics should (as yet wilfully they do) mistake and think Faith alone
without goo^ W^^ks were saving; whereas it is the active and laborious Faith
that brings us to Heaven; The Faith which is continually working by Charity,
that is to doing good deeds: for lest they should mistake, and think he meant
their Faith was only the Work of God; (which as it is a gift indeed, is true)
see how immediately he illustrates his own other meaning to the sense above, of
operative Faith, when he adds to the works of their Faith, the labor of their
Charity? as who should say, the sole habit of Faith is not enough to those who
are able to produce acts thereof; and those acts of Faith are then best, when
accompanied with deeds of Charity, giving life to Faith, which without good
Works were a dead habit, nothing at all availing us: But the Apostle proceeds
yet further, and to make his sense full of perfection, adds also to their
Faith, and Charity, which he took special notice of, their hope in God, which
made them endure persecution for their Faith, and indeed in this Verse he has
artificially (and solidly too) given the three fittest Epithetes to these three
Theological Virtues that could be; whilst he takes notice of their working
Faith, their laborious Charity, their susteinning Hope: whence Saint
Chrysostom, and others note, the Apostle commends not Faith without Works in
the acts thereof; nor Charity without Pains, in Alms toward the Poor and
Sickly; nor Hope without Patience, or suffering in persecution for Justice. And
not without reason does the Apostle here take notice of these three Virtues in
the Thessalonians, in regard Jason, a Thessalonian by name, was summoned to the
Tribunal of public Justice, as we read, ( Acts 17. ver. 6.) for having
concurred to Saint Paul's escape from his persecutours, as also diverse other
Thessalonians were molested both by the Jews and Gentiles, for their becoming
Christians; and in this the Apostle commends the work of their Faith for their
pains in relieving the Apostles, and cherishing all the poor Christians they
met with; hence he commends their laborious Charity, their imprisonment
patiently endured for their Religion; their sustaining Hope, that gave them
courage to endure temporal losses, in expectation of eternal rewards, which
he calls the hope of our Lord Jesus Christ; that is to say, the hope of what
Jesus Christ brought us news of, eternal Glory: For before he came, most men
lived and dyed like Beasts, without regard to any other life, than this sordid
one they enjoyed upon earth: but it is worthy observation, to see the Apostle
speak so confidently of our sufferings here before Men, as if God, for whom
these men did see us suffer, were as visible in our eyes (though we see him
not) as the men are, whom we do see; and truly, so it is: For God is
remarkably seen in all his creatures, according to that of Saint Paul, Rom; 1.
ver. 20. The invisibles of God, by those things that are visible, (and rightly
understood) are seen unto us. And if we could always have this truth in our
mind, we should always have God before our eyes, as the Apostle avoucheth the
Thessalonians had, saying they did believe, love, and hope, (in the senses
above) as if they had God the Father, and his sacred Son perpetually standing
before them, and visibly encouraging them to all the good actions of their
lives; which indeed, if every good Christian should persuade himself, and
square his actions accordingly, we should soon see a good world here, and a
happy reward of our goodness in the next life.

4. The knowledge he here speaks of, is not that of his Belief, and Faith, but
rather of his experience: for it was an evident proof to him, that God did love
those whom he had Elected to the happy calling of Christianity, as it was
preached by Christ himself, and his Apostles; not as now, when that term of
election is too loosely, and too largely taken, God knows; though in truth he
alludes here to his knowledge, that their Election to Glory will be the reward
of their vocation to Grace, if they persevere, as they have begun, to be good
Christians; so he speaks (as by what follows appears) literally of their
present election to Grace, mystically, and as by consequence, of that glory,
upon condition of their perseverance.

5. For it was a sign of present Grace (joined with a hope of future Glory)
that he takes notice, his preaching did not only work in force of words with
them, but in power of Grace also, both in the Preachers, and in the hearers; In
the Preachers, as confirmed in Grace by the holy Ghost descending upon them,
and making of poor ignorant men, deep Doctors in an instant, for this is it he
alludes unto, saying, You know what men we have been among you; meaning before
the holy Ghost came down upon us, and what now we are for your sakes, that is
to say, men illuminated by God for your instructions, and exposed to all
hazards of our lives for your conversions, all which argues the gift of present
Grace in the Preachers; and the actual conversions of the hearers, argues the
same gift of Grace in them, and both these give indeed hope of future Glory to
them both: Note, that by the much fullness, is here understood, the like
plenitude of his Doctrine confirmed by like miracles, preached by the like
impulse of the holy Ghost, avowed by the like sufferings for the truth of his
Doctrine, as was the Doctrine, Miracles, Preaching, and Sufferings of the other
Apostles called before him, who never had been persecutours of the Church as he
was, whom they had seen do all in the same fullness of Grace, as the other
Apostles did; and by the Gospel in the beginning of this Verse, he means his
particular preaching the Word of Christ.

6. Here is a strange kind of speech, wherein S. Paul puts himself, Sylvanus
and Timothy as examples to the Thessalonians before Christ, when he says, they
were followers of them, and of Christ; as if he meant for their sakes, they had
also followed Christ and not them, or Christ his sake; yet if we reflect upon
it, this seeming immodesty is hugely modest, and extremely true, indeed
necessary; for however Christ were the Apostles, and his other Diciples
immediate example and pattern which they followed; yet to all the after-Ages,
the Apostles, and their successors to their respective times, were the
immediate, and visible rule of Faith unto the world, and the examples, whom
they (first) following, afterward are called Christians; because Christ, as he
was the first rule to the Apostles, so is he the last rewarder of those that
believe in him for the Apostles sakes; that is, by means of the Apostles, and
their successors, teaching, and preaching the Faith of Christ; in regard
Christ not being now visibly amongst us, gives us leave to follow him by such
examples, as he pleases to send unto us, wherewith to supply his own absence,
namely, the governors of holy Church. Nor is it any way derogatory to Almighty
God, that man is isntrumental to his Divine Service, as that we say, we owe
our conversion to such an Apostle, to such a Priest, to such a holy Man, as the
immediate, and visible cause thereof; however, we finally place our Faith in
Christ, and our trust in God, who has given such Gifts, such Graces, such
Powers unto Men, as to prevail with their followers, to joy in their
Tribulation, which they suffer for hearing, and receiving the Word of God: true
it is, we receive this Word from the mouths of Men, but it is the holy Ghost
that moves us joyfully to suffer the Tribulation of all severest persecution,
rather than not embrace this Word as Divine, however delivered by men unto us,
because it has in it an energy, a force exceeding all humane power, such as
inables us to renounce all temporal happiness in hope of the Eternal, which
this sacred Word does promise us.

7. See here how the Apostle courts his own Converts, by making them in a
manner Co-apostles with himself, whilst their exemplarity of life is the means
of converting others to the Faith of Christ, whom the Apostles never did
converse withal: as here they are said to be worthy of the style of
Co-apostlate over all Macedonia, and Achaia, great Countries, looking upon
Christianity as an object of ^arest Beauty, by reason of the singular Virtues
shining in these Thessalonian Matrons, to whom this Epistle relates.

8. Nay, he goes further, and to their religious demeanor, attributes the
Conversion in a manner of all other Nations, insomuch as there is no more need,
as he says of the Apostles, and he adds, that as the Thessalonians believe, so
all the world beli^ves, seeing in them such remarkable signs of sanctity,
verity, and doctrine;

9. They themselves, that is to say, all those amongst whom we now come, have
heard of your celebrated conversion, from Gentilism to Christianity, from
plurality of gods, (so he means by Idol gods, dead stocks, and stones,) to the
Adoration of one sole, True, and living God, from all, and unto all eternity:
And this your conversion is the more famous, by reason of the persecutions
raised against us, and you, upon this account, who rather chose to die, than to
desert us, though our entrance was persecution, and your exit sufferance, for
the promulgation of the Gospel, which teaches us to adore one only God.

10. And to expect the second coming of his sacred son Christ Jesus at the day
of Judgment to revenge his Fathers, and his own wrongs done unto them, by the
sins of ungrateful and mis-believing men, who notwithstanding they see Christ
was raised from the dead, will not yet believe him to be the Messiah and
Savior of the world; from which revenge or wrath, those who believe in Christ
Jesus are delivered, that is, from the damnation due to their incredulity, who
believe not in him; or to their evil lives, who though they do rightly
believe, yet live not according to the rule of Faith, or do not works
answerable to their belief.

The Application.
1. AS it is huge Reason we should fly to heaven for help in humane dangers,
according as we were taught last Sunday, so is it very reasonable, we should
practice what S. Paul exhorted the Thessalonians to, whilst his Lesson to them
is this day read to us. Namely, to be mindful of the work of our Faith, etc
for albeit Faith elevateth Reason to believe some things that are above Reason,
yet it binds us not to do any thing either above, or against Reason, and so
leaves us in all our thoughts and actions to be regulated by reason.

2. Hence it is great Reason that we, who now profess the same Faith with the
Thessalonians, do persevere with them in the works of faith, such as may
render us able by our exemplar lives, to convert all that we converse with, as
w^ hear the Thessalonians did convert all those of Macedonia, and of Achaia, to
the faith of Jesus Christ.

3 Now because our actions commonly are such as our thoughts propend and lead
us to, it is fitting that to be the better able to do reason in all our
actions, we should admit of not^ing but reason into our thoughts and
meditations, since we are certain, whatsoever can lay claim to Reason
(especially such ^s is elevated by Faith) must needs be pleasing to almighty
God, According as we are taught in the Prayer above.

The Gospel, MATTHEW. 13. verse. 31.
31. ANother Parable he proposed unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is
like to mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed in his fi^ld.

32. Which is the least surely of all seeds, but when it is grown, it is
greater than all herbs, and is made a Tree, so that the fowls of the air
come, and dwell in the branches thereof.

33. Another Parable he spoke to them, The kingdom of heaven is like to
leaven, which a a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, until the
whole was leavened.

34. All these things Jesus spoke in Parables to the multitudes, and without
parables, he did not speak to them:

35. That it might be f^lfilled, which was spoken by the Prophet saying, I will
open my mouth in parables, I will utter things hidden from the foundation of
the world: Psalm. 77. v. 2.


The Explication.
31. OUr Savior it seems at this time made profession to speak nothing but
Parables; so after he had, as we heard last Sunday, told them the Parable of
the cockle amongst the corn, here he likens the Church to the least of grains,
a mustard seed sowed in a man's field; that is to say, scattered over the field
of this world, which is truly said a man's field, in regard Christ, who is God
and man, is Lord and master of this whole Universe, and all over it has
planted this mustard seed, his holy Church.

32. And as in very truth a mustard seed is the least of all others, so the
Church of Christ was, when first planted or sowed, the least of all communities
in the word: But some conceive Christ himself to be this mustard seed, on whom
grew, (as so many birds in their nests) The Apostles, Popes, Bishops, Pastors,
and Saints of all sorts, and of both sexes: Others will have the Church to be
this mustard seed, little in it self at first, now spread over all the world:
Others contend it is the Gospel of Christ, his doctrine or the word of God,
that at first was only sowed like mustard seed, among the Jews, but now is
diffused over the whole Universe. In fine, it avails little which of these we
take, the Parable is verified in them all, and indeed they are all in a manner
one and the same thing; for all have root in Christ, and are branches of him,
and the Analogy holds between the mustard seed and every one of these; for who
less than Christ, who was the outcast of men? What Church less than the
Primitive Church of Christ? What Doctrine avowed by weaker men than his
Disciples were? and so consequently, what word less than his, which was
exsibilated or hissed out of the world at first? when it was said to be a
scandal to the Jews, and a folly to the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 1.23. to preach the
Gospel of his resurrection: And this is special between the word and
mustard seed, that as in this seed there is a kind of fiery quality; so is
the word of God, (as holy David said, Psalm. 119. v. 140. Thy word is exceeding
fiery, that is, servorous and hot, inflaming hearts to the love of God: and
whereas the Text speaks of this seed growing to a tree, it is indeed so in
Syria, where birds really build in the boughs thereof, as all the members of
Christ do upon him, as was abovesaid.

33. This other parable of the Church, or of her doctrine, being like to
leaven, suites exceedingly therewith: for as a little leaven gives a relish to a
whole batch of bread, so the least Word of God hidden in men's hearts, as leaven
is in meal, makes them rise into professions of Christian duty, and renders
all their actions savourie both to God and man: By the woman is here meant the
Church, which is the Spouse of Christ, hiding the leaven of Christian doctrine
in the three measures of meal, that is to say, in three parts of the World,
whereunto Christianity was then immediately designed, namely, Asia, Africa, and
Europe; for America has been discovered but an hundred years ago, and whither
formerly disjoined from some one of these other three parts of the Earth by an
interjected Sea (as now it is) we know not: But this we conceive, that these
other three parts seemed to have been a division of the whole Earth, into all
the parts thereof, when Noe divided the World between his three Sons, assigning
Asia to Sem, Afirica to Cham, and Europe to Japhet: and this perhaps may be the
literal allusion of the three measures of meal seasoned by the leaven of the
Gospel Mystically; Saint Ambrose applies this leaven to the three parts of Man,
his spirit, his life, and his body, or to his three appetites, rational,
Irascible, and concupiscible, So that by virtue of Gods holy Word, (Saint
Hierome says) in our reason we possess prudence, in our anger we lodge a holy
hatred against Sin, in our desires or concupiscencies we harbor a coveting of
Virtue: And all this in having these natural appetites elevated to
supernatural propensions, by hearing the most elevating Word of God:
Symbolically, Saint Hilary says, This leaven of the Gospel was hid in the
three measures of meal, the Law, the Psalms, and the Prophets; and now appears
in the Trinity of the three Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity; or
as others will have it, to the three sorts of Believers, Beginners,
Proficients, and Perfect, who bring forth loaves of fruit swollen to these
correspondent proportions of Thirty, Sixty, or an Hundred fold increase of
bigness: Allegorically Saint Bernard makes the womb of the Blessed Virgin
Mother of Christ to be the leaven of the Hypostaticall union, (having a
seasoning influence into the three parts of Christ; his Soul, his Body, his
Divinity) uniting them all in one Person, or one loaf made of these three
measures of meal, as above. Anagogically, Caesarius Dial. 4. Says the woman is
the divine wisdom or deity of Christ, the three measures o^ meal are all
humane natures, death, and hell; and the leaven Christ's humanity hid in his
grave and in hell, whither his humane soul went with his deity, seasoning all
mankind into the blessed condition of a resurrection from death and purgatory,
to life eternal in everlasting glory.

34, 35. There is no more mystery in these two verses, than literally they
sound, only this we may observe, that as all the whole 77, Psalm of David is
a kind of parabolicall or aenigmaticall, grave, sententious speech, because in
that psalm he speaks prophetically of this manner of parabolicall speech of
Christ, therefore to verify that prophecy, Christ here speaks both in grave
and truly parabolicall senses, though David have much of litterall sense in
his said psalm, as where he recounts the Benefits God bestowed on the
Synagogue or children of Israel, in their forty years march with Moses through
the red sea, and the desert from Egypt to Canaan, the land of promise; yet S.
Hierome says that David (the type of Christ) speaks there mystically as in
Christ's person, promising to his Church infinite blessings, namely to man
passing through the red sea of his passion, and through the desert of this
world, into the heavenly Canaan, or promised land of Glory: And for that
purpose Christ here ends his parabolical discourse with this second verse of
that 77 Psalm of the royal Prophet David, I will open my mouth in parables, I
will utter things hidden from the foundation of the world.

The Application.
1. AS it was reason Christ should speak in Parables, to verify what was
prophesied of him according to the last Verse in this Gospel; so with those
Parables he is said (with great reason doubtless) To utter things hidden from
the foundation of the World; we may suppose the hidden Mysteries of the Blessed
Trinity, and of the Incarnation in particular; and in general the works of
Faith, whereof Saint Paul in this days Epistle minds the Thessalonians, and
in them all after Believers. For it was indeed the main business our Savior
had to do upon Earth to plant a Faith in men's minds, whereby they might work
out their salvation, Hope and Charity assisting the said work of Faith, as
Saint Paul above cited says.

2. As it was reason Christ should verify the Prophets sayings of him, so was
it reason he should draw the Ignorant multitude to a belief of the greatest
Mysteries of Faith by degrees, as he did, in first speaking Parables, and then
expounding of them (by his Apostles at least) in so rational a way, that they
easily took all he said, for good, when they had heard good sense to be wrapped
up in his Parabolicall speeches, which at first they understood not: so what
seemed to be spoken to blind their understandings, was indeed intended to open
them; and thus did Christ reasonably condescend, when he seemed most
unreasonably to transcend the capacities of the People.

3. As the Mustard seed of Divine Faith, and the leaven of Christian Doctrine
have seasoned the whole world with Christianity; so is it great reason they
(being both received into our hearts) should in such sort season the little
world we are within our selves, that all our actions may be answerable to those
hidden roots of Religion planted in our hearts: as then they will be, when our
thoughts are always meditating upon those Christian Duties which (in reason)
we are always bound unto. And that we may do this, the Church reasonably
prays to day, as above.

On SEPTUAGESIMA Sunday.
The Antiphon, MAT. 20. ver. 6. THe householder said unto his workmen, What,
stand you here all the day idle? but they answering, said, Because no man has
hired us: Go ye also into my Vineyard, and what shall be just, I will give you.

Verse. Let my prayer, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
We beseech thee, O Lord, clemently to hear the Prayers of thy People, that
we, who, for our sins, are justly punished, for the Glory of thy Name, may be
mercifully delivered.

The Illustration.
We were in the fourth Sunday after the Epiphany taught to pray much to this
purpose; but we must not think much of repeating the same Prayer, when we daily
repeat the same Sins, which are the cause of our increased punishments; yet we
shall find that danger was there the punishment we deprecated; here it is
labor, either in the race we are by the Epistle bid to run; or in the pains,
the Gospel calls us too in the Vineyard of Christ, as if we were hereby given
to understand, our life in this world is a continual toil, and labor, to
deserve an eternal rest in the next: But further, we are to note, this Prayer
is particularly proper to this day, not only as referring literally in a
manner to the Epistle and Gospel, but even to the whole Series of holy
Churches service upon this Septuagesima Sunday; when the Priest in his office
is bid begin the story of Genesis, thereby to mind us, we should from this day
begin to serve God, as if we were but newly created for that purpose: and yet
lest we should forget that we were no sooner created, than we had by sin
annihilated, as it were, our selves, and lost our right of return to that
All-being, (the Creator of Heaven and Earth) from whence we came out of our
nothing. See the Prayer of this Day puts us in mind of our degenerating from
God by Sin: But withal, of our return to him by Repentance, if we cooperate
with his holy Grace, who is ever more ready to give, than we are to ask him
Pardon: Now in regard the Epistle of this day falls from the simile between a
Christians life, and those who runn a race, and minds us of the Children of
Isreal's going out of Egypt into the Land of promise, of the Cloud, and of the
Red Sea, wherein they were by Moses, as it were Baptized; as also the Rock
which followed them to quench their Thirst, and of the Manna from Heaven to be
their Food, we must observe that this Story suites unto the rest of this days
service also; because all these were figures of our Baptism in Christ, of our
being fed with the Manna of his Blessed Body, and with the drink of his
precious Blood; and lest it should be with us, as the Epistle ends, by telling
us it was with the Children of Israel, in the greater part of whom God was not
well p^eased, because they requited those signal favors with their
murmurings, ingratitude, and other heinous crimes; therefore holy Church this
Day, with more than ordinary reason, bids us all pray (as guilty, it seems, of
like ingratitude) that we, who for our sins are justly punished, for the
glory of Gods Name, may be mercifully delivered from the same; that so having
prayed away Sin, the cause, we may be quit of the effect, our just punishment
for Sin: And this for the only reason whereupon we can hope it, merely to
glorify the Name of God, who, if for his own glory he should not forgive us,
could have no title, or motive from us to do it: and for that cause this
Prayer does press him home for Mercy, when it minds him of his own Glory in
the being merciful; as being indeed the end for which he made mankind, that
by him he might be glorified, and fill up the places of the collapsed Angels.

The Epistle, 1 COR. 9. ver. 24. etc. and Chap. 10. ver. 1. etc.
24. KNow you not, that they that run in a race, all run indeed, but one
receives the price? so run, that you may obtain.

25. And every one that striveth for maistery, refraineth himself from all
things, and they certes, that they may receive a corruptible crown; but we an
incorruptible.

26. I therefore so run, not as it were at an uncertain thing: so I fight, not
as it were beating the air.

27. But I chastise my Body, and bring it into servitude, lest perhaps when I
have preached to others, my self become reprobate.

Chap. 10.1. For I will not have you ignorant, Brethren, that our Fathers were
all under the cloud, and all passed through the Sea.

2. And all in Moses were baptized in the cloud and in the Sea.

3. And all did eat the same Spiritual food.

4. Aad all drunk the same Spiritual drink, (and they drunk of the Spiritual
Rock that followed them, and the Rock was Christ.)

5. But in the more part of them God was not well pleased.


The Explication.
24. THE Apostle had in the foregoing verses spoken of his disinterested
evangelizing without the least mixture of sordid gain for his so doing, but
merely out of zeal to Souls and love to God; and in this verse he similifies
between an Evangelizer and one that runs a race: having first stated his
business, that the Evangelizer must be a man void of all proper Interest or
ends, aiming only at Gods honor, and the salvation of Souls: so to this
purpose he tells us first literally of Evangelizers, that though all of them
do run, yet it seems not always all with one aim or end, not for one and
the same prise; some for true zeal, and they win the race, others for self
interest, and they (though continually running) yet loose the match, because
they run by the bow, not by the string; they would feign carry with them the
compass of their own desires, and yet think to get heaven too, so they take
perhaps more pains, and yet to less, indeed, to no purpose. Mystically the
Apostle means the same of the lay people, who all pretend to run for the
prize of heaven, but he, that is to say, such only win it, who run right
on, and make no Maeanderous circles of mixed ends, which retard their speed.
And that he means not only one person, but all such as run equally, that is
to their utmost, all for one pure, simple and impermixed end, the following
words avow, when he says, so run ye that ye may obtain, that ye may
win the race, the prize, the kingdom of heaven, the Crown of Glory: Here he
speaks in the plural number, to show that heaven is not reserved only for the
best of Christians, but that every good Christian may by running reach it, but
then he must be always running, as continually racers are, since the least
interpaulation or intermission of running is to cast ones self behind, and
therefore by so running is here meant running with all speed possible; since
when we do all we can, unless God reward our uttermost endeavors, with
adding spiritual wings to our leaden heels, we shall come short. Hence it is
S. Austine says very well, Not to go forward in virtue, is to go backward:
So S. Bernard too, ( Epist, 254.) therefore if to advance be to run, not to
run is to loose ground: and in the same place he brings in a similitude of
Jacobs ladder, whereon there was no angel at all stood still, but every one was
in perpetual motion, either upwards or downwards; The ascending Angels
importing the blessed souls, and the descending the damned, whence it is that
not to rise in virtue is to fall to vice, showing there is no final medium
between good and bad, between heaven and hell.

25. Here the Apostle alludes to his own refraining all sinister or propper
interest in his Evangelizing, least they might retard his speed in that race he
was running for his crown of Glory, as Racers refrain from all such meats as
do obstruct or shorten their wind, and feed upon those things as dilate the
lungs, or lengthen wind, which is of greatest use for Coursers; and thus he
does to confound those sordid Souls, who will abridge themselves here of many
pleasures and delights, merely to gain the temporal reward of popular
applause, and yet will not refrain the least of their sensualities, to gain
the eternal reward of praise from God and Angels: but if we shall gather one
principle which will serve to all purposes in this kind, let us here fix our
eyes upon temperance, as most conducing to healthy and vigorous souls, as
taking away all lustful humors, and supplying us with chaste spirits, that
render our souls sound, agil, active and victorious.

26. See how prettily S. Paul compares sinister ends in Gods service to men at
cuffs with the air, or running at hazard whether they shall win or loose, that
is by mixing humane, with divine ends, by railing at the world and the devil,
as if they were our only enemies, and yet pampering the body, which is indeed
man's greatest adversary, in regard neither of the other two can hurt us, if we
be sure the body be subdued. Because we are not tempted as angels by pure
intellectual motives, but by sensual or corporeal ones.

27. And that this was the Apostles sense in the verse above, see how he now
speaks in clear terms to the same purpose, saying, I chastize my body, and
bring it into servitude, as if that were indeed the maine enemy a man had, and
truly so it is: for nothing (says Aristotle) enters into the soul or
understanding, but first it must pass the sentinels of our outward senses, and
they, if loyal, will keep out all sin whatsoever, but if corrupted or
treacherous to their sovereigne, the soul, then they welcome any traitor sent
by the world or the devil to surprise their Prince: and indeed all resistance
to foreign enemies is vain, if we first subdue not our domestic foe, our
own bodies, by forcing them to obey the commands of reason; for unl^sse we
bring them first to this obedience, all our resistance to sin is like
artilery let fly at crows in the air, when an army of daring men are ready
to run into the mouths of our Cannon, and might be taken off if levelld at,
whilst our bullets fly in vain above their heads, by a mismounting our
Artillery, that is to say, by roaring and crying out against the distantiall
world and devil, when indeed the flesh is the storming foe that scales our
walls, unresisted at the same time we pretend a maine resistance to our
mightiest foes: this fond way of fight the Apostle tells us of, when he shows
his own close guard to be the safer defense, namely, the chastizement of his
own body, and if we ask what that chastizement imports, we shall find it to be
not only a correction or slight rebuke, but an absolute subduing or
captivating of it to the souls command, by fasting, prayer, and other
corporal austerities, as haire-shirts, disciplines, or worse tormenting
instruments, such as holy men have taught us the wholesome use of upon all
notable occasions of temptations or dangers to the soul: nay, these means the
Apostle used amidst his greatest spiritual labors, least as he said, while he
preached to others, he might himself become, reprobate, by the assault of pride
or vainglory; how much more then oght those to mortify their bodies, who do
not wast them in spiritual endeavors, as S, Paul did: but above all how
fondly do Heretics shake off the use of corporal mortifications, the exercise
of good works, under pretense of Faith alone to be sufficient? when the
greatest master of Spirit in the world, S. Paul, dares not hold himself by
Faith secure without good works, much less did he boast, as they do, of a
revelation, that he should be saved, noe nor rely upon his being confirmed in
grace, but wrought his salvation with fear and trembling, which did accompany
his hope, not his presumption thereof. Hear Saint Ambrose how he speaks
against heretics opposing this doctrine, and practice of Saint Paul, in his
Epistle to the Vercellan Church, I hear (says this Doctor-Father) some men
say, there is no merit of abstinence, and that those are mad, who chastize
their bodies, to make them subject to their souls, which certainly Saint Paul
had never done, if he had held it to be madness. To the same effect all the
rest of the Fathers abound with like sentences, which for brevity sake I omit
to transcribe, but not to admonish the Christian reader of, especially the
heretics, whom it most concerns: I say not who they be, least I offend
persons, while I only oppose their errors, cut of charity to them, and zeal
of their souls salvation.

Cap. 10. verse. 1. Here the Apostle seems to divert from the Corinthians to the
Jews, but indeed makes this seeming diversion an approach to them again,
whilst he puts them in mind, that it is not only Faith with Abraham, nor to
be baptized with Christians, will suffice to get the goal of heaven, unless
we run continually thither upon the speed of our perpetual good works: for,
says he, I will not have you ignorant that our Fathers, namely the children of
the Synagogue, the Israelites, wanted not Faith, nor the figurative Baptism of
the cloud and the red Sea, types of our true Baptism; yet because they did
murmur at God, and sin in the desert, deserting thereby the necessary adjunct
of good works, to merit their arrival at the land of promise, of six hundred
thousand, only two men, Joshua and Caleb did arrive at, and enter the said
land: In like manner Christians, be they never so firm in their Faith, never
so deeply dipped in the true Baptism of the red sea of Christ's passion, unless
they hold on the speed of good works, while they are running the race to the
heavenly Canaan^, they shall never enter that heavenly land of promise, which
is the price they run for. But we are here to note how Calvin corrupts this
place of S. Paul, saying, the Jews received no less the truth and substance
of Christ and his benefits in their umbratile and figurative Sacraments only,
than we Christians do in our real Sacraments, which are the true substance of
the Jewish shadows. For the Apostle does not say, they and we eat all one
meat, but that all they among themselves did eat of the figurative body of
Christ, the Manna in their desert raining down upon them, and drank of his
figurative blood, the waters flowing out of the rock stricken by Moses, as a
Type of the blood and water, the matter of our truer meats, issuing out of our
Saviors side, peirced by Longinus, as Jesus hung upon the cross: The cloud
here mentioned is that we read of Exodus 13. shadowing them in the day from the
scorching Sun, and shining like fire to guide them in their nightly marches
through the deserts; as prodigious a thing, as was the division of the red sea
by the switch of Moses his wand, as he marched on before them.

2. Note this verse does not assert the Jews to have been baptized in Moses,
as in a sign of their belief in the Mosaic Law, but that by this precedent
miraculous kind of Baptism, they were induced afterward to believe in the ^aw
of Moses; so in this the figure differs from the thing figured, for though this
their umbratil Baptism previous to their Faith be a Type of our true Baptism,
yet our Faith in Christ is precedent thereto, whereas the Jewish Faith was
consequent to their shadow of baptism: And whereas the divided sea stood as
two brass walls to secure the children of Israel a dry passage through the wet
element of the waves, yet joined again to overwhelme the Egyptian forces,
that presumed to persecute the children of God: so the red sea of Christ's
passion divides it self to secure the children of grace, but closes to drown
the children of the devil, original sin in infants, original and actual
too in the adult, being those who are at years of discretion: As therefore our
Baptism is the thing praefigured by this divided sea, so Christ is by Moses,
so the holy Ghost by the cloud, cooling the scorching sun of concupiscence in
us, and inlightening our darkened souls by his holy Grace.

3. We were told in the exposition of the first verse of this Chapter, that
they did all eat the same figurative food, only with us, that is Manna, which
was a figure of Christ's body, our spiritual food in the Sacrament of the holy
Altar, not his real body as we do: so the true sense of this place is, that
as they all did eat one figurative bread, and had one faith in God, so do we;
but yet, as their faith and food did not carry them all to Canaan, so will not
faith alone car^y us to heaven without good works.

4. This verse is harder than the former, in regard it will not be easy to
show, how they drank of that rock that followed them, unless we allow they
drank of Christ's blood as well as we now do, since Christ is truly the rock
that did follow them, or came after them, and issued out his precious blood for
us really to drink; again Christ was a spiritual rock, as here is said, not a
real rock of stone: for the true understanding therefore of this place, we
must know by spiritual rock is here understood a mystical or typical rock,
and such was the real and natural rock out of which Moses commanded water
with a stroke of his rod; and yet that real rock was but a mystery, type, or
figure of Christ, and so in regard of that mystery, is called here spiritual,
because it did praefigure the rock of Christ: some therefore say with the
Hebrews, that this rock did miraculously follow the children of Israel even to
the land of Promise, grounded in that text, Numb. 21. ver. 16. Others conceive
this to be verified by the water of the rock following the children of Israel,
at least till they came where plenty of more water was; others think following
them is veryfied by the obedience the rock showed to issue out water once at
Moses command, so by follow they understand obey, but this falls short of the
gramatticall signification of the word follow: so the true and genuine sense of
the Apostle is, that this rock as it was a type of Christ, so the following of
this rock is typical and not real, Spiritual and not natural, as who should
say, Christ, who corporally followed them many years after, did spiritually
now follow them, that is in his sacred Deity, or as he was God, not man,
marched with them from the beginning to the end, and so by his providence still
supplied them with water, which was in effect to make the rock follow them: so
here Christ his divinity was the thing signified by the water out of the rock,
which did represent the same; and to clear this sense, the Apostle says in
plain terms, the spiritual rock (here meant by the material or natural rock)
was Christ. Those are his words. But the rock was Christ; as who should say,
what we mean by this spiritual rock following them was Christ his divinity,
for his humanity was not then in being, when spiritually he did follow them nor
does it urge against this truth, what is further objected, they did drink of
this rock, but the rock they dr^nk of was the material rock, therefore that
material rock was not only a type of the spiritual, but was truly the
spiritual rock, since as the drink was material water, so the rock must be
the ma^eriall rock, for it is answered, the water they drank was typical,
because it was a figure of Christ's Deity, and so the materiality of both rock
and water hinder not the spirituality of Type or Figure in them both. To
conclude, the Allegory of this place holds thus. Christ was this rock, who was
therefore said stricken by Moses, because the Jews were of the Mosaicall
Synagogue, who struck Christ to death by the Rod of the holy Cross, the blood
of which rock was satiating drink to the true believers, and was water of
contradiction to the Incredulous Jews, who will not believe in his deity, and
misbelieving heretics, that deny the reality of his blessed body and blood in
the Sacrament of the holy Altar, by whose virtue we are carried through the
desert of this world into the heavenly Land of Promise; nor will it follow,
that therefore these words of Christ saying, this is my body, are to be
understood as heretics pretend, This is a figure of my body, as here we say,
this is a spiritual rock, that signifies This is a figure of a spiritual rock,
because Christ does not say, this is a figure of my body, or this is my body
spiritually meant, no, but this is my body, absolutely and really, the same
which shall be crucified for your sins upon the cross, as it was indeed, not
only figuratively, but really: besides the sixth verse of this Chapter cleares
all doubt of this point, saying in express terms, These things were done as
in a figure to us, so here is a plain profession of a figurative speech in the
Apostle; we find none such of any figurative speech of Christ, when he said.
This is my body.

5. This fifth verse confirms what was said before, That Faith alone without
good works was not enough to bring the children of Israel into the Land of
Promise, and consequently, much more are good works necessary to bring us to
heaven; lest as the greatest part of the Hebrew people perished in the desert,
so the greatest part of Christians be damned, if they lead not lives answerable
to their Faith and Religion.

The Application.
1. FRom the first Sunday in Advent to the Nativity of our Savior, the
Churches service represents the senility, or decrepit age of Judaism, weary of
old expectation, and longing for the coming of new hopes in Jesus Christ: Yet
to show the Jews were dear to God, he gave them a happy period, a glorious
Catastrophy in John the Baptist.

2. From the Nativity to this Septuagesima Sunday, the Holy Church has fed us
with the admirable doctrine of out Infantile Christianity, beginning with the
Infant Jesus, and teaching us how to walk religiously, as so many Infants and
children of grace.

3. From this day to the end of Lent; the service runs upon another strain,
minding us of the forfeiture of our first Father Adam, made of that Repose and
Rest he was created in, and of the toil and labor he drew upon himself, and
his whole Posterity by his disobedience: so the vicility or perfect manhood of
humane nature, is the state we are now taught to perfect. And therefore this
Epistle brings us into the school of virtue to day, neither as decrepid men,
nor as new born Infants, but as active youths, all running of a race to win the
Prize of heaven; and this to verify the curse imposed on our Father Adam of
eating his bread in the sweat of his brows: So that toil and labor is we see
most justly inflicted on us for the punishment of sin, and all the rest we can
hope for, must be by the mere mercy of our Lord, who yet is ready to give us an
eternal Rest in the next life, for a short race here, for a little labor
taken to glorify God by loving our own souls. Say then, beloved, the Prayer
above, as the fittest Petition for the performance of our present duties.

The Gospel, MAT. 20. ver. 1, etc.
1. THe Kingdom of heaven is like to a man that is an householder, which went
forth early in the morning to hire workmen into his vineyard.

2. And having made covenant with the workmen for a penny a day, he sent them
into his vineyard.

3. And going forth about the third hour, he saw others standing in the market
place idle.

4. And he said unto them, Go you also into the vineyard; and that which shall
be just, I will give you.

5. And they went their way: And again he went forth about the sixth and the
ninth hour, and did likewise.

6. But about the eleventh hour, he we^ forth, and found other standing, and
he says to them, What stand you here all the day idle?

7. They say unto him, because no man has hired us. He says to them, Go you
also into the vineyard.

8 And when evening was come, the Lord of the vineyard says to his Bailiffe,
Call the workmen, and pay them their hire, beginning from the last even to the
first.

9. Therefore when they were come, that came about the eleventh hour, they
received every one a penny.

10. But when the first also came, they thought that they should receive more:
and they also received every one a penny.

11. And receiving it they murmured against the good man of the house,

12. Saying, These last have continued one hour, and thou have made them equal
to us, that have born the burden of the day, and the heats.

13. But he answering said to one of them, Friend, I do thee no wrong, did
thou not covenant with me for a penny.

14. Take that is thine, and go: I will also give to this last, even as to
thee also.

15. Or, is it not lawful for me to do that I will? Is thine eye naught,
because I am good?

16. So shall the last be first, and the first last, for many be called, but
few elected.


The Explication.
1. WHen it is said the kingdom of heaven is like a man doing as this Parable
relates, the meaning is, that in heaven it is done, as here by such a man is
said to be done; though true it is, this alludes also to the great ones in this
world: Let us therefore state the Parable thus: By the Vineyard is meant the
Church, by the market, the world, by those called at the first, the third, and
sixth hour are understood the Jews, signfied in their forefathers Abraham,
Jacob and Moses, called to Gods service in that sort, as he was pleased to lay
his commands upon his Church or Synagogue rather; by the last called are
signified the Gentiles in their primitiae or first fruits; the holy Apostles
who were made the Pillars and Props of the Christian Church: By the evening is
meant the day of Judgment, when every one shall receive his hire according to
his labors in the Church of Christ; that is, the penny which was promised unto
him for his pains, and this penny is eternal glory to the blessed deserving
well, though withal by the word penny is understood pence of several coins,
or rather values; that is to say, money called a penny at pleasure, though
worth perhaps much more: Again, we are to note, the greater reward is not given
for the the greater pains, but for the greater grace, or greater cooperation
with equal grace, and according to this sense by the first are understood the
blessed or saved souls, by the last, the accursed, or damned men and Angels;
but diverse of the Fathers explicate this Parable thus: As by the first made
last, to understand those who have been longest Catholics, but making less
use of time and grace, than those who are later called to the Catholic Faith,
and yet make more profit of their little time, and more use perhaps of their
less grace, than others have done: So then the penny which is heaven, is
equally divided to each, each being saved, and none damned, though the last
called have the greater glory, which makes no essential difference in the
Beatitude common to them all; that is, in their genericall or objective bliss,
which consists in seeing God the Beatifying object, whom all shall see, though
there shall be a difference in their more or less clearly seeing this
blissful Object, or Objective bliss, according to their more or less Merit,
or Cooperation with the Grace given unto them in this life, So though they
have an equality of a most happy eternity, yet shall they not be equally happy
by equality of glory in that eternity of happiness; and in this sense the
parts of the parable are thus to be applied. That by the day we understand the
whole course of this world, by the several hours of this day we understand
the particular ages thereof; by the first hour, from Adam to Noe; by the next,
from Noe to Abraham; by the third from Abraham to Moses; by the sixth from
Moses to Christ; by the eleventh, or last, from Christ to the day of doom: Thus
S. Chrysostom and others. Or by the day may be meant the whole time of each
man's life, by the several hours, his Infancy, youth, virility, old age, and
decrepicie. Thus S. Hierome and others: But the fullest sense, and that which
best exhausts the whole Parable, is to join all these together; so what falls
short in one, will come home, and be supplied by the other: for though here S.
Chrysostomes enumeration of parts in the Parable seem different from S.
Hieromes, yet they both agree in the sense, of the equal penny given to first
and la t, whereas the former enumeration of these parts, casts out the last
from all reward, and supposes them damned souls, so there are but two senses
in three Enumerations of parts to this Parable. And this long Preamble in the
first Verse will ease us much in the explication of all the rest, and shorten
what is to be said upon them.

2. The covenant here made with the Workmen for a penny, is the promise God
makes of heaven to those that live here in the Church of Christ, (which is
called his Vineyard) according to the Apostolical Rule of Faith including good
works, and cooperation with the grace of God, answerable to the proportion
thereof given unto us.

3. The Romans first, and then the Jews under them divided as well the day as
the night into twelve parts by four equal divisions, answerable to their four
watches or changes of their Guards: The first hour of the day, when the first
guard mounted, was from Sunrising: The third, was three hours after: The
sixth, six hours after that, which was noonday: The ninth, was three hours
after noon: The last, was at Sunsetting; and to these hours allude what is
here said of the several hours of men's being called to the vineyard of Christ:
By those who were found standing idle are meant remiss souls, who make it not
their study or labor to gain heaven, but expect it should be given them
gratis.

4. Observe here in this Verse and the next, there is no promise made of a
penny, which was the just reward of a whole days labor, but only of what was
just, proportionable to the time and merit of their pains, which argues for the
doctrine of merit asserted, by the Catholics, denied by Heretics, who cannot
endure to hear of merit in any but in Christ: Nor is there any in men, as due,
to what like men corrupted; they do; though to what they do as more than men,
that is, as elevated above the pitch or reach of nature, by grace we do allow
them merit, but still so as this merit receives value from Christ's Passion,
not from Humane actions only, and consequently Christ merits in them, or they
in Christ, but not in themselves or of themseves.

5. This verse puts us in mind that God has more solicitude to call us to
him, than we have of going our selves.

6. Here we find an addition of a whole days idleness, whereas before there
was only some little loytering objected to those that were called, as we heard
ver. 3. above. The reason is, that this eleventh hour is the last which can be
allowed to loss; for at the twelfth, Judgment begins, and therefore those now
called were told they had lost all their former time, and were bid go, for one
hour at least, labor to save their souls: The former calls we may understand
made to the Jews, This latter to the Gentles. Origin takes Adam to signify
them called at the first hour, Paul to signify them called at the latter hour.

7. Hear the reason given by these last called, why they came no sooner,
because no man did sooner hire them, and to this excuse the rational master
makes no reply, as not willing to blame where there was no fault, and
certainly there is none in those, who come not before God calls them, for it
is impossible any corrupted nature should look toward heaven, were it not that
Gods holy grace propends than that way. To these therefore it was only said,
well, go now at last, that I do call you, employ this last hour to Gods
honor and glory; where observe, nothing is promised, not that these shall need
fear to receive no reward, but that they shall humbly acknowledge the little
they can do in so short a time, as this life affords us, is not worthy so
great a reward as heaven: and that thence Gods infinite goodness may appear
the more, giving to the least minute of holy labor, an everlasting crown of
glory for our rewards; a gallant encouragement indeed to all noble souls, and
enough to give noble thoughts and hopes to the most abject spirits.

8. By evening is here meant the day of doom: by the Bayliffe, Origin
understands S. Michael or the Angels guardian of each soul, summoning men to
this latter Judgment, and leaving them to receive the public reward or
punishment, as formerly they had done the private: but better is Christ
understood to be the Bayliffe here of his heavenly Father, paying each soul
the hire of his labors; though some conceive the holy Ghost may be the
rewarder, as he is by his grace given the Caller, and Imployer of Souls in the
Vineyard or Church of Christ. The reason why the penny is here called a reward,
is because a reward is not a thing given answerable to time or pains, but to
merit, and therefore the distribution of this reward is said to begin first
with those who were last called, because the grace, whereby the Apostles and
Gentiles were made servants of God, and Laborers in Christ's Vineyard, was
infinitely more valuable than that whereby the Jews were called; and
consequently no marvel if in an hours time it caused more merit in
Christians, than in all the ages before it had caused among the Jews.

9. There was but a penny promised the first comers, and the last receiveing as
much, were in that regard preferred, and made as it were the first, because
they received equal reward for unequal labor, but since all reward was
gratuite, as respecting the party rewarded, no marvel the rewarder gave his
bounties as he pleased, though he would vouchsafe them the title of rewards.

10, 11, 12. The greatest difficulty we have here, is to explicate what is
meant by murmur in that sense of the parable; which makes the last to be saved
souls: for those, who understand them outcasts from glory, will not scruple
to say the damned souls live, not only in eternal murmur, but in open mutiny
and rebellion against Almighty God for saving the Blessed, and not them too;
but we may piously acquiesce here to Suarez and Vasquez their interpretation of
murmur, in the last blessed to see the first so strangely above their merits
rewarded, not that this admiring murmur is the least repining, but the most
extatick admiration of the infinite goodness of Almighty God, first in saving
any Jews at all, since they had butchered his sacred Son, next in giving an
endelesse crown of Glory to an instantaneous time of labor, in the Gentiles.
This I say, we shall rather give to those renowned men for a plausible
exposition of this hard place, than contrast with them the solidity thereof,
unless a better could be found out. By the burden of the day, and the beats,
we may here understand the long time with. the Jews groaned under the dark law
of Nature, or tormenting Law of Moses, from Adam to Christ, which was the
duration of the Jewish Synagogue, and the hot persecution the Jews groaned
under not only when the Romans first sacked Jerusalem, and destroyed it with
the greatest number of the Jewish nation, but while the subjection of the Jews
lasts, even to the worlds end, they being the scorn of men for ever in a just
revenge of their scorning the most beautiful among the Sons of men, CHRIST
JESUS.

13, 14. These two verses show, that first there was no injustice done to him,
who had the just reward of his labors, which he contracted for: next, a
contracted bragaine with one, hinders not an ultroneous reward to another, if a
man please to bestow his bounty upon those, who never labored to deserve it,
since it is free for any man to dispose of his own, as best pleases himself.

15. This is a friendly expostulation of the Master with the Servants, who
needed not have given other reason for his will but his own pleasure; and
though here he give no other, yet it is a vouchsafing in him to give that,
since the murmur was unjust, where no injustice was done; and indeed this place
shows how truly S. Austine says, That when God rewards man, he crowns his
own, not the works of men.

16. According to the first sense of this parable explicated as above, The last
first are the blessed not only called but chosen, and these are in number few;
and the first last are the damned, not chosen but called only, and for not
answering the expectation of their calling are damned, and these are in number
many, in regard of the blessed that are saved: but in the other opinion making
both first and last saved souls, it is hard to solve, how all that are called
are not also chosen, since every saved soul is elected to salvation: But
Mal^onat solves it thus, saying out of the precedent particular assertion, that
the first shall be last, and the last first, he now makes a general
conclusion, affirming many are called, but not many chosen, as in such a kind
of way he spoke in the precedent Chapter, ver. 23. how hard it was for all rich
men to be saved, because once a wealthy young man refused the counsel of holy
poverty given unto him; others say, by many called are included all, because
all are many, though few only are saved: others will have it, that all are
called to observance of the Commandments, but not all to the observance of
evangelical Counsels; or all to grace, but few to glory.

The Application.
HOw ever S. Paul in his Epistle to day seems to set us all a running over the
Race of this life, each upon his uttermost speed for the gaining of his own
soul only, yet S. Matthew in this Gospel gives us hope we may gain heaven for
others, as well as for our selves, while he sets us all on work in the Vineyard
of our Lord, where the fruits of our labors are common, though our reward be
but particular.

2. Hence it is this days Gospel points directly at the Pastors of Gods Church,
and at the missionary Priests, set on work in the Vineyard of Christ for
gaining souls, by converting of the whole world: yet indirectly it alludes to
every souls particular endeavors in cultivating of their own special land, in
hope of gaining heaven by the sweat of their brows.

3. So still we see toil and labor is to be the life of man upon earth, who
forfeited all his temporal rest by Adams sin, and though our Savior
purchas't again an eternal rest for us in the next world, yet that future
rest must be gained ^y a perpetual present labor here, most justly inflicted
one us for the punishment of sin. Hence we fitly pray to day as above.

On SEXAGESIMA SUNDAY.
The Antiphon, LUKE. 8. ver. 10. TO you it is given to know the mystery of the
Kingdom of God, but to others in parables, said Jesus to his disciples.

Verse. Let my prayer, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
O God, who see we confide not in any of our own Actions, grant us
propitiously, that against all adversities we may be armed by the protection of
the Doctor of the Gentiles.

The Illustration.
I Have known hundreds (even Priests themselves) much admire at this prayer,
wherein Saint Paul with his best attribute is so unexpectedly brought in, when
not the least mention of any feast to him sacred, is made by holy Church,
either in the office or service of the day: and though I might in so hard a
condition, as I am now plunged into for making my design good to day, pretend
it were sufficient for all the whole Church to be commanded to pray, as now the
mother Church of Rome does this day unto Saint Paul, whose Station is now kept
in that holy City with great concourse of people thereunto; yet this were to
run my self upon the rock of why not? other Saints to be brought as
unexpectedly into the prayers of the Church by this account as well as two
only are in all the year? Saint Paul to day, Saint Cosmas and Saint Damian
upon Midlent-Thursday, though we shall find every day in the year made sacred
to some Saint or other, by the frequentation of their stations in the City of
Rome: besides if this might satisfy others, it must not be satisfaction to me,
because it comes not home to my design of adjusting the Prayer to the Epistle
and Gospel of the day, unless we can find it as suitable to the latter, as it
is indeed to the former, relating from first to last, the whole story in a
manner of Saint Paul's life, though truly in the Gospel there is not one
syllable of him, wherefore if meditation had not helped us out, this concordant
design had been very discordantly broken off: but upon a day or two spent in
prayer to find out some report between these parts of holy Churches services,
and upon remembering it was but last Sunday we were taught our life was a mere
labor here upon earth, and that we were all hired as laborers to work in the
Vineyard of Christ, me thought it was not strange, this next Gospel should
bring us in laboring indeed, and like so many husband men sowing with corn
the Vineyard we had lately ploughed up; nor was it then so strange to hear us
call upon the chief labourer, (now in eternal rest) Saint Paul, to help us
with his intercession, that our labors might be, if not as great or as
profitable, at least as incessant as his were, who by the common suffrages of
all the Church will easily be granted to have been the chief Seeds-man
thereof, though Saint Peter were the chief pastor or governor; and if so,
then it will be a most proper prayer on that day, when the Gospel runns all
upon sowing seed in several grounds (as to day it does) that the principal
Seeds-man be called upon to help us, the chief Preacher, he that is styled the
Doctor of Gentiles, or Nations, for his eminence in preaching, that is to say
in sowing the word of God in the hearts of men; and that this word is the seed
to day made mention off, we have our Saviors own authority to avouch it; so we
cannot be said to have strained this sense out of the prayer to day, because it
is as genuine to it, as the Word of God in the parable, is to the seed our
Savior does compare it unto; and look how many ways Expositors make Analogies
between the Word and Seed, so many ways at least shall we find this a proper
prayer both to the Epistle and Gospel of the day; and we may hope for the same
answer from heaven, whilst we complaining like S. Paul, do look up thither,
and say, we cannot confide in any of our own actions, and therefore beg
Almighty God will propitiously grant us in all our adversities, that we may be
armed with the protection of the Doctor of the Gentiles, that is to say, not
only by his prayer for our perseverance, who were with Adam last Sunday sent
to gain our bread with the sweat of our brows, but further by his protection,
namely by the same protection which was S. Paul's in all his temptations and
difficulties, the grace of God, for this is that answer which was given to him
in the height of his complaints, Saul, Saul, My Grace suffices thee, and truly
the same Grace is more than an abundant protection for all the world, nor can
any man in the whole universe ask this protection with more instance than S.
Paul did, or in a case more important than was his perpetual flaile of the
flesh, wherewith the devil did continual buffet him: so we asking the same
protection this day, when the Church has set us a sowing, a labovring in her
Vineyard, do ask it most seasonably, and most properly even in the sense of
that design I now prosecute, in adjusting the Prayers to the Epistls and the
Gospells of the day.

The Epistle, 2 COR. 11. v. 19. etc. CAP. 12. verse. 1. etc.
19. YOu do gladly suffer the foolish: whereas your selves are wise.

20. For you suffer if a man bring you into servitude, if a man devour, if a
man take, if a man be extolled, if a man strike you on the face.

21. I speak according to dishonor, as though we had been weak in this part,
wherein any man dare (I speak foolishly) I dare also.

22. They are Hebrews, and I. They are Israelites, and I. They are the seed of
Abraham, and I.

23. They are the ministers of Christ, and I. (I speak as one scarce wise) more
I; in many more labors, in prisons more abundantly, in stripes above measure,
in deaths often,

24. Of the Jews five times did I receive forty save one.

25. Thrice was I beaten with rods, once I was stoned, thrice I suffered
shipwreck, night and day have I been in the depth of the sea.

26. In journying often, perils of waters, perils of thieves, perils of my
nation, perils of Gentiles, perils in the City, perils in the wilderness,
perils in the sea, perils among false Brethren.

27. In labor and misery, in much watchings, in hunger and thirst, in fastings
often, in cold and nakedness.

28. Beside those things which are outwardly, may daily instance the
carefullnesse of all Churches.

29. Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is scandalized, and I am not burnt?

30. If I must glory: I will glory of the things that concern my infirmity.

31. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is blessed for ever,
knows that I lie not.

32. At Damascus the governor of the nation under Aretas the king, kept the
city of the Damascens, for to apprehend me.

33. And through the window in a basket was I let down by the wall, and so
escaped his hands.


CHAP. 12. verse. 1. 1. IF I must glory, (it is not expedient indeed) but I will
come to the visions and revelations of our Lord.

2. I know a man in Christ above fourteen years ago (whether in the body I
know not, or out of the body, I know not: God does know) such a one rapt even
to the third heaven.

3. And I know such a man, (whether in the body or out of the body I know not:
God does know) that he was rapt into Paradise, and heard secret words, which it
is not lawful for man to speak.

4. For such a one I will glory: but for my self I will glory nothing, saving
in mine infirmities.

5. For and if I will glory, I shall not be foolish: for I shall say truth.

6. But I spare, least any man should esteem me above that which he sees in
me, or hears any thing of me.

7. And least the greatness of revelations might extol me, there was given me
a prick of my flesh, an Angel of Satan, to buffet me.

8. For the which thing thrice I besought our Lord, that it might depart from
me.

9. And he said to me, My Grace suffices thee, for power is perfected in
infirmity.

10. Gladly therefore will I glory in mine infirmity, that the power of Christ
may dwell in me.


The Explication.
19. NOte the Apostle in the beginning of this Chapter tells the Corinthians,
(v. 3.) as Eve was seduced into a curiosity by the subtility of the Serpent
from her innate simplicity and obedience, so by these false Apostles they are
drawn (being tickled in the ears with novelties of doctrine) to a curiosity of
knowing and embracing it, and consequently fall from their simplicity and
obedience to Christ. Note ( v. 7.) he professes to have preached gratis,
without taking by way of tax any thing from the Corinthians, but supplying
himself of means from Macedonia, rather than he would burden them: This he
alludes to, ( v. 20. if any take) as false Apostles did. Note ( v. 16. of this
Chapter) he desires them to bear with the folly of his now pretended (nay
intended) boasting, to show how they were fooled by their false Apostles in
that way, and tells them ( v. 15.) he is not in his labors interior to the
greatest of those boasting- Apostles; and some expositors understand that verse
of the real Apostles, and of his non-inferiority even unto Peter in his
pains; but not in his Power as heretics wrest it to import, contrary to the
true meaning of Paul, and sense of the whole Catholic Church. Again, ( ver.
13.) he bids them beware of the crafty workers, transfiguring themselves into
Apostles of Christ, as Satan did himself into an Angel of light ( ver. 14.)
Note lastly, ( ver. ^8.) he professes, as others glory according to the flesh;
that is, either of their birth, or natural abilities; so he will now boast
himself of his good parts and labors, which he declares is not according to
the Spirit of God; ( ver. 17.) nay, he confesses it is enough to make him
seem a fool; but he uses this way, only to retort folly on them who are
fooled by false Apostles with this Art. For we are to note, Saint Paul had huge
opposition against him by these Silver-tongued men, and persons of quality; who
partly by their power with Friends, partly by their transcendent Eloquence did
much mischief amongst the Faithful; so that the Apostle here was fain to use
part of his enemies Arts, by vaunting himself, to try if that might keep the
faithful from being seduced by such slights: and who can deny but a pious
slight is more avouchable, than an impious one: so in this Verse he partly
jeers, partly flatters; as who should say, You are wise in Christ, and yet let
the fools, his enemies, carry you away from him.

20. It was indeed notorious, the thraldom which these false Apostles brought
their adhaerents into, by attendance on them, as little Gods, by exhausting
their estates in maintaining these men's prides, which he calls devouring them,
and buffeting them on the face with contumelious reproaching them of their
faults in the open hearing, of others.

21. In this verse the Apostle pretends he can, if it please him, act the
tyrannical part also, take from them as much as others do, extol himself as
high as others do, and depresse them as much as any dares to do it, and this
kind of speech he professes to be ignoble, dishonorable, nay, foolish; yet
some others prevail by such means, therefore he gives himself leave to act that
part awhile.

22. In this Verse he vaunts to be of the Hebrews Race, as well as others who
boasted of it; where we are to note, the Caldeans, by passing the River
Euphrates, were called even thence Hebrews, which signifies passe-over, as the
Chaldeans did pass Euphrates to live in Palestina. And Abraham, as we read,
Genesis 14. ver. 13. was the first called an Hebrean, because he was the first
that passed Euphrates, or as others think, because they were descended of them,
that in the confusion of Babylon, only reserved the pure Hebrew tongue, the
Faith and Religion of Abraham, to which descent, as the false Apostles laid
claim, so does Saint Paul; and thus consequently an Israelite, and of Abraham's
Seed, as well as they, Acts 22. I am a Jew, born in Tarsus the Metropolitan of
Sicilie.

23. He does not here affirm, They are the Ministers of Christ, but takes it as
an assertion of their own; and for argument sake lets it pass, saying, he is
truly so, whereas they only pretend it; and for even letting this pass for a
truth, he tells them, he speaks as one scarce wise, for humouring them in such
fond arguments; yet they are ad hominem, such as themselves using, they cannot
but allow them to have force, if he use them too; and whereas the false
Prophets boasted of the pains they took, the true Apostle here professes he
has taken much more pains than they, to indear himself to them, since he was
often in Prison, for laboring to convert Souls, and was often beaten on the
High way; by deaths are here meant the dangers of death, to which he often
exposed himself.

24. It was a Law in Deuteronomy. 25. ver. 5. that no man corrected with stripes
should receive above forty lashes, and so to be sure not to infringe this Law,
the Jews never gave above thirty nine strokes to any Malefactor that they
whipped; and therefore when Saint Paul was five times whipped for his preaching,
he had every time one stroke less than forty; which whipping he avoided at
Rome, by pretending the privilege of Tarsus, whose natives were all held
Romans, and so free from that base punishment of being whipped.

25. He tells here of much more than Saint Luke mentions in the Acts of the
Apostles; whence we may conclude Saint Luke writes not all the truth, though
all he writ be undoubtedly true. It seems this whipping with rodds was
different from the former flagellations he spoke of, which was with whips. He
says the wracks he suffered were in the middle Ocean, not as usually on the
shoars; so that it was miraculous how he escaped, and therefore he speaks, as
if he had been so often at the depth of the Sea, because had not Miracles
preserved him, and brought him like Jonas to the shore, he had indeed been
drowned; so he tells what naturally would have been his fate, but that God
providentially prevented it.

26, 27. See here how both by Jews (those of his own Religion and Race, Acts
22.) he was in danger, in all times, in all places, by all parties of
acquaintance; friends as well as foes, whom he calls False Brethren, pretending
friendship, and yet betraying him; which sufferings ought to be encouragements
to Bishops and Pastors ever after, finding how their Predecessor led them the
way, and pattern of Apostolical behavior in such occasions.

28. He passes now from his outward troubles to his inward cares of all the
Churches under him, all the Souls converted by him; and any one of these Souls
he values at so high a rate, that to save her, he is willing often to incur all
these enumerated dangers.

29. What greater tenderness can be expressed, than the making other men's
evils his own, out of the equal love he bears to them with himself; hence he
is weak with the weak, burned with those that are scandalized, that is to say,
scorched with the passion that boyleth in those, whose zeal makes them take
scandal at others misdoing.

30. Now whereas the False Apostles did glory in their power amongst the
people, Saint Paul (to teach the Corinthians better principles, makes
profession to glory rather in his infirmities; that is, in those passages of
his life, which rendered him mean, and contemptible in the sight of others, in
his being whipped, and scorned for Christ his sake; not in his Miracles, for
there he showed power, but in his sufferings; not in his Sins, for had he
committed any, those he could not boast of, nay, must blush at, but in his
being weak with the weak, etc.

31. See how severely he avers this Truth, when he calls God to witness it:

32, 33. This Governor was Father in-law to Herod, who first married the
daughter of Aretas, King of Arabia; and whom he after repudiated, and cast off,
to marry Herodias his brother Philips wife; for which cause Aretas made war
against Herod, to revenge his Daughters wrong; in which war Herod was slain;
and Damascus being a City near Arabia, Aretas put in there a Governor, whom
the Jews dealt with to seize upon Paul, as a man Factious, and one that would,
under pretense of zeal, move sedition against Gentilisme, and so bring in
Vitellius, Governor of Syria, sent by Tiberius Caesar, to revenge Herod's death
upon Aretas; and consequently they falsely pretended Paul would bring him into
Damascus, to out Aretas of his command there; so by this means the Governor of
Damascus (Aretas his substitute) laid wait to apprehend Paul, and he was by the
zeal of good people let out of a window in a basket, and so escaped his fury;
which passage the Apostle brings in to prove how h^ was persecuted by th^se of
his own Religion, the Jews, suggesting he aimed to destroy Gentilsme, the
Religion of Aretas.

Chap. 1^. ver. 1. Now he enters into a pretended vainglory about his Visions
and Revelations of our Lord, which he seems to say, he must do, though it be
not expedient, to prosecute his Trope, or Figure of Ironia in flowting them
that are made fools by men, boasting with much less cause than he can boast,
to make them wise believers of the Truth he tells them.

2, 3, 4. And lest they might think he was Rapt by the Devil, as Simon Magus
had been; he says he was Rapt in Christ, that is, by the Spirit of God; it
seems this Rapture happened to him nine years after his miraculous conversion;
for he writ this Epistle in the year of Christ fifty eight, which was the
second of Nero's reign; so his Rapture happened unto him in the year of Christ
forty four, which was fourteen years before his now boasting of it, (as thus
provoked thereunto) whereas he was converted in the year of Christ thirty six,
that is nine years before; and therefore by no vain impulse, after so long, and
so modest a silence of it; so if fourteen year before he had the illuminations
of this strange Rapture, how eminent must he be now after so long a practice in
that spirit of Devotion, which this Rapture must needs put him into: note,
though the Apostle speaking of a spiritual truth, will not mix any natural
verity therewith, so as to determine whether he remained alive or dead in this
Rapture, yet Saint Thomas disputing this question purposely to declare the
natural truth, determines him to remain alive, because God does not kill men,
to honor them by his conversing with them: so Saint Thomas concludes his soul
was in his Body, and consequently resolves that which the Apostle will not
determine, saying, this Rapture was when Saint Paul's Soul was in his Body,
whence he was alive, though he did not know so much: But many doubt what this
Third Heaven means, unto which the Apostle was elevated; but the common
consent runs to affirm he was carried up even to the Empyreall Heaven, the
highest of all, that where God shows himself in his greatest glory, and
concludes, this is called the third, not as to averr there are but three
heavens in all, but as to include all, be there never so many, by the briefest
way, which is by saying, three for all: Yet the common division of the heavens
into Aereall, Aethereall, and Empyreall will serve literally to this Text,
making the air the first heaven, so birds are called the Inhabitants of
Heaven; The second, the Aethereall, which includes all the voluble Orbs above
us, and the Empyreall to be that of the Blessed; to which last understand the
rapture of S. Paul to have been. The greatest doubt is, whether he were rapt
both body and soul up so high, some think no, and that this rapture may be
understood to be imaginary only, or Intellectual, wherein he had a revelation
or vision of stranger things, than were lawful for him to speak, or then were
in his power to utter, if it had been lawful, and this they ground out of the
1. verse of this Chapter, and out of the 17. both which mention visions; yet it
is much more probable, that he was really rapt both soul and body: First,
because it was as easy for God to do both as one; Secondly, because the
Apostle doubts whether it were so or not, as we see in this second and third
Verse, where he professes not to know, which in his sense is to doubt; whereas
those who have visions or revelations do not doubt, but know they are upon
earth, for all those Visions, which only make a rapture of the soul, but none
of the body: so it is probable, as Moses went corporally up to the mount
Sinai, where he was rapt out of the sight of the people by interposition of a
cloud snatching him from their eyes, and had delivered into his corporal ears
the words of the Law, in like manner Saint Paul, who was to be the heavenly
Doctor of all nations, had corporally delivered to him such secret words, as he
mentions even in Paradise to have received; and thence to bring back to earth
such a Magazine of spiritual commands, as he has filled the whole world
withal, though he neither have told, nor could tell all he heard; and
therefore S. Paul after he had spoken of the third heaven, adds the mention of
Paradise, to show he was rapt, not only in his understanding, but also in his
will, above the pitch of nature, and even into that place of heaven, which is
therefore called Paradise, because it ravisheth the wills of the Blessed with
an infinite delight of loving, as well as of seeing and understanding God: So
Divines allow in the vast Empyreall heaven a kind of place apart, called
Paradise for the variety of pleasure it affords: And hither they allow S. Paul
to be rapt; yet do they not therefore say he did see God face to face, as the
blessed souls there inhabiting do, because he was not to remain there with
them; yet S. Thomas and other Divines think it probable he might have a
transient sight thereof 2 secundae q. 175. a 5. but more probably it was not
so, since to Moses was only granted to see the back of the Angel representing
God; and since 1 Timothy 6. v. 16. we read, No man ever did see God, that is to
say, with corporal eyes, as here the Apostle was corporally rapt: For if of
the Angel it were said in Gods name to Moses, No man shall see me and live, how
much more probable is it that Paul living after this rapture, did not see God
himself, though no man doubts but he might see the glory of Christ, and not
unlikely heard from his own glorious mouth those secrets which he could not
utter; however to render his calling or Apostolate undoubted, he had it
conferred upon him personally by our Savior in heaven, as he upon earth did
personally call the rest of his Apostles to his Service. Of this Gal. 1. v. 12.
the Apostle makes mention saying, Christ revealed unto him the doctrine that he
preached, and then most probably was this Revelation made, when he therewith
revealed his glory too: and those secrets he speaks of here may be partly
certain Attributes of the Deity; assuredly the Ranks and Orders of Angels and
their natures, which S. Dennis seems to have drawn more particulars of from the
Ap^stle, than himself utters in his own enumeration of their nine Orders; and
therefore in his celestial Hierarchy S. Dennis (this Apostles Disciple) tells
us of higher matters belonging to the holy Angels, than ever any man else durst
venture on: Lastly, we may piously believe S. Paul had told unto him by Christ
in this rapture much of the course of divine providence in governing the world,
especially the holy Church, much of the conversions of nations, by himself and
the rest of the Apostles, which his modesty would not permit him to boast of.

5. ^ee how he distinguishes himself rapt from himself in the ordinary
condition of man, even as if he were not the same man, for of him that was rapt
he pro^esseth to glory, (still in the sense as above, not vainly) but of him
that was not rapt, he boasts not, at least not in this place, to show how
great a difference there was between his rapt and not rapt condition; and
therefore as of his usual self, he boasts only that he is infirm, namely,
that he is liable to affliction, and miseries which are ^nconsistent with the
state of rapt creatures, for their rapture exempts them from the pain of sense,
and so from grief or pain, which is meant here by infirmity, as it is when our
Savior is called the man of griefs by Isaiah cap. 53, v. 3. which he
explicates by adding these words, Knowing infirmity, that is to say, liable to
all torture, misery or pain.

6. We read in the Acts cap 14. v. 10. that the Lycaonians held Paul and
Barnabas for Gods: To avoid vainglory in this, he tells them he will not be
understood above what he is, above a man liable to all misery and persecution,
which gods are exempted from; nay, lest they should think him an Angel,
though not god, he speaks sparingly of those prerogatives of his rapture, An
excellent example for them to follow, who are indeed nothing extraordinary, and
not boast themselves as more than ordinary men, which yet the meanest often do.

7. Further he proceeds to tell them he fears even himself, (as man) liable to
the titillation of vainglory, and therefore to quell the rising of that
rebellion in his own thoughts, he confounds himself by declaring how rebellious
he found his flesh, even after he had the honor of this high rapture; Note
this rebellion of the flesh as given (that is, permitted to molest him) by God,
intending thence to increase his merit by his humiliation, not by the devil,
who intends always thereby to tempt and destroy, though God permitted the
devil to make use, by his temptation hereupon, to bring Paul to carnality, as
he permitted him, and therefore it must not be held immodesty to take this
place in the right sense, as explicating the Apostles affliction of body in
this kind, ^o gain him the greater merit of grace and glory thereby: For thus
the Fathers understand S. Paul to call the buffeting of Satan; that is, the
Devils raising in him this perpetual rebellion of his flesh against his
Spirit, though his corporal labors in the vineyard of Christ were such as
rendered his body little able to perform acts of lust: First, because the
Apostle calls it here the sting of his flesh, though he attributes it as a true
effect to its true cause, and therefore styles it the Devils flail, beating or
buffering him continually: Secondly, because he often complains of his carnal
concupiscence molesting him, especially Romans 7.13. where he says, it torments
him as much as all his other persecutions, and to quell this, he tells us 1
Cor. 9. he does chastise his body. Thirdly, because there is nothing can so
truly humble a true Saintly spirit, as this base temptation, or rebellion of
the flesh can do, which pulls men into the puddle of corruption, as envying
their happiness by rising up to the Paradise of immortality and glory. Fourthly
because these temptations do not properly hurt pure souls, but only
dminister matter of their better advantaging themselvas, by showing the power
that a soul well ordered hatheto subdue all rebellion of the body, lastly

8. By the Apostles professing he did three times pray to be delivered from
this molestation: for as by the number of three we heard before is included all
number, so by the trine repetition of prayer to this effect, we conceive he
means his always praying to be eased of it, and was answered it should not
hurt him, being (as he was) supported by the grace of God against it; God
dealing with Paul in this, as Physicians do with patients, calling to take off
tormenting plasters from them; that is, not reguarding their call to this
purpose, as knowing the pain that troubles them, will be the cure of their
disease, against which the painful plaster was applied; so was this of carnal
concupiscence against the spiritual pride S. Paul might else have been
transported with, had not this humbling trouble kept him free from so dangerous
a sin as pride and vainglory.

9. And that this was the true reason, see what follows, the more infirm man
is, the more power God shows by his grace, killing sin in man: by this power
is understood, his virtue overcoming the Apostles infirmity, as importing
carnal intemperance; for these were the words of Christ denying Paul's request
to be eased of his corporal infirmity, his carnal temptation; saying to him,
that as his Grace suffices for a remedy against all such temptations, so his
Virtue, (which in it self was always perfect) did appear in us to be
perfected, when it had power to cure our like infirmities; that is, so to
qualify them, as though they remained in our bodies, they should not hurt our
souls: but still the resisting soul should grow better, however the suffering
body seemed to grow worse by the perpetual combat. Note diverse do diversely
expound this place, some say it is also verified, when any other heroic Acts
of virtue are produced by weak men, as well as those of Temperance, Continence,
Chastity; others, when being conscious of our own infirmity, we render the
glory of all we do to God: others, that the true subject, whereon virtue
works, is weakness to corrobotate what is infirm; others, that experience of
often harm by such and such things makes weak men strong, and able to refrain
from what hurts them, and so to make weakness the perfecter of their
fortitude: lastly S. Hierome to Ci^sephontes says, this is the only
perfection of the present life, that thou acknowledge thy self imperfect;
wherefore S Paul concludes, that he willingly and joyfully gloryes in his
infirmities, as in withdrawing rooms, to the virtue of Christ, which delights
to be and dwell where infirmity is, as the Apostle here tells us.

10. And in the next verse of this Chapter, he tells us he means by infirmity,
(pleasing himself as he says in his infirmities* contumelies, necessities,
persecutions and distresses for Christ, concluding, that when (in any of these
kinds) he is weak, then he is mighty, meaning when weak in body, he is strong
in mind or virtue; when weak in man, he is mighty in Christ; for whose sake he
glories, and pleases himself to become weak: and if we will take S. Bernards
opinion, by the virtue which was perfected in infirmi y, he will tell us it was
humility, and that this was the special virtue Christ recommended to his
Apostles, saying, learn of me, because I am meek and humble of heart Matthew. 11.
verse. 29. So indeed the Apostle ends his boasting Chapter with his chiefest
glory in his infirmity, in his humility, and conceives he shall best quell the
pride ^f his Antagonists (the false Apostles) by leaving them to vaunt in flesh
and blood, in their greatness: while he glories in his pressures, in his
imprisonments, in his whippings, in his carnal temptations, as having overcome
all these by the virtue of Christ, that is, by humility in stooping patiently
to the pressure of all these.

The Application.
1. BLessed God! must we run, dig, delve, and plow all days of our life,
and that upon our masters ground, nay, in his own Vineyard too, and must we yet
lie open unto danger while we toil? is our ease damnable? so last sunday told
us, and our labor dangerous? so we are told to day.

2. For what we read befell S. Paul, we may be sure hangs also over us. Danger
here, danger there, and consequently danger every where. If we do ill, it is
damnable to us, if we do well, it is odious unto those that persecute us for so
doing.

3. Nay, if we fly to heaven it self in heavenly contemplation, yet the danger
does not cease, so long as we are living here on earth: S. Paul was there, and
after that he had the Devil at his back to pluck him down to hell, nay, his
own flesh rebelled against him too, so it is with us, what remedy?

But that we pray as holy Church appoints, and that we hope so praying to
obtain the help he had. The Grace, that maugre danger, will protect us as it
did S. Paul.

The Gospel, LUKE, 8. verse. 4. etc.
4, AND when a very great multitude assembled, and hastened out of the Cities
unto him, he said by a similitude.

5. The sower went forth to sow his seed, and whiles he sows, some fell by
the way side, and was trodden upon, and the fowls of the air did eat it.

6. And other some fell upon the rock, and being shot up, it withered, because
it had not moisture.

7. And other some fell among thorns, and the thorns growing up withal,
choked it.

8. And other some fell upon good ground: and being shot up, yielded fruit an
hundred fold. Saying these things, he cried, he that has ears to hear, let
him hear.

9. And his disciples asked him, what this parable was.

10, To whom he said, to you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of
God, but to the rest in parables, that seeing, they may not see, and hearing,
they may not understand.

11. And the Parable is this. The seed is the word of God.

12. And they besides the way, are those that hear: then the devil comes,
and takes the word out of their heart, least believing they may be saved.

13. For they upon the rock, such as when they hear, with joy receive the
word: and these have no roots, because for a time they believe, and in time of
temptation they revolt.

14. And that which fell into thorns: are they that have heard, and going
their way, are choked with cares, and riches, and pleasures of this life, and
render not fruit.

15. And that upon good ground: are they which in a good, and very good heart
hearing the word, do retain it, and yield fruit in patience.


The Explication.
4. SAint Matthew tells us this parable was delivered out of a Bark or little
Ship, which our Savior went into, and set off from the shore, as in a pulpit
removed from the people, and as giving him advantage of height above them: so
that he might be seen by all his Auditory, which was great, the people flocking
after him out of the Cities and villages, which way soever he went: such was
the fame of his miracles and preaching: so this Gospel we may look upon as a
sermon to the people delivered first in a parable, and afterward at his
disciples entreaty, explicated by our Savior himself, whence it will need the
less help of any other Expositors; for the the fifth verse is explicated by
the eleventh and twelfth, the sixth by the thirteenth, the seventh by the
fourteenth, and the eighth by the fifteenth, so there will remain to expound
apart and by it self, the ninth and tenth verses, which I shall rather choose
to do, before I begin the rest, because they may not interrupt the connection
of those that must be brought together in the exposition, though delivered
asunder by the Preacher, as also because these two verses, being cleared first,
will give an open gate to the understanding or introspection into the rest; let
us therefore begin with the ninth verse.

9, 10. Though S. Luke do here seem to tell us the Apostles themselves did
ask the meaning of this Parable, expressed in the four verses above, as if they
being in the Ship with Christ were wholly ignorant thereof, and had no regard
unto the people on the shore; yet Saint Matthew in his thirteenth Chapter
recounting the same passage, makes the Discip^es ask our Savior the meaning of
this Parable for the peoples sakes, saying, Why do ye speak in Parables unto
the people, as if they had told him, it was lost labor, in regard they on
snoar did not understand him; which may import the Disciples themselves were not
altogeth^r ignorant of his meaning, delivered in this dark parabolicall sense;
and yet to these Disciples, after he had left the people lost, as it were, in
their understandings, our Savior fully explicates the meaning of the Parable:
and this seems the reason why the interjection of these Verses, the ninth and
the tenth do interrupt this Sermon of our Savior, because the parabolicall
sense thereof was only delivered to the people, and his clearest meaning was
afterward declared to the Apostles. But we must here solve a difficulty before
we proceed further, and that is to give the reason why our Savior, who did
nothing in vain, should upon design, loose his labor; that is to say, Preach
to a people who did not understand one word of his Sermon; nay, why he should
so couch his speeches, as to make them not intelligible by the people: as if he
were resolved to take away the little understanding they had before, by this
present parabolicall expression of his mind unto them; and indeed Saint
Matthew, in relating this Story, tells us as much in plain terms, saying, our
Savior answered his Disciples to this question in these terms, chap. 13. ver.
12. He that has, to him shall be given, and he shall abound; but he that has
not, even that which he has, shall be taken from him. This was his answer,
being asked, why he spoke to the ignorant people in this Parable; and his
meaning in this was as follows: To you my beloved disciples, that have some
Faith in me, I shall give more, and you shall thereby abound, not only in
belief, but in all knowledge that follows the singular gift of Faith; But
since these people, notwithstanding all I have said to them of my being the
Messiah, all what my life tells them was foretold by the Prophets concerning
me; nay, all the Miracles I have wrought in Capernaum amongst them, and
elsewhere, will not believe in me; and since I know they come now (most of
them) out of curiosity rather than zeal; many out of malice to laugh and scorn
at my Doctrine, to these therefore that have not the gift of Faith, which you
have; I shall by my speeches take away from them what they have in a greater
measure than you; their natural abilities, their learning, their so much
vaunted understandings in the Scriptures; for they shall be blinded, so as not
to see what is clearly set before their eyes, nor understand what is as plain
as their Alphabet unto them; for so were the works of the Messiah to the
Doctors, Scribes, and Pharisees when Christ appeared, and yet none of them
would believe him to be the expected Redeemer of the World: in a word, to these
what they have shall be taken from them, namely, their being the Elect of God,
the Synagogue, the Masters of a Law; these Prerogatives I will take from them,
they shall be cast out of all favor both of God and Man; their Synagogue shall
be effaced, and their Law abolished, abrogated, antiquated: and in testimony of
all this, I speak now to them purposely to prevent their designs of scoffing
at what I say, because I will not speak to be understood by them: yet withal,
in regard there are some few amongst them, who have a little zeal, therefore I
speak in parables, at least to them, that hearing me speak, they may come after
me, or you, to know the meaning of what I said, and so to increase in them
their zeals, by little and little opening their eyes and understandings: and
this may, I hope, suffice for a sufficient exposition of the two Verses. Now to
the Parable and Explication thereof, as our Savior himself delivered it to his
Disciples, that thereby the Faith they had in him before, might be increased,
when they see how much solidity of clear Doctrine, and true Piety, was couched
under his parabolicall expressions.

5. 11, 12. As to the fifth, or eleventh and tweltfth verses (for these are in
sense all one, as our Savior himself declares in the very letter of the Texts)
we are therefore only to give a reason, why the Word of God is compared to
seed of Corn sowed in the fields: and we shall find as many reasons for it, as
there are Analogies between the Seed, and the Word, the Sowing the one, and
Preaching the other: as first, because the Word of the Preacher is cast into
the ears of his Auditory out of the Pulpit, as the Seed is cast over all the
ground by the sowing Seeds-man: Secondly, as the Word links from the Ear of the
hearer into the Heart, so the Seed descends by degrees from the surface, or
superficies of the earth, into the bowels thereof: Thirdly, as Seed is the
Mother of all Fruits, so the Word of God is the Parent of all good Works:
Fourthly, as the Earth without Seed brings forth nothing but weeds, briars, and
brambles; so Man, without the Word of God, brings forth nothing but futility,
vice, and vanity: Fifthly, as Seed requires soft, manured, and tilled ground to
grow in, so the Word of God must find gentle, rich, and mortified Souls to
fructify upon: Sixthly, as Seed requires moisture and sun to bring it forth;
so the Soul requires the tears of sorrow for our Sins, and the Son of Justice,
his heat of Grace to make the Word of God fructify in man's heart, and bring
forth Acts of love to God. Seventhly, as the Seed in the Earth must first
dissolve, and die, before it spring, so must the Word of God be ruminated upon
by meditation, and procure in us a death to the world, before we can find in
our selves the spring of living in Gods favor Eighthly, as the Seed must first
take root, then sprout up, branch into leaves and boughs, next blossom, and
then knit into a fruit; so the Word of God must first enter deep into our
hearts, then rise by holy cogitations, branch it self into variety of good
desires, blossom into Religious resolutions, and at last knit it self up into
the knot of good Works, which are the fruits of our lives: Ninethly, as the
force and virtue of all fruits is contracted into its Seed, so the force of all
our good Works is lodged in the Word of God. Tenthly, as diverse seeds bring
diverse fruits, so diverse sentences of Scripture bring forth diverse Virtues
in our Souls: Eleventhly, as to the child of fruit are required two parents,
the Seed as the male, and the Earth as the female; so to the Children of
Virtues are required the Word of God, and his holy Grace: Lastly, as from the
best Seed (man preparing his ground with most industry) proceeds the best Crop
of Corn: so from the best chosen Texts delivered by the best Preachers, (those
that use the most diligence in preparing, and making soft the hearts of their
penitents toward God) proceed the best fruits of Virtue and good Works here,
as unto the best Saints, to serve as fruits for a Heavenly banquet in the next
World. Now we see the meaning of the seed, let us examine the reasons why these
several effects follow upon the several grounds the Seed falls on. First,
that falling on the highway cannot enter to take root for growth, and
consequently lying open, to be both trodden to pieces by passengers, and pecked
up by birds, must needs be like to so much cast away: such is the Word of God,
as Saint Matthew says, Heard, but not understood, because the hearer does not
ask his spiritual Adviser the meaning of what is told him, but pretends to be
satisfied therein, when indeed he carries away the only empty sound of words,
but is wholly ignorant of the sense through his own laziness in not asking the
meaning thereof; and consequently what is thus ignorantly received, is not
understood; and by that means makes no entrance into the heart of the hearer,
so is trodden to pieces even by our own trampling over it, whilst we run from
Sermons, as if we had never heard a word of what the Preacher said unto us;
which indeed is commonly their case that come to Church for curiosity, to hear
Humane Eloquence, not Divine Preaching; to see, and to be seen, not to hear
their faults, and amend them; to laugh indeed at the Preacher, if he please not
the palate of their fancy, or curious ears, as those did, to whom (for that
very reason) Christ spoke Parables, not clear sense; and to such as these, be
the Preachers words never so clear, never so easy, they sound as Parables in
his ears, whose own distracted mind robs him of the faculty of understanding
what he hears; and though such men seem to come to God, when they appear in
Churches, yet in very truth their coming is to the Devil in Gods House: and no
marvel then he carry them, and their understandings away with him, lest
hearing (that is intelligently hearing) they believe, and believing plow up the
highway, their hearts with acts of Love, and so render the Corn (the Word of
God) capable to sink into their Souls, and take root to their emolument, indeed
to their Salvation, as Text the speaks.

6. 13. The first reason of the Corn failing to grow, was the want of sinking
into the earth, now it fails, (though sunk) because it wants moisture by
incountring a stony, or rocky ground, which is only covered with a shallow
superficies of earth, and cannot receive moisture enough to carry the Corn
deeper into the ground, and to root it there. This place alludes to
schismatics, whose petrifying hearts, whose cold affections to God turn all
they hear of him (how ever they believe it to be true) into rocks and stones,
into sterility, and barrenness of Soul; and hence rather, than suffer the least
temporal loss for Gods sake, they hazard to loose themselves eternally. A
clear place to covince Heretics by, that Faith alone is not sufficient without
good Works to save them, and that Souls, though once in the Grace of God, may
nevertheless loose his favor, and the Kingdom of Heaven too.

7. 14. The second reason of failing, was for want of ground to take sufficient
root, and to cherish the Seed, in both which may seem to be defects of
intrinsecall requisites; now this third reason points at what is extrinsecally
necessary, and rather at defects of redundance, than of want, because the Corn
wants no inward cause of prospering, but is outwardly hindered, by being
choked, or kept down with over growing briars, and thorns, that hinder the
rising thereof: Now, though our Savior best knew how to explicate his own
meaning, and has declared, that by these Thorns he means Riches, which prick
the Souls of those that possess them in their rising up to acts of love
toward God, and so force them down again to the love of earthly things: yet
Saint Gregory found this exposition so beyond his expectation of this Text,
that he admiring, says, If he had thus expounded it, the world would not have
believed him to attinge the true sense thereof; as being possessed, what they
handle and hug daily sn their arms, (their wealth and riches) cannot prick,
nor gall them, yet now our Savior says they do so, we must believe it: and
truly so it is, for what more ordinary, than to see the high and mighty men of
the world (mighty, I mean, in wealth) abject, and low in their growth upwards
to Heaven, to see them still pricking down their rising Souls; and under the
title of riches, we may here understand honors, pleasures, pastimes of the
vain, licentious, and idle people of the world, whose own conscience tells them
they do ill in following such courses as yet they will not leave.

8. 15. By the good ground is here understood a tender Conscience, which makes
a Religion of each action; and so hearing Gods Word, first labors to
understand it, then puts in execution the Doctrine thereof, and thereby brings
forth fruits of all sorts of Virtue, and good Works; nay, brings forth indeed
an hundred fold, or more, according to the proportion and measure of grace
received from Almighty God; but we are here to observe the reduplicative speech
of a good, and a very good heart; that is to say, a heart illuminated with
Faith, but working by Charity; or as Albertus will have it, Good, by being free
from Sin; very good, by being in all things conformabled to the Will of God: or
as Saint Bonaventure says, Good, by verity, or rectitude in the understanding;
very good, by rectitude in the affections; or as Saint Augustine will have it;
Good, by loving our neighbor as our selves; very good, by loving God above all
things; saying, and they properly retain the Word, (as the Blessed Virgin did)
and bring forth the fruit thereof in patience, that is, by bearing with
unperturbed minds, the perturbations of this world. And though S. Luke do not
mention the quantities of fruits produced, yet S. Matthew, chap. 13 ver 23.
speaks of the Thirty fold, the sixty fold, and the hundred fold fruit of those
who hear the Word of God as they ought to do; meaning, it makes some good men,
others better, others best of all, according to the respective measures of
dispositions in their Souls, answerable to their several proportions of Grace,
and co-operations therewith, or if we will have these threefold quantities all
in one Soul, then say, we bring forth Thirty, when we think well; Sixty when we
speak well; an hundred fold, when we do well: or when we begin to be virtuous,
profit therein, and at last attain to the perfection of virtue, till we arrive
at the top of all Virtues, or when we observe not only Gods Commandments, but
his Counsels too, and at last his transcendent charity, being ready to die his
Martyrs, in requital of his dying our Savior, and so make degrees and steps
in our own hearts up to Heaven, as the Royal Prophet says he did, Psalm. 83.
Making Ascents in his heart, by rising up toward Heaven, from Virtue to Virtue.

The Application.
1. THis Parable shows how many ways we may labor in vain, by sowing the
grounds we have plowed up, and be still in danger, lest the Devil reap what we
have sown: namely, that beside the way. When for company sake we go to Church,
not for Devotion. But to see, and to be seen, rather than to hear the Word of
God.

2. That on the Rock, when out of fear of Parents anger, or the punishments of
Magistrates we are forced to Church, and hearing there the Word, must needs
with open hearts receive it in, being of it self s^ forceable, as to pierce the
very stones; but then, because we hear it by compulsion, every difficulty
nature frames against Grace, shuts up our hearts again, and will not let it in
to take good rooting there.

3. That on the thorny ground,; when rich men hear the Word of God, for
custom, or for curiosity, to recreate, and not to edify; to censure, rather
than con^orm to what they hear. No marvel th^n, if to prevent the danger of
our going to the Devils Chapel, even in the Church of God

Our holy Mother pray to Day, as above, for the best seeds-mans protection
against so many dangers; hoping by so praying, to render our hearts such as the
Gospel closes with to Day.

On QUINQUAGESIMA Sunday.
The Antiphon, LUKE 18. ver. 40. ANd Jesus staying, commanded the blind man to
be brought unto him; what will thou that I do to thee? O Lord, that I may see,
and Jesus said to him, Look up, thy Faith has made thee safe; and he forthwith
did see, and followed magnifying God.

Verse. Let my prayer, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
O Lord, we beseech thee, hear clemently our Prayers, and being loosened from
the fetters of our sins, keep us from all adversity.

The Illustration.
NO marvel, if many of my friends told me here the common place of this Prayer
would not easily be made particularly proper to our design of a sweet connection
between that prayer and the other parts of this days service; for see in the
Epistle charity, in the Gospel faith insisted on, whereas in the Prayer neither
of these virtues are mentioned. What remedy? truly none but by applying
mystically to our selves that now which was actually done when our Savior
lived; and by remembering, that as the propagation of faith, amongst Infidels
was the chief work of Christ, so the conservation and augmentation of charity,
is the chief thing Christians have to do; for as Faith was the Basis or
foundation of the Church whilst it was a building, so charity must be the
covering and top thereof now it is built: What wonder then, while the Gospel
tells us, how Christ confirmed in his Disciples by the miracle upon the blind
the faith of his Deity: That the Epistle exhorts us (who need not, God be
praised, any confirmation of our faith) to an augmentation of our charity by
seeing it laid to day before us in such lively colors, as S. Paul has drawn
it in; so that whilst holy Church tells us, what Christ then did towrds the
Jews, by introducing faith among them with miracles, we that now need no
miracles, should do toward him, by acts of love to the divine goodness: that
is to say, labor to show our loves to him as he did to beget faith in them;
but what will this avail to our design? though we admit the Epistle may fitly
talk of charity while the Gospel runs all upon faith, since the prayer which
we must have to suit with both these virtues, makes not the least mention of
either? Truly we must look back to some rules given us in the Preface to this
work, and thereunto add, that there are many rare hidden things which are
causes of admirable visible effects: for example, we see not the root, whilst
yet the beauty of the Tree is pleasing to our eyes: In like manner, if we
reflect upon what we deprecate in this days prayer, namely, the innumerable
evils and visible adversities we groan beneath, which are all rooted in our
sins, we shall then confess this prayer is not so void of coherence with this
days service, as at first it appears to be: for holy Church, like a prudent
Mother, goes the direct and shortest way to work by curing our adversities,
with cutting up the root or cause thereof, whiles she asks humbly in this days
prayer to be loosened from the fetters of sin, which are the causes of all our
sorrows and adversities, and which produce a greater blindness in our souls,
than was cured in the eyes of the blind man specified in this days Gospel: Nor
can holy Church be blamed to make her prayer to day general, that is, a
deprecation of all our adversities, out of the memory of this particular misery
of blindness set now before our eyes, since this single corporal infirmity is
a figure of the general contagion in our souls by a world of adversities
falling upon us, through our reiterated sins: And therefore Holy Church to day
begs, that by a precedent absolution from the fetters of our sins, we may enjoy
a consequent cure of all our adversities; nor is this desired absolution
dissonant from our purpose, since as charity is so much this day inculcated to
us in the Epistle, so we may remember charity was the only cure of the
greatest sinner, (reputed at least) in this world, S. Mary Magdalen, for we are
told many sins are remitted to her, because she loved much. Hence we may be
confident, that the best way to untie the fetters of present sin, (and so to
take off present adversities) is to love much, and to conserve and augment
charity. But to find out the connection of parts here; this I must confess was
the Priests work, and could hardly be expected from the Laity; yet now we see
Holy Church does in this sense to day present us the prayer above, we shall
soon confess, it is not (thus understood) discordant to the Epistle and Gospel
of the day, and consequently, we shall believe Holy Church is ever present to
her self, and has reason for what she does, much beyond what our distracted
thoughts are able easily to reach unto, whilst we make only a slothful
lip-labor of those holy Prayers, which should be our deepest study, our most
serious meditation, and which, (so studied) will be understood in their genuine
sense (as under correction of better judgments) I humbly conceive this
sacramental or mysterious prayer is, being thus expounded as above.

The Epistle, 1 COR. 13. ver. 1. etc.
1. IF I speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and have not charity: I am
become as sounding brass, or a tinkling Cymball.

2. And if I should have prophecy, and knew all mysteries, and all knowledge,
and if I should have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not
charity, I am nothing.

3. And if I should distribute all my goods to be meat for the poor, and if I
should deliver my body, so that I burn, and ^ave not charity, it does profit me
nothing.

4. Charity is patient, is benign; charity envieth not, deals not perversely;
is not puffed up.

5. Is not ambitious, seeks not her own, is not provoked to anger, thinks
not evil.

6. Rejoices not upon iniquity, but rejoices with the truth:

7, Suffers all things, believes all things, hops all things, bears all
things.

8. Charity never falls away; whether prophesies shall be made void, or
tongues shall cease, or knowl^dge shall be destroyed:

9 For in part we know, and in part we prophecy.

10. But when that shall come which is perfect, that shall be made void which
is in part.

11. When I was a little one, I spoke as a little one, I understood as a little
one, I thought as a little one. But when I was made a man, I did away the
things that belonged to a little one.

12. We see now by a glass in a dark sort, but then face to face; now I know
in part, but then I shall know as also I am known.

13. And now there remain, faith, hope, charity, these three, but the greater
of these is charity.


The Explication.
1. IN these three fi^^^ verses the Apostle tells us, charity is the top and
crown of all gifts and virtues, insomuch ^t without it no other virtue profits
us at all; which ^. Paul dilates upon in all this Chapter, because he found the
Corinthians apt to flatter themselves, that the gift of tongues; was the
greatest of all other gifts: And in having that, they boasted of equal favor
and grace even with the Apostles, whereas he ended the twelfth Chapter of this
Epistle with these words, pursue the better gifts, and yet I show pou a more
excellent way; by the better gifts he means the Apostolate, wisdom, science,
counsel, discretion of spirits, miracles, prophecy, and the like; by the more
excellent way, he means this of charity transcending all the rest; and to show
he meant it was particularly surpassing their so much boasted gift of tongues,
he begins first to beat that error down saying, If I speak with tongues of men
and Angels, etc. and have not charitty, all is nothing worth. But by the
tongues of men, he alludes both to the learned tongues as Hebrew, Greek,
Latin, which were ever held kind of roots to all others, as also to those all
tongues, or several Languages, which by the gift of the Holy Ghost many men
and women (even the most ignorant amongst both sexes) had bestowed upon them:
and in particular that natural gift of tongue, which many men had in such
perfection, that by their eloquence and facundity of speech, they were able to
ravish their Auditorie, and persuade them into any abominable error, schism or
heresy whatsoever, as we heard S. Paul profess the false Apostles did, when
they made him Apologize for his defect of their Eloquence. See what was said
upon last Sundays Epistle, v 19, 20, 21. to this effect: All these ways
therefore he here takes the tongues of men, and says, if he were the most
excellent in them, yet without charity all were nothing worth: Now for the
tongues of Angels what he means o^ those tongueless creatures language or
eloquence, it is not easy to express, yet we may conceive his meaning is, if
Angels should take upon them the shapes of men, and vouchsafe to speak unto us
as men do, certainly they were able to exceed in eloquence the best of humane
Orators that ever were, as much as well spoken men exceed the dumb, who have
no tongues but signs to speak withal: So when he says, if he should speak
with the more ravishing tongues of Angels, than any can be of men, and yet
wanted charity it were to no purpose. But why may we not allow S. Paul here to
allude unto the Angelical tongues indeed, which he alone of all the Apostles
was acquainted with in his Rapture to the the third heaven, and in which
tongues h^ ^eard those Arcana's, those secrets which it was not lawful for man
to speak; but then we come here into the Labyrinth of expressing what tongues
those Elinguine spirits use, who as immateriall creatures cannot be framed of
any composition of Integral parts, such as are head, tongue, teeth, mouth,
face, or the like material and corporal members; how then can the Apostle
speak of an excellency in the faculty of speech, in those that do not speak at
all, because they have no tongues, which are the Instruments of speech, he must
therefore mean that the tongues of Angels are their mutual Illuminations, and
that if he could so excellently well express his mind in words to the
Corinthians, as Angels do to one another by Illumination, yet if he had not
charity, he were but like to harsh sounding brass, or the empty noise of a
tinkling Cymbal, neither keeping time, nor speaking any tune, which is as much
as to say, if he could tell them all the secrets he heard in heaven, and show
them by clarity and eloquence of speech, as clear as illumination, even the
best of objects God himself, and make them understand (if possible) the reason
of the Trinity, yet unless they did love the goodness understood they were not
yet happy, because the best of knowledge in this world is by understanding, and
all that speech can make us understand, will not render us happy, unless we
love the thing understood: Now love being an act of the will, must have for
motive goodness in the thing beloved, as well as verity, and consequently
though words or speech may make us know the verity of things here, yet it is
love must make us adhere unto the goodness thereof; so the Apostle demonstrates
all speech and all knowledge acquired thereby is fruitless, unless by Love or
Charity to God and our neighbor, our wills be rendered as perfect, as our
understandings are by knowledge: In a word he would say, be it man or Angel, he
talks in vain of God, that loves him not.

2. In this verse the Apostle shows the gift of Prophecy to be greater than
that of Tongues, for he proceeds from less to greater still: besides in the
four first verses of the next Chapter, to this the Apostle tells the
Corinthians in plain terms, what here he inferres only by eduction of more
from lesser force of reason, as 1 Cor. 14. verse. 1. Follow Charity, pursue
spiritual things, but rather that you may prophecy. Verse. 2. For he that
speaks with tongues, speaks not to men (intelligibly) but to God, for no
man, (that has not that gift of tongues) hears (understands) but in spirit
he speaks mysteries. Verse. 3. For he that prophesies, speaks unto men to
edification, and exhortation and comfort. Verse. 4. He that speaks with
tongues edifieth himself, but he that prophesies, edifieth the Church. What
more plain for Prophecy: the like he concludes for science and Faith, which
he adds here as jointly with Prophecy transcending the gift of tongues, though
by faith some contend he means only faith to remove mountains, or such as is
peculiar to working miracles, as if, though that could be without Charity, yet
justifying Faith could not, but without reason this; First, because Faith to
Miracles, is the most excellent of all other; Secondly, because to take away
that doubt, the Text here says all Faith, and all must needs include both
justifying Faith, and that which men may have without being just: but in such
case, S Augustine tells us, Lib. 5. de Trin. Cap. 18. Faith according to the
Apostles may be without Charity, but it cannot be profitable without it; for,
says he, Charity alone, is that which distinguishes between the children of
God, and the children of the devil, the sons of the Kingdom, and the sons
of perdition. Now while the Apostle says, Faith, even to miracles, without
Charity, makes us nothing in the sight of God, how can heretics pretend Faith
alone shall save them? for sure the blessed souls are something in Gods sight,
and yet by only Faith they are nothing says the Apostle, or which is all one,
they are of no esteem, or esteemed as nothing at all, not but that they are
things in being, yet so, as being without esteem, renders them in a manner
nothing in the sight of God.

3. Nay so serious is S. Paul in this assertion, that he tells us, if for any
other end than purely for the love of God, we should give away our whole
estates, indeed our lives, and be martyrs for the Faith without loving God, yet
this would nothing at all avail us, unless we had Charity to make proficuous,
to render profitable our martyrdom for the Faith of Christ, since formally
there can be no Faith without Charity, though materially there may: whence we
see, that beside; Faith, Charity is necessary to salvation, insomuch that if a
Turk or Heathen should be so persuaded of the verity of Christ's being the
Son of God, and should be contented to die rather than to recede from
professing his belief in that, and all other points of Christian belief, yet
unless withal he had perfect Charity, that is, unless he did love God above
all, and his neighbor as himself, he should never be saved, nor be esteemed a
formal martyr, but a vain and foolish prodigal of his life to no purpose, I
say God and his neighbor too, because to die believeing and loving God without
loving our neighbor, were not enough of Charity to gain a man the title or
crown of martyrdom; Because things are good by the integrity of their cause,
bad by the least defect of such integrity.

4. In these four next verses, S. Paul enumerates the sixteen conditions of
perfect Charity to our neighbor: ^ut whereas he calls Charity, Patient, and
Benign, we must note, he does not mean it is formally so, but abusively, that
is, Charity is the cause of Patience, Benignity, and the like, or which is much
one, Patience is not an elicite act of Charity, but an act (as Schools say)
commanded by Charity; Though Tertullian gives this Encomiastick to Patience,
that it is the inseparable companion, and as it were governesse of all other
virtues, in as much, as the longanimity (or constancy of mind in always doing
good) makes a man patiently to endure the labor of well doing, and the
opposition which that labor is many times obstructed withal; and for the like
reason, Charity is benign, because as it gives us fortitude to resist
impediments in our way to do well, so it gives us mildness, affability and
sweetness toward the persons who oppose our doing well. Again Charity is not
aemulous, or envying at other men's good, as if what did go to another, went
from us: No, she looks not upon any thing as mine and thine, but upon all as
Gods: Insomuch that Saint Gregory i^ his fifth Homily upon the Gospels, says
elegantly and excellently well, Whatsoever we covet in this world, we envy our
Neighbors having that. Hence it is, that Charity chils, while Covetousness
does grow warm, and contrariwise where Charity reigns, there covetousness is
exiled from the Court: moreover Charity deals not perversely or peevishly
with any body, because such a proceeding would destroy both her patience and
benignity above asserted.

5. It is not without reason the Expositors have diversely interpreted this
place, some saying, not to be ambitious imports not to be immodest, others not
to be sordid, but what seems perhaps least, and yet is most proper; others say
it signifies not to be bashful, or rather indeed not to be shamed, and upon the
matter all these are one and the same; for shame is here taken as a blush of
guilt, not of grace, as who should say, for any man immodestly to arrogate unto
himself honor and esteem, when no man can deserve the title of true honor,
or for any man to be so sordid, as to take delight in earthly things, is to
conclude himself guilty of so much baseness, as (when discovered) betrays it
self with a blush of shame and confusion: as contrariwise for any man being
contemned, reviled or scorned by others to blush or be ashamed at the disgrace
thereof, argues he thinks himself injured or undervalued, which is a token of
huge pride, of high ambition in him, whereas true Charity would teach him to
glory, rather than otherwise in such occasions, that he were held worthy to
take off part of that indignity was laid upon our Savior, which was indeed due
to sinful man, that instead of confessing his demerits, glories, as if all
respect, esteem, and honor were due to him, which is high ambition, and a
thing contrary to Charity: and for the same reason the Apostle tells us, as we
must not be ambitious of more than is our due, so true Charity forbids us even
to seek our own, telling us we have no title of property to any thing at all
but our sins, which are the only things we can lay claim unto as owners of:
hence he adds, Charity is never provoked to anger, because anger argues an
apprehension of an injury received, and those who are truly, Charitable ought
to esteem themselves the most contemptible things in nature, capable of nothing
but neglect from others, as a condign punishment for the continual neglect of
their own duty to God: whereunto if we can happily arrive, then will follow,
that which the Apostle concludes this verse withal, of Charity never thinking
ill, for if she never be angry, probably she never thinks of revenge, because
she never esteems her self hurt by any body but her self, as believing she is
rather in fault to deserve injury, than that any body else can do her wrong;
where note what is here said of Charity, is meant of the person who is truly
Charitable.

6. As it is an evident sign of ill will or hatred in us to another, when we
rejoice to see him injured (which must needs include some third man's iniquity
exercised on him) and so to rejoice at the injury done is to be partaker of the
delight wh the third party takes in his iniquity, or doing ill: in like manner
it is a token of good will or true Charity not to rejoice in such iniquity, for
contraries are ever best descerned by juxta-position or being set together: and
wehn the Apostle says, Charity rejoices in Truth, he means by Truth in this
place, probity, goodness, justice, as the opposites to injury, which as it
must not be rejoiced at, so the contrary virtue to that vice ought to be a
cause of our Joys.

7. See how Charity here makes her self an arched bridge for all men to trample
over, how she cries out to all men lay your loades on me, it is only I that am
the packhorse of malice, my duty is to bear away the burden of sin from mount
Calvary, where all the load was laid on Jesus, come beloved, bring away from
thence apace your burdens, heap them on my arched shoulders, who am made for no
other end than pressure, and to be oppressed. As you can do your selves no
greater pleasure than to lighten your own burdens, so you can no ways oblige
me more, than to add plummets to my weights: for as a Palm tree deprest, I
grow the better, do what you please to me, I believe you mean me no hurt,
because I know you can do me none, if I do it not unto my self; therefore
doubt not of my misconstruing your actions, I will believe the best of them,
(such as are not apparent sins) as of your angers, I will hold my self the
cause: I will think your punishing of me, is your particular care toward me,
your fatherly chastizing my undutifull behavior both to my God and you: and
thus Charity believes all in the Apostles sense: whence consequently she hops
all in the same sense, that is, her own amendment upon the just chastizement
she received from others, who she persuades her self were Gods Ministers of
Justice to change her eternal punishment due unto her into temporal pennances
imposed upon her by Gods Vicegerents; and in this hope she grounds her bearing
all things patiently here, will bring her to a crown of glory in the next
world: For if she stands thus persuaded, she cannot think she bears to much
here, and so the Apostle says, she bears all things, wherewith he ends the
sixteen conditions, as above expressed, requisite to perfect Charity.

8. From hence he proceeds to the end of this Chapter, declaring the excellency
of Charity in it self, as more durable than all other virtues, even than the
other two Theological, since Faith in heaven shall cease and be changed into
vision, (inconsistent with the obscurity of Faith) and hope shall vanish, as
exchanged for fruition (incompatible with hope) which being a desire of having,
must needs vanish, when all is had that can be wished or desired. And hence it
is, that heretics ground ill their heresy, saying a man once in grace (that
is in perfect charity) can never sin, because here the Apostle says, Charity
never fails; but the true meaning of this sentence is, Charity of her self
never fails, however by sin she may be here extinguished: or (which is
equivalent) Charity is never wearied, never tired, never exhausted by doing
good to others, even to our enemies, whereas Faith is often sha^en and lost,
Hope is many times lessened and quite gone, when we see our expectations fail
us: what the Apostle says here of prophesies failing, is to be understood,
that they fail, not as defective in revealing truth, but as not rightly
understood by those to whom they do reveal the same, through the defect of our
capacity to hard and abstruse points. Note the possible failing of tongues is
here on purpose expressed in the plural number, as alluding to the cessation
of the gift of many tongues, which even now is ceased, and was so long since,
not that the power in God of giving such gifts again is lost, but that there is
not the like necessity thereof as in the primitive Church; but we may observe,
he does not say, the Tongue shall possibly cease, but Tongues, or the plurality
thereof; for it is a common opinion amongst Divines, that all men in heaven, as
they have their bodies there; so they shall have the use of their tongues, and
speak to one another, but so, as they shall all speak one, and that the Hebrew
tongue, (the most perfect expresser of the mind, and that which Adam spoke in
the state of innocence, and all the Ancient Patriarks, before the destruction
of Babylon confounded the Tongues, and likewise the Prophets) singing, as in
the Apocalypse, Amen, Allelujah. Though some think it not improbable, they
shall, rather than want the use of speech, have a new language created common
to them all, and more perfect yet than Hebrew: For thus all shall cease that
ever were in use, and yet another never used may be made without contradiction
to this text; not that the Blessed shall want in heaven the gift of Tongues, if
they please, but that as they are there all of one mind, so they shall choose
rather to speak all one tongue, than to use many, which multiplicity argues
rather an imperfection than otherwise, though here it were a Blessing necessary
to our imperfect state: by Science being destroyed in heaven, some will have
the acts thereof destroyed only, and the habits remain, yet to no purpose
this, for in vain is that habit, faculty, or power, which never shall be
reduced to act; hence we must rather say, Science, as it is imperfect here,
shall be destroyed by a change into perfect Science there, yet even this is
rather preservation by addition, than destruction by subs^^action. Let us
therefore say yet further, Science shall be destroyed, as it imports here
teaching and learning, which there shall cease, since no man can teach, nor no
man learn in heaven any new Science. To conclude, let us grant a total
cessation of Science, as the best of Sciences, namely, Divinity, grounded on
points of Faith, deduced here partly out of natural reason, partly out of
revelations, nay, even Faith it self, the Mistress of Divinity; and yet we
shall do no wrong to the Blessed, because intuition is better than cognition,
clarity of knowledge is more excellent than obscurity; in a word, vision is the
best of demonstrations, and therefore Science being nothing but a rational
exhibition of the object, shall suffer no prejudice by ceasing, when the object
is there more clearly seen with the eye, than it could be discerned by the
understanding here, but the truth is, the cessation of prophecy, tongues, and
knowledge, or science, is not here absolutely asserted, but supposed only, to
prove their cessation would not yet take away charity.

9. See how this Verse cleers the former in the latter sense thereof; here we
only know in part, so there this partial knowledge ceasing, our Science may
be said to cease; as also our prophecy, which though it be a revelation of
truth, yet it is not a revelation of all truth, which in heaven shall be
revealed, and so take away all divisions of truth by an unity or integrity of
all truths in one.

10. See how still the succeeding verse in terms avowes the explication of the
precedent, when perfect intuition comes, then imperfest exhibition shall cease,
when God in his own, and sole perfect self shall appear, then creatures, who
show him only in part, shall need no more to make their imperfect exhibitions
of him; or when we see the creature perfectly in God, then the imperfection we
did see of them in themselves shall cease.

11. In this verse he illustrates by a similitude of a child or little one in
respect of a man, what he said in the former, and makes the Science, Prophecy,
or perfection we have here to be (in respect of what we shall have in heaven)
like the mere sensible knowledge in a child to his intellectual and rational
science, when he is a man, which is as much as to say, most of all our science
here, is but as knowledge of sense, and not indeed intellectual, because not
grounded in certitude of principles, but in apparences only of truths and
causes, which, though they do not, yet for any thing we know, they may fail
us, even when we think our selves most certain of truth therein.

12. Some will have S. Paul to allow clear Intuition of God here, by his
confessing we see him at least in a glass, because glasses do represent the
real things, and not the pictures only thereof; which is true, but withal
they represent the things in a reflected, not in a direct line, and hence we
see nothing so perfectly in a glass, as when we look directly on the object it
self: Again, hence we never see nor know so much of our selves, as we do of
others, because we see not our own shapes so directly in a glass, as we do
others out of it, by looking on their persons directly: Others understand S.
Paul to mean by a glass here, our seeing God in a confused way, as Mercers show
a multitude of ware together, to distract the eye of the buyer, or as if they
were shown by false lights, giving them other luster than indeed they have, or
as things shown in a transient way to cheat the eye, rather than to satisfy
it; all which is to see God wrapped up in Riddles of knowledge, not in the
reality thereof: Now if we ask what glass it is we here see God by; say,
either the creature representing him, or the fancy apprehending him, or Christ
his humanity best of all expressing his goodness, yet infinitely short
thereof; or as some will have it in the Sacraments, which are visible signs of
invisible things of grace, and of God the Author thereof. By seeing God face
to face some conceive it shall only be when we see Christ in heaven, and
through his glorious face behold with our corporal eyes his sacred Deity,
grounded in the words of Theodoret faying, We shall not see his nature
(meaning his Deity) which falls not within the compass of our corporal eyes,
and so can be seen by none, but that nature only which he assumed (meaning
humane nature) but Theodoret thus understood would be made the Author of a huge
error, as denying us the happiness of the Beatificall vision, which does not,
nay, cannot consist only in seeing Christ's humanity face to face, because that
humanity is but a creature; his meaning therefore must be, that with our
corporal eyes, we can only see the Deity as tralucent, and shining through
the face of Christ, or through his humane nature; but yet with our souls eyes,
that is, with her faculties of understanding, we see even the sacred Deity,
and with our wills we love him as the beginning and end of all our hopes, as
our chief and infinite goodness; and when the Apostle says he shall know God
in heaven, as he is there known by God, his meaning is, only that we shall see
God perfectly. and not in part only, as he does know us perfectly, by knowing
the integrity of all the causes concurring to our making, and the infallibility
of all the effects of our each operation or motion; not that therefore our
knowledge of God shall be equally perfect with his of us, for such knowledge
would argue identity, and not only similitude of knowledge, whereas here there
is no identicall, but only a similitudinary knowledge asserted.

13. We must note, that Iraeneus, Tertullian, and others, understood by the
word now, that the Apostle meant now that we are in this perfect knowledge,
that is, in heaven, Faith, Hope, Charity shall remain; but this were to
contradict all that has been said before of Faith ceasing, when vision comes;
of hope decaying, when Fruition affords all that can be hoped for* so those
Fathers must be explicated to mean by faith, all firm, assured and undoubted
science, such as only consisted in vision, and by hope, all incessant adhesion
to the infinite goodness of God above all things else beloved, which adhesion
they called fruition: and yet though this qualify their sense to be nearer
the Apostles than an asserting that faith and hope remain in heaven formally as
charity does, yet this comes short of S. Paul's meaning by the word now, in this
life, not in heaven: for his main scope was to prove to the Corinthians, that
charity was the chief of all other virtues; faith, hope, and charity, but the
chiefest and greatest of these is charity, and not so much boasted gift of
tongues, and therefore as to them he says, Now there are three Theological
virtues, faith, hope, and charity, but the greatest of these is charity; not
your vain faith, which is not acquainted with love, nor your idle hope, which
fixes your expectation of help from creatures, nay though your faith be pure,
and your hope in God alone, yet charity is greater than these virtues, and
shall remain in heaven, when the other two Theological virtues cease, however
now they are all three together here, the most excellent indeed of all other
gifts or virtues, however you esteem more that of tongues, which I see you
prefer fondly before any other gifts of God. To conclude, the Apostle resolves
charity to be above all other virtues, as the fire is the chief of Elements,
gold the principal of metals, the Sun the best of Planets, the Empyreal the
highest of heavens, and the Seraphins the top-gallant of Angels, so is charity
the chief, the principal, the best, the highest, and the most gallant of all
virtues whatsoever.

The Application.
1. SInce the first operation of Adams soul was an act of love to his Creator,
because he see him to be infinitely more amiable than all the lovely creatures
he had made him master of. Therefore every child of Adam does even in that
degenerate, if his first reasonable operation be not also an act of love to
God. Nature as well as grace teaching the giver ought to be beloved far above
the gift he gives.

2. Hence it is that in Regeneration, we are bound to make our first act a
profession of our faith and love to the divine Majesty so solemn, that it is
accompanied with an abrenuntiation of all love to creatures, namely those that
tempt us most, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, with all his Pomps and
vanities. And this because original sin had fetterd our affections, and tied
them to a dotage on the creatures, so as to love these above the Creator of
them and us.

3. Now because this indebit love to creatures is the fetter that fastens us to
sin, making us affect it even when we do not commit it actually, and because
for sin we are liable to all adversity, therefore S. Paul, by tying a
true-lovers-knot of perfect love and charity to God within our hearts, would
loosen the fetters of our love to creatures that fasten us to sin: and by this
art would keep us free from all adversity, no effect remaining longer than the
cause thereof remains: Whence it is that whilst Saint Paul so passionately
recommendeth charity in this Epistle, as the only remedy against adversity,
We properly pray as above.

The Gospel, LUKE 18. ver. 31, etc.
31. ANd Jesus took the twelve and said to them, Behold we go up to
Jerusalem, and all things shall be consummate, which were written by the
Prophets of the Son of man.

32. For he shall be delivered to the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and
scourged, and spit upon.

33. And after they have scourged him, they will kill him, and the third day he
shall rise again.

34. And they understood none of these things, and this word was hid from them,
and they understood not the things that were said.

35. And it came to pass, when he drew nigh to Jericho, a certain blind man
sat by the way begging.

36. And when he heard the multitude passing by, he asked what this should be.

37. And they told him, Jesus of Nazareth passed by.

38 And he cried saying, Jesus son of David, have mercy upon me.

39. And they that went before, rebuked him that he should hold his peace. But
he cried much more, son of David, have mercy upon me.

40. And Jesus standing, commanded him to be brought unto him, and when he was
come near, he asked him.

41. Saying, what will thou that I do to thee? but he said, Lord, that I may
see.

42. And Jesus said unto him, Do thou see, thy faith has made thee whole.

43. And forthwith he saw,, and followed him, magnifying God. And all the
people as they saw it, gave praise to God.


The Explication.
31. OUr Savior being now near the time, wherein he was pleased to be
sacrificed for man's redemption, took with him in this his last ascending to the
grand feast of the Jews, their Paschall solemnity, all his twelve Apostles,
and lest they should be surprised by his sudden death, which they knew not to
be at hand, (as himself did) he forewarnes them of it, nay, for their further
comfort he tells them, his death was foretold long before by the holy
Prophets; but with this consolatory clause of his rising again, after he was
dead, to prove thereby it was God redeemed us, when God and Man dyed for us,
and such was the Messiah; such was he, who now foretold them this of himself,
to prepare their patience against his passion, to secure their Faith, though he
lost his own life for that purpose: And that this was the last time of our
Saviors going to this City of Jerusalem, in observation of their Paschall
solemnity, all the four Evangelists agree; Saint John only adding this
circumstance, Chap. 11. ver. 54. that Jesus came now from the City Ephrem
privately to this Feast, having fled thither for fear of the Jews, after he
had raised Lazarus from death to life a little before, and was much envied, and
sought after, to punish, not to reward him, for his said goodness: Now some
Expositours will have it, that from this very instant of Christ foretelling his
Apostles he should die, and rise again, Judas gave his first way to the
temptation of covetousness, which moved him to betray his Master for Money,
since he did believe the first part of his death, but gave no credit to his
last, of Rising again; and so concluded, when once his Master was dead, all the
little treasure of the common purse would fall to his share, that feared no
account to be exacted from a dead man by his Resurrection; nor is this
conjecture improbable: But to the letter of the Text, we shall not do amiss
to observe the phrase our Savior uses, saying here, Behold, we go up; and
indeed, the word Ascend, or go up, alludes deeply to the mystery of the
prediction, as above, of Christ his passion; for by ascending voluntarily now
to this Feast, he showed he was as voluntarily to ascend within few days out
of this City up the Mount Calvary to his Passion. Again, the Temple of
Jerusalem was upon the highest part of the Town, and contiguous, if not
continuous to the Mount Sion, which over-looked the City, and so by Analogy,
the heavenly Jerusalem is called Sion; besides, he now said, we ascend, as
showing with what alacrity he resolved to rise up the ascending Mount, when he
was upon the Cross to triumph over Sin, Death, the Devil, and Hell: for as
Saint Chrysostom says well, By his voluntary death he showed himself to be
God, as well as Man, since though to be able to die, argued he was man, yet to
be willing to die, showed he was more than man. But see how he was not content
to tell them in general terms of his future Death and Passion, and that it
should be consummated, as was written by the Prophets, unless he had farther
told them, what particular death he was to die, saying as follows.

32. For he shall be delivered to the Gentiles, as he was, when Pilate and
Herod (substitutes of the Roman Empire) set upon him as Judges; and condemned
him, after many mockeries, scourgings, and revilings, even to the Death of the
Cross: but because the proper place to enlarge upon this subject will be, when
the Passion is dilated upon, here we shall say no more of it, than that

33. He foretells the Glory of his Resurrection shall recompense the ignominy
of his death: and this honey of his rising, he gave them a taste off, thereby to
sweeten the gall of his Passion; nor shall we now add more, here, than that as
Christ used the prediction of his Death, as a means of comfort to his
Apostles, in hope of his future Resurrection, so we must make affliction,
sorrow, grief, persecution, and death it self for love of God, sweet unto us,
in hope we shall rise from death to glory, and from our corruption to
incorruptibility, as our Savior did.

34. No marvel they understood not these words, nor the things they meant, for
our Savior did not then intend they should understand them, but then only told
them what they should hereafter know by experience; and remembering they had
been foretold as much, should not be dismayed, but hope they should, by the
integrity of the prediction, (including the joy of his Resurrection) be eased
of their affliction at his Death and Passion. Then therefore he gave them the
cordial of comfort, and they were after to feel this effect th^reof, when it
should have a comfortable operation in them, which actually it had, as soon as
he arose from his grave, and did appear alive again amongst them all, according
as he now foretold them he was to do.

35. There is some difficulty in the true meaning of this verse, in regard
Saint Matthew, chap. 20. ver. 19. and Saint Mark, in his tenth chap. ver. 46.
both of them say this blind man was cured by our Savior, as he went out of
Jericho; whereas Saint Luke here tells us, it was done as Jesus went into
Jericho; again, Saint Luke, and Saint Mark, make mention only of one blind
man restored to his sight; and yet Saint Matthew speaking of the same time and
place, tells us of two blind, then and there cured by Jesus, as he passed by
them, and heard them both in the same words, as (the other two Evangelists say
one only) they called on him for cure, saying, Jesus, son of David, have mercy
on me, on us, says Saint Matthew; but for reconciliation of these two
different relations by the Evangelists, we must recurre to our accustomed
observation that Saint Matthew generally under takes to write the Story of our
Saviors life most methodically; and therefore since he, from the verse 29.
above cited, to the verse 33. ending his said twentieth Chapter, continues his
Story in the plural number, we are to presume there were two blind men cured,
though here S. Luke mentions but one, and though Saint Mark name that one to be
Bartimaeus, the son of Timaeus so called; as Bartholomaeus is called the son
of Tholomaeus, Bar in Hebrew, importing Son: hence therefore we are to conclude
there is no contradiction in the relation, though it be more amply, and
entirely made by Saint Matthew, than by the other Evangelists: and as for the
differing circumstances of the Miracle being done, as Saint Luke here says,
when our Savior went into Jericho, happily one of the Two was then cured, and
the other (namely Bartimaeus) when our Savior came out: again, Saint Matthew,
and Saint Mark may relate the Story as perfected by a double cure in the exit
of our Savior from Jericho, which S. Luke began with a single one, in his
entrance thither, as if it were a continuation of one and the same cure
exercised upon two several persons, one at the entrance, the other at the exit
of the City; and so the circumstantialls of the cure make n^ diversity therein,
all being but a restitution of sight to the blind; but whither Christ were
going or coming, restoring sight to one, or two, it makes no great matter, the
Miracle being of the same nature, and equally showing Christ to be God, and all
Evangelists agreeing, they both believed alike, and both petitioned in the same
style if there were two of them: in fine, as silence is no disproof, nor
contradiction to what another positively affirms; so Saint Matthews positive
affirmation stands good without any constradiction by the silence of Saint
Mark, and S. Luke to part of the Story: what else we are here to note, is that
Jesus came from Ephrem to Jericho, and from Jericho went to Jerusalem, where
he prepared himself to his Passion, by praying in the Temple at the Paschall
solemnity mentioned as above, in the first verse of this Gospel; and though
there we gave other reasons, why our Savior said we ascend to Jerusalem; yet
here we may add this one more, that although while he went out of Ephrem, his
ways from thence to Jericho (being two leagues, and an half) were all level
and even ground, yet from Jericho to Jerusalem there were seven long leagues,
all hills and dales as mountainous ways use to be, and therefore are called
ascendings, because they take their denomination from their most difficult
passages; however, there be much descending ground gone over between all hills:
as for the name of Jericho, it is derived either from the Hebrew word Jareach,
signifying the Moon, because that City was built horned, as the quartered Moon;
or else from reach, which signifies odor, or sweetness, because Jericho is
famous for the best of Balsames, in, and about it: and Saint Gregory in his
twelfth Homily upon the Gospells, alludes to the cure done at Jericho upon the
Blind, taking this name in the first derivation from the Hebrew, and saying,
The Moon is an Hi^roglyphick of defect in nature, because it is ever changeable
and various: Therefore, says Saint Gregory, while our Savior comes to
Jericho, the blind man's defect in nature is cured; because, when the Divinity
put on the defect of our flesh, mankind received the sight which it had lost:
for whence God suffered humane infirmities, thence man was raised to divine
perfections. And Origin, upon this place makes a pious allusion of this blind
man, importing the blindness of all humane nature, then cured thereof; When
Christ with his Apostles comes to lead them from their natural Jericho, or
defect, into the heavenly Jerusalem, where they shall have a supernatural
perfection added to their natural Vision, and by that supernatural addition
shall see God face to face, and seeing him, shall become like unto him; and by
this likeness to God, become perfectly cured of all their natural defects:
Thus piously we see the holy Fathers make advantages to our Souls, out of every
passage of holy Scripture, by applying the letter thereof in a spiritual sense
unto us; and why may not we hence presume to add, this cure alludes in the
other sense of Jericho reporting to odor? as to the Apostles and the blind man
cured, following Jesus from Jericho to his passion, according to what the
Spowse in the Canticles says, We shall run after him in the odor of his
sweetness. Since the holy will and pleasure of our Savior was to take this
Balsamic passage through Jericho to serve as a sweet perfume upon the
Carian-mountaine of Calvary; that so the stanch of sin might not surpass the
fragra^t odours of grace, rayning down showers of our Saviors precious blood
from the odoriferous tree of the holy Cross, and from the more holy fruit
hanging thereon.

36. 37. It seems this blind man was not deaf, that could hear the murmur of
the talking multitude, some going rudely before, and others following our
Savior from Ephrem to Jerico, all discoursing of his works and wonders in so
great a lowdnesse, that the blind man asked what the matter was? what great
company was approaching, which were heard, before they were at hand? and being
told it was Jesus of Nazereth who came thus accompanied,

38. He cried out immediately, Jesu, Son of David, have mercy on me, by the
Son of David, meaning the Messiah whose office followed the nature of his
name, for Messiah imports mercy toward the miserable; and hearing it was
Jesus, of whom he had heard such wonders, and by whom such miracles were done,
he concluded presently this was the Messiah marked out by the Prophets saying
of him, then when he shall come, the eyes of the blind shall be opened. Isaias,
Chapter, 35. Verse. 5.

39. By this it seems some of the people were before our Savior, as we said
above, Verse. 36. talking of him, and these people, either unwilling to be
interrupted in their own discourse, or that Christ should be stopped in his way
by this poor man, and so they hindered from something they expected from our
Savior, either in Jericho or Jerusalem whither he was going, and this company
with him) they rebuked the blind man, both for the noise he made, and for the
doubt they had, least by his importunity he might stop Jesus in his march, as
indeed it happened, for the rebuked man went on calling still to Jesus for
help, and the more he was bid hold his peace, the louder he cried out Jesus the
Son of David have have mercy on me. A good example for us to follow, and not
let the interposition of any creatures hinder us from our approach to God, no
nor any rebuke for well doing deter us from continuing to do well. Thus S.
Augustine expounds this place: and S. Hilary has these words upon it, Faith,
when forbidden, is more increased, and therefore in dangers it is secured, and
in security it is endangered.

40 Strange to see, how upon the standing of Jesus the Expositors do descant;
S. Hierome says his standing in the litterall sense was, because the blind
should not follow him in that heat of zeal they were in, (when no reprehension
was able to make them desist to cry for help) least they might thereby fall in
to the ditches, or stumble at the uneven ways about Jericho. S. Gregory gives
the Symbolicall sense thus, That by this standing was argued his Divinity; for
says he, Passing betokens man, persisting betokens God. Origin says his
standing mystically signified the permanence of the benefit received, the sight
restored to continue, not for a time, and then he to be blind again. S.
Augustine says anagogically thus, Jesus stood to signify, that the temporary
Faith of his Incarnation prepares to the understanding things eternal, and so
Jesus stood as Eternal, and as bequeather of Eternal sight of God in glory in
recompense of this blind man's Faith, who now believed in his Deity. And indeed
had it not been, that our savior intended something mystical, he neither
needed to have stood, nor called, but could have cured the party with his sole
will or pleasure: but he stood for the reasons as above, and came near to ask
him.

41. What he would have, thereby to give the blind man occasion to express his
Faith and confidence in him the more, as also because he knew the people had
forbid the man to trouble him, and he therefore called him, to show God holds
not our importunity in good things any way troublesome unto him. Our Savior
asked what he would have, not that he was ignorant, but that he would declare,
his knowledge of our infirmities excuseeh us not from the confessing of them
nevertheless: as also to show God is not only ready to give us what we lack,
but also whatsoever we can rationally ask of him, who is no niggard of his
favors, and while the blind man asks his sight, we may conceive he asks as
much as his life too, for a blind man is like a visible death to all other men,
and a sensible one unto himself: since he can feel misery on all sides, but
see comfort no way: to which purpose see Tobias, Cap. 5. ver. 12. and hear
Saint Ambrose, Uti tristes sunt, etc. As the day without Sunshine is but sad,
and the nights without Moone-light not so pleasing; so is the life of man
deprived of the light of his body, his eyes: for they, (the Sun and Moon)
are as it were the eyes of the world, and without their luster the heavens
themselevs do suffer a deformity of blindness: And S. Austine upon this place
says, Tota igitur vita, etc. Our whole life's exercise therefore is but to cure
this eye of the heart: to this end has Almighty God instituted all the holy
Mysteries, to this end is the word of God preached, to this end tend all
Ecclesiastical exhortations, etc. Let us therefore all cry out, O Lord, give us
the light of Grace, to see the turpitude of sin, the vilitie of
concupiscence, the exilitie of pleasure, the atrocity of hell fire, the beauty
of virtue, the happiness of Paradise, the eternity of Glory: Amen.

42. No marvel our Savior gave so speedy a reward to so strong a Faith, the
cause taken once away, the effect must needs cease: the cause of this corporal
blindness was spiritual coecity, the blind-mans infidelity, which taken away
by Faith, he enjoyes immediately his corporal sight, and so has the effect
gone, upon surcease of the cause; nor need we scruple to make this exposition,
when our Savior says in express terms, This man's Faith was his cure; for if
so, then Infidelity was his disease.

43. We cannot read this story, without being moved to imitate the gratitude of
the blind man, in giving thanks for the benefit received, as we shall be
forward enough to imitate his importunity in calling to God for help, in our
necessities: and what was his gratitude? his following our Savior: magnifying
and praising of him, as also did all the people that were witness to the
benefit received; that we would our selves thus testify our own gratitudes,
thus get all the world to help us express our thanks for such benefits as they
all see, we receive daily and hourly from almighty God; since we have an
assurance, if we go as far with him, as this blind man did, to his passion,
to his Cross, to his death, to his grave, he will raise us with him to a new
life of grace here, and to an eternal life of Glory in the next world.

The Application.
1. AS it was this blind man's Faith that made him corporally whole, so was it
his love and charity that made him spiritually sound, that did shake off the
Fetters of his affection to sin, and kept him (by that means) from all
adversity, while it fastened him to the purchaser of all prosperity, our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.

2. It was indeed his Charity that made him leave all other company to follow
Jesus, and to magnify his Deity by proclaiming his mercy in having delivered
him from misery. And whither did he follow him? To Jerusalem, to his Passion,
to his Death, to his Sepulcher.

3. O lively Faith that did not die in this poor man, when Jesus dying for him,
left even his Apostles tottering in their Faith. O burning Charity, that like a
flaming lamp hung ore the Sepulcher of Jesus dead and buried; Adoring then and
magnifying the Divinity which never did forsake the sacred corpse of Christ's
Humanity, though his living soul had left his dead body in the grave. O
admirable way to shake off the shackles of sin, and to keep us free from all
adversity, thus firmly to believe, thus ardently to love, and so to follow
Jesus from his grave into his glory. O for this purpose well adapted Gospel of
Faith to an Epistle of Charity.

O well adjusted Prayer as above to both.

On the first Sunday of Advent.
The Prayer called the Collect.
ROwse up we beseech thee, O Lord, thy power, and come away, that from the
emi^ent dangers of our sins (thou protecting) we may deserve to be freed, and
(thou delivering us) we may be saved. Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

So end all Prayers.

The Prayer called the Secret.
MAy these Sacrifices, O Lord, by their powerful virtue bring us cleansed, and
more pure unto their purifying fountain.

The Prayer called the Post-Communion.
LEt us receive, O Lord, thy mercy in the midst of thy Temple, that we may
prepare for the future solemnities of our reparation with congruous homages.

On the second Sunday of Advent.
The Prayer.
ROwse up our hearts, O Lord, toward preparing the ways of thy only begotten
Son, that by his coming amongst us, we may deserve to serve thee with
purified Souls.

The Secret.
VOuchsafe, O Lord, to be appeased by our humble Prayers and Offerings; and
whereas we have no title of merit, succor us with thine own supplies.

The Post-Communion.
BEing filled with the food of Spiritual Alms, we humbly beseech thee, O
Lord, that by the participation of this Mystery, thou will teach us to contemn
Earthly, and to love Heavenly things.

On the Third Sunday of Advent.
The Prayer.
LEnd, we beseech thee O Lord, thine ear unto our Prayer, and enlighten the
darkness of our mind, with the Grace thy Visitation.

The Secret.
MAy the sacrifice, O Lord, of our Devotion, be continually offered up, both to
perform the precepts of this sacred Mystery and admirably in us to produce thy
saving work.

The Post-Communion.
We implore, O Lord, thy clemency, that these Divine helps may expiat^ our
sins, and prepare us to the future solemnities.

On the fourth Sunday of Advent.
The Prayer.
O Lord, we beseech thee raise up thy power, and with thy mighty virtue come
away to our succor, that by the help of thy Grace, what our sins retard, the
indulgence of thy propitiation may accelerate.

The Secret.
ORdain, O Lord, we beseech thee, (being by these present sacrifices appeased)
that they may avail to our Devotion, and Salvation also.

The Post-Communion.
HAving received thy bounties, we beseech thee, O Lord, that by frequentation
of thy Mystery, the effect of our salvation may increase.

On Sunday within the Octaves of the Nativity.
The Prayer.
OMnipotent Sempiternall God, direct our actions in thy good pleasure, that in
the name of thy beloved Son, we may deserve to abound in good Works.

The Secret.
GRant, we beseech thee Omnipotent God, that the offering, which we have made
in the eyes of thy majesty, may obtain us the grace of holy Devotion, and bring
unto us the effect of a blessed Eternity.

The Post-Communion.
BY the operation of this Mystery, may, O Lord, our sins be purged, and our
just desires be accomplished.

On Sunday within the Octave of the Epiphanie.
The Prayer.
We beseech thee, O Lord, prosecute with heavenly Piety the desires of thy
suppliant people, that they may both see what is by them to be done, and be
able to perform what they see they are to do.

The Secret.
GRant, O Lord, that this Sacrifice offered unto thee, may quicken always, and
defend us.

The Post-Communion.
We humbly beseech thee, Omnipotent God, that whom thou have with thy
Sacraments refreshed, thou will graciously grant they may serve thee with an
agreeable comportment.

On the second Sunday after the Epiphanie.
The Prayer.
ALmighty, everlasting God, who do moderate at once, both Heavenly, and
Earthly things, hear clemently the Prayers of thy people, and grant us thy
peace in our times.

The Secret.
Sanctify, O Lord, our offered gifts, and purge us from the spots of our
Sins.

The Post-Communion.
O Lord, we beseech thee, let the operation of thy virtue be increased in us,
that nourished by thy Divine Sacraments, we may be prepared through thy bounty
to receive thy promises.

On the third Sunday after the EPIPHANIE.
The Prayer.
OMnipotent eternal God, look we beseech thee propitiously on our infirmity,
and extend to our protection the right hand of thy Majesty.

The Secret.
We pray thee, O Lord, let this Host cleanse our sins, and sanctify the
bodies and souls of thy subjects, toward the celebrating of thy sacrifice.

The Post-Communion.
TO whom thou do, O Lord, grant the use of so great mysteries, vouchsafe we
beseech thee, that we may truly be adopted unto their effects.

On the fourth Sunday after the EPIPHANIE.
The Prayer.
O God who know us set in so great dangers, that we cannot through humane
frailty subsist, gran, unto us health of mind and body, that what we suffer
for our sins, (thou helping) we may overcome.

The Secret.
GRant we beseech thee, almighty God, that the offered gift of this sacrifice,
may ever purge our frailty, and defend it from all evil.

The Post-Communion.
LEt thy gifts, O God, free us from terrene delights, and refresh us always
with heavenly food.

On the fifth Sunday after the Epiphanie.
The Prayer.
KEep we beseech thee, O Lord, thy family in continual piety, that resting on
the only hope of heavenly grace, it may ever by thy protection be defended.

The Secret.
We offer unto thee, O Lord, the Host of Pacification, and that thou may
mercifully absolve us from our sins, direct our drowsy hearts.

The Post-Communion.
We beseech thee, almighty God, that we may have the effect of that safety,
the pledge whereof we have received by these Mysteries.

On the sixth Sunday after the Epiphanie.
The Prayer.
GRant, we beseech thee, Almighty God, that always meditating those things
which are reasonable, we may both in our words and deeds, do what is pleasing
unto Thee.

The Secret.
LEt this oblation, O God, cleanse and renew, govern and protect us, we beseech
thee.

The Post-Communion.
BEing fed, O Lord, with heavenly delights, we beseech thee, that we may
always covet those things by which we truly live.

On SEPTUAGESIMA SUNDAY.
The Prayer.
We beseech thee, O Lord, clemently to hear the Prayers of thy People, that
we, who for our sins are justly afflicted, may for the glory of thy Name be
mercifully delivered,

The Secret.
THou having received our gifts, O Lord, and our prayers, cleanse us with thy
heavenly mysteries, and hear us clemently we beseech thee.

The Post-Communion.
Be thy faithful, O God, strengthened by thy gifts, that they may without
end, knowing, seek, and seeking, know the same.

On SEXAGESIMA SUNDAY.
The Prayer.
O God, who see we confide not in any of our own Actions, grant us
propitiously, that against all adversities we may be armed by the protection of
the Doctor of the Gentiles.

The Secret.
MAy this sacrifice offered unto thee, O Lord, always revive and protect us.

The Post-Communion.
We humbly beseech thee Almighty God, to grant, that those, whom thou do
refresh with thy Sacraments, may graciously serve thee with their good
behavior.

On QUINQUAGESIMA Sunday.
The Prayer.
O Lord, we beseech thee, hear clemently our Prayers, and being loosened from
the fetters of our sins, keep us from all adversity.

The Secret.
MAy this oblation, O Lord, we beseech thee, purge away our sins, and sanctify
the bodies and souls of thy subjects, for the celebrating of this sacrifice.

The Post-Communion.
We pray thee, O God Omnipotent, that we, who have received Heavenly food,
may thereby be guarded from all adversity.

FINIS.
The END Of the FIRST PART.
THE SECOND PART Of the first TOME.
On the first Sunday in Lent.
The Antiphon. 2 Cor. 6. v. 2, etc. BEhold now the acceptable time; behold now
the days of health: in these days therefore let us exhibit our selves as the
Servants of God, in much patience, in fastings, in watchings, and in unfeigned
charity.

Verse. To his Angels God has given charge of thee.

Resp. That in all thy ways they may keep thee.


The Prayer.
O God who do purify thy Church with an annual observation of Lent, grant
unto thy Family, that what it endeavors to obtain of thee by Fasting, it
may finish the same by good works.

The Illustration.
IF in the holy time of Lent we find not so exact a report between the Epistle,
Gospel, and Prayer of the day, as at other times of the year, it must be given
to the more then ordinary regard had unto the Lenten Fast, which we shall
observe all these Prayers make special mention of, as if holy Church intended
nothing more then a recommends of that wholesome Fast unto us; nevertheless I
shall not despair to find the Epistle and Gospel, even like full-sail'd
Vessels falling down this channel of holy abstinence, and directed by the
helm of the Prayer, come full fraughted with the same concording Spirits into
the Ports of our ever open hearts to Ghostly comforts, which the other seasons
of the year afford unto us: But before we venture upon a thing so hard, let us
facilitate the way, by first clearing the full sense of the Prayer: for when we
know what we ask therein, we shall see what relation the Petition has to the
Epistle and Gospel, whence we must draw it out. Observe then first in this
Prayer an acknowledgement, that Almighty God does purify his Church with an
annual observation of Lent; so the end of this Fast is the Churches
purification. Next, see how the Prayer begs, that what we endeavor to obtain
by Fasting, we may finish by good works; so though purification be the end of
our Fast, yet the Fast alone is but an endeavor toward that end; and nothing
brings us home unto it, unless to the endeavoring fast we add the finishing
help of good works: and this with great reason too; for as we are never said to
be perfectly purified, until we can in a chaste body represent a pure Soul to
God; so by Fasting alone we only chastize our bodies, but by good works the
grand affair is finished, our Soul is made pure, and then the Churches end is
accomplished, then the whole creatures we are, become, (as was intended)
purified: but least I should be thought to state this sense to my own design,
let us hear Saint Leo in his Homily upon this day (which the Priest reads in
his Office) tell us his opinion, wherein consists the perfection of our Lenten
Fasts. Not in the sole abstaining from meat, consists the integrity of our
Fast, but in the joint taking away our affections from sin thus he; and how
shall we give better Testimony of our not being sinners, then in doing good
works, such as may make us Saints: see here then the Scope of holy Fast is as
it were to starve the body, and to feed the Soul; for in vain this forbears to
eat flesh, if that do not feast upon Spiritual Cates, such as are good works,
of Prayer, Almsdeeds and other sorts of virtues, especially recommended in
this holy time of Lent; nor is it without mystery the Prayer to day begges, we
may finish by good works, what we endeavor only by Fasting, our annual
purifications by this Lenten Abstinence, since though we have the grace to keep
the fast exactly in point of diet, yet in vain our bodies fast toward
purification of the whole creature which we are, unless our Souls at the same
time feast upon virtues by abandoning all vices: and in this the Prayer to day
observes the method of the Epistle; in vain the Ministers of holy Church
receive the grace of God, unless they make use of the acceptable time, the
days of salvation that now are flowing; and this by rendering themselves (with
good works) pleasing to all men, offensive to none; unless to their Fast they
add the good works expressed in the Antiphon above, taken out of the same
Epistle, and many more, which those few refer unto, from one end of the
Epistle to another: nor can we say these are counsels proper for Churchmen
only, since those the expositours understand by Helpers in the Ministry of
God; because the Apostle lays himself open to the Corinthians, not only as a
Minister of God requiring such perfections, as this Epistle mentions, but as a
pattern to the people to imitate; so that all the good works he tells them,
Churchmen should be perfect in, he exhorts laymen to practice too, as if he
would have the sheep equal Saints with their shepherds; and indeed this is no
strained sense of mine; for we see holy Church to day exhibits unto us not only
Apostolical perfection in the Epistle, but even that of Jesus Christ himself,
the Master of the Apostles, when his forty-dayes Fast is set before our eyes in
the Gospel, and not that Fast alone, but withal the addition of his good
works, his Watching, and his praying, his resisting the strongest temptations
that the Devil could accost him with: now who that sees this can say, there
wants sufficient Harmony between the preaching and the Praying part of this
days service? and that ample, as can be in an abstract of Prayer, exhausting
two such large Texts, as are the Epistle and Gospel of the first Sunday in
Lent.

The Epistle. 2 ad Cor. 6. v. 1, etc.
1 And we helping do exhort, that you receive not the grace of God in vain.

2 For he says, In time accepted have I heard thee: and in the day of
Salvation have I helped thee. Behold, now is the time acceptable: behold now
the day of salvation.

3 To no man giving offense, that our Ministry be not blamed.

4 But in all things let us exhibit our selves as the Ministers of God, in
much patience, in tribulation, in ne^cssities, in distresses,

5 In Stripes, in Prisons, in Seditions, in Labors, in Watchings, in Fastings,

6 In chastity, in knowledge, in longanimity, in Sweetness, in the holy Ghost,
in charity not fained,

7 In the word of Truth, in the virtue of God, by the Armor of Justice on the
right hand, and on the left.

8 By honor and dishonor, by infamy and good fame; as Seducers, and True; as
they that are unknown, and known.

9 As dying, and behold we live: as chastened, and not killed.

10 As sorrowful, but always rejoicing: as needy, but enriching many: as
having nothing, and possessing all things.


The Explication.
1. THe Apostles, stiling themselves Helpers in this verse, allude to what was
said more plainly in the immediate Chapter before, to the Corinthians. v. 19.
where they were told Christ, was the true reconciler of the people to God, and
his Apostles had given unto them (by Christ) the Ministry of this
reconciliation, the Administration of the Sacraments, whereby we receive the
grace of God, and so are reconciled to him, principally by himself,
Secondarily or Ministerially by his Apostles.

And the like is done by their Successors, the Priests of holy Church: to
which alludes that saying of the Apostle, Coloss. 1. v. 24. That his Ministry
and sufferings for the Faith, does accomplish those things which are wanting of
the Passion of Christ; not but that Christ did suffer personally, all he was to
suffer, as head of his Church, but that he was yet to suffer more in his
Members, and even their sufferings, he esteemed his own, in so much as he gives
the Apostle leave to say, his and the other sufferings of Christians are
supplies even of what was wanting in Christ his passion, to show us, how near
and deer our sufferings are to God, while he esteems them as those of his own
sacred Son; and as thus by suffering for Justice, all Christians supply what
was wanting of Christ his passion; so particularly all Priests by their
exhortations and administration of the Sacraments are helpers of Christ in the
reconciliation of Christians to Almighty God his favor, through the grace of
the holy Sacraments dispensed to them by the hands of the Priests, who only
have this prerogative of reconciliation between God and Man, what by their
Sacrifices, what by their exhortations and Sacraments which are dispensed unto
us While the Apostle exhorts us not to receive the grace of God in vain, he
destroys the fond doctrine of heretics, who will have grace alone without
cooperation on our behalf to be sufficient; whereas out of this very Text the
Catholic Church first teaches, that that Gods grace offers no violence to our
free will, but that it comes so sweet unto us, as it is in our powers to reject
or receive it, as we please; and that further we are taught, that by our own
free act of cooperation, and this gratuite grace joined together, we are made
grateful to God, whereas if we have never so much grace given us, unless we
do freely cooperate therewith, it is in vain received, as the Apostle says
here in plain terms, whatsoever Heretics pretend to the contrary, thereby to
make a gap open to their lazy liberties, persuading themselves Christ has
already saved them, and that it boots not, what they do, so they have his
grace (or rather Faith alone, without his grace) a doctrine diametrically
opposite to the genuine sense of the Apostle in this Text: who by grace here
understands both the general benefit of all mankinds redemption, or
reconciliation to God by Christ his passion, and the special concourse of holy
grace, which Christ has merited for every particular man, and which God
consequently gives to every one, that thereby he may, (if he will not in vain
receive it) make himself an effectual partaker of the said passion of Christ,
by cooperating therewith toward his own Salvation, whereas otherwise Christ
his passion remains only sufficient, but not effectual or actually
efficatious to every particular man's Salvation.

2. This prophecy reports to the second person of the Blessed Trinity, thus
speaking to his heavenly Father, Jsaias 49.8. in the accepted time of his
Incarnation, and in the saving day of his passion, which wrought Salvation to
the whole world: and when the Apostle tells us that now this acceptable time,
this day of Salvation is come, he means, the whole time afforded man in this
world, from the hour of our Saviors Incarnation and passion, to the very
latter day of doom, is all and every minute of it so acceptable, so saving,
that no man can use any the least instant of it in vain, if he please to serve
himself thereof; but may in any time of his whole life (in any instant of that
whole time) by a true conversion of his heart to God, and by an aversion of it
from sin, save his soul: though it were huge presumption in any man, that
had enough to do in all his life to overcome his vices, and would be so
supinely negligent, as never to convert his Soul (and the affections of his
heart) to God, but at some posting minute, when he could no longer enjoy the
liberty of sin: note also, though this be the literal sense of Isaias above,
yet the mystical of it is, that holy Lent is singled out as the most
acceptable time in all the year to work out our Salvation in, because we have
then the assistance of the whole Church jointly prostrate with us in Prayer,
Fasting, and Penance; so in case our own endeavors come short, yet they may
now be carried on, as some men are in crowds, being borne up by others, when
they have no footing of their own to carry them along.

3. Here the Apostle seems to put so much force in the necessity of good life
in Christians (such as takes off all note of scandal or offense,) as if all
the labor of the Priests were lost, unless the people did live according to
the doctrine of the Church, according to the preaching of the Pastors; for so
he concludes, as though their Ministry might be blamed, and questioned whether
of God or not, if the people did not live virtuous lives, and without offense;
because men would be apt to say, they were fine teachers, fine Masters indeed,
who breed up such sinful Scholars, as give offense to others.

4. And lest the people might pretend, it is in vain for Priests to Preach
good life, unless they also lead the same, the Apostle both for this reason
(and further to let them see, they were seduced, by following such Preachers,
as without ordination or Mission took upon them that Ministry, and did
perhaps speak well, but do ill themselves) falls tacitly into an Encomiastick
of himself, and of all true Ministers of Gods holy word, above what was due to
false Ministers, by exhorting the people to such good life, as they might see
example of in him, and the rest of the Apostles, and Disciples of Christ: while
he says, let us show our selves like Ministers of God (instructed, ordained,
and sent by him to Preach and lead examples of good life) not obtruded upon the
world by man, pretending Mission, and ordination, who had none indeed, and
therefore could not truly be called the Ministers of God (as only the
Apostles, and their legal successors are) all this he means by those words,
let us live as the Ministers of God: then he proceeds to tell the Signs, and
the Tokens of such, (or at least the effects commonly following all such true
calling, ordination or mission) that it renders them capable of much patience,
and lest this virtue should seem but narrowly communicated by God to his
Apostles, here is an ampliation of it to all Emergencies, or occasions, wherein
commonly men's patiences are truly tried; that so whiles it is not limited to
any one occasion or circumstance, but extended to all, it may appear to be a
mark, or an effect of a true Minister of God, since it is his gift, whose every
work is perfect, and from this very place to the end of this Epistle, the
Apostle runs on declaring the marks of a true Minister of God, squaring out the
excellency and perfection of an Apostolical man, and of his life; so that
little need more to be said for explaining the verses following: now we know
they all drive to this end, and are spoken in this sense, yet now and then, I
shall observe in each verse something particular, when the sense is deeper then
it may seem to be at first reading.

5. Note in this verse the Apostle exhorts even in persecutions (such as was
expressed above) to use voluntary Mortifications, namely, Watching and Fasting,
for they are seldom inflicted as punishments of our Persecutors; though even in
that sense the hunger of prisons and restless nights thereof (caused by the
unruly company commonly in such places) may also have been glanced at as things
the Apostle exhorts to bear patiently.

6. Chastity is here of special regard, because we see the Ministers of other
Churches profess it is not to be of obligation, nay they will have it
incompatible with humane Nature, and no way possible to be prescribed to
Priests, or vowed by them: So by this particular mark of Chastity, the Apostle
distinguishes a true Priest from an usurper of Apostolical Mission; and gives
this as an eminent splendor in the Catholic Church, abounding in many
thousands of Priests, and Religious persons of both Sexes, vowing, and most of
them doubtless (if not all) keeping their Vow exactly. Knowledge or Science is
here of special remark too, since it behooves all Priests not only to know the
common Principles of Christian Doctrine, but further the genuine sense of holy
Scriptures, and deepest Mysteries of our Faith; so to enable them upon all
occasions to teach, to preach, and to instruct the ignorant. By Sweetness is
here understood Meekness; that since they must meet with all rudeness in
nature, and know all the harshness of sinners, they had need of this Virtue to
make their Reprehensions (upon occasions) more efficacious, by the mildness and
sweetness wherewith they exhort to good, and dehort from evil life.

7. By the Virtue of God is here meant, either the power whereby sometimes they
work Miracles, or that fortitude wherewith they run through all difficulties in
the practice of Christian Perfection. By the Armor of Justice on the right
hand and on the left, is understood on all occasions of prosperity, or
adversity; importing right and left, as good and bad to us, that we must stand
armed with acts of Virtue, such as may render us just to God, whatere men may
imagine of us.

8. By honor and dishonor, infamy and good fame, understand whether we are
praised by others, or undervalued; and here the Apostle alludes to his own
avoiding vainglory, when the Lycaonians would have adored him as a god for his
rare parts: Though we are esteemed Seducers (as in time of persecutions Priests
are, and as Christ himself was, who yet could not preach false Doctrine, he
being Truth it self) yet we must not (for that) refrain to preach the Word of
God. By unknown and known, is meant unknown to the wicked, whilst we are known
to God and our own Consciences.

9. As dying (as given over in the opinion of the world for condemned, at the
corrupt Tribunals of unjust Judges) and yet alive to God, to his holy Angels,
and to all just men, whilst our cause is just; like Chastised and not killed,
either imprisoned, and yet not executed for our Faith, or else using voluntary
moderate Penance, and yet not such as may shorten our days by death, being too
violent, as many times those Penances are which men use (without allowance of
their Ghostly Fathers) to inflict upon themselves.

10. As needy, and yet enriching others, temporally poor, and yet giving the
riches of Spiritual Instructions and ghostly counsel to our Neighbors; or
perhaps the Apostle might mean literally, whilst they who had given to them
the Oblations of all the Laity in those days, yet did not bestow any thing
almost upon themselves, but gave it all away to the poor, and so enriched them
(supplied at least their Necessities, as S. Paul at Jerusalem was noted to do
very notably.) As having nothing (of our own) and yet possessing all things (by
the liberality of others) whence our Savior asked, Did you want any thing,
when I sent you to preach to all the world, without a staff, or purse? the one
to bear up your weary limbs (which I supported with my grace) the other to buy
you victuals (which I inspired good Christians to afford you without your
money.)

The Application.
1. SEe the Illustration of the Prayer above, for the general notions of our
Christian Duty this Lenten time: but for the particular, see how the Priest is
set before our eyes, for us to imitate the many perfections he is bound unto;
the whole Epistle being nothing else but an Ennumeration of Priestly Duties:
for then (and not before) we may hope to see a Religious Laity, when the
Priests of holy Church are the Saints they ought to be, such indeed as they are
here pointed out unto us.

2. And lest the people should be lost in so large a field of Virtue as the
Priest is bound to walk in, see how the Antiphon before the Prayer culls out
the proper Duties of the people during holy Lent: Namely, Patience, Watching,
and unseigned Charity; that is to say, Mortification, Prayer, and Almsdeeds.
For therefore Patience is now recommended, because Mortification is intended,
which (to avail us) must be born patiently. Therefore we are now to watch, that
we may spend more hours then ordinary in our Prayers, rising earlier, and going
later to bed in Lent, then at other times. Therefore Alms are accounted
unfeigned Charity, because men are ever held to love their Neighbors more then
Money, when they do relieve the poor.

3. Thus we see no one good work is perfected alone, without the help and
company of others. Let therefore Mortification, Prayer, and Alms, accompany the
holy Fast of Lent, so shall it feed, and purify the feasting souls of fasting
bodies.

According as we pray above it may. The Gospel. Matthew. 4. v. 1, etc.
1 Then Jesus was led of the Spirit into the desert, to be tempted of the devil.

2 And when he had fasted forty days, and forty nights, afterward he was
hungry.

3 And the Tempter approached, and said to him, If thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made b^ead.

4 Who answered and said, It is written, Not in bread alone does man live, but
in every word that proceeds from the mouth of God.

5 Then the devil took him up into the holy City, and set him upon the pinnacle
of the Temple;

6 And said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down, for it is
written, That he will give his Angels charge of thee, and in their hands they
shall hold thee up, lest perhaps thou knock thy foot against a stone.

7 Jesus says to him again, It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God.

8 Again the devil took him up into a very high mountain: and he showed him all
the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them;

9 And said unto him, All these will I give thee, if thou falling down wilt
adore me.

10 Then Jesus says to him, Avount Satan: for it is written, The Lord thy God
shall thou adore, and him only shall thou serve.

11 Then the devil left him: and behold Angels came, and ministered to him.


The Explication.
1. THen] alludes to the time of his being by John Baptized, so that
immediately after his Baptism he began his forty days Fast, by the conduct of
the holy Spirit which had descended on him in the shape of a Dove when he was
Baptized, to show how immediately, and how efficaciously God works in those
that (by grace) he does descend upon. The force of this Spiritual impulse is
intimated by his being led of the Spirit (drawn as it were by the power
thereof) into the desert, where he might hear (without interruption of, noise
or company) what God spoke to his heart, as we read Osee cap. 2. v. 14. The
name of this Desert was Quarentana, near the River Jordan: But we are here to
note, The Holy Ghost did not intend to thrust Christ upon this Temptation ( for
God is Tempter of no man, Jam. 1. v. 13.) but only indirectly permitted it, to
give Christ the honor of foyling the Devil, and to show the good Spirit was a
bane unto the evil one. But we may piously believe, Christ pleased to be
tempted after Baptism, to give Christians an example, that we can no sooner
receive the grace of God, whereby we are adopted and made his Children, then
immediately the Devil is upon our backs; as also to show, the Devil cannot
tempt us beyond our power of resistance, if we recur to Prayer, to Fast, to
Reading Scriptures, or the like, as Christ did, who made himself our example of
these defenses; and to declare besides, that those who will become Doctors
abroad to others, must first go themselves Scholars into the School of a
virtuous Solitude.

2. There is much difference between the forty days fast of Moses, of Elias,
and this like Fast of our Savior: for theirs were performed by the help of an
extrinsecal assisting grace, this by intrinsical, flowing from the Deity. The
causes of this Fast were many; As, that thereby he might satisfy for Adams
eating the forbidden Apple; That his own humane Soul might be more apt to
contemplation by this means; That he might sanctify the Lenten fast of forty
days, which he knew his Apostles would erect and deliver over for the Church to
follow until the worlds end, in imitation of this example he had given them.
When it is said, That after forty days he was hungry, this argues not but he
might sooner have felt the want of meat, however his divinity supplied the
defect thereof: and when he was sensible of hunger afterward, it was not that
he could no longer fast, but to have the merit of being tempted against his
holy purpose, and of resisting that Temptation, for our future instructions in
like occasions.

3. The Tempters approaching, argues, he came visibly in the shape of a man,
which he had assumed; for Christ had his internals so regulated (as likewise
Adam by Original Justice had) that he could not be tempted by any inward
Suggestion against Reason: nor was Adam (what-ere he might have been) so
tempted, but by Eve, and she by a Serpent outwardly appearing. When the Devil
said, If thou be the Son of God, it argues he was doubtful of it, for he had
heard the voice from heaven saying, This is my beloved Son, when Christ was
Baptized; as also he had heard how John the Baptist preached him to be the
Messiah, the Son of God; and yet seeing him appear to be a man; and finding he
was hungry (as men are) he tempts him to break his fast, by the subtilty of
telling him, it would show him to be the Son of God, if he would turn stone
into bread, to satisfy his hunger.

4. Excellent answer, giving no advantage to the aggressor, but repelling him
rather by his own weapons turned upon him by holy Writ, saying, Man does not
only live by bread, but by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God,
Deuteronomy. c. 8. v. 3. and what need he convert the stones to bread, to manifest his
power, who with the least word of his mouth could feed the better part of man,
his Soul; intimating thereby Prayer and Meditation to be as fit a food for the
refreshment of a Christian, as his daily bread; the one enabling him to live
eternally, the other helping out a momentary breathing only.

5, 6, 7. The evil Spirit finding Gluttony to be no motive able to prevail with
Deity, flies to the medium that had wrought upon himself, the Titillation of
Ambition or Vainglory, when he said he would be like the Highest, fondly
thinking what prevailed with him in Heaven, would work upon our Lord on Earth,
To be forsooth attended on by holy Angels, though in an act of diabolical
presumption, Precipitation of himself from the pinnacle of the Temple: Too short
a cloak to hide so large a sin as the Revenge thou aymest at beneath it: Thou
had thy self a Fall from Heaven down to Hell, which thou would now repay,
by giving Christ another from off the Temple (where God is adored) down to the
ground, where thy High Altar is, when men adore low Creatures of the earth,
before their high Creator. This, this, fond Serpent, is thine aim, to make thy
God lie sprawling on the earth, as thou do lie in everlasting flames; and
this thou would have done before the doors of all the holy Priests whose
houses were about the Temple, so to make them scorn and trample ore the God
they had adored upon their holy Altars. Alas! how short is thy Serpentine
wisdom of his that is eternal? of his that sees thy specious pretexts are all
deceits, and tells thee so when he replies; Thou shall not tempt thy Lord, thy
God, Deuteronomy. 6.16. How can thou hope to Tempt hereafter any man to evil under
show of good? this thou have got, to make poor man thy Master, by aiming at the
Mastery upon thy God. To conclude, by the Hands of Angels in this Text, is
understood their aid, for Spirits have no hands, nor any other limbs or parts
at all.

8, 9, 10. Alas how poor a thing is Avarice to tempt a God withal: say who is
able first to give him any thing, and it shall be restored. Romans 11. v. 35.
Thus creatures seem to uncreate their God in their foolish imaginations,
thinking him to be imperfect as themselves, needy or indigent as they; who yet
has made, and given to the universe a being out of nothing. But for the devil
to presume God should adore him too, for that he could not give, this is a
fondness not to be expressed, as passing all imagination and so was best
returned with a scorn, of bidding the fond usurper know his distance, go (like
a Lacquey) at the heels of his creator; and well he was not yet reduced to his
first principle, to nothing, by an immediate annihilation. It was indeed high
time to tame his insolence, when nothing but an homage due to God, an Adoration
would suffice him. No, devil, no, maugre thy pride, Thou must ador^ thy Lord
thy God, and he alone it is that thou, (and we, and all the world) must serve.
His are the Heavens, and the earth is his; and well it is thou art the Lacquey
yet of him, thou would have Lorded over if thou could. It is his greater
glory to force thee to thy duty, maugre thy proud heart, then to deprive
himself of what is good in thee, (thy being) how bad soever thou art thy
self, and howsoever despicablely miserable in that being too.

11. Some do doubt, how Christ came back to his desert of Quarentana, when
the devil was gone, affirming the good Angels carried him thither, as the bad
Angel had brought him thence; but probably himself gave his own Divinity leave
to do that office to his body, if yet we may not say it was the effect of his
glorified soul and body too, for they were both as glorious then as now.

Sure enough as soon as he was there, the Angels, (as to their Lord and God)
came offering their attendance: however, this is for our comfort, that after
the devil has tempted us (if we resist) we may hope, the Angels will come to
comfort us, that need it, since they did so to Christ, who stood in no
necessity thereof at all.

The Application.
1. WE had the honor to be called into the field to day by the Lieutenant
General, the Priest of holy Church: but we are led up to the Battle, by the
Captain General himself our Savior Jesus Christ, who has already vanquished
all our enemies, for as he dyed to conquer death, and purchase us eternal life
by dying, so by his being tempted, he secured us of the victory in our
Temptations, if we but resist the Temptor, and (persisting in our holy
purposes) Crown the Fast, with our Perseverance therein: such as Jesus in his
hunger gave us an example of, although not bound to Fast as we.

2. It is a common practice of the devil when he cannot tempt to open sin, to
flatter by pretense of sanctity: and so to draw us into the trap of
self-conceit, and dangerous vain glory; thus he (in vain) attempted Jesus
Christ; thus he deludes the souls that he tempts to sin by telling them they
are Predestined to be saved, and cannot finally be damned, do what they will;
the least humility is remedy to this vain glorious disease; Thou shall not
tempt thy Lord thy God; (our Saviors way to kill that devil of vain glory)
Saint Paul has such another; He that thinks he stands, let him beware he fall
not. Religious fear and trembling is the firmest footing to hold us fast upon
the highest Pinnacles of Grace.

3. The latter end of all Temptation shows the Temptors aim, the ruin of the
tempted soul. This is designed under fair pretexts, such as do tickle
natures appetite, Riches, pleasure, honor, and command; but see the choking
Hook armed with alluring baits, behold Idolatry coucht under Gratitude. It
seems a reasonable homage to adore the giver of so great a gift, as all the
wealth and pleasure of the world; but it is a huge injustice, to receive them
from the hands of an usurper, who has as little power to give, as we to take
the stolen gift. And mark how this usurper then pretends to give, when the
right Owner takes away, by a command of Abstinence.

Christ came not here to reign, but to bestow on us a Crown of glory; to rob
us then of heaven, the devil proffers us the scum thereof, the rubbige swept
away from thence, and cast into the common shore, the sink of nature, Earth.
O how sordid earth appears, when I behold the beauty of the heavens; thus holy
David, thus we ought to say, and more, with Jesus, bid the fiend avaunt; so
shall we by religious adoration of Almighty God accompanied with holy Poverty
this time of Lent, forbear to covet riches (and by them to Idolize unto the
devil) add then these good works to the Fast they will accomplish, So shall
we render our selves, the Purified souls we pray to be by fasting.

On the second Sunday in Lent:
The Antiphon. 2 Cor. 17. v. 9, etc. THe vision which thou have seen, thou
shall tell to none, until the Son of man do rise from death.

Verse. To Angels God has, etc.

Resp. That in all thy ways, etc.


The Prayer.
O God, who do behold us void of all strength, guard us, we beseech thee,
exteriorly and interiorly, that we may be defended from all corporal
adversities, and purified, from evil cogitations of our souls.

The Illustration.
THe last Sundays Prayer laid our Lenten Fast for the chief ground of all the
Prayers in Lent. This (fixed on that ground) looks to the end of the aforesaid
Fast, our purification of the whole creature which we are; and so confessing
here first, that we are void of all strength to guard our selves, we beg of
Almighty God a guard both for the exterior and interior man; that thus our
bodies being outwardly defended from all corporal adversities (particularly
sickness, to tempt us from our Fast) our souls may be purified from all
inward evils of filthy cogitations; and this with regard to what Saint Leo
told us last Sunday, was required for the integrity of a Fast, namely to
withdraw our minds from sin, lest in vain we did else take meat from our
mouths: and hence we shall find little excuse by what casuists tell us, the
end of the precept is no precept to us, though the means to that end be of
absolute command: for example in this present case, they say, it is no breach of
our Lenten Fast to commit a sin in Lent, though we are commanded to use the
means of fasting, to the end we may avoid sin, and so render our selves the
purified creatures, which holy Church intends by this forty days Fast to make
us: for truly casuists in this may seem to favor us, but yet upon reflection
it is no favor, because sin being at all times prohibited under strict
command, we never sin mortally, but we break some precept of Almighty God,
greater then this of the Church, by any other kind of mortal sinning, which at
all times is forbid us; and then much more strictly, when we are actually under
a wholesome cure for sin, the holy Fast of Lent: so it will not be to render
souls scrupulous, but religious, to tell them that sins are aggravated at
least, when committed at that time, we are commanded to take Physic for
preventing sin; as now, when holy Church injoynes a Fast expressly for that
purpose: But to our maine design, let us see how this days Prayer suits to
the Epistle and Gospel of the day, as well as to the season of Lent; why truly
very well to the former, because this Lenten Fasting is one of the Apostolical
precepts mentioned here by Saint Paul to the Thessalonians; and in regard
Fasting is one of the best of remedies against that carnal sin, which this
days Epistle dehorteth from; as also it is the best step to that walk,
recommended to us from virtue to virtue, that we may by abounding more and more
therein, please God, by the fulfilling of his holy will, which is (as Saint
Paul to day calls it) our Sanctification, and that particularly by the gift of
chastity, of purity both in body and soul, which altogether comes home even to
the letter, and full sense of this days Prayer: nor is the Gospel of the
Transfiguration read to day for any other end, then to mind us of being
spiritually transfigured from Polluted to Chaste bodies, from Sinful to Sainted
Souls; for so shall we appear to our Saviors eye, with faces shining like
the Sun, and bodies pure as the whitest Snow, as himself appeared on
Mount-Tabor to his Apostles, and as the expositors conceive Moses and Elias did
appear so too; thus to show we cannot by our virtuous lives approach near to
God, without being Transfigured to the world, and made mirrours of admiration
to men and Angels, and such indeed ought to be our Lenten Fasters. How exactly
then is this days Prayer set to the other service of the day, when by saying
it in order to perform our Lenten Fasts, it brings forth in us the effect of
Sanctification, which the Epistle aims at, and that of our Transfiguration
from Sinners to Saints, which the Gospel points unto.

The Epistle. 1 ad These. c. 4. v. 1, etc.
1. For the rest therefore, Brethren, we desire and beseech you in our Lord
Jesus, that as you have received of us how you ought to walk, and to please
God, as also you do walk, that you abound more.

2. For you know what precepts I have given to you by our Lord Jesus.

3. For this is the will of God, your Sanctification: that you abstain from
Fornication.

4. That every one may know to possess his vessel in Sanctification and
honor.

5. Not in the Passion of lust, as also the Gentiles that know not God.

6. And that no man over-goe, nor circumvent his brother in business: because
our Lord is revenger of all these things, as we have foretold you, and have
testified.

7. For God has not called us into uncleanness, but into Sanctification.


The Explication.
1. THe Apostle fitly uses the word walk instead of live in this and most
places, since it is not a posture suitable to the present life for Christians
to stand still; we remember our Savior rebuked those that did it. Matthew. 20.
v. 6. Saying, why stand ye here the whole day idle? as if to stand still were
to be idle and loyter: so the posture of a good Christian is and ought to be
walking, moving, going on from virtue to virtue, Psalm. 38. until at last he
arrive to the rewarder and source of all virtues, God himself: for by bidding
us to walk so, as thereby we may please God and abound more and more, we are
bid to accumulate virtues upon virtues, so long as we live in this vicious
world; and that we may know how to do this, the Apostle bids, that we follow
his rule for this purpose framed to our hands, as it was to the Thessalonians;
since what he writ to them was with intention it should be handed over from age
to age, even to us, and to those that should live in the very last of times.

2. His meaning is, that he gave them this rule of perfection by Authority,
Commission, or inspiration from our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and this
rule was not to tell them only what he had observed in our Savior to this
purpose, making himself an example of perfection to us all, but also what by
inspiration of the holy Ghost himself as an Apostle entrusted with the care
and charge of souls, had upon occasion found expedient to prescribe unto them:
and this Authority, as it was given to the Apostles, so it descends from them
unto their successors, the Fathers and rulers of Souls, especially the
governing party of the Church the Pope, and Bishops thereof.

3. By the will of God is not here understood that will which is commonly
called the will of his Beneplacitum, or holy pleasure, to do himself what he
pleases, but the will of his sign, mark or token what he would have us to
do, and that not in general, for so his will is, we should have perfect and
universal Sanctity in all our actions; but in particular, he points out here
for us the Sanctification of chastity, (so we may see by all the following
verses;) as who should say, God was particularly pleased to point out his
Signal will unto us, that the virtue, which is most suitable to his infinite
simplicity and purity, (namely chastity) should be aimed at by all Christians,
that even those who were married people should by tempering their carnal
passions and desires, partake in some measure of this divine virtue; and those
who were not married, should have an express prohibition from the foul
impurity of Fornication: since it seems the Apostle forbids it here, not only
under the general rule, (the prohibition thereof in the commandments,) but
with a specially preamble, that he does by name forbid this sin, as having it
specially declared unto him, that it was the signal will of God, he should do
so.

4. This place is commonly understood as prescribing a rule of moderation to
married people, that they so use the lawful bed of pleasure, as they forget
not to Sanctify themselves even by, and in the use thereof, remembering God
has elevated that corporal communication (so much coveted and delighted in by
Flesh and Blood) that he has raised the wonted civil contract of marriage to
be now a more holy thing, even a Sacrament or conduitepipe of his holy grace
into the Souls of such people, as make religious and not lustful use thereof:
for of the latter we see sad examples in the seven husbands of Sara, snatched
from her bed, because they married her purely for lust, not for any limited or
regulated love: and so again by a pious abstinence upon fasts or feasts, from
corporal knowledge of each other, specially when married Christians receive
the Sacrament, they use their vessels in Sanctification of themselves, and
honor of God thereby, for reverence to whose blessed Body and holy Sacraments
they abstain from their otherwise lawful pleasures: yet there is a deeper and
more universal application aimed at by the Apostle in this place, even to all
Christians whatsoever married or single; since though to married persons their
mutually betrothed bodies to one another are their vessels properly here
specified, yet to single persons by their vessels, are meant their single
bodies, which contain their souls within them, as so many precious liquors in
the sight, and to the Palate of Almighty God, who is jealous, lest any of that
liquour should be drawn out, and given to creatures; that is, lest by
following the impulse of sense, they should pour out the affections of their
souls upon their own corporal pleasures, or the delight of any other body
whatsoever, for pure respect to the creature, and not so stand upon their
guard, as not to part with the least drop of their souls affections, either to
themselves or any others, which are all due to Almighty God; for this is to
possess each one his own vessel, as Romans 6 v. 19. Saint Paul advises, and
to possess it in Sanctification of himself by acts of love to the divine
Majesty, and in honor of Almighty God by so doing: and contrary to this
counsel do all those, who make their bodies possess, that is to say, command
their Souls, whereas the soul is to possess her body in this sense of
commanding it, as finally she shall do in the kingdom of heaven, and as at
first Adams soul did, even here on earth.

5. This verse prosecutes the sense of the former, by representing unto us the
bestiality it is in Christians to proceed like Gentiles, who are called a
people that is no people, because they are more like beasts then men; and such
the Apostle accounts Christians, who follow the passions of lust, the full
swinge of their carnal desires, without any religious limit thereof, even when
carnal pleasure is lawful; because to do thus, is as if we knew no God, for
whose sake we were to refrain our inordinate appetites, not only in carnal
pleasures, but in those meats, drinks, or companies that propend us thereunto.

6. In this place the Apostles sense lies liable to a very easy mistake, and
the words sound, as if he did leap from the Subject of lust, to that of fraud,
deceit or injury, but indeed he prosecutes his former sense in this whole
Epistle: So he must here be understood by business to forbid Adultery as above
he has forbidden Fornication; not to overgo is here meant literally,
forbidding any man to go over his neighbors marriage bed, and thereby defraud
him of his due, which is to have his wife wholly and solely to his own single
use; and by business is not here understood traffic, bargain, sale, law or
the like, but properly that business which is between man and wife, their
mutual accompanying one another in the Act of wedlock, because our Lord will
in a particular way revenge (and commonly he does it by some curse upon the
children of Adulterous parents) this wrong, for as much as it is a special
abuse to God to violate the Faith of marriage bed, since by the Sacrament of
marriage is represented the union between Christ and his spouse the holy
Church; and consequently, since for that reason men are bid to love their
wives, as Christ does love his Church, and wives their husbands, as the Church
loves Christ, so to violate the sign of this holy union, is to attempt an
adultery even between Christ and his holy spouse, since they who are disloyal
to their marriage bed, can no more be, what they are appointed by God for,
representers of Christ his fidelity to holy Church, and of the Churches loyalty
to him.

7. See how the Apostle closes this subject with a general address to all
Christians, that chastity is a virtue they all must practice more or less; and
since in particular the Gentiles were noted for huge licentiousness and
liberty in their lustful ways, he requires of Christians a special study of
the virtue contrary thereunto, namely of purity and chastity, as a distinctive
sign from Gentilisme and a peculiar badge of Christianity; whence it is, that
as all Gentiles, in the primitive Church (before they were reconciled) had
particular instructions to forgo their former uncleanness, and were made by
Baptism to renounce the world, the Flesh and the Devil, so we see it is still
continued a rule in holy Church, that all who are new converted from Infidelity
to the true faith of Christ, and all Infants, as soon as they are borne, are
by the voices of their Godfathers and Godmothers to make the like renunciation,
and to enter a solemn Covenant with Almighty God of purity and Sanctification,
to show they renounce the soul feind, their former parent, and adhere to
Almighty God, the fountain of Purity and Chastity; and that peculiar virtue of
Sanctification is it, the Apostle here says all Christians are called unto.

The Application.
1. THe grand design of finishing by good works the Purification we aim at by
this Lenten fast is closely carried on to day by the recommended work of
chastity, from the very beginning to the end of this Epistle.

2 Now because we are not only unable of our selves to compass this virtue,
but have further huge interior and exterior temptations against it; and are
for the most part more propense naturally to the sin of the flesh, then to any
other vice whatsoever.

3. And lastly, because the breach of Chastity exposes us more to corporal
adversities, then the violating other v^^^ues do, which violation we are yet
often tempted unto, by evil (that is to say, by unclean) cogitations. Therefore
as least able of our selves to compass this Virtue of Chastity, necessary for
rendering our Fast complete, and our Souls purified thereby, We pray for it most
properly as above, much as on S. Joseph's day we pray, That what our Possibility
cannot obtain (namely Chastity) may be granted us by his Intercession.

The Gospel. Matthew. 17. v. 1, etc.
1 And after six days Jesus takes unto him Peter, and James, and John his
brother, and brings them into a high mountain apart.

2 And he was transfigured before them. And his face did shine as the Sun: and
his garments became white as snow.

3 And behold there appeared to them Moses and Elias, talking with him.

4 And Peter answering, said to Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here: if
thou will, let us make here three Tabernales, one for thee, and one for Moses,
and one for Elias.

5 And as he was yet speaking, behold a bright cloud overshadowed them: And lo
a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased; hear ye him.

6 And the disciples hearing it, fell upon their face, and were sore afraid.

7 And Jesus came and touched them: and he said to them, Arise, and fear not.

8 And they lifting up their eyes, saw no body, but only Jesus.

9 And as they descended from the mount, Jesus commanded them, saying, Tell the
vision to no body, till the Son of man be risen from the dead.


The Explieation.
1. IT was six days after Christ had told his Apostles and the people, that
some of them who were then in his company, should not dye, before they had seen
him in his Kingdom: Thus ended the sixteenth Chapter of S. Matthew; yet S. Luke
recounting the story of Christ's Transfiguration, says, it was eight days
after our Savior foretelling his passion, told them, That some there present
should see him in his Kingdom before they dyed: here seems a contradiction,
where one says eight, the other six days after: but both are true in their
several senses; for S. Luke includes the day in which this was spoken, and that
on which Christ was transfigured: S. Matthew speaks only of the six days
between, spent by Christ in teaching and preaching, as he went that twenty
leagues between Caesarea Philippi (the place where he spoke this) and Mount
Tabor, whither he went to fulfill his saying: So that although many conceive
diversely in the true sense of what Christ meant by his Kingdom, which some will
have to be his Church, others his Resurrection, others his Ascension (whereof
many then present were witnesses) yet the most probable opinion is, that he
meant by his Kingdom, this very mystery of his Transfiguration, wherein he
showed the Apostles in a transient passage a glimmering of that permanent glory
he was to reign in for all Eternity in his Kingdom of Heaven; for having before
declared he was to dye, it was fit he should give them a testimony, he was
nevertheless the Ever-living God; and for this purpose he did in this glorious
manner appear unto them, so that they seeing him, thought they were in heaven;
and consequently, having seen him thus glorious once, could not lose their
Faith, but that he would assuredly rise again from death to life, which yet few
could give credit unto, when once they see him dead and buried. The reason why
he took these three Apostles only, was to show, he had special regard to each
of them more then ordinary; to Peter, as the head of all the rest; to James, as
honored with the Title of our Saviors Brother, for being like him in person,
and so left his successor at Jerusalem, where James was the first Bishop after
Christ his death, and first Martyr of the Apostles: to John, as his favorite,
being known by the title of that Disciple whom Jesus loved: These three
therefore Christ singles out, and carries them into a high Mountain, called
Thabor, near to Nazareth, where Christ was bred up, and not far from Capernaum,
where he wrought his most Miracles; high, to show heaven is hugely elevated
from earth, and that, as in heaven the glory of God shall be, so in Thabor the
glory of Christ was manifested to those, who were (like the Elect, amongst many
chosen) singled out for eternal happiness, in the next, and for testimonies
here of Christ his Deity, shining through the cloud of his humanity, as the
next verse describes.

2. His Transfiguration consisted not in the change of his humane shape, nor in
his giving his body all the gifts of glorified bodies in heaven, impassibility,
agility, subtility, clarity, but in showing to the Apostles the last only of
these gifts, and that so far forth as their weak eyes were capable of, which
clarity Christ was fain to suppress, whilst he lived here, that he might be
seen and conversed with by all men; for else it was at all times due to him, as
all the other gifts of glorified bodies were, by reason of his Divinity united
to his humanity. Note, though there be special mention made of a change in his
face only, shining like the Sun, and his garments become white as snow, yet
this clarity, or glory was general, over all his blessed body; and as the
brightness of the Sun in his face was a type of his Deity, so the whiteness of
his garments did represent the purity of his humanity; and withal it showed us
how the grace and glory of God renders our Souls as white as snow, and by that
means transfigures the Saints from their Ethiopian blackness of sin, into so
many garments of whitest lillies, as it were, bedecking the body of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.

3. These two were summoned as Witnesses to testify that whatsoever the Law or
Prophets said of Christ should be verified, Moses standing for the first, Elias
for the second, as also to reward them for their forty days Fast, which each
had undergone, the one to be worthy thereby to receive the Laws, the other to
ascend the Mount Horeb; and farther yet, because he would take away the doubt
which people had, that he was Moses or Elias, or some other Prophet: and again,
lest Moses should appear to have been injured when Christ did abrogate the
ancient Law: as also, lest Elias should be valued equal to Almighty God in
glory, which some conceived of him: fin^lly, to show he had full power of life
and death; to call Moses dead thither, and to summon Elias alive from the place
where he was kept till his second coming: To both of whom Christ communicated a
splendour, something like indeed to that of his own garments white as snow (that
so they might be more worthy of the honor done them to confer and talk with
him) but far inferior to the whiteness of his own.

4. All Expositors say, this was a speech of a man half beside himself, drunk,
as it were, with the present glut of contentment, and not forecasting future
things; besides that it was impertinent to build Tabernacles for those whom he
saw in glory, as also it was to fix Christ upon earth, and in Thabor, who came
to purchase heaven for all the world by his passion (which by his remaining
here had been prevented) and to hope for heaven before himself had labored to
deserve it, or to think eternal Beatitude consisted in the glory of Christ's
humanity, and not in the beholding of his Deity, which here they did not see.

5. The interposition of this Cloud upon this speech, argues a check given to
the speaker thereof, by depriving him of that alluring sight, which he knew not
how to make right use of, but not separating them from a due distance both to
see and hear, whence they fell (as S. Luke says) into a present fear; yet this
Cloud was clear, to show the difference betwixt the Old Law and the New, That
being delivered to Moses in a dark cloud, This avowed to be delivered by
Christ, before Moses, Elias, and these three Apostles, in a clear resplendent
Cloud; out of which was heard the voice of God the Father, saying, This is my
beloved Son, etc. Some think Moses and Elias were gone, before this voice was
heard, lest the Apostles might doubt, to which of the three it was spoken: but
since they were to be both eye and ear-witnesses too, it is probable, they might
see to whom the address was made, and questionless God did make this testimony
such, as could not be liable to doubt, since he was pleased to have these
Witnesses of the thing, as he made them, saying, Hear him, that is, Hear my
beloved Son, for from his mouth, not from the mouth of Moses and Elias, shall
proceed all Truth and Salvation to Mankind. The reason why this command of
hearing him, was not added when he was styled by the like voice from heaven, to
be Son to the same Father, at his Baptism, was because then he was only showed
to be the Messiah, whom men before conceived the Baptist to have been: But here
he is in presence of Moses and Elias preferred in point of Doctrine before
them, as if all they had said or done was but to prefigure him, but that what
he says, reports to none beside himself, as having vigor in it, to make him
known to be the Illuminator of all the former Prophets, and so of himself, the
true Doctor of Nations, and Lawmakers thereunto, whence he (for his own sake)
is to be heard, others for respect only to him, and there was reason to say,
Hear him, that comes to abrogate the Old, and to make a New Law, to dye for the
sins of his people, in such excess of ignominy, as he and Moses did but now
talk of, to rise from the dead himself, and thereby to empower all men to rise
again (after they are dead) to the Judgment Seat, where those, that till then
believe it not, shall find there is a Hell, and those who are believers shall
know there is a Purgatory, and a Limbus Patrum, since Moses was from the latter
summoned hither to this Mystery of Transfiguration, which was exhibited as an
undoubted testimony of the Truths that were preached by him, whom we were then
commanded to hear, and consequently to believe.

6. They feared at the shrilness of the voice, though sweet, at the loss of the
sight they had before of Moses and Elias, whom they might suspect were sent
away, to fulminate vengeance from God upon the people, who had abused his
beloved Son, and hence fearing, they fell upon their faces, to show, they were
themselves ready to adore him.

7. And Jesus pitying the fright they were in, came presently to comfort them,
and raise them up again from the posture of their prostration, thereby to show,
we cannot sooner humble our selves to God, then he is ready to raise a comfort
in us.

8. The reason why they then see none but Jesus, was, because now all things
were given up to his cure, no more rigorous Law was to terrify the people, the
sweet Law of grace was to be their guide, he alone their comfort; so that to
him they were to stand firm in all distresses, of him to receive all reliefes,
and by him to be brought finally to the eternity of that heavenly glory, which
here the Apostles had but a transient glimmering of; thereby to show this is
not a time or place for comforts, but rather for afflictions, and that lest we
should be dejected by being always in affliction we may hope for the
intervening comfort now and then of mystical Transfigurations, by which we
shall (for a short time) take content in the service of God, but they passing
away again, are to leave us unto the trials of new afflictions, till by
frequent conformities of our wills, to the pleasure of Almighty God, we be
rewarded with eternal glory, for our patient enduring the many Eclypses we
found here of heavenly comforts in our Souls, by the interposition of earthly
tribulations.

9. By bidding them tell this vision to no body, he forbids their speaking of
it not only to the people, but even to the rest of the Apostles, lest it might
trouble them, not to have been present at it; and by his resurrection, all men
would be easily made believe he was God, who, if they had been told it before,
would have doubted thereof, especially when they see him dead and buried: so to
speak of this Testimony of his Deity before his resurrection, were labor lost:
but by this injoyning silence of his glory, and propalation of his death and
passion, Christ gave us an admirable example to conceal our own praises, and
to be content with publication of pressures and infirmities, since none can
have any infamy so great to him, as was the ignominy of the Cross to Christ,
wherein we see he gloryed, whilst he suppressed the fame of his glory, till he
had suffered the ignominy of his most opprobrious death: hence Saint Paul
forbids himself all other glory, then in that of the Cross of Christ: a good
lesson for all good Christians to learn, and practice to be perfect in.

The Application.
1. SInce there is a day made specially sacred to the Mystery of the
Transfiguration, the sixth of August, when that Feast is celebrated, we cannot
expect to have this mystery looked on to day so directly, as that the Prayer
should literally relate to it; suffice it then to find it mystically proper to
the Prayer.

2. And thus, it will be proper enough, since we are taught the Transfiguration
was at least a transient vision beatificall, such as Saint Peter held to be a
kind of Heaven, where he was content to build a Tabernacle of abode: and look
how unable we are to be chaste, so are we in our selves void of all strength to
go to Heaven; and have need of a world of guards both interior and exterior,
to preserve us from the corporal adversities (or sins) that keep us thence, or
from the spiritual sins of evil thoughts that shut up Heaven Gates against us.

3. To conclude, since nothing makes our way securer into Heaven, then to carry
a Pure Soul in a Chaste body, (we being taught the clean of heart, are
therefore blessed because they shall see God, for this cause the Gospel of the
transfiguration was very fitly joined to the Epistle of chastity, because the
Chaste Body is that Transient Heaven upon Earth, which is most delightful to a
pure Soul. And as Chastity Transfigures us into a similitude of God, whom we
shall then live like unto when we see him, and therefore like unto him because
we see him, that we may, (by the virtue of chastity joined to our holy Fast) be
Transfigured into a similitude of his Divine Majesty.

We pray with holy Church as above. On the third Sunday in Lent:
The Antiphon. Luke 11. v. 27. A Certain woman of the multitude, lifting up
her voice said, blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the Paps that gave
thee Suck: But Jesus says to her, yea rather blessed are they that hear the
word of God and keep it.

Verse. To his Angels, etc.

Resp. That in all, etc.


The Prayer.
WE beseech thee Almighty God, look down on the desires of thy humble people,
and extend the right hand of thy Majesty in our defense.

The Illustration.
IF any be to seek here what is meant by the desires, we beseech God to look
down upon, of his humble people, it is but casting back an eye, to what was
declared in the first Sundays Prayer of Lent, to be the end of this holy fast;
and finding it thereto be our purification, we shall soon conclude that self
same end is still and ought ever to be our desires all the Lent long: because
the continuation of the Fasting Medium, argues our constant desire of arriving
at the end, to which it drives, our being Purified by that means. So thus we
see the Torrent of our holy Fast runs never the less slowly on, because it
makes not a noise in our ears, rather it grows the deeper, by how much less
we hear thereof: for shallow waters are those that tell us of the stones they
fall upon, but deep ones silently go by: nor is the style of humble people any
common place, but hugely proper to this time of Lent, which draws the whole
Christian world upon their knees, and not content to have them low as earth,
while they Fasting watch and pray, did in a manner bury them below the earth,
when on Ashwednesday, they were all Sprinkled over with holy Ashes, as if they
were not worthy longer to be the upper earth, that had so proudly rebelled
against Almighty God, but must lie lower now, and hope by falling down to rise
again: and truly if we reflect upon the words of this Prayer, they are exact
terms of a most humble Soul, who dares not say, she has a will to fast on
still, and to be purified, but only tells Almighty God, it is her desire, and
hopes this humble expression will make it be his holy will, she shall obtain
her desires, because his only looking on it (as she humbly prays to day, he
will) is able to effect it: But lest we forget to show the Prayer suits as well
to the Epistle and Gospel, as to the time of Lent, we must remember no terms
could more directly exhaust them both, then what this Prayer is couched in: For
how can we be followers else of Almighty God, as Saint Paul exhorts us to be
with the Ephesians, unless we show our selves to have learned the lesson of
the Son of God without book; Learn of me, that am meek and humble of heart;
which lesson this days Prayer repeats, when holy Church calls us the humble
people of Almighty God, and meekness ever goes with humility hand in hand: so
having set our first step right into the track of this Epistle, we need not
fear the missing of our way; for true humility has root in love, and will not
stumble at an enemy, unless it be to fall upon him with a kiss, desiring him
to rise from dangers way, and leave us to run his hazard, whose sins are
greater then any his can be: say now, beloved, which of you cannot go on
through all the counsels of Saint Paul in this Epistle, when with Christ your
charity has laid you humbly at the feet of your enemies, and made you now
offer your selves an oblation to him, that before you hated. Blessed God! how
small a Key opens a great door into devotion, when diligent Souls will once
vouchsafe to turn it: I dare say, there is not one syllable in all this whole
Epistle, which this Prayer thus applied unto it, will not correspond withal.
And to the Gospel what more suitable, then to beg help of Gods right hand for
those humble people in the valleys of the Church, where the devil plays his
pranks, as soon as God Almighty turns his face up to the mountains, where
his Speculative Saints abide: for thus we see it was literally with those in
the vales below, when Christ upon Mount Thabor was Transfigured before Peter,
James, and John, as if the devil had spyed his time, when Jesus face was turned
up to heaven, and then the feind presumes to enter into those below: so to
prevent the like being possessed in this our valley of misery, we are taught by
holy Church to day, to pray that God will look upon the desires of his humble
people, and extend the right hand of his Majesty in our defense: nor is any
hand indeed strong enough, to wrest us from the devils clutches, but the right
hand of God himself.

And thus we see, how rightly understood, the Churches Prayers report to all
the other service of the Church. The Epistle. Ephesians. 5. v. 1, etc.
1 Be ye therefore followers of God, as most dear Children.

2 And walk in love, as Christ also loved us, and delivered himself for us an
oblation and host to God in an odor of Sweetness.

3 But fornication and all uncleanness, or avarice, let it not so much as be
named among you, as it becomes Saints.

4 Or filthiness, or foolish talk, or scurrility being to no purpose: but
rather giving of thanks.

5 For understanding know you this, that no fornicator, or unclean, or
covetous person (which is the service of Idols) has inheritance in the
Kingdom of Christ and of God.

6 Let no man seduce you with vain words: For, for these things comes the
anger of God upon the Children of diffidence.

7 Become not therefore partakers with them.

8 For you were sometimes darkness, but now light in our Lord; walk as
children of the light.

9 (For the fruit of the light is in all goodness, and justice, and verity.)


The Explication.
1. HE had ended the last Chapter before this, in showing them how mercifully
and lovingly God in Christ had forgiven their offenses, and so there he bid
them likewise forgive each other; whereupon he now proceeds saying, Be
therefore followers of God in this example of remitting to each other your
offenses, as showing therein you are most dear Children unto God, by letting
the world see, you follow his example, and in following it give a testimony to
the world, that you are indeed most dear unto him, whilst he gives you that
grace, which above all others makes you dear, namely the grace to imitate and
follow him, in a practice so much above flesh and blood, as it demonstrates,
there is more then man in those who can arrive to this perfection, that is, a
likeness unto God himself, whose special attribute is mercy, as transcending
(in our eyes) all the rest of his works.

2. And since this mercy is radicated in love (for it must needs be love, that
produces this effect) therefore the Apostle prosecutes his exhortation to this
mercy, by bidding us, not only once be merciful, but walk, (continually
persist and live) in acts of the same love, which produce mercy in us; and this
continuation of love is showed to be meant by walking in it, when the next
words in this verse import the same, else they would not bid us walk in love,
as Christ did, who when once he loved us did love us to the end, as is even
here proved, when it is said, he delivered himself up for us an oblation and
host to God, to show that as his love continued to his life's end, so
consequently it must continue to eternity, since by his death he gave himself
(and his affections to us both together) up into the hands of his eternal
Father, and in eternity there neither is, nor can be any change: so the Apostle
might have added, he loved us not only unto the end, but even beyond it, that
is to say, without end, since his life did end with an Act of such undoubted
love, as never can have end. Blessed God! how this ought to animate us, that we
see our selves made capable to imitate Almighty God, though not in his power,
nor greatness, yet in his humility, meekness, and love, whilst his Sacred
Son gave us examples thereof, thereby to dignifie us with the title, of not
only his, but even Gods own followers, since by doing what Christ did, who was
God, as well as man, we unite, and, as it were, identifie our Souls to God, as
Christ his humanity was united and made one person with his Sacred Deity; not
that our persons can be made one with God, but that our loves may be united to
his love by being the same to our neighbors, as Christ's was to us: and if we
will instance in the best example of this imitation, it is when we are content
to dye for our neighbors Souls, as Christ did dye for us; for that was indeed
an odor of sweetness to God, when his only and beloved Son was Sacrificed
unto him; and the like odor of sweetness do the martyrs of holy Church send
up to God, when to confirm the Faith they have settled in Christian Souls,
they are content to dye examples for them, to do the like, rather then to
desert their Faith.

3. And now the Apostle has told them, what they most do to imitate (and
thereby to please) God in the highest degree, he proceeds to tell them what
they must avoid and fly from, as they would fly from the face of a devil,
namely Fornication, etc. which he will not allow so much as to be named, or be
in the mouth of a Christian, lest it should be thought to come from his heart,
since the mouth speaks commonly out of the abundance of the hearts
affections, but bids us fly such sins, as it becomes Saints to do, those who
by their Baptism, vocation, and profession are truly consecrated Saints to
God, and therefore must not give the lest suspicion, that they go retrograde,
back to the devil again, by degenerating from that constant sanctity of
heart, which ought to shine in every action, word or thought of a Christian:
note we shall explicate Fornication and Uncleanness in the Epistle on the
fourteenth Sunday after Pentecost; avarice shall be explicated anon in the
fifth verse, of this Epistle, so we now proceed to the fourth verse as it here
follows in order.

4. By Filthiness is here understood obscaenity of words, for uncleanness is
properly that which is obscaenity in deeds or actions; by foolish talk is
understood wasting time in any impertinent discourse, that does not tend to
edification of our neighbor, by some report or other to Almighty God but
busies the mind in idleness, as the foolish virgins were busied, who not so
much for doing ill, as for not doing well, for fooling away their time, were
shut out of heaven; so all the discourse may be called foolish, that does not
tend to God more or less. By Scurrility is here properly understood rusticity
or rudeness in discourse, not only where it is wanton or obscene (to which
only sense some men ignorantly apply the word Scurrility) but when it is
redundant (nauseating the hearer) unproper to the Subject in hand, and to the
company present, or indeed unmannerly, and so offensive to them, when too too
ridiculous, as procuring laughter upon any ill chosen Subject, but principally
and above all, when it is breaking Jests out of holy Scripture, or the Fathers,
or Councels, and so making Sacred things the Subject of an idle end, which is
to raise laughter and mirth, from that which should render us most sober and
serious, whence is grounded that axiom, it is ill manners (besides that
thereof can come no good) to jest and scoff at Holy Things; and of Scurrility
in all these senses as above, the Apostles next sentence is, that it is nothing
to the purpose, meaning nothing at all tending to the Salvation of our Souls,
which is (and ought to be) always the scope of all our words, of our thoughts
and actions: not that by this the Apostle forbids civil mirth, such as
relaxeth the fixed sobriety of our minds, merely for honest recreation sake,
for such mirth is lawful, as offending neither God nor Man: but Scurrility is
ever to be avoided; and instead of that unlawful way of mirth in our
discourse, the Apostle exhorts to giving God thanks, that is by praising his
goodness, showed either to our selves or others in his mavelous providence
over all the world; for this is a scope so ample, as will ever give abundant
way to discourse, and so laudable, as no man can be offended at it.

5. In this verse the Apostle sums up what he had before forbidden, and tells us
that no such persons as these can hope for heaven, his meaning is, by being
such, not but that when they leave and repent, they may be saved: but here by
the covetous person, he puts us in mind of what he meant in the third verse
above by Avarice, namely Jdolatry of the mind, for as much as covetous persons
make their money their Idol God: I say Jdolatry of mind, or rather Spiritual
Jdolatry, because I would show how impertinently Heretics translate this place
of Scripture, when thereby they understand the prohibition of Images, or
pictures in the Churches, which is very far from the sense of this Text, where
the Apostle forbids to make Riches our God; for so he means by calling Avarice
adoration of Jdols; and such it might be in Catholics, if they did set up
their baggs of gold in Churches, and worship them; but who ever heard, they
were so fond, or how can they by worshipping pictures, in memory of the God or
Saints they represent, be said to love the pictures, as the covetous man does
his Idol, his Golden God.

But we are to note here by Avarice annexed to Fornication and Uncleanness,
the Apostle glaunceth at a huge excess of lust, such as makes men's minds long
after carnality, as covetousness does fix them wholly upon hoording up of
riches, and as such covetous men care not to cozen others for lucre of sordid
gain, so men wholly addicted to lust, care not to cozen other men of their
wives, and engrosse them to their own adulterous ends: and this kind of excess
in lust is properly called Carnal Avarice, because as the covetous man is
never satisfied with gain, so is this lustful mind never satiated, though
the body be rendered even unable to act the desires of a bestiall mind: whence
the Apostle properly calls it Spiritual Jdolatry, because such a man is always
adoring this Idol of his lust.

It is a pretty art the Apostle uses in the close of this verse, to put the
Kingdom of Christ, and of God together, as one joint thing; meaning that those
who with Christ here are humble, obedient, and holy, shall in heaven be
exhalted, rewarded, and glorified with him.

6. The Apostles meaning here is, that whosoever tells you, it is needless to
avoid your swing of pleasures in this world, provided you but believe, does
seduce and cheat you, and therefore, be not, says he, carried away with their
vain words, who would pretend to make you good Christians by Faith alone,
though you did not depose, or renounce the Sordid Gentilisme of your former
corrupted manners, and lives; these are indeed specious, but false allurements,
so we must take heed, we be not cheated by them, because for Christians
continuing their sinful courses, by relying only upon Faith alone, as
sufficient to save them; we often see the present effect of Gods anger upon
them, by the punishments inflicted either on their persons, or on their
Children and Family even in this life, and that is meant by the anger of God
here mentioned to fall upon the children of diffidence, namely those who are
not here confiding in God, that he will accept of our renouncing ill manners
for his sake, as well as our infidelity; for in the next life there can be no
diffidence, when the truth of all things, shall be known to all in general,
and none can doubt, or distrust what they ought to do, but shall either
receive reward or punishment for what they have already done.

7. Here good Christians are forbidden the participation with lewd ones, not in
their persons, but in their vices.

8. And that upon no less penalty then of falling back into the same darkness
they were in, before they were converted, when Gentilisme or Infidelity did not
forbid them such lewd courses, but held them in the dark of believing, there
was no sin in liberty of life, or rather in the licentiousness thereof; and
for this opinions sake, the Apostle calls the men that hold it, darkness it
self; and contrary-wise those who depose such errors, and become true
believers, he calls them light, because they following the light of grace,
become light it self; as therefore you are light, so walk like children
thereof, in the light of virtue and sanctity of life.

9. For the fruit of the light is (that is to say, consists) in all
goodness, meaning in benignity and bounty to others, and in justice, giving to
each his due, not defrauding, as above the covetous men were said to do, and
in verity is opposite to hypocrisy and lying; that so by these contrary
virtues to the vices of Infidels, you may (as by their fruits trees are known)
be distinguished from children of darkness, while you bring forth the fruits
of light.

The Application.
1. BY the Illustration of this days Prayer, we see how the aim of our
Purification is prosecuted therein; nor can there be a greater Purifier, then
the Fire of perfect Love and Charity, the virtue recommended in the two first
verses of this Epistle, as necessary to the accomplishment of our Lenten Fast.

2. And because Christian perfection, consists as well in declining evil as in
doing good, therefore we are here exhorted to avoid two sorts of evils for the
rendering our Holy Fast complete. The first is the evil of our own Tongues:
the next is the evil of lewd Company: both necessary to be avoided for
perfecting the work of Chastity recommended unto us on Sunday last.

3. Now in regard the Fire of Charity must be fetched as far as Heaven, and
handed to us by Almighty God himself, the chief Purifier of our Hearts; and in
regard these evils (above mentioned) are so weighty, and lie so heavy on us
continually, that no humane arm is strong enough to lift them off, and ease us
of their burden: Therefore we pray as above, to have these things done for us,
by extending the Right hand of God, first to give us this Charity, and next to
defend us from these Evils, by taking them away from us, that so we may be
bright shining purified Souls, as the close of the Epistle exhorts us to be.

The Gospel. Luke 11. v. 14, etc.
14 And he was casting out a devil, and that w^^ dumb. And when he had cast out
the devil, the dumb spoke: and the multitudes marvelled.

15 And certain of them said, In Beelzebub the prince of devils be casts out
devils.

16 And other tempting, asked of him a sign from heaven.

17 But he seeing their cogitations, said to them, Every kingdom divided
against it self, shall be made desolate; and house upon house, shall fall.

18 And if Satan also be divided against himself, how shall his kingdom stand?
because you say, that in Beelzebub I do cast out devils.

19 And if I in Beelzebub cast out devils: your children, in whom do they cast
out? therefore they shall be your judges.

20 But if I in the finger of God do cast out devils: surely the Kingdom of God
is come upon you.

21 When the strong man armed keeps his Court: those things are in peace that
he possesses.

22 But if a stronger then he, come upon him, and overcome him, he will take
away his whole armor wherein he trusted, and will distribute his spoils.

23 He that is not with me, is against me: and he that gathers not with me,
scatters.

24 When the unclean Spirit departs out of a man, he wandereth through places
without water, seeking rest: and not finding, he says, I will return into my
house whence I departed.

25 And when he is come, he finds it swept with a besome, and trimmed.

26 Then he goes and takes seven other Spirits worse then himself, and
entering in, they dwell there.

27 And the last of that man be made worse then the first.

28 And it came to pass when he said these things, a certain woman lifting up
her voice out of the multitude, said,

29 Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that thou did suck.

30 But he said, Yea rather, Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and
keep it.


The Explieation.
14. NOte, this possessed party was one and the same, of whom S. Matthew
speaks, cap. 12. v. 22. that was both blind and dumb, though S. Luke makes
only mention of his dumbness, which is not to contradict the other Evangelist,
unless he had said, he was only blind and not dumb: whereas to speak of one
effect of his being possessed, and let alone the other, is no contradiction at
all, as some would have it to be. Note also, this dumbness is not understood to
be natural, or rather a defect of Nature from the birth of the party, but only
accidental, and a mere effect of the Devils possessing him with a dumbness, but
not any other defect in Nature: for such a dumbness is not cured by casting our
a Devil, but by cutting out some string, that ties the Tongue up, and gives it
not leave to play according to the exigence of speech or else by curing the
deafness, if it be from the birth, for all such deafness consequently causes
dumbness, because speech is learnt by hearing the sound others make with
speaking, or otherwise; and thus imitating the same motion, which does beget
speech: So this cure was wrought by Christ taking away the impediment, which
the Devil had by his power put in the parties speech; and consequently that
impediment being gone, by casting out the Devil who was cause thereof, the
party spoke immediately, without addition of any other Miracle at all: though
what S. Hierome says Rhetorically of this passage is not false neither, but a
pious ampliation of the Truth, by declaring the consequences of one thing when
he said, Three Miracles together are wrought in one person: for the blind man
saw, the dumb man spoke, and the possessed had his devil cast out. The close of
this verse argues the possessed was not born dumb, for to that cure no devils
being cast out was necessary, as we said before; and therefote as soon as he
was cast out, the party spoke to the admiration of all the people, (who could
not then force him to speak) though happily they had heard him do it often,
before he was possessed.

15. See the malice of the wicked, to attribute Gods power to the devil, rather
then glorify God, by giving him the due praise of his own wonderful works: And
while they tell him, he works in the name and power of Beelzebub, they vilify
him all they can, to show the little they attribute to his own power, how
little they think him God, or of God; since Beelzebub, in the Hebrew
Translation, signifies the god of Flies; and they being the most abject and
inconsiderable things in nature, therefore to attribute no more Power to
Christ, then to a Fly, is to undervalue him all they can: nor does it magnify
him, that Beelzebub is here called the Prince of Devils, more then it were to
magnify a man, to call him the Prince of Flies, unless it be any kind of
honor to have a man called the best of Flies, as Beelzebub is therefore Prince
of those Devils, who rule over that contemptible Creature the Fly: not that the
Devil has any proper dominion over any Creatures, but that the Accaronites,
when they were troubled with a Plague of Flies, erected an Idol, which they
called Beelzebub, that is, God of Flies; and to feed them in this Idolatry,
upon such Adorations the Devil did many times ease them of these Plagues the
Flies caused amongst them; though in the Greek Beelzebub signifies the god of
Muck or Dung: and yet that is not inconsistent with the sense as above; because
where Dung is, there are always Flies; and so the Devil is by this name called
both God of Flies and of Dung too: since the ordure of Sin is far more nasty,
then that of any dung can be.

16. This Verse will in effect be explicated on the Seventeenth Sunday after
Pentecost, where the Doctor of the Law tempting our Savior, asked him, etc. so
here needs no more to be said of it, then that it was an impertinent demand to
ask a sign of his Deity, after such a Miracle as this.

17. Here he shows them he knew their minds, by confounding them in what they
thought, although they spoke it not, with the applying this Simile unto them
that follows: which is as clear, as that Civil Wars destroy a Kingdom, and
Faction in particular Families ruins both parties of the Faction, for that is
understood by house upon house, family against family.

8. For if I undertake to cast out a devil, in the devils name or power (and so
by your consequence am my self a devil) do you not see, it were to make a
faction against the devil, who had Seated himself there, from whence I cast him
out; and so I should rather make a new, then end the old strife; therefore to
end the matter I must use another power.

19. By the former Verse he had showed them, his power was from another source,
then from the devil, and consequently if they will yet hold that Doctrine, and
say that one Devil is cast out by another, he leaves them as men so desperate,
that are past all cure of reason; and so to be left unto the guide of that
Devil, who had so strangely blinded them. Thus the close of this Verse argues
he concluded of them, whom he found so maliciously, so perversely obstinate in
an Error: Or if we take it literally, that he casting out devils in the devils
name, if their children would undertake to cast out the devil in another name
(since he that was God, knew they did it not in Gods Name) he leaves them to be
guided by their children, that is, he calls them fools, who would have children
for their guides, and especially children of Infidelity, for such were all
theirs.

20. By the finger of God, he in this place understands the Spirit or power of
God: for so S. Matthew speaks, relating the same story, cap. 12. v. 28. by the
Kingdom of God, he means the grace which does here begin to reign, and shall
perfectly rule in Glory, when it has brought those to Heaven, whom it governed
upon Earth. And certainly Grace deserves the Title of the Kingdom of God, when
it is manifestly made appear to be destructive to the Kingdom of the Devil, as
by overcoming Sin it is, and as here actually it was, by casting out the devil
from that place where he had seated himself; for though God be the principal,
yet Grace is the instrumental agent in all Sanctity, and works that are above
Nature.

21, 22. These two Verses argue from Similitude, very strongly, and yet so
clearly, that they need no other Exposition, then their own words literally
understood: only that we note, the Devil was meant by the strong man, his
Court was this World, all wholly in his possession by the sin of Adam, and that
as fully as a fortified Town is in that Governors hands, against whom none
dares lay a Siege, but leave all in peace in and about the Town: not that the
children of Adam were in peace by being the Devils Captives, but that no power
was such as durst undertake to force them out of Captivity; until that happened
which Christ aimed at, namely, that God came, who alone is able to lead
Captivity captive, to overthrow the Devil and all his works.

23. By this Verse our Savior told the Pharisees, they were his enemies,
because they took the Devils part against him, or which was all one, because
they did not take his part against the Devil; for as in a Town besieged, all
that will not (if called upon) fight to keep out the Enemy scaling the Walls,
are held as much friends to the Enemy, as if they did actually fight for them:
so they, now that Christ came to take this City of the World (these Pharisees)
who would not, being called upon by him, fight for him, were esteemed as if
they did actually fight against him, since (as God) he was their lawful
Commander, and might command them to fight for him, by believing in him, as one
that had power to quell the Devil.

24. By the unclean Spirit, is here meant the Devil; so called, because he is
not only defiled by the malice of his own rebellious Sin, but is like a Sow,
ever wallowing in the mire of all sinful actions, as if his whole delight were
to roll in the filthy soul sink of sin: Christ here alludes to the former
casting out this unclean Spirit from the Jews, when God chose that stiff necked
people to be his Favorites above all the Nations of the earth: and in the
persons of his holy Patriarchs and Prophets, declared he had cast the Devil out
of all the Jews, who departing from them, wandereth up and down among the
Gentiles, not unfitly called places without water, first as to God, affording
no drop of penitential Tears to expiate their sins; next as to the Devil, being
people he could not rest in, because he had not content in the easy conquest
he made of them, who were not worthy to be esteemed the Favorites of God: And
therefore the Devil out of pride esteemed them even unworthy to be his accursed
lacqueys, and so could not rest in such a conquest, but returned again to that
earth, which had at least some wholesome water to compact it into a body of
people worthy to be called a Nation, which the Gentiles were unworthy of, while
God, angry with the Jews, said by the mouth of David, I will provoke them in a
people, which is no Nation, meaning the Gentiles, that destroyed Jerusalem: The
Devil therefore cast out of the Jews into the Gentiles, when God made the Jews
his chosen people, says with himself, he will return again into his house
whence he departed; for indeed he was master of all men's Souls, till God
snatched the Jews out of his hands.

25. The besome that had swept this house, was the Law of Moses, which did
indeed purify the house of clay, the body of the Jews, but brought no Grace
into their Souls: So hither the Devil returns again, when he set all those
people a murmuring in their way from Egypt to the land of Promise.

26, 27. And remembering he was before cast out, when he had taken but single
possession, he now comes armed in with many guurds, brings seven devils more
along with him, that is to say, all the devils in Hell, or an indefinite number
meant by this definite of seven, for so the malice of the Jews imports, when it
grew more enraged against the Son of God, then all the devils of Hell alone
could have expressed, had not the more hellish Jew concurred to increase the
same. Blessed God! how truly does this Verse close, saying, These devils dwell
there; since we are told the refractory Jew shall never be dispossessed
absolutely of this devil, till the day of Judgment, when Jew and Gentile shall
both make up one Church of Christ, though but for a little time, yet sufficient
to verify the Oracle of Truth, There shall be one sold, and one shepherd. And
thus literally we may expound these three Verses: mystically the recess and
access of this foul Fiend is verified, when Baptismal Grace first cast a single
devil out of our Souls, guilty only of single Original sin, and he by our
reiterated actual sins, returns again with his increased numbers, his sevensold
Fiends, the seven deadly Sins, or some such graceless rabble, who made the last
of this man worse then the first. God send he dwell not in us till the Day of
our private Doom, as certainly he will, unless we cast the waters of Contrition
on him, to quench the fire of his Malice both against God and us; and so smoke
him out of his Mansion house, by making it a Temple for the God he hates, when
it is perfumed with the incense of Devotion, and adorned with all varieties of
Virtues.

28, 29. It seems there was a huge energy in Christ his delivering himself upon
this subject, when a pious woman ravished, as it were, with admiration of his
Sanctity and solidity of discourse, cried out, praising and magnifying not
only him, but even the womb that bare him, and the paps that gave him suck,
not without special Providence of God, ordaining her speech to the praise of
the Mother, not the Father, to show he had no Father, as he was man.

30. This did not deny, but it was indeed a great blessing for the virgin Mary
to have had her Savior in her womb, but yet it tells us, both she and others
are more blessed to have him in their Souls; and so to make their Souls
Mothers to the Words-Spirit, or of Spiritual Words, is to be much more
honorable then to have the word-flesh in their bodily womb, or to be the
Spiritual Parent of Christ, (bringing forth the fruit of his Gospel) then the
corporal (bringing forth his flesh and blood;) so the word of God is valued
above the body of Christ, his Spirit is better then his Flesh. And the reason
is, that to be Mother of God was a grace gratis given, not making graceful,
but to hear, and keep the word of God is an internal grace rendering one
acceptable: again, to be Gods Mother did not suffice to save her; but to hear
and keep Gods word does: the one proper to her, the other common to all
Christians,

The Application.
1. WE heard in the first Sundays Epistle of Lent the Priests were bound to
Preach unto us this holy time, (as in Catholic Countries they do every day)
now we are particularly minded of our duty to hear them Preach as a work
appertaining to the Integrity of our holy Fast. And lest we should think we
had complied with our obligation in this particular by a bare hearing of
Sermons in Lent; see our Savior adds another branch to integrate this duty,
namely to keep the word we hear: that is, to conserve it in our hearts by
meditating thereupon, and by doing as the Preacher tells us we are bound to do:
for those only that so hear, as they also keep this holy word, are they our
Savior, proclaims to be blessed Souls.

2. Now as this Active word of God cannot lie still in our hearts; so it was
fit to day to tell us of casting out a Dumb Devil, thereby to mind us, we are
bound to speak forth the praises of Almighty God, this holy Time of Lent, as
well as to hear his sacred word delivered to us.

3. And because we are not silent only out of sloth to speak forth the praises
of God, but sometimes out of shame are dumb, and will not speak the guilt of
some foul sin that lies upon our souls, (when yet we are bound in confession
to discover it) at which time we are truly possessed with a Dumb Devil (who
by the story of this Gospel is not to be removed but by maine force) therefore
the most forcible of other words (that we call divine) and the mighty finger of
God himself, are said to be the only means to cast this devil out: who lest
he enter in, to the disturbance of our holy aims.

We fitly pray as above, to keep him out, and so to be defended from him. On
the fourth Sunday in Lent:
The Antiphon. John 6. v. 3. Jesus therefore went up to the mountain, and
there he sat with his Disciples.

Verse. To his Angels, etc.

Resp. That in all, etc.


The Prayer.
GRant, we beseech thee Almighty God, that we who through the merit of our own
actions are afflicted, by the consolation of thy grace may be comforted.

The Illustration.
SEe how the Lenten Letter of our Holy Fast is silently carried down the
mystical stream thereof in this present Prayer; for why do we now afflict
our bodies with abstinence, but because we have justly merited that punishment
to be inflicted on us, through the merits, or demerits rather of our sinful
actions: more it is to be wondered, how we dare close this Prayer with a
Petition of consolation? how we can hope to be comforted by his holy grace,
with whom we are so deeply in disgrace, as to lie actually under the lash of
his correction; but here is the difference between Almighty God and man, the
latter never mixeth favors with his frowns; of the former the royal prophet
tells us, that even whilst he is angry, he is mindful of mercy toward us; so
hence it is we beg this consolation of his grace to be our comfort, even
while we are under the affliction due to the demerits of our actions: and this
with reason, because every action that is absolutely ours is mixed with sin, and
so merits punishment: but this obedientiall action of our Holy Fast, is rather
an act of grace then of nature and thence it is, we presume to beg the
comfort of that grace, which does enable us to this act of penance: But we
have yet a harder task in hand, what relation is there in this Prayer to the
Epistle and Gospel of the day? where is there here a word of Agar and Sarah,
Abrah. Jsaac, or Jsmael, Sinai or Sion? where a Syllable of a miracle, of the
multiplication of five loaves and two fishes into food sufficient for above
five thousand persons? yet these are the Subjects of the Epistle and Gospel,
and we must find report to these, as well as to the time of Lent in the Prayer
above, or we are else below our high design of connecting all the parts of
this days service each to other: and yet perhaps we are no further from the
matter, then he is from twenty several shillings of silver, who has in his
pocket one only single piece of gold; for as in that is virtually all the
silver he desires, so in this golden Prayer, are all the silver Sentences of
the Epistle and Gospel of this day: The merited affliction we confess to lie
upon us, as condign punishment of our actions, exhausts the First: the
consolatory Grace we beg to be our comfort, draws out each letter of the last:
For what is the Action we merit affliction by, but that of our common Parent
contracted by us in the guilt of original Sin? and which makes our Mothers
Agars, us all Ishmaels, by our first birth to nature, to this worlds Sinai or
Jerusalem: what is Baptism but our second Birth, when holy Church becomes our
Mother Sarah, and we her Isaacs, both children of the caelestial Abraham, and
heirs to Sion, or the heavens Jerusalem? and what our actual Sin, but a
degenerating into our former bondage (in this Prayer called the merited
affliction of our sinful actions?) and what remedy for all this, but the last
verse of the Epistle knitting up to the Gospel the consolatory grace of
redemption, to be our petitioned comfort, as often as we do penance for our
reiterated sins? And see this grace figuratively represented by the miracle
mentioned in the Gospel; for what better Emblem of the grace we beg then these
Two natures of Food to our bodies, Fish and Bread, Types of the Humanity and
Divinity of Christ in the blessed Sacrament, the very source of all Grace,
Comfort, and Consolation? And why this called the Sunday of Joy, but because
God will have us comforted with the memory of a Spiritual Feast, in the very
midst of our corporal Fast, for in very deed these five thousand people fed
better on the feast of Faith, then on that of fish and bread, though they were
full of both: and thus we break happily out of the cloud of doubt, into the
clear Sun of certainty, that this Prayer holds (mystically at least) a sweet
and pious harmony with the other parts of this days service.

The Epistle, ad Gal. c. 4. v. 22. etc.
22 For it is written, that Abraham had two Sons: one of the bondwoman, and
one of the freewoman.

23 But he that of the bond woman, was born according to the flesh: and he that
of the free woman, by the promise.

24 Which things are said by an Allegory: For these are the two Testaments. The
one from mount Sina, gendering unto bondage, which is Agar.

25 (For Sina is a Mountain in Arabia, which has affinity to that which now is
Jerusalem,) and serves with her children.

26 But that Jerusalem which is above, is free: which is our Mother.

27 For it is written, Rejoice thou barren that bear not; break forth and
cry, that travailest not: because many are the children of the desolate, more
then of her that has a husband.

28 But we brethren, according to Isaac, are the children of promise.

29 But as then he that was born according to the Flesh, persecuted him that
was after the Spirit: So now also.

30 But what says the Scripture? Cast out the bondwoman and her son; for the
son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman.

31 Therefore brethren, we are not the children of the bondwoman, but of the
free: by the freedom wherewith Christ has made us free.


The Explication.
22. NOte it was then lawful (beside the wife) to have concubines: so Abraham
had for his wife Sara, for his concubine Agar; Sara his wife was a Freewoman,
and of her he begat Isaac: Agar his concubine was a Bondwoman, and of her he
begat Ishmael.

23. That is to say, Agar the concubine was a young and fruitful woman: so no
marvel (though Abraham were an old man) that he gat a child by the force of
nature upon a young woman, and she fertile too: hence Ishmael is said to have
been begotten and born according to the flesh, that is by the due course of
nature; but Isaac was not begotten, nor born thus, but according to promise,
that is miraculously, since God had promised Abraham that in his seed all the
nations of the earth shall be Blessed, and so that this seed might be lawful
heir to the promised Benediction, it was of necessity, it should be the son of
Abraham's wife, not of his concubine; since the concubine was a bondwoman,
whose issue could not inherit the Fathers estate; wherefore to make this
promise good, God gave power to Sara (a steril and aged woman) to conceive and
bring forth a son miraculously; and this son is therefore called the son of the
promise, not of nature, the son of grace, not of flesh and blood: and his name
was Isaac.

24. Here the Apostle professes to speak Allegorically, that is, mystically or
figuratively, comparing these two women of Abraham to the two Testaments Old
and New: by Agar he means the Old, by Sara the New Testament. So when in this
verse he say^, which things are said, he means these things which he spoke in
the two verses before: and in the following verses we shall find so much
Allegory, as therein use will be made of all the several Senses, which in
speech are used: so that upon the literal sense of Agars natural, and Sara's
supernatural son, follows the Allegorical sense, that these two women signify
the two Testaments: hence follows the Tropological, v. 29. that as then the
natural son did persecute the spiritual, so now also: and v. 26. we find the
Anagogical sense, that the Heavenly Jerusalem is the freeborn-woman, and our
Mother. This premised we shall better understand what follows: As for the two
Testaments, they are so called, because they contain the two Pacts or
Covenants, which God made at several times with his people: The first with
Moses and the children of Israel, which God made by the mediation of an Angel,
upon the mount Sinai promis^ng him and the people of Israel, that he would give
unto them the land of Canaan flowing with milk and honey, whence this is called
the land of promise: and the people on the other side promised God, they would
upon this consideration keep the Commandments or Law, which he by Moses did
deliver to them: The second Pact or Covenant was that which God made with
Christ and Christians in Jerusalem and Sion; where God promised to Christians,
he would conduct them into the kingdom of Heaven, and make them heirs thereof,
whereupon they promised to keep the Commandments delivered to them by Christ
himself, and such other precepts, as our Savior should deliver unto them by
the mouth of his Apostles and their Successors: and this Pact was on both
sides ratified at the last Supper of our Lord immediately before his passion,
as we read in Saint Matthew, Saint Mark, Saint Luke, and Saint Paul. Now the
reason why Sinai is said to engender unto bondage, is because the Law which
Moses brought the people from Sinai, was a Law of terror, punishment, and
servitude, as menacing temporal punishments and corporal death to the
infringers thereof, and giving only temporal rewards to the observers of it,
namely prosperity and plenty in the land of Canaan; and this Law is therefore
represented by Agar the woman of servitude and bondage, whose children could
not hope for better condition, then that of their parent Agar. Hence we may
figuratively say, that as Abraham, Noah, Moses, and the rest of the Prophets of
the old Law were Christians, because they served God filially and freely in
hope of Christ's coming to redeem them, so all wicked Christians are Jews,
serving God only servilely, that is, for fear of Hell.

25. This vicinity, is of Similitude, not of Site or Place, for between Sinai
and Jerusalem lies a great distance, and that tedious by the interposition of
the Idumean Mountains; so that this vicinity consists in the sterility of
Jerusalem, producing no fruits of virtue, but the mere ceremonial servitude of
the Synagogue, as Sinai was a very barren ground; again as in Sinai this steril
law was given, so in Jerusalem it was principally kept, and as Sinai was out of
the land of Promise, so this legal or earthly Jerusalem was out of the Church
of Christ Militant and triumphant, which is the heavenly Jerusalem: but lastly,
(and perhaps most appositely to the Apostles Sense) as the people who received
the law in Sinai were Parents to the Jews of Jerusalem, which is a natural
vicinity in blood, and consequently begets in the Jews the same dispositions of
fear and servitude, as was in their parents, so Jerusalem with her children is
by the Apostle called a servant here of fear, and not a child of love.

26. whereas the heavenly Jerusalem the mother of Christians is free, and
brings forth children of love, not of fear, according to that of the Apostle,
etc. Love banisheth or shuts fear out of doors, for in heaven there is no
fear at all, but a continual and fervent love, which rules in that blessed
kingdom. The Etymology of this word Jerusalem is worthy our remark, not that it
is derived as Erasmus would have it, of Jebus and Salem, by both which names it
was formerly called, but rather of the Hebrew Jire, which signifies videbit, or
shall see, and of the old name it had Salem, alluding to the mystery which
reports unto this change of the name: for example; the passage between Abrabam
and Isaac on the mount Sion, when Isaac seeing the fire burn asked his Father
Abraham, where the victime was, that should be sacrificed, and Abraham
answered, God will see to that, or provide it, whence the mount Sion is called
Moria, that is to say visio Dei, the sight of God, as we read Genesis 22. or his
provision, for that which shall please his Divine Majesty; and hence the city
which was near this mountain was called Jerusalem, more exactly after the
Hebrew written Jerusalem, beginning with Iod, then with He, though the other be
as usual as this, thorough a common error in Orthography: Now hence it is
easy to apply the reason, why Heaven is called Jerusalem or Sion since, there
God has provided most abundantly for his own glory, where he has made a
glory, by virtue whereof, all the Saints and Angels see his most glorious face,
and so the Prophets words are verified, saying, in thy light we shall see
light, that is, in thy light of glory we shall see thy light of Deity, an
inaccessible, however (by thy mercy) it is become a visible light of comfort to
all the blessed court of heaven, whose bliss consists in the Majesty and
Glory of that blissful Sight, and is therefore called the beatifical Vision,
and it is most literally called Jerusalem, because as the old Law was given
upon mount Sinai, so the new was given upon Sion, a mount near to Jerusalem,
though figuratively it has this name, from being the place of blessed vision
or provision, as above: It is called Free, for four respects it has to
freedom; First, Civil, which is opposite to slavish, Second, Moral, which is
opposite to the servitude of sin, Third Spiritual, which is opposite to
temporal or corporal, and so serves in the freedom of the true Spirit, not in
the servitude of the binding Letter; Fourth, Heavenly, which is opposite to
earthly or transitory: She is called fecund or fertile, because out of steril
Souls (bred up in Gentilism) she brings forth fruitful Christians, such as
abound in all virtues whatsoever.

27. Whence the next verse bids her rejoice even for this cause of her
fecundity joined to her freedom: and though Isai. 54. v. 1. bid her rejoice in
her sterility, because out of it (as out of nothing to be expected from her own
barren Gentilism) God by his holy Grace brought forth a plentiful Issue of the
Church of Christ, when the Synagogue of the Jews was antiquated or taken quite
away: so though she of her self be steril, yet she is to rejoice that out of
her sterility springs Christianity, as out of barren Sara sprung fruitful
Isaac; though she travail not with any Homogeneal fruit of her own barren womb,
yet she is in travail with the Heterogeneal, the spiritual fruit of grace; so
her cry is to be of joy, not of sorrow; and why? because many more are the
children of the Church, that was desolate when she did first fructify, then
were those of the Synagogue that had a husband, that was actually and long
married unto God, but under the notion of a punisher, rather then of a
rewarder; whereas when Christ was espoused to this desolate Church of the
Gentiles, then God became husband to his Spouse under the notion of a redeemer,
a rewarder, and a Savior of his people: again, more are the children of the
desolate, than of her that has an husband, might be understood comparatively
spoken to the time of the primitive Church, unto that time of the Synagogue, as
who should say, God has more servants in the very first days of the primitive
Church, then he had in all the time that the Synagogue of the Jews did last; so
fruitful was the child of the Spirit, so barren that of the letter; so
abundant the child of grace, so sparing that of flesh and blood; the reason
was, because Moses being but a man of flesh and blood, was the firstborn of
the Synagogue, but Christ who was both God and Man, was the firstborn of the
Church: not that therefore he was not the head and founder thereof, but that in
the order of Gods decree, the first thought was to serve himself of his
creatures, or people regulated in the old Law by a Synagogue, in the new, by a
Church, and so by priority of nature, (as the Schoolmen speak,) the Jdaea's
of Synagogue, and Church were first in Gods decree, though there were no
priority of time, wherein the Synagogue was existent before Moses the
firstborn thereof; nor of the Church before Christ, the firstborn of her:
So here we see, it is not inconsistent, that Christ be both the Father and the
child of the Church, the child, as the first borne of it in the sight of God,
the Father, as the first erector of it in the sight of man.

28. And from hence flows the genuine sense of this next verse, wherein the
Apostle does not only mean, that we Christians are Brothers to each other,
but that we have yet an honor far transcending this, namely to be even the
Brethren of Christ Jesus, so that he is a child, as as well as we are the
children of promise, and consequently he and we are brethren, being borne both
of one promising parent Almighty God, out of the barren womb of Sara, he only
having this prerogative to be the firstborn of Sara, and so Abraham's heir,
but we (as being his brethren,) by virtue of the same promise, are his coheires.

29. This verse alludes to what we read, Genesis 21. v. 8. of the jesting or
playing of Jsmael so familiarly with Jsaac at the banquet which Abraham made,
when Isaac the younger brother was weaned; that Sara knowing it was her Son
Jsaac, who must be heir to his Father Abraham, complained to him not only of
the boldness of Ismael, and of his saucy familiarity with Jsaac, (which was a
figure of the Jews mocking of Christ, and of false Churches scoffing at the
true one) but also of Agar his Mothers impudence, not to reprehend her
Slave-borne Son for his boldness with his Freeborn Brother, whereupon Agar
and Ismael were turned out of doors by Abraham, as the Synagogue and Jews
were out of Christ's Church; for by Son of the flesh is here meant Ismael, and
by the Son of the Spirit, the Apostle in this place means Israel, as was said
before: adding that this quarrel between those two brothers continues still in
us, so long as the flesh rebels, against the spirit in man, or so long as false
Churches arise, and persecute the true one.

30. Then, (and not tiil then) shall the Son of the Bondwoman be cast out by
Christians, as well as the Synagogue was by Christ himself, according to Saint
Paul's meaning here, when there shall be in the worlds end, but one stock, and
one shepherd; though even now we that are children of the true Church must
cast out of our communion in spirituals at least, those that are of false
Churches, for they cannot with us inherit the kingdom of heaven, what claim
soever they lay unto it by feigned Sanctity, or pretended legitimacy of birth
unto that inheritance.

31. Note though here the Apostle tells us for our comfo^t, that we true
Christians (whereby is understood only Catholics, who are of the true
Christian religion,) are Sons of Sara the Freewoman, that is, of the remaining
Church of Christ, and not of Agar, the abrogated Synagogue of the Jews, yet
withal he minds, that we have not this Freedom, this honor, by right of
inheritance, as from our earthly, or spiritual parents either, but merely as
from the gratuite gift of Jesus Christ; since by his holy grace it is, we are
adopted Children of Heaven, and not by our Fathers in nature, or in Spirit, the
Priests of the Church; for as the first are no way able to beget us unto God,
so the last do it but instrumentally, as they are Vicars of Christ, or
dispensers of the mysteries of God, and of his holy grace by means of the
Sacraments.

The Application.
1. THe Illustration upon this Sundays Prayer, and the explication upon this
Epistle are so full, and so home to the purpose of the Lenton Fast, and to the
end thereof (our Purification,) that nothing will remain now, but to find
what good works now are by this Epistle taught to add unto the Holy Fast,
which is not perfected without them.

2. Now in regard we see this Parabolicall Epistle winds off with an
Application to the Catholic Christian, Redeemed (from the Bondage of the
Jewish Synagogue, and from the slavery of sin) by the merits of Christ, and
consequently gives us cause of huge comfort for this redemption: therefore we
shall do well to join an Alacrity of soul unto the Lenten Fast (because God
loves a merry giver) as a proper integrative part thereof, especially on this
Sunday, which is called the Sunday of joy; and not unfitly, so when the whole
Epistle runs upon the joyful Allegory, between the Church Militant, and the
Church Triumphant, by the abolition of the Jewish Synagogue.

3. And yet because the motive of our joy is ever extrinsecal, coming from
Heaven to us, out of the infinite mercy of God, and no way proceeding from our
selves, whose every action (so far forth as it is our own) is demeriting and
drawing punishment upon us, for the sin it is in us, unless by Gods assisting
grace it be made virtuous, therefore we are justly bid in our greatest
comforts, to acknowledge the punishments we deserve, if God should ever give us
our own due, and consequently to mix with our Joys, our Tears, or rather never
to look for any joy, that we do not first beg with sorrow for our sins, to the
end it may be with us as Holy David said, according to the multitude of my
griefs, thy consolations have joy'd my soul; whence it is we are taught to
mix contrition with Alacrity, this holy time of Lent, to make our Fast complete.

And that we may do this, we fitly pray (when this is preached to us) as above.
The Gospel. Joh. 6. v. 1, etc.
1 After these things, Jesus went beyond the Sea of Galilee, which is of
Tiberias.

2 And a great multitude followed, because they saw the signs, which he did
upon those that were sick.

3 Jesus therefore went up into the mountain, and there he sat with his
Disciples.

4 And the Pasche was at hand, the Festival day of the Jews.

5 When Jesus therefore had lifted up his eyes, and saw, that a very great
multitude comes to him, he says to Philip, whence shall we buy bread, that
these may eat?

6 And this he said, tempting him. For himself knew what he would do.

7 Philip answered him, two hundred peny-worth of bread is not sufficient for
them, that every man may take a little piece.

8 One of his disciples, Andrew the Brother of Simon Peter says to him.

9 There is a boy here that has five barley loaves, and two fishes: but what
are these among so many?

10 Jesus therefore says, make the men sit down. And there was much grass in
the place. The men therefore sat down, in number about five thousand.

11 Jesus therefore took the Loaves: and when he had given thanks, he
distributed to them that sat, in like manner also of the fishes, as much as
they would.

12 And after they were filled, he says to his Disciples, gather the fragments
that are remaining, lest they be lost.

13 They gathered therefore, and filled twelve Baskets with fragments of the
five barley loaves, which remained to them that had eaten.

14 Those men therefore, when they had seen what a sign Jesus had done, said,
this is the Prophet indeed, that is to come into the world.

15 Jesus therefore when he knew, they would come to take him, and make him
King, he fled again into the mountain himself alone.


The Explication.
1. AFter these things, that is, immediately after Herod had cut off the
Baptists head, and after Christ had cured the Paralytick, of whom the
Evangelist makes mention in the two precedent Chapters. Then he passed, etc.
but it was about a year after, that he did pass this Sea, for Christ did that
cure a little before the Paschall time, in the year after. So Saint John says
nothing, what Christ did all this year, that intervened between these two
miracles; but one reason is, he undertakes not to tell all the story of Christ,
so much as to supply in many places, what the other Evangelists had not spoken
of: though much were done by Christ in that year, as namely his calling his
twelve Apostles, Luke 6. His Sermon upon the mountain recounted by Saint
Matthew cap. 5.6. and 7. the mission of the Apostles to preach and teach, etc.
and though in this story, Saint John repeats cap. 6. what others had said, yet
it is because he takes occasion thence, to fall upon the subject of the holy
Eucharist, or Sacrament of the Altar, wherein he is more copious then ordinary,
and wherein the rest were very sparing: He calls one and the same Sea, (which
our Savior passed over) the Sea of Galilee, and the Sea of Tiberias, because
it was first called the Galilaean Sea, as lying upon the confines of Galilee,
and afterward the Sea of Tiberias, in regard it was near the City Tiberias,
which Herod built, and called by that name in honor of Tiberius the Roman
Emperor, under whom the Jewish Governors did rule, and by whose power they were
made.

2. The multitude went footing it after him, as he did on foot go round about
the Towns, that lay near the Meandrous windings of this Tiberian Sea; and
still as he went, the fame of his conversation and miracles made the company
increase, those being carried on, who fitst set out with him, by the desire
they had to enjoy him more, and those that met him with a zeal to see
something of that much they had heard of him, who being many in number, could
not all go in boats, as he by boat went from one point of land to another, on
the same side of the Country, so that still the same company met him sooner or
later, as he stayed by the way doing miracles, while they went about.

3. This Mountain is that which stood in the desert near Bethsaida, not far
from the Tiberian Sea, to which place he went with design, because resolving
to feed the people (as after he did) and being in a desert where no provision
was near, their refection should be the more miraculous: and yet by this text
it seems Christ and his Disciples were gotten up to this Mountain, before the
following multitude could overtake them, when in the interim, he set with his
disciples, teaching them in his accustomed manner.

4. What is to be said of this Paschal Feast, will be proper in the Lenten
Tome, when that comes out: for I refer it thither.

5. St. John according to his wonted custom omits what St. Luke has more in
relation of this story, namely that Christ, after he had lifted up his eyes and
saw a great multitude of people, said, I have compassion on this people,
because he remembered what David had foretold, was his charge, Psalm 9. verse
14. The poor man is left unto Thee, and thou will be a help to the fatherless:
O! how many eyes do we lift up to the Potentates of this world? how few do we
cast down upon the poor? but Jesus remembers his affection to us, how negligent
soever we are of our duty to him; he looks upon the poor with eyes of mercy, of
pity, of compassion, and therefore says immediately to Philip, whence shall
we buy bread, that these may eat? where we are to observe the only efficacious
way to relieve the poor is to consult their exigencies with the pitiful, as it
seems St. Philip was, of whom for that special reason Christ asks this
question, rather then of the other Apostles; again we must note, Christ was
sollicitous to buy corporal bread for those that out of zeal had followed him
to feed upon the spiritual Doctrine, or bread of his sacred Word.

6. Christ is here said to tempt or try Philip, because it is very fit men
should first see their wants can be supplied by none, but God himself; and this
appeared by Philip a^king all the rest, what store of victuals they had among
them; whence it was clear there could be no hope of supply from humane store in
that place, unless God showed a miracle, as indeed he intended to do. So thus
Christ tempted man to show himself God, by doing that which was above man's
power to effect, or to hope for indeed; again he tempted an Apostle to declare
those are the men who by office are to have care of all the poor throughout the
world, for their recommending mouths must be (when all is done) the poor men's
purses.

7. But see Philips answer to this Temptation: he only told what slender store
of money they had in all their company, but two hundred pence, and the bread
which that could buy, would not be for each mouth there one morsel: so he
despaired of their being fed upon that slender stock of money; but in this
account the Apostle was out, the purse of providence was full, though theirs of
maintenance were empty; and the more Philip proceeds like man, the more we see
Christ appears like God.

8. 9. See how St. Andrew (nearer allied to Faith by his brother Peter)
renowned for that virtue more then Philip, was, finds out a boy with five
loaves and two fishes at least; but checks himself for the fondness of his
first flash of hope, that this could be enough, by adding, what is this amongst
so many? yet still divine providence guids the process of this humane action,
for by how much the more they all despair, by so much the miracle is still the
greater; and that Christ had no ambition in this action is evident, because he
rather chose to let creatures share with him in contributing something at least
to his miracle, then that he would Creatour-like, do it all himself out of
nothing; so for this reason he permits those inconsiderable numbers of fishes
and of loaves, to enter into the relief of that prodigious multitude, he
satisfied therewith.

10. This verse is only narrative, that the five thousand were by Christ his
command placed most probably as St. Mark tells us the story in companies,
according to the custom at great dinners, men by men, and women apart with
their children in their laps, both for modesty sake, and for the more easy
distribution of each persons proportion.

11. Hence we learn while, Jesus gives thanks, the laudable custom of saying
grace before and after meals, to show all our sustenance, is Gods special
blessing upon us; but we are here to note Saint Matthew. ca. 14. Says in this
story, Christ looking up to Heaven Blessed, brake, and gave the Loaves to his
Disciples, which they afterward distributed to the people set round about on
the ground: the like says St. Mark cap. 6. v. 41. he blessed and break the
bread: so has St. Luke cap. 9. v. 36. all which is alleged to show, how ill
the heretics decline the usual custom of Christ, who ever blessed bread, and
lest they should be convinced, that this blessing of bread at any time was
previous to his consecrating of it, into his blessed body, they always
translate Blessing for Thanksgiving; whereas to bless God, is indeed a
thanksgiving to him, for the blessings we receive from him; but yet blessing
bread and meat is another thing, which Heretics will never yield unto, for the
reasons above. It remains here to reconcile St. Matthew and St. John upon this
place, the former saying, Mat. c. 14. v. 19. Christ gave the bread and fishes
to his disciples to distribute; The latter, Ioh. c. 6. v. 11. that he gave it
to the people himself, whereas both being verifiable in a right sense, there
can be no contradiction, for what the Disciples distributed to the people,
Christ gave them, by the mediation of his Disciples hands; and indeed it is
more likely the Disciples did distribute the gift, because thus, it was sooner
distributed by many hands to so many people. We will not stand here to discuss,
how this bread was multiplied, whether by creating new corn, or extending that
little to infinite parts, certain it is which way soever we grant it done, the
bread given was most substantial, and gave as wholesome nourishment, as it did
abundant saturation to the hungry stomachs that did eat it; for the works of
God are perfect, and morally hence we learn, what we give to the poor, does
increase (not any way diminish) our wealth, since after all men were full,
there remained of five loaves twelve baskets of surplus more then all could eat.

12. 13. These two Verses afford us this Doctrine, that the poor man is the
richest rewarder of any courtesy in the world: lo here, how twelve baskets of
gratitude are returned for five little loaves of bread only. So this boy that
had given little, received much, as a testimony that God never asks us for any
thing, that himself has need of it, but because he knows we have huge
necessity of his infinite Blessings, for the trifles he asks at our hands, with
no other end, then to put them out for our emolument, a hundred fold over and
over, above what that is worth, we give him; nor is it void of mystery, that
being there were twelve Apostles, each should receive his multiplied share in
the distribution he made, to show, that no Minister of God can in vain labor
in his cause, since even Judas whom Christ knew then to be hollow-hearted, was
not excepted from the fruit of his labors too, because they fructify from
their root, Almighty God, not from the branch they grow upon.

14. By the Prophet they mean the Messiah, of whom they expected wonders, and
seeing these, they concluded Christ was he. See the difference between these
devout people and the proud Pharisees; these ask signs upon signs, and when
they see more, then they can in reason ask for, yet they believe none at all to
be the work of God; for indeed the signs which they demanded were curiosities,
mere Castles in the air; but here are people, without asking can observe a
sign given of Christ's omnipotency, bestowed not in vain, but in a case of
necessity upon the poor, and seeing but this one sign, they rest satisfied,
and went away praising God for the wonderful works of his sacred Son, our
Savior Jesus Christ.

15. This intention which Jesus saw in these people of seizing on him to make
him king, he did also see, was out of a Judaical Interest, that he might make
them rich and great, for they served God in their way with regard to humane and
temporal blessings, and as much for that reason as for his own disdain of
humane honors, he fled from these promotions, that is, he slipped aside from the
people, who were going to the Towns from whence they came, when first they did
follow him.

The Application.
1. AS the Expositours of the Holy Text do interpret this, feeding many
thousand people in the desert Mountain with five loaves of Bread and two Fishes
only, to be a mystery of the Blessed Sacrament, so the Holy Church having
carried us now up to the high Mountain of corporal abstinence, which we have
been climbing these three weeks together, following her Preachers daily, as
these people did our Savior, gives us this present Gospel as a spiritual
Banquet to refresh us after a tedious journey; to show us that the end of our
corporal Fast, is to make us worthy of a spiritual Feast, which is this day
bestowed upon us in this mystery of the Blessed Sacrament. And hence we call
this the Sunday of Joy.

2. And because this is the last Sunday of Lent which carries us down the full
Tide of our Holy Fast (the next two Sundays bringing in a new stream upon us of
our Saviors Passion) therefore (having it under Precept to receive once a year
at least, and that about Easter) we shall now do well to look upon this Gospel
as on the best Instructions for our complying with that holy Precept; deviding
our selves into our several Parishes, and repairing each to our own Pastors
for performing this Precept, as these people were divided into several ranks,
and each division served by the Apostle our Savior appointed them, every
Parish has by a proper Pastor distributed unto her Parishioners the Holy
Communion at or about the Feast of our Saviors Resurrection. Hence we are
taught to add unto our Lenten Fast the virtue of Decency or Order in our
religious Duties and Devotions, each one going to this commanded Communion in
such sort and order, as is by Holy Church appointed.

3. Lastly because we see twelve Baskets of fragments left, and carried away
(after this refection given unto the people) out of that little store of fishes
and bread, we are minded thereby to carry with us from the Communion Table,
where we are fed with the Banquet of the two Natures in Jesus Christ, his
sacred Deity, and his Blessed Humanity (if not all the twelve Fruits of the
Holy Ghost as the abundant effects of this heavenly Feast) at least the Fruit
of Joy which is proper to this Communion, in regard it is a Banquet mercifully
bestowed upon us, whose guilty consciences tell us we deserve a famine in
punishment of our sins, rather then such a Feast as joys our hungry souls. And
as by this we see a joyful Communion is an accomplishment of our Lenten Fast;
so before that Communion we are fitly taught to premise such a Prayer, as may
first strike into us an act of Contrition, and then complete our Joy.

Say then the Prayer above, and see if it be not most propper to this purpose.
And say it also to force out of us further yet the virtue of Gratitude, such as
these people showed to Jesus, when they thought to make him presently their
King. O let us make him the perfect Commander of our hearts-affections he will
not fly from that Sovereignty; because he does affect it. On Passion Sunday in
Lent:
The Antiphon. John 8. v. 56. YOur Father Abraham rejoiced, that he might see
the day, he did see it, and was glad.

Verse. Deliver me O Lord, from the evil man.

Resp.. From the wicked man deliver me.


The Prayer.
WE beseech thee, Almighty God, propitiously behold thy Family, that thou
giving we may be governed in body, and thou reserving, we may be preserved in
soul.

The Illustration.
Just as your ebbing waters meet young floods, so does the Edde stream of Lenten
fast fall to the banks to day, and leaves the Channel for the Churches Prayers
to bring the red Sea of the Passion in upon us; whence we call this Passion
Sunday. Yes, yes, beloved, This is very true, and yet I do believe few have
observed this to be so. God grant, that all may see it, when it is made appear
out of the Prayer above: which I confess was to me as hard, as if I had been
forced to pick a lock, whereof the proper key was lost: and truly where to
find a mention of the Passion in a proper term, in all this Prayer I know not;
but yet this help remains, a common key will do as well, when proper keys are
missing. Take therefore the propitious look of God upon us which to day we beg,
and then believe the door is open to our Saviors Passion; for what is that?
but a propitiation for our sins? which we implore, when we beseech Almighty God
to look propitiously upon his Family; and though we use this phrase at other
times, as well as now, yet that forbids not a common key to open a private
door, nay rather this is indeed the particular key unto the Passion, and made
common upon all other occasions, because that sacred Sea flows over all the
other works, and mercies of Almighty God, gives force and value to all our
actions, and so is here properly applied, however it has become a common style
in all our Prayers. Now by this key we shall open all the doors of this days
Epistle and Gospel, for why is Christ his blood a more powerful Sacrifice then
that of Oxen, Goats, and Heyfers in the old Law, as this Epistle tells us? but
because theirs availed only to a nominal purity, This to a real propitiation
for all our sins, that only leads us into the Tabernacle of the Arc, this
into the Tabernacle of glory: to conclude, this propitious look we beg to day
unlocks the Cabinet of the Gospel also, and leads us (after a long contest
between Jesus and the Jews, whether he or they were devils, whether he or
Abraham were the greater person,) unto the very first entrance into his Sacred
Passion; where we should find them stoning him to death, but that he
miraculously preserves himself for a more ignominious Sacrifice upon the Altar
of the holy Cross; for whilst Jesus thus expostulated with the Jews,
certainly he did look propitiously upon the Gentiles, in whose behalf he so
much exasperated the Jews, as they menaced his death, And this may suffice to
bring our new flood in. See now how the Lenten edde meets the Passion Tide, in
a way as strange as true, while we are bid beg our sparing meals out of Gods
ample giving hand, and the preservation of our Souls, out of his reserving
from us; whereas fasting requires a hand which will take away rather then give
food to the body, and our souls preservation depends upon Gods ever giving
hand, his adding more and more to his former graces bestowed on us; all this is
true in one sense, and so is the contrary in another; for we beg in this
Prayer a rule, and government of our bodies, and that according to the time of
Fast, whence it follows, our meat should be now given us with the same
regulating hand of God, that knows best, how to proportion food fit for a
Fast, which we do not know, nor do we ask absolutely the full-giving hand of
God, to be extended to us; but that which may so give, as to reserve withal;
and hence we pray, that thou giving us little food for our bodies, they may be
well governed, and thou reserving the former plenty we may enjoy at other times,
our Souls may be preserved from the guilt of those past excesses, and so
prepared, as vessels empty of worldly trumpery, to be the more capable of those
heavenly treasures, that are Sailing toward us, upon the red Sea of thy bitter
Death and Passion (O Blessed Savior) now flowing in upon us.

The Epistle Heb. 9. v. 11, etc.
11 But Christ assisting an High Priest of the good things to come, by a more
ample and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hand, that is, not of this
creation.

12 Neither by the blood of Goats, or of Calves, but by his own blood entered
once into the Holies, eternal redemption being found.

13 For if the blood of Goats and of Oxen, and the ashes of an Heifer being
sprinkled, sanctifies the polluted, to the cleansing of the flesh.

14 How much more has the blood of Christ, who by the Holy Ghost, offered
himself unspotted unto God, cleansed your consciences from dead works, to
serve the living God.

15 And therefore he is the Mediator of the New Testament; that death being a
mean, unto the redemption of prevarications, which were under the former
Testament, they that are called may receive the promise of the Eternal
Inheritance.


The Explication.
11, 12. HItherto the Apostle in this Chapter had described the manner of the
High Priests officiating in the old Law, as also he described the ( Exodus c.
25. c. 26.) Tabernacle, wherein were placed the Candlesticks, the Table, and
the Bread of proposition, and this Tabernacle was called Sanctum, The Holy; but
behind a Curtain, at the back of this Sanctum, there was yet placed another
Tabernacle, which was called Sanctum Sanctorum, or the Ho^y of Holies, unto
which none but the High Priest could go, who there was to offer Sacrifice,
while the people remained all without, praying for themselves, as the Priest
did for them all; and here stood a golden Thurible, the Arc of the Testament,
all gilded over, wherein was a golden Shrine, which had in it the Manna, the
two Tables of the Law, and the Cherubins of Glory, above this, overshadowing
the propitiatory: and the Apostle told them, this way of Sacrificing should
last, till the time of correction, that is, until the first coming of Christ
into this world, who should correct this manner of proceeding, and take away
those legal rites and ceremonies, by putting in their place a spiritual
Sacrifice, and worshipping of God: not that it is to be understood, the old
being corrected should stand, but be abrogated by command of Christ: as we say,
ill manners are corrected in youth, not by remaining in the young man, but by
being taken away by good behavior, and by virtue correcting his former vices;
so the Apostle having told the Hebrews thus much of the old way of
Sacrificing, begins in this verse to show, how Christ assisting, (taking upon
him the office of High Priest of the new law, and of the good things to come)
thereby distinguished the fruits of his Sacrifice from those of the High Priest
in the old Law, who by assisting, (officiating at the Tabernacle) obtained
only present and temporal benefits, but Christ was an High Priest, obtaining
the good things to come, Spiritual and Heavenly things, as here remission of
sins, graces and virtues, and in the next world glory, bliss, and everlasting
life: and this by entering (to keep the Analogy between the old way of
officiating and the new) first a more ample and perfect Tabernacle, that is,
(as some say) by his Divinity entering our humanity (as others,) by his
entering his Virgin Mothers womb, but the most genuine sense is, by his
entering into his Church Militant, and becoming the first member of it, as it
was framed in the Idaea of his Heavenly Father: For so it was not a work of
humane hands, of flesh and blood, or of this creation, (of creatures making)
but was indeed the Tabernacle of God, the first Sanctum (Holy) through which he
was to pass by the vale of the Cross, into the second Tabernacle, Sancta
Sanctorum (the holy of Holies) his Church triumphant, the Kingdom of Heaven;
nor was it necessary for Christ to prepare his way from his outward Tabernacle
his Church Militant, to his inward, his Church triumphant. by the blood of
Goats, for his own sins, (since he had none) and the blood of a Calfe, for the
sins of the people, as in the old Law the High Priests did once a year, that
by Sprinkling the Sancta Sanctorum with this blood, they might render God more
propitious to themselves and the people; no, he shed once (for all mankind)
his own most sacred blood, and dying on the Cross, he entered the holy of
holies, the kingdom of heaven, whereby he found for us eternal redemption, so
copious an one indeed, as needed not be repeated by his dying any more for us
then once, though in the old Law, the bloody Sacrifice of the High Priests were
annual, because the power of that blood they shed, was weak, and could not
plead for long mercy, whereas Christ's blood prevails for eternal, and that
by being shed but once.

13. It was the ceremony of the old Law, Number. 19. first to shed the blood of
Goats, Oxen, and Heifers, and then burning the Beasts, to keep the ashes, and
putting them into living (so they called fountain) water, and Sprinkling the
people with them, to declare they should, by that aspersion (after Sunset, not
before) be reputed sanctified, (corporally clean,) and be admitted into the
company of the faithful, as formerly, which was a figure of the blood of
Christ issuing out of his earthly body, to be a real purgation of sin out of
our Souls, and not only of our corporal impurity; it was also the ground,
whence holy Church uses aspersion with holy water, wherein is mixed Salt
instead of those burnt-ashes. Note it is well said here, this ceremony was but
to the cleansing of the flesh; for it only did declare their bodies, who were
thus sprinkled should be esteemed clean and pure, though before polluted by
the touch of a dead carcass, a leper, or otherwise; and this cleansing was
then called sanctifying, as in this text it is.

14. It is indeed great reason the blood of Christ, who was God as well as man,
inspired by the instinct of his own Deity, and by the special instigation of
the Holy Ghost, to offer up his life, as an unspotted Sacrifice to God the
Father for our sins, should have much more force to purge our Souls from sins,
that is from dead works, then the blood of beasts had to cleanse men's bodies;
and Sin is not unfitly called a dead work, because it not only defiles our
Soul worse then the touch of a dead carcass did their bodies of the old Law,
but even kills them too; and yet by the blood of Christ, they are both purged
and revived so, as to be able to wait upon the living God, before whom no dead
Soul, that is to say, no Soul in deadly Sin, can give any attendance at all,
it being unfit that the Fountain of life should be attended on by the ougly
countenance of death.

15. He is therefore truly the Mediator, because he did partake of the nature
of both extremes, that is, of God offended, and of man offending, and so death
being a mean, which is to say, man dying in Christ, God was satisfied, not
only for the Sins of those, who live under the Law of grace, but as is
specially noted here in this verse, for the Sins of those under the former Law
of Moses, which was the former Testament here specified, and of those also
under the Law of nature, ( quoniam copiosa erat apud eum redemptio, because
redemption with him is plentiful,) and since he took humane nature, it was not
out of the Sphere of his activity to satisfy for all mankind, to whom that
nature is common; by those called: are understood here the elected, for those
only are effectually called, to the participation of the promise of eternal
inheritance, of being eternally heirs of God and coheires of Christ; and this
inheritance is called a promise, because it was the pact of God the Father,
with his Sacred Son, that if he would once dye to satisfy divine justice for
man's Sins, those whom he should call, that is, effectually single out, or elect
for eternal salvation should receive the same by virtue of promise from God
the Father, to his Sacred Son, whence their salvation is called the promise
of eternal inheritance; and in this regard Saint Paul speaking of himself, as
of one thus effectually called or elected, said, that he having done what was
required of him, had reposed for him in heaven a Crown of Justice, not as due
to his work, but as due to the promises, God the Father in Paul's behalf, made
to his Sacred Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and the like promise, we
account is made in the behalf of all those, whom Christ has elected to his
eternal inheritance; not that it is a thing, man can claim of God in respect
of his own merits, but in respect of the merits of Christ, elevating man's
works to a height of value, more then in themselves they have, or can have; or
to speak more plainly, not that man works his own Salvation by his own
power, but that God works that in man, which man alone cannot work in
himself; and which yet by cooperation with Gods holy Grace, he may claim, not
as absolutely due to him, but as due to Christ working in him.

The Application.
1. Whilst St. Paul brings us in the very front of this Epistle, our Blessed
Savior himself, the High Priest officiating to day, no marvel that the
Church erects the Altar of the bloody Cross for Christ to celebrate upon, and
this Passion Sunday, when the ensign of the Passion is displayed alone, the
holy, and the bloody Cross of Christ.

2. As little marvel it is we are to day deprived of all the suffrages of Saints
in Public Office of the Priest, such as we formerly made open intercession to,
beseeching their assistance in the close of Lawds, and Even-song; because we
now are to suppose that time is flowing when there were no Saints at all, (nor
any Angels able to relieve us) since we see the Saint of Saints, the Son of God
begins to suffer, more, decreed to dye: hence are the usual Ornaments removed
to day, the Churches left with naked walls in Catholic Countries, where Rights
and Ceremonies are observed, the Pictures of the Saints pulled down, and
nothing left us, but the bloody Cross, to mind us, that Almighty God never
looked propitiously on us, but when he frowned upon his Sacred Son and made his
Passion our Propitiation.

3: Say then beloved, what is our duty now? is it to wave the Holy Fast or no?
is it to seek for dispensations, by corrupting our Physicians, by deluding
Ghostly fathers, by flattering (indeed by cheating) of our selves under pretext
of sickness or infirmity? fie no, where these are real, there is no Fast
commanded, where they are not, dispensation's Null, because the Fast obliges
maugre dispensation. Cease then O Christians, cease to pamper sinners, while
God suffers for our sins; look for no favor but from Christ himself, take
no relief, but what his sparing hand gives to your bodies now, reserving
greater graces for your souls, as in the Illustration we have heard. Add
rather frequent Tears unto your, Fast, for the accomplishment thereof, add
your Compassion to our Saviors Passion, because there is no company acceptable
to our bleeding Christ, but a weeping Christian.

Thus may we hope for the Propitious look we beg to day, when he beholds us
the relenting, the resigned souls we ought to be, whilst holy Church prays
as above. The Gospel, Io. 8. v. 46, etc.
46 Which of you shall argue me of sin? If I say the verity: why do you not
believe me?

47 He that is of God, hears the words of God. Therefore you hear not,
because you are not of God.

48 The Jews therefore answered, and said to him, do not we say well, that
thou art a Samaritan, and have a devil?

49 Jesus answered, I have no devil: but I do honor my Father, and you have
dishonored me.

50 But I seek not my own glory. There is that seeks and judges.

51 Amen, Amen, I say to you, If any man keep my word, he shall not see death
for ever.

52 The Jews therefore said, now we have known that thou have a devil.
Abraham is dead, and the Prophets: and thou say, if any man keep my word,
he shall not taste death for ever.

53 Why, art thou greater then our Father Abraham, who is dead? and the
Prophets are dead; whom do thou make thy self.

54 Jesus answered, If I do glorify my self, my glory is nothing? it is my
Father that glorifieth me, whom you say that he is your God.

55 And you have not known him, but I know him; and if I shall say, that I know
him not, I shall be like to you, a liar. But I do know him, and do keep his
word.

56 Abraham your Father rejoiced, that he might sete my day: and he saw, and
was glad.

57 The Jews therefore said to him, thou have not yet fifty years, and have
thou seen Abraham.

58 Jesus said to them, Amen, Amen, I say to you, before that Abraham was made,
I am.

59 They took stones therefore to cast at him; but Jesus hid himself, and
went out of the Temple.


The Explication.
46. IT was in the presence of the High Priest; as well as of diverse Doctors
and Pharisees, that Jesus used this art of proving, he might uncontrouleably
reprove the people, because he knew they could not answer him by recrimination,
nor put him to the blush of turpitude in a doctor reprehending others who is
himself faulty in the same kind; so Christ here reprehending the abominable
sins of the Jews, takes the pri^iledge he cannot be denied of urging them to
tax him, (if they can) with sin; and yet lest his immunity from sin might
not suffice in their esteem, which yet was rooted both in his beatificall
vision, and hypostaticall union, making God and man but one person, he futher
tells them, it is pure verity that he preaches to them; so by these two titles
of his veracity and sanctity he claims belief of his doctrine, and authority
of rebuking their sins; and he does not here mean only a naked delivery of
truth, but a demonstration of all he tells them to be undoubted and absolute
verity, rooted in his own divine veracity, and so not to be any ways
disputed, but exacting their firm and constant belief, whence with great
reason he says here, why do you not believe me?

47. It is here to be noted, that the Manichaean Heresy was ill grounded from
this place, as if there had been some men born of a good, and others of a bad
Spirit, and so they (of necessity, not of choice) were either good or bad;
since here Christ alludes not to the natural, but to the supernatural man:
Hence when he says, he that is of God, his meaning is, he that is inspired by
the Grace of God, and of his Spirit; such it is that hears the word of God; and
therefore they heard it not, because they followed the inspiration of the evil,
and not of the good Spirit: Now that he meant this as to them ill (at that
time) inspired, not ill created, or naturally made ill, it is evident, for
diverse of them were afterward by his death, and by his Apostles preaching,
converted and doubtless saved too; whence it follows, that as they naturally
were not made so bad, as no good could come of them, so they were by
supernatural (and not by natural) means made the good people, which afterward
they became; and thus those once good, become bad again, when leaving the
inspiration of the good Spirit, they follow the dictamens of the bad one.

48. It seems by this manner of speech they were used frequently to call him
Samaritane, so now they think they have reason, and do well in so reproaching
of him, because first they had observed he did frequently converse with
Samaritanes; next that he was bred up in Nazareth a City in Galilee near to
Samaria, whence the Jews of that place were esteemed to be much like the
Samaritanes: Lastly and most literally, that the Religion of the Samaritanes
was mixed partly with Judaism, partly with Gentilism, since they did worship
the god of the Assyrians (from whom they were descended) as well as keep the
Rights of the Synagogue, and for this cause the Jews held them Schismatics,
and so detested their Sacrifices; that to call Christ a Samaritane, was to show
they did detest him too, which appeared by their adding he was also poss^ssed
by some Devil, and spoke as mad men do that are in diabolical frenzies. But the
truth is, they did really believe he was some Devil himself, because he laid
claim to be the Messiah, and to be the Son of God, which they looked upon him
for, as if he had been Lucifer himself; and Christ understood their meaning to
be thus, when in the next Verse he tells them.

49. He neither is, nor has in him any Devil, because in telling them he is
the Son of God, he does not boast his own descent so much, as that he gives the
honor and glory of all he does unto his heavenly Father; and for this Act of
his, they seek to disgrace, and to dishonor (indeed to revile) him. O
unparalleld meekness, and deep reply in one word to both their calumnies! for
though he mention not Samaritane in this Reply, yet by saying he has no Devil
in him, he includes the other, since the Schism of the Samaritanes made them
slaves of the Devil: wherefore he replies only to the Slander cast upon his
Father, by calling him Devil, to show he regards not much the abuse they
committed against himself, as he was man, but as he was the Son of God, whence
he must needs vindicate his Fathers, if not his own cause.

50. How well might he say this, who had professed he came hither by command of
his Father, that he preached his Fathers, not his own Doctrine, and the like: I
do therefore (said he) not seek my own, but my Fathers honor and glory; it
suffices me, that I know, when the hour of his holy Pleasure is come, he will
clarify (glorify) me, as afterward he did, when Christ said unto him before
his Transfiguration, the hour is come, clarify thy Son, Joh. cap. 17. v. 1.
and as then he did honor him by manifesting his glory, and avouching him to be
his Son; so the other part of this Verse will be verified, when he shall judge
(as God) and punish those that revile his said Son; not that in this place
Christ reflected on the general Judgment, which is referred to himself, but
unto the private Judgment, that God makes either by punishing temporally the
sins of the people (as he did in the destruction of the Jews by Titus and the
Romans, for having crucified Christ) or eternally, if he reserve their
punishment till the hour of their death; for Christ is not properly said to
come as Judge to every Soul dying, but to all Souls at the latter day. So our
private Judgments are the Sentences of God rather then of Christ upon us, yet
not to the exclusion of Christ neither.

51. Whereupon turning to his own veracity rather then regarding their
falsehood, he says Amen, Amen, Truly, Truly) or (since I am God, and cannot
lie) be men's opinions what they will, yet really and truly be it so, that
whosoever shall hear and keep my Word shall never dye eternally, for so he
would taste eternal death, but though he dye temporally through the separation
of his Body from his Soul, yet he shall not die eternally, that is, he shall not
sin mortally which can only cause eternal death, and even that death of the
body I shall take away too, when at the general Resurrection, I shall give both
corporal and spiritual life everlasting to those Blessed, who have inviolably
kept and observed my word, by living as I have given Law unto them.

52, 53. By this Reply we may see they understood not the true Sense of Christ's
meaning, when they think to obtrude the lie, and the Devil upon him, by showing
he has asserted a manifest lie, in saying, who believe in him should never
dye, for say they, though thou were God, yet would it not follow, to hear thy
word and keep it, were enough to render one immortal; since Abraham and the
Prophets did hear and keep Gods Word, and yet are dead; whereas he never meant
they should not dye temporally, but that they should not dye eternally, or
which is all one, dye in deadly sin; nor can indeed the other Sense be
rationally inferred out of the Letter of the Text, which alludes only to
eternal death. No marvel they should wonder at his pretending to be greater
then Abraham, whom they were content to make Head of the Synagogue, by reason
he was the First Believer, for this proceeded not only out of their affected,
but indeed out of their real ignorance, that Christ was God, as well as Man,
and so they held it absurd, he should pretend to an immunity not granted to the
best of them, as then, they (to argue against him) were content to admit
Abraham to be, he being indeed the Father of all Belief, (the first Believer
of all the Synagogue) for they went not to Adam, nor to the Faithful under the
Law of Nature, though indeed Moses was the first Member of the Synagogue,
framed into a Body; for Abraham's Belief was Personal, only Moses his was
Legal.

54. The beginning of this Verse, is his Answer to the close of the last, as
who should say, he did not make nor boast himself to be much; (though he might
with modesty and truth enough have done it) so he does not desire any other, or
more glory, then what his Father gives him; and says, if he desire more, it
proves null, alluding to the Judgments of Courts, that never take the
Testimony of any Party in his own Cause; and so now that he is in contrast with
them, he pretends not to his own Testimony of himself, but remits all to his
Father, whom they did confess to be their God, and consequently beyond all
exception to be believed.

55. Observe he tells them, they do not know his Father, (though they confess
him to be their God) when they heard him speak, and profess Christ was only
his beloved Son, and bid them hear (that is, believe) him, for then they did
not (or would not) take notice this voice came from heaven from God the Father,
as it did indeed. But the literal sense of this place is, that though they knew
there was but one God, and did believe in him, yet they did not know that God
who was one in Essence, was Trine in Persons, and consequently did beget the
word his eternal Son, and that from these Two (loving each other) did proceed
the Holy Ghost, the third Person of the Blessed Trinity; in this Sense he said
they did not know him, and in this Sense he professes he did know him, and
that if he should say otherwise, he should be a liar, as they were liars who
had called him Devil and Samaritane; yet particularly that they did not thus
know him to be as well Father of Christ Jesus, as to be one only true God: But
says Christ, I know him thus, and more then this, I ke^p his Word (that is) in
the best literal Sense, I am his Word, though this place may bear the other
Glosses too, that Christ (as Man) obeyed the Precepts of his Father, and that
as the Jews did show, they were not of God, because they did not give ear to
his Word, meaning his Laws and Commandments; therefore he said they were not of
God, but rather of the Devil, whose suggestions they did adhere unto and follow,

56. Abraham your Father (from whom you glory to be descended in your Faith) he
himself was glad to see me, nay did long desire it, and when he had the
happiness of my sight, he leapt for joy, and yet you that boast your selves to
be his children, are so degenerate, as seeing me, and perpetually conversing
with me, you rejoice not, but reject and revile me most blasphemously. Many
expound this Place diversely; some will have the day of Christ (which Abraham
did long for, and exulted to behold) to be the time of the eternal generation
of the Word of God; others, the day of his Living upon Earth; others, the
instant of the Incarnation of God in his Mothers Womb; others, the Day of his
Passion, which wrought all mankindes Redemption, and all these very well. And
they differ as much in expounding the Time, when Abraham enjoyed this desire by
actually seeing this day; some affirming that by Faith he see this day, when he
obeyed God, in Sacrificing his Son, which was a Figure of Christ his being to
dye for our Sins; others, that he see it by Revelation, as Prophets do things
to come; others, that he knew it, and see it, when Simeon came to Limbus, and
told Abraham he had held Jesus in his hands; as also when Zachary, St. Anne the
Blessed Virgins Mother, and St. John Baptist told him, they had seen him, and
likewise by the Angels of God telling him thereof, as the like Angels do tell
Souls in Purgatory, what does daily comfort them; but the best way of all is,
that God for a reward of his Obedience, gave him the happiness, both by
Revelation and Elevation of his Souls Faculties to see Christ Born, as the
Saints in Heaven. Now see all we do (if yet this may not be done as some
conceive) by the very natural Faculty of a Soul, able of her self to know all
things naturally, as soon as she is out of the body) or as St. Stephen, Act.
cap. 7. v. 55. from Earth (though clogged with his body) did see Christ up as
high as Heaven, by the like Elevation: nor does this lessen the Joy Abraham had
therein, to see and know no more, then an other separated Soul, since his joy
was answerable to his expectation (longer then that of any other) and if we say
more earnest, perhaps we shall not do others wrong, because as the promise of
all our happiness was made to Abraham in his Seed, so questionless, his share
of joy was greater, because he had thereby the fulfilling of the promise made
to him above two thousand years before; and although all who receive a benefit
equally divided, are equally happy, yet if among these any one had the
happiness to be able to say, this benefit was derived to them by virtue of a
promise made to him in all their behalfs, sure he has somewhat more of Joy even
in his equal share (admit he had no more) then others have. This then was
Abraham's Case, though if this were not, the Text does not deny, all the rest
that see the day of Christ with Abraham, did exult thereat with him; but here
it was enough to the purpose, that Christ told them, how careless soever they
were of the honor, yet their Father Abraham rejoiced at it.

57. It is not hence to be inferred, that Christ did live, as some have
pretended, almost fifty years, for the reason they said, he was not yet fifty,
was to be sure they would not fall short of the years he had; lest our Savior
might have intrapt them, as they desired to do him, so they named a time much
beyond what he had lived, and therefore he could not (as they conceived)
possibly have seen Abraham, whence they would inser, he did lie, and was not to
be believed, not reflecting (nor indeed knowing) he (as God) was elder then
Abraham, how much younger soever he were as man.

58. And by this Answer of Christ, it is evident he spoke of knowing Abraham,
not as man (for so he was Abraham's Junior) but as God, who (as such) created
Abraham and all the world besides, and therefore he does not say of himself, I
was before Abraham, but I am before him; thereby to show, that in God there is
no difference of the time, no not any time at all, but all that is in him is
eternal, and so cannot be said to have been, or that it shall be, but that it
is; whence we see, God giving himself a name, Exodus 3. says, I am who I am, so
now Christ speaking of himself as God (not as man) says, before Abraham was, I
am, which was as high an expression of his Deity, as he could use, and for that
cause, the Jews not believing but even hating him, run and

59. Took up stones to pelt him immediately to death, as the highest blasphemer
in their opinions that possibly could be; For it was according to the Law,
Blasphemers should be stoned to death, Levit. 24. v. 16. though indeed they
were so doting on their Father Abraham, that even for Christ to have preferred
himself before him only, was enough for them to have stoned him to death if he
had not declared also that he was God, and the Creator of Abraham (for so his
words imported) and so it was indeed; by our Saviors hiding himself is here
understood his hindering the Faculty or Power of their optic Nerves, or
withdrawing his concurse (as God) from their Faculty of seeing him, though he
left them power at the same time to see all things else besides himself, as
perfecttly as ever: if yet we may not more rationally say this was done by
hindering his body from reflecting any species to their eyes, for this, every
glorified Body shall be able to do. So it is not hence to be conceived Christ
did hide himself by running into any corner or covert (for thither their malice
would have pursued him) but that he did by his omnipotency work a miracle, that
they seeing, should yet not see him, who stood in the midst of them, when he
had spoken to them, and angered them as above.

The Application.
1. SAint Paul to day has been the Sacristan, and made the Altar ready for the
Priest, lo here he enters in, who is the Sactifice and the Sacrificant, our
Savior Jesus Christ, the lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world.
And therefore enters reprehending sin as you hear in this days Gospel, because
he came to dye for sins. And who can better reprehend then he that is himself
irreprehensible? as Jesus showed he was that asks the Jews, who amongst you all
can accuse me of sin?

2. Thus by his Lamb like Innocence is he brought bleating into Holy Church to
day, as was the Legal Lamb, Exodus 12. v. 11. just fifteen days before the
Pascal Feast, that by his bleating day and night, so many days together, he
might mind the Jews how the blood of the Lamb upon their doors did cause the
Angel to show mercy there, where he had found that blood. Now in regard the
Blood of Christ is that which is the Safeguard of the World, from the not only
killing but damning sword of the Angel of Darkness; therefore is this Lamb of
God brought in to Holy Church to day bleating and minding Christians (by the
justifying of himself from sin) that he is indeed the lamb of God who takes
away the sins of the world, and that brings salvation unto those who by
Integrity and Innocence of Life shall accomplish the Holy Fast of Lent, and so
make up that happy Fold of Lambs and Sheep, who know their Shepherds Voice, and
who are known by him for their Compassion on him now they hear the Tidings of
his bitter Death and Passion.

3. And in regard the Jews should not pretend they were excused from having his
Innocence so far, as therefore to believe him God, because he was an Innocent
Man; See how all this Gospel runs upon a pregnant Proof of his Divinity, where
he not only tells them, Before Abraham was, I am (that is to say) I am, who
am, I am Almighty God, whose best Definition is his Eternal Being. Nor did he
say this gratis, for see the stones they sting (pretending this was Blasphemy)
can no way hurt him, nor can the Flingers see whom they intend to hurt, though
just before their eyes, because his Deity was not pleased they should then see
his Human Person whom they thought to stone to death; yet from this malicious
Intention we may fitly call this Passion Sunday.

And therefore fitly pray as above expressing in the begged Propitiation, all
his Passion, and so conclude by casting all our care upon him both for Soul and
Body. On Palm Sunday in Lent.
The Antiphon. Matthew. 26. v. 31. FOr it is written, I will strike the Pastor,
and the Sheep of the Flock shall be dispersed: but after I shall rise again, I
will go before you into Galilee; There you shall see me, says our Lord.

Verse. Deliver me O Lord, from the evil man.

Resp.. From the wicked man deliver me.


The Prayer.
OMnipotent everlasting God, who have caused our Savior to take humane Flesh
upon him, and be crucified, for mankind to imitate the example of his
humility, grant propitiously, that we may deserve to have both the Instructions
of his patience, and the fellowship of his Resurrection.

The Illustration.
YOu will have heard in the preface to this Book, why the Antiphon above is not
taken out of this days Gospel of the Mass, but of the Gospel read at
Blessing of Palms. Suffice it here to say, they are both waters of one and the
same red Sea, and therefore suitable to the design in hand; and I think it
will be sufficient, to cast your eyes only upon the Epistle and Gospel here
below, to satisfy you, how this Prayer above and they agree, since in them
both we have the greatest examples of humility that can be given: in the one
Christ humbled to the very ignominy of the Cross, in the other his humble
entrance, that he made into Jerusalem upon an Ass, to the triumph of his
ignominious Death and Passion; for he was pleased only to accept the
acclamations of his being King, to make greater unto us, that example of his
humility, which he desired we should imitate, and which he gave us for that
very end, as we see this Prayer avoucheth, professing, that God caused our
Savior to take humane flesh, and be crucified, for mankind to imitate the
example of his h^mility; whence we beg as follows That he will grant
propitio^sly we may deserve to have both the Instructions of his patience, and
the fellowship of his Resurrection. Stay blessed Jesu; how can we deserve this?
to have thee our eternal God become our Temporal Master in the School of
patience, and which is more (if more can be) to deserve, that we may have the
fellowship of this Resurrection? what fellowship can there be betwixt God and
man? the creator and the creature? (setting that aside, which is betwixt the
Sacred Deity, and the humanity of Christ, where man may in a kind be bold to
say, Hail, fellow well met?) But for us, that are as much removed from Christ
in dignity, as nothing is from all things in the world, for us not only to
hope for our resurrection out of the infinite mercy of God, but to beg we may
deserve it too, nay, deserve the fellowship thereof with Jesus Christ himself,
this I confess seems very strange, and sounds like a bold presumption, rather
then a modest Prayer: and yet because the Holy Ghost inspires the Church to
make this Prayer to day, we must not fear to say it with a confidence, it will
be grateful in the eare^ of God, and for that reason grateful to him, because
feasible by us; yet no way feasible, unless he grant us his propitious glaunce
again, by looking on us through the blooshed eyes of his Sacred Son; then
indeed we may hope for propitiation by his passion; and that propitious look
being afforded us, we may like Peter weep most bitterly, when the like aspect
was cast upon him by our Blessed Lord. Luc. 22.61. But why do we so timorously
come to that, which Saint Paul so confidently leads us up unto? did not he
vaunt to the Colossians cap. 1. v. 24. His sufferings to have been an
accomplishment of those things, that are wanting of Christ's Passion, according
as we heard in the first Lenten Sundays Epistle? See there v. 1. for in
consequence to the Doctrine there delivered, we pray to day, that we may
deserve to have had Christ our Master of Patience, and to be his fellows in
his Resurrection, since then we shall deserve such a Master, when we become
such Scholars, as Saint Paul was, and as he taught us (in the Colossians) to
be, Imitators of his patience in our passions) which then become the
accomplishment of his, when we bear them, as patiently, as he bore his Cross,
Coloss. c. 3. v. 12. and being his, at least they must have merit in them, and
that merit is to make us to have deserved such a master; then let us
confidently say this Prayer to day, and all this holy week: for as it is the
last of the Lenten Sundays Prayers, so we may see it Steers the ships of our
Bodies and Souls down the very gulf of our Saviors Passion, where to suffer
shipwreck is to be saved, since the greatest mercy in this Sea, is to be cast
away upon the waves thereof, as our Pilot Jesus was himself; hear his own
words out of the royal Prophets mouth, Psalm. 68. v. 3. I came into the depth
of the Sea, and was drowned in the Tempest of it. This Sea was that of his
Passion, which we are now all sailing on, nor can we hope for greater mercy
then to be used, as heavenly Jonas was, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to
be swallowed up by the whale of death, to dye to this wicked world, that so we
may with Ionas-Jesus be cast upon the shore of Resurrection, according as the
Prayer above purports: But lest we forget the Edde of our Lenten Fast, running
by the shoares of this Red Sea, see how admirably the holy Ghost has contrived
this Prayer, with due regard to all circumstances of persons, time and place;
for what more eminent effects of a religious Fast, then patience and humility?
and to what more apparent end are these virtues recommended unto us in this
days service, then that thereby we may obtain a propitious look from heaven,
and to deserve a fellowship in the resurrection with Christ, after we have
learned without book these lessons of humility and patience, which God sent his
Sacred Son to teach us?

The Epistle, Philip. 2. v. 5. etc.
5 For this think in your selves, which also in Christ Jesus.

6 Who when he was in the form of God, thought it no robbery, himself to be
equal to God.

7 But he exinanited himself, taking the form of a Servant, made into the
similitude of men, and in shape found as man.

8 He humbled himself, made obedient unto death; even the death of the Cross.

9 For the which thing God also has exalted him, and has given him a name,
which is above all names:

10 That in the name of Jesus every knee bow, of the celestials, terrestrials,
and infernals.

11 And every tongue confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory of
God the Father.


The Explication.
5. THe Apostle had in the foregoing verses of this Chapter exhorted to
humility in superiority; and now in this verse he takes for a rule of our
humility that of Christ, who (though God) disdained not to fall below the
repute of man, and called himself even a worm, and not a man, so low he had
stooped for our instruction and example: And Saint Paul by this expression does
not only wish us to think humbly of our selves, but even to feel by a
practical humiliation, the same subjection within us, which Christ felt, when
he became the scorn of men, and the outcast (or offals) of the people: This
is the genuine sense of the Apostle, though even to think (to reflect on
Christ's humility) and by reflecting thereon to humble our selves, is not an ill
exposition of this place neither; and thereby to comfort our selves, that as
Christ his humility was the cause of his exaltation, so will our humility prove
to us, if we embrace it for our Saviors sake.

6. But to imprint this Doctrine deeper in us, the Apostle amplifies, how far
Christ did debase himself for our example, saying, that though he were in the
form of God etc. Where we are to note, this word form is here taken
perversely by the Arrians, when they thence infer, Christ was not really and
truly God, but had only a shape or form divine, better then other men ever
had; yet this is a gross corruption of the Text; for Saint Paul means here
Physical, not Artificial, natural and not fictitious form, such form as
gives being to the thing in which it is; as the form of wood gives an
essential distinct being to wood, differing from all other substances that are
not wood; and so in this place the Apostle says, Christ being in the form of
God, (being really God himself) who neither is nor can be multiplied into many
Gods, by the form of God being communicated to many persons, as the form of
man is multiplied into many men, though all those men have but one form
specificall, one humane form. This shows, the nature or form of God is
infinitely more perfect, and more simple, then any other nature can be, which
may be numerically multiplied, though specifically it still remain one, as
humane nature is, when many men contract it, but the divine nature is not so
multiplied, though contracted by three distinct persons: for we cannot say,
there are many Gods, though it is most true, there are many men: so the Apostle
here speaks literally, and rigorously of the form (of the nature divine) and
says, Christ, being coequall God with his Father (in regard of his divine
nature) held it not robbery to say he was equal to God, held it no prejudice
to his Father to say, he was truly one and the same God with him.

7. And yet this notwithstanding, though he were in the form of God, who is
Lord and Master of all the world, he would exinanite himself, debase and
lessen himself, into the form of a servant, made into the similitude of man,
and in shape found as man, who is by all the Titles of the world, a vassal,
Servant, and creature of Almighty God; though indeed exinanire is not to be
truly rendered into English; for it is in effect to say Annihi^a^e: not that he
was in truth annihilated, only this word imports thus much, that Christ, who,
as God, was all things, had in a manner annihilated himself to become man, who
in the sight of God was, and is, as much as nothing, because pure man, has no
being, but from God, and if God could take away that gift or rather loan of
Being which he affords to man, instantly man would return into his first
principle which was nothing, before Being was lent unto him; I say, if God
could, because as to give Being argues perfection, so to take it away, some
Divines think would argue imperfection in God, as if he would or could destroy
himself by Annihilation of any thing, since to take Being from a thing is to
take his own perfection away, which God cannot do, though he may punish those,
who use their Being to the dishonor of God, by making them Be eternally
miserable, whom he created with power to have Bin eternally happy. By the form
of Servant is here understood the humane nature, which Christ assumed, for that
was truly a Servant even to his own Divine nature, which did assume it; and
this, for as much as that nature was a creature, and so a Servant to the
creator thereof; but not that Christ was a Servant, by any legal servitude
imposed on man, as punishment of his sins against God, for this servitude took
hold on the Individuals of humane nature, not of the nature it self; and since
our Saviors Individual person was one with that of God, the second person of
the Blessed Trinity, he was not a Servant, by any legal servitude falling on
his person; and so even his humane nature, though servile, as a creature, was
not yet servile as a sinful man, because he had not the least guilt of sin
in him; and thus we see in captives, humane nature is no slave, though the man
that is taken, be made so: when then we say humane nature was corrupted in
Adam, we do mean every child of Adam received a contagion, or corruption from
him, and yet humane nature in the line of a creature to God was not corrupted,
so as to be a less perfect creature then it was before, for that had been to
corrupt the Essence, not the Persons of mankind; whereas sin only corrupted
his State, and not his Essence, the Persons contracting Humane Nature, and not
the Nature of man it self: for if so, Christ being man made of that Humane
Nature must have been corrupted (in that nature at least) which yet he was not.
By the Similitude of man in this verse, we are to understand literally the
external shape of man, not the accidental or fantastical (as the Heretics
said) but the substantial and real shape: though St. Augustine takes it here as
for the predicament of habit, which consists in Garments or Clothing, and
likens Christ's Humanity to be as a Garment covering his Divinity, or as Iron is
made fiery, or as Gold is made a Statue; and even in that Sense the thing is as
true, as it is ingeniously expressed by St. Augustine. By being made as man is
not to say only like man, and not to be truly such, but like here signifies to
be so like as it is the very same; as if a Statue should from a dead Stone be
made move, as a man moves, eat, as a man eats, speak, as a man speaks; why
still by every one of these gradations the Statue becomes more like a man then
it was before, and when at last it had all the Faculties of a man, it became as
man indeed, that is to say, not only like, but really and truly man: In this
Sense our Savior was said to be as man, as if we said, though he were truly
God, yet he did not appear to be so, but appeared only to be as man, which
truly he was, as well as he was God.

8. This humility was not an Act of God the Son to God the Father, for so there
is no commanding Power in the one over the other, but of his Humanity, both to
his own Divine Person, and to his heavenly Father too; by dying on the Cross in
virtue of this command, Christ did humble himself as low as could be, in regard
no death was so vile and contemptible, as that on the Cross was in the esteem
of man in those days, though since even for reverence no man is executed in
that kind; so Christ's Humility made this contempt become reverentiall.

9. For the which (Act of Humility and Obedience) God has exalted him, (his
Humanity for his Deity could not be exalted) and given him a name: Here we are
to note Calvin's pervisity, who took such a hatred against the Church for the
Doctrine of merit, that he hence denied Christ the honor of meriting this
Exaltation by his Humiliation, but says, that for which is to be taken
consecutively or consequently, not causally, as who should say, after his
Humility God rewarded him by exalting of him, but not for his Humility, or for
the merit thereof, which yet is an abominable Impiety and Heresy: whereas we
allow Christ by his Death not only to have merited for mankind redemption
(whereof himself had no need, who was from his first Conception Blessed by his
Hypostatical Union) but even for himself the Glory of his Body, and the
endowments of a glorious Body, the highest place in Heaven above Saints and
Angels, nay, the very setting at the right hand of God, the Power to Judge all
the world, and the dominion over Heaven and Earth, which were not only due to
him, as united to his Deity, but as merited by his Passion; further he merited
to have a name that is above all names, and such a name it was when Christ was
called God, and the Son of God, the name of the Messiah so famous in this
world; lastly the name of Jesus, and Redeemer of all mankind, which name
though it were given him in circumcision, yet it was not divulged to all the
world, till he was crucified: so then, he was truly said to have merited that
name of Savior; and many times names are given to foretell what such men will
merit before they dye; thus was the Blessed Name of Jesus given to Christ,
foretelling how richly he would deserve to be called Savior of the world.

10 In the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, because this name is greater
then ever any other was; for Jehovah (which signified God creating, and was the
greatest that ever had before been heard of) is not so great as God redeeming,
and that is meant by the name of Jesus; whence the Church boldly says, it had
nothing availed us to be born, unless to have been redeemed had made our birth
availing to us; So it is a greater abuse to blaspheme the name of Jesus, then
the name of God, because God gave us more Grace and Benefit by our Redemption,
then he did by our Creation; and Jesus includes both God and Savior, which God
alone does not: whence the very Angels, who were not redeemed, bow their knees
to the name of Jesus, as convertible with that of God; and therefore all
mankind has much more reason so to do; for the Devils, they would refrain to
honor it perhaps, if they could, but as it is, they cannot; since (if no
otherwise) they must adore Man in the Person of God, ever since Jesus took
Humane Nature upon him.

11. And every tongue, not only all Nations upon the Earth first or last,
shall confess that our Lord Jesus is in the Glory of his Father, but every
tongue of Angels and Devils, as well as of Men: and by saying he is in the
glory of God the Father, is understood more then that he s^tteth at his right
hand, namely, that he is equal in Glory to God the Father, since Jesus is not
only Man, but jointly God withal. So that the summity or highest pitch of
Jesus his praise is indeed this, that the Man Jesus being God as well as Man,
is, (though as man much inferior) yet (as God) even equal to the Heavenly
Father in Glory, Power, Majesty, Goodness, and all the other Attributes Divine,
which are given to Almighty God.

The Application.
1. MOrtification, Prayer, and Alms-Deeds: Perseverance in good Purposes, The
Fear of God, and Holy Poverty, were the good works that help to Sanctify the
First weeks Fast of Lent.

Chastity of Body, and Purity of Soul, The Second.

The Love of Enemies, Declining evil Talk, and evil Company. Hearing the Word
of God, keeping it in our Hearts, and Speaking forth the Praises of our Lord,
The Third.

Alacrity of Soul joined with Contrition: Decency and Order in the Rights of
Holy Church, and the Fruit of Joy (if not all the other twelve Fruits of the
Holy Ghost (after Communion) the Fourth.

Compassion and a perfect Resignation to our Saviors Passion: Integrity and
Innocence of Life, The Passion Week.

Add now to these this Holy Week (to make the Fast Complete) Patience,
Humility, and Obedience (besides the Contempt of the World, recommended in the
following Gospel) so shall we do as we are taught this holy Time of Lent, and
as we Pray we may, to share in the Joyful Resurrection, according as we
(Fasting thus) condole with Jesus in his Sacred Passion.

2. Let not the first Verse of this Epistle stagger us, beloved, seeming to
require not only these three Virtues from us for the accomplishing our Holy
Fast, but those in some degree of perfection answerable to the like Virtues in
our Blessed Savior; so that it is his Invincible Patience, his Profoundest
Humility, and his most Prompt Obedience we are to imitate. His Patience St.
Paul 2 These. 3. presumes to bid us pray for, saying, Our Lord direct our Hearts
in the Charity of God and in the Patience of Christ. His Humility himself bids
us imitate Matthew. 11. v. 29. Learn of me because I am meek and humble of heart.
His Obedience we come nearest to, at greatest ease, in loving one another:
since he says, Joh. 15. ver. 12. This is my Precept, That you love each other,
as I loved you; and this obedience we bring nearest home to his, when (as he
died for us all, in obedience to his heavenly Father) we dye for one another in
Testimony of our obedience to this his Precept, as all Martyrs do, or when we
rather choose to dye to Nature (by not sinning) then to Grace, by breaking our
obedience to his least Commands.

3. Thus shall we with a general view see what we ought to have been at this
time of Lent, and with a particular regard behold our present duty proper to
this Holy Week, that being dead to sin, we may live to Grace, that being buried
with Christ, we may rise with him to Glory, since only they deserve to share
with him in the Joy of his Resurrection, who by imitating of his Virtues, are
partakers with him in his bitter Death and Passion.

According as we pray above we may. The Gospel. Matthew. 21. v. 1, etc.
1 And when they drew nigh to Jerusalem, and were come to Bethphage unto Mount
Olivet, then Jesus sent two disciples,

2 Saying to them, Go ye into the town that is against you, and immediately you
shall find an Ass tied and a Colt with her: loose them and bring them to me.

3 And if any man shall say ought unto you, say ye, that our Lord has need of
them: and forthwith he will let them go.

4 And this was done, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the
Prophet, saying,

5 Say ye to the daughter of Sion, Behold thy King comes to thee, meek, and
sitting upon an Ass, and a Colt, the fool of her that is used to the yoke.

6 And the Disciples going, did as Jesus commanded them.

7 And they brought the Ass and the Colt: and laid their garments upon them,
and made him sit thereon.

8 And a very great multitude spread their Garments in the way: and others did
cut boughs from the trees, and strewed them in the way.

9 And the multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried, saying,
Hosanna to the Son of David, Blessed is he that comes in the name of our Lord.
Hosanna in the highest.


The Explication.
1. NOte that St. Mark, Mark 11. ver. 2. and St. Luke, Luke 19. ver. 29.
relating this Passage, mention Bethania, which yet is here omitted: the reason
they speak of it was, for that Bethania, Bethphage, and Jerusalem are all three
near together; and St. John Cha. 12. v. 1. makes mention of our Saviors
Supping the night before in Bethania; so they name the place whence he came, as
well as those he passed by, and went unto Jerusalem; whereas St. Matthew.
mentions only those places he passed by, which were Bethphage and Mount
Olivet, before he came unto the valley of Josaphat, which lay just in view of
the City, through which valley runs the river Cedron. As for Bethphage, it is
so called, as signifying the Mouth of the valley, because it is placed just at
the entrance into Iosaphat, and is as it were the mouth thereof; so it is
called the House of the Mouth in the Hebrew Tongue, because through a little
narrow passage out of Bethphage close by the Mount Olivet they go into the
valley of Iosaphat, and then (at a Golden gate) in to the Temple, which stands
without the City of Jerusalem: Hence Bethphage is thought to be the place,
where the Priests of the Temple living, all provisions for Sacrifices were made
ready, Lambs, Goats, Oxen, Pigeons, Turtles, and the like; and therefore Christ
was pleased to pass this way (through the Golden gate) into Jerusalem, to show,
he was the lamb of God, who came to be sacrificed for the sins of the people;
and that it was his sacred Person, whom the Paschal Lamb did prefigure: As also
for this cause he came from Bethania, when he had a little before raised
Lazarus from his grave, and passed now triumphantly through the valley of
Josaphat, into the earthly Jerusalem; to declare that in the same valley he was
to come much more triumphantly, as Judge over all the dead, who should at the
latter day be raised, and (carrying the Blessed only with him into the
heavenly City of Jerusalem) would leave the wicked to eternal confusion; as
those (who now conspired his death after this Triumph) were to be left over to
utter destruction, both ^^ey and their famous City; what two Disciples were
sent, is not certain, some say Philip and Peter, some Peter and John; it boots
little who they were, though the two latter are more likely, because they were
those for certain that went afterward to provide the Pascal Lamb, which Christ
did eat with his Disciples.

2. Whether Christ spoke these words between Bethania and Bethphage, or after
he came past Bethphage, is uncertain; if before, then probably he meant by the
Town against you, Bethphage; if after, then he meant some little village by it,
for certainly all agree, it was not meant of Jerusalem, because in the Latin
it is called a little Castle.

3. In this verse is showed both the Deity of God, and his Dominion, or power
over all things; the first, that he could see things absent: the second, that
he could command them to be presently brought unto him without any
contradiction; only this, that if any durst oppose, it should suffice to
answer, our Lord has need of them, he who is not only Lord of those Animals,
but of their Masters, and of all the creatures in the world, and then when you
shall tell them this, they will let them go; see the humility of Christ, he did
not say this shall command them away, but they will let them go, to show Gods
commands do not force, but court our wills into consent, for, those who he will
have do any thing, he moves their consents, and does not wrest it from them,
whether they will or no; the like humility he showed in choosing so
comtemptible a Beast for his Triumphant Steed, but yet a creature patient and
able to labor, thereby to declare he was to bear a great burden, not of our
Saviors weight, but of all the sins of the world laid upon our Saviors
shoulders; yet lest men mistake, it is here to be observed, the Asses of Iudaea
were large, strong, and stately beasts, much like unto the Mules of other
Countries, whence we read Iud. 12. v. 14. where seventy Sons, and Nephews of
Abdon, the Prince of Israel, were all mounted upon such like Asses; and by this
it appears, they were beasts of esteem, as well as of strength; so Christ
resolving to make a kind of Triumph, chose though a contemptible, yet not an
unapt beast for his purpose, who was resolved to show, he esteemed not the pomp
of this world, though he was content to be once acknowledged to deserve the
style and title of King.

4. 5. As by these two following verses does appear, it was necessary that he
should take this title to verify all the predictions, that were of him by the
Prophets, as namely this of his Triumph into Jerusalem was by the Prophet
Isaias, Chap. 62. v. 11. though others conceive this place is but cited as
coincident with that of Zachary, Chap. 9. v. 9. to the same purpose; and so
Cornelius a Lapide explicates this Text upon that of Zachary; see him for more
of this subject in that Tome; by the Yoke is here understood, the burden laid
upon the Asses back, not that Asses did then use to draw with Yokes upon their
necks, as Oxen do.

6. This Verse only shows the promptitude wherewith the Disciples obeyed our
Lords commands, as no way doubting to find what he bad them seek, or to have
been bid to bring what they should not find: and by this we are instructed not
to dispute God Almighties commands, nor doubt of our Powers to keep them, if we
go about them, as he bids us, and confide in his assistance for the performance
on our parts.

7. The reason why both the Ass and her Colt were brought, was, that Christ
rode on them both; on the Ass, the longer and mountainous way of Mount Olivet,
on the Colt, into the City, but principally for the mystery couched underneath,
namely that Christ was to command not only the Jews, who had been used to the
bridle of the Law, represented by the Ass made to the Saddle, but also the
unback't and unbridled Gentiles, meant by the Colt as the ruder people, before
the Law of Moses, who never were bridled, broken, nor made fit for ^he Commands
of God, by any Precept or Law upon them: Now the Reasons why Christ was pleased
to come in this Triumph, were to give a Pledge of his absolute Regal Power over
all the world, by coming like a King into the most famous City of the Earth; to
let the Jews, their Scribes, Pharisees, Doctors and Priests see, he was the
Messiah, foretold thus coming among them by the Prophecy of Zachary above
cited; to show again that he was indeed the Lamb of God taking away the sins of
the world, while he came, not only from Bethphage, as they do, but in the
manner they use to come (in Pomp and Solemnity) into the City, some days
before the Feast of the Pascal Lamb, as the Legal Lamb was wont so to be
brought in to deride the Pomp and Glory of this World, by seeming to accept of
it to day, and resolving to renounce it as contemptible immediately, when he
rather chose to dye a Sacrifice for the people, then to live their King;
Lastly, to show that his kingdom truly consisted here of Suffering, however in
the next world it was to be glorious, and therefore even to his Suffering he
went Triumphantly, as giving his Holy Martyrs example to do the like in their
persecutions, and in going toward their Executions with Alacrity and Joy, to
take possession of the Crown of Sorrow, before they come to their Crown of
Glory.

8. This was to show, they did in earnest look upon him and treat him as their
King; for when Kings did pass by, it was usual to strew the streets and deck
them, as well as could be, thereby to show their affections and loyalties to
their Sovereign: by their garments we are here to understand those only that
hang loose, as Coats, Cloakes, Scarfes, and the like. These boughs they had
from the Mount Olivet, a place full of all sorts of Flory Plants and Trees:
This ceremony mystically bids us, cut off the luxuriant branches of our
inordinate desires, pluck up the flowers of our wanton sensualities, and cast
them at our Saviors feet, as the spoils of his grace for him to trample over;
and thereby to show they shall no longer have root in us; if any soul be so
happy, as to have no sins, let him cast down then the better branches of his
good works, the flowers of his virtues, and so bedeck the way for Christ our
Lord to pass.

9. Hosanna is a word compounded, and signifying an apprecation of health or
happiness, not much unlike to that we use to say, long live the King, or God
bless the King, so by this word they both acknowledged him to be the Messiah,
and the new King, that had been so many thousand years expected for the
comfort and redemption of the people; for that was imported in the words Son
of David, because the Messiah was to come by promise out of David's loins, who
had reigned gloriously in Jerusalem, and who came descended lineally from
Abraham; so the best sense of this acclamation was, to wish health first to
Christ their King, and next to themselves, as knowing the good of the people
depends upon the Kings prosperity; by blessing him coming in the name of the
Lord, they mean as the promise of our Lord God made to Abraham, and in him to
the people; Hosanna in the highest imports, thou God on high, save this our
Messiah, and in him save also us.

The Application.
1. WHat may be added here more then was said in the Illustration of the
Prayer, in the Epistles Application, or in the Explication of this Gospels
Text, is, that as Jesus came to dye for all the world, so he was pleased by all
sorts of people to be attended on in this his Triumph into Jerusalem (the
whole worlds Metropolis or Head-City.) by Saints, and Sinners, his Apostles,
Jews and Gentiles: by all Sects and Ages, Men, women, and Children; that so he
might give an example of his humility to all the world, and unto all mankind.

2. But especially to great ones, Nobles, Princes, Monarchs: that these may
learn, Pal. 61. v. 11. If Riches slow, not to set their hearts upon them. Nor
if honored by their subjects, Psalm. 48. v. 13. to lose their understandings,
and to become like foolish Beasts, by taking Pride in Popular Applause; but
rather with the wise to say; So passes by the Glory of the world, this day
cried up a King, and in three days decry'd to dye, an ignominious death.

3. As therefore Princes you are those whom Jesus represented last of all, and
made the least demur upon your Pompous State, so learn of him to set the world
at naught, by a contempt thereof, and thereto fix your thoughts where true
joys are, live humbly, dye patiently with Jesus here, that you may rise and
reign gloriously with him in the world to come.

See how to all these purposes we fitly pray as above. On Easter Sunday.
The Antiphon, Mark 16. v. 4. ANd looking they saw the stone rolled back, for
it was a very great one. Alleluja.

Verse. This is the day which our Lord has made.

Resp. Let us exalt and rejoice therein.


The Prayer.
O God, who this day by thine only begotten Son, have opened to us the door
of eternity by the destruction of death; prosecute, we beseech thee, in us
those good desires, which thou preventing have afforded us.

The Illustration.
Look how the Salt Sea waters (strained through the loose and Sandy grounds)
break into Springs, that head the greatest and the freshest Rivers; thus does
the red Sea of our Saviors Passion, break from his Sepulcher into the
Crystal streams of his glorious resurrection; so that all the Churches
Prayers will now a while taste of those living waters that do spring from
death, (from the Sepulcher of our Blessed Lord) in such sort as if death were
content to dye, that we may live. For we see by this Prayer holy Church
esteems Christ's resurrection to be the destruction of death (since he has no
otherwise then by rising again this day from his grave, opened unto us the
door of eternity (of eternal and blissful life) whereupon she prays the
zeal we are now supposed to have of living eternally may be perfected, by God
his prosecuting in us our good desires thereof, which are first afforded us by
his preventing grace, without which indeed we cannot have (as of our selves)
one good thought, much less can we do any the least good deed. Now as there
can be no tidings of any greater joy unto us (who even naturally desire
eternal life) then for holy Church to tell us, it is this day bestowed upon us
by Christ his rising from his grave, and by his raising us to everlasting life
from the eternal death of deadly same, which before had swallowed up all
mankind; so we ought to rejoice to day, as a dead man would to find himself
revived, and brought from the brink of eternal damnation, unto a promise of
eternal life and bliss. O could we say this Prayer with a lively apprehension
of this to be our present condition, with what fervor should we say it? with
what joy should we repeat it over and over again? and how infinitely should we
profit our selves thereby? nay, how home should we Preach unto our Souls by
praying thus? Since thereby we should exhaust not only the whole Epistle and
Gospel of the day, but even the Introite of holy Mass, wherein the Royal
Prophet, Psalm 138. speaks in the Person of Christ, saying, I am risen, and
yet I am with thee. He was indeed with Jerusalem many a day after he had risen
from his grave, to show her whom she had crucified, her Jesus, (if she
pleased,) if not, her Judge: and again in the graduall at Mass, (which Holy
Church makes stand to day for a versicle to the Antiphon above) the same
Prophet, Psalm. 117. Speaks in our persons saying, This is the day which our
Lord has made, let us exult and rejoice in it: hence we see how gladsome a
day, our Holy Mother would have this to be unto us? how cheerfully she would
have us say the Prayer aforesaid? and withal how suiteably to the Epistle,
which (if observed) is no other then a groundwork of our Prayer, in the very
sense above, of our holy desires given us by Gods preventing grace, and
prosecuted by his grace continually helping us to enter in at the door of a
new life, by going out of the old gate of sinful death: for that indeed is the
true meaning of this days Epistle, exhorting us to purge away the old leaven,
the sin, that makes our actions not only sour, but deadly in the esteem of
God Almighty, who having set his teeth on edge, by the leavened bread of our
sins, desired now to make us unleavened loaves, seasoned with virtues, not with
vices; for though Saint Paul, as the Rhemists interpret this place, alludeth
here to our Communion at Easter, (according as by precept we are bound,) and in
that sense, calls the blessed Sacrament Christ our immolated Pasch, whereon he
bids us Feast, when by the Sacrament of penance, we have purged away the old
leaven of malice and wickedness out of our Souls; yet in very truth, both the
beginning and ending of this Epistle tells us, that while we thus Feast on
Christ, he feeds on us, who have made our selves Azymes, or unleavened loaves
of sincerity, and verity, which is to say, pure Manchet for his heavenly Table;
since thus we become the new paste and Azymes of Sanctity, as the Apostle calls
us under the terms of sincerity and verity; as to the Gospel, (which is Saint
Mark his story of the Resurrection) it is all wide open unto us, even in the
first clause of the Prayer above, saying, Christ opened this day the door of
eternity, by the destruction of death; though it be all abstracted too, even in
these closing words of the Prayer, thou preventing; for in every deed, as
Christ prevented the early Mary's in his rising, so does his holy Grace prevent
even the first thoughts of our rising from the laziness of sin, into the
sedulity of serving God Almighty: And thus we see the whole service of
Easterday abstracted in this little Prayer, and consequently, we have hitherto
made good our hard design thereof.

The Epistle 1 Cor. 5.7, etc.
7 Purge the old leaven, that you may be a new paste, as you are Azymes. For
our Pasche, Christ, is immolated.

8 Therefore let us Feast, not in the old leaven, not in the leaven of malice
and wickedness, but in the Azymes of sincerity and verity.


The Explication.
7. BY the old leaven, Saint Paul means that notorious kind of Fornication,
which was practiced amongst the Corinthians, worse then any among Gentiles, as
in the first verse of this Chapter, the Apostle says of it in terms, namely
to lie with their Mother in Law, or Fathers wife, which, it seems, some one or
more among the Corinthians did so openly practice, that they even defended the
fact, or at least would not be reclaimed from it; whence the Apostle orders
them to be excommunicated and given, (as he says v. 5.) corporally over to
Satan, that so by this punishment their Souls may be reclaimed from that
filthy sin and saved. Wherefore it is of this notorious vice by name, (and of
all other whatsoever sort of sins) the Apostle speaks here under the name of
leaven, which he would have the Corinthians to purge, (to cast out from amongst
them) for he had told them in the immediate Verse before, how the least of
Leaven would spoil a whole Batch of bread, giving it a disrelishing taste; and
for this cause it was commanded in the old Law, that when the Pascal Lamb was
killed, it should be eaten with bread purer and sweeter then ordinary, such as
was made without any leaven in it at all, to give it the least disrelish to the
taste: and this Bread was by a special and proper name called Azymes, which
signifies unleavened bread; and to this the Apostle alludes, when he exhorts
the Corinthians to purge out of their consciences all sin whatsoever, as he
insinuated, when he wished them to cast out of their society (by
excommunication) any one that should be scandalous in his life, as it seems,
this, both Adulterer and Fornicator was, that kept his Mother in Law for his
Concubine, a sin the very Gentiles did abominate. The literal Sense therefore
of the Verse is exhorting the Corinthians (and in them all us Christians) that
since our Pascal Lamb Christ Jesus is immolated (sacrificed upon the Altar of
the Cross for the sins of the people) they (and we also) should remember, as
the Legal Pasche was to be eaten with pure and unleavened bread, so the
Spiritual Pasche Christ Jesus was at this Feast of Easter to be received with
pure consciences, clean Souls, such as by Contrition, Confession, and
Satisfaction had been purged from the old leaven of sin, and more, made a
Spiritual Azyme or unleavened bread, fit to be eaten with this Pascal Lamb,
this Blessed Sacrament, that was now by special command of Holy Church to be
received, with a Christian Piety exceeding in all degrees that of the
Ceremonial Law, upon the only Umbratil or Figurative Exhibition, of this real
Substance and Truth, Besides it is worthy our remark in this place, that all
the Neophytes of the Primitive Church were brought in White Garments on the
first Saturday after Easter to be Baptized, and at the putting off their White
Garments were to receive an Agnus Dei from the Bishop, which was to hang about
their necks, down upon their Breasts, in Testimony of an inward Purity of
Conscience put upon their Souls at the casting off their outward Garments,
which were only Figures of this Internal Candor of Conscience: to this also
alludes the Chrysome put upon the heads of those that are Baptized, and the
Candle given into their hands, representing the Light of Grace to be their
guides to Heaven, whose Souls are pure and clean from sin: Note, that what we
now call Pasche was originally called the Passover, because it was a legal Lamb
yearly commanded to be killed and eaten in memory of their preservations, who
had their Posts and Thresholds of their Doors, sprinkled with the Blood of a
Lamb, as we read Exodus 12. v. 11. for a mark to show the Angel whose houses he
was to pass by, or over, without killing the Firstborn therein, whereas else
he was to spare none that had not the Blood of a Lamb upon their doors: so by
Allegory we now call Christ our Pascal Lamb, because his Blood was shed to
preserve from the Angel of darkness his Ireful Sword, the Firstborn of Grace,
that is the Christians, or the true Believers in Jesus Christ.

8. And hence the Apostle in this next Verse exhorts the Corinthians (and in
them all Christians) to make a Solemn Feast of Joy all this Paschal time, that
is, all their life time (for the seven Days of this Feast signify all the days
of our life) and to feed now, not upon old Leaven, that is, (not upon pristin
Infidelity:) And least hence it should be thought, Faith alone were enough for
a Christian to be saved by, the Apostle adds, we must not only believe right
(which is to cast off the old Leaven of Infidelity) but further we must do good
Works, and so cast off the Leaven of malice and wickedness, also by taking in
their places the Azymes (the unleavened bread of good Works) of Sincerity in
our Actions, of verity in our Words, as the Badges of upright Christians, that
neither we dissemble with God nor with our Neighbor, in thought, word, or
deed; but as we have vowed in Holy Baptism, we shall make it good all the days
of our life, that so we renounce the World, Flesh, and the Devil, and will be
Loyal to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, loving him above all things, as our
heavenly Spouse, and loving our Neighbor (with all other Creatures) but for
his sake, and in order to heavenly Conversation with Almighty God, both in this
world, and in the next.

The Application.
1. THe Expositors upon this Holy Text tell us, it points at our present
Obligation to Celebrate the Feast of Easter by now Confessing, and receiving
the Blessed Sacrament, that being purged thus from the old Leaven (from the
sinful Creatures) we were formerly, we may become the Saints we ought to be
hence forward. For though before our Savior suffered for our sins, he did
converse with sinners, yet now that he is risen from his Grave, he has not
taken any sinner with him from the dead, how then can living sinners hope to
keep him company? and how without him can we hope to live?

2. O happy Christians in our Rising Christ! who has destroyed Death, and
given us a double Life by his once only dying; a Life of Grace to that we had
of Nature, so though we cannot hope to keep him company by living, as to
Nature, which propends to sin, and so to death; yet we may hope by living as to
Grace, which leads to Virtue, and so to everlasting Life, to keep him company
for all Eternity: yes, this may be our hope if with St. Paul each one of us can
say, I live now, not I, but Christ he lives in me.

3. And thus no doubt it will be too, if we can either keep what we have got in
Lent, (the Magazine of Virtues requisite to Sanctify that Fast, and make us
fitting for the present Feast) or if we can but wish we had those Virtues, and
that we were able yet to make amends (as yet we may) for not acquiring them
when they were easier to be had then now, by reason of that Season more
acceptable. So good, so gracious is Almighty God, that where there wants a
will, a wish suffices: Say then beloved can you wish at least ability to rise
from Death of Sin, into the Life of Grace? O wish it then for shame, and wishing

Pray as above with Holy Church, that having had from God the grace of such a
wish, he will vouchsafe to prosecute it in you, till you come thereby to such a
Glory, as you cannot wish to have a Greater. The Gospel, Mark 16. v. 1, etc.
1 And when the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene and Mary of James and Salome
bought Spices, that coming they might anoint Jesus.

2 And very early the first of the Sabbaths, they come to the Monument, the Sun
being now risen.

3 And they said one to another, who shall role us back the stone from the door
of the Monument?

4 And looking, they saw the stone rolled back; For it was very great.

5 And entering into the Monument, they saw a young man sitting on the right
hand, covered with a White Robe: and they were astonished.

6 Who says to them, Be not dismayed: you seek Jesus of Nazareth, that was
crucified: he is risen, he is not here, behold the place where they laid him.

7 But go, tell his Disciples and Peter, that he goes before you into Galilee:
There you shall see him, as he told you.


The Explication.
1. THat is, when Saturday night was past (for Saturday was the Sabbath of the
Jews) then (and not till then) lest they should be said to violate the Sabbath,
they bought Spices to anoint Jesus. Here is to be noted the Sedulity and
Diligence to be used by Christian Souls, to take hold of the first minute of
time allowed for devotion, and not to loyter any instant thereof away, since
these pious women watched purposely all night to lay hold of the first stroke
of the clock, which struck twelve, that then they might freely call up the Shop
keepers to sell them ointments, when the last minute of the Sabbath was past.
Note, these three women, were Mary Magdalene the sister to Martha and Lazarus,
Mary of James, that is, the Mother of James the lesser, so called for
distinction from the other James the greater, who was also an Apostle: and
Salome, wife to Zebedeus, Mother to James the greater, and to John the
Evangelist, the favorite of Jesus: and whether or no Salome be her Christian
name here or her surname, is not clear by the Text; For she may have been Mary
Salome wife to Zebedeus above, which is not unsuitable to the common Tradition
of the three Mary's that visited the Sepulcher of Christ, and to whom in
recompense he after appeared: by this action we see the ancient custom of
Pilgrimage to Holy Places, and reverencing of Relics, however those who deny
that to be lawful, distinguish between the Relics of Christ, and others,
because Christ was God: and it was besides an ancient custom of the Jews to
embalm dead bodies, to make them odoriferous and sweet; so this was not done by
them to Christ as God, for indeed they did not then firmly believe in his
Deity, but were passionate Lovers of his Holy Person; and as they esteemed him
a man of Blessed Life, so to show their devotion to him, they went as it were,
to embalm his Body and his Tomb, which they revered as Relics of man, not of
God: and as this gives a literal avowment to Pilgrimages and worship of
Relics, so it is a Tropical Example for all Christians to carry the ointments
of their Virtues and good Works about them, as showing they desire therewith to
embalm the Memory of Christ's Death and Passion; and those who shall be diligent
in this Art of Piety, may hope with the first to see Christ in Heaven, for the
reward of their attending so Religiously on the Grave of his Death and Passion
in this life.

2. It seems they had been stayed in their journey to the Sepulcher, either in
the buying their ointments, or upon other accommodations for their holy
purpose, that it was Sunrising ere they came to the Monument, how ever they
were going thither from midnight to that time of the day, and had assuredly the
merit of a more speedy arrival, though (by Divine providence) it was appointed,
Christ should be out of his Grave, sooner then any the most faithful Soul could
get thither, to see whether he was risen (or not) according to his promise; if
yet they were not retarded by the same Providence, for a punishment of their
want of Faith, that came with intent to find him there, and as man to embalm
him, whom as God they ought to have believed was risen, and needed not those
pious expressions toward his humanity, which this Resolution and Action in
these holy Women did represent.

3. Here again they betrayed the weakness of their Faith, as if God could not
remove all obstacles in the way to his own Service; as it seems really he did
by the hands of his holy Angels, who St. Matthew. cap. 28. v. 3. says, had
rol^ed this stone away before they came, which yet the Angel did not by any his
Corporal Touch, but by making an Earthquake purposely to do it, and jointly to
show the terror all the Earth was in, for having covered the glorious Body of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: and by this we see the Power that Angels
have over all Corporal Things, when they can (even by the Touch of their
Virtues or Powers) make the whole Earth to quake: not that there was need for
the Angel to remove this stone, that Christ might rise, for he did rise before
the Stone was gone, by the same Power wherewith he came out of his Mothers
Womb, without the least violation of her Virginity, but merely that by the
stones removal the coming Mary's (and others to follow) might see Christ was
risen: and why may not Christ's Body be as well all under the Little Wafer of
the Consecrated Host, as it was able to pass through the Virgins Womb, a
Child, and through the Stone, a Man, without any Division in either Quantities
or Bodies through which it passed? Note, though these Mary's were solicitous
who should help them to role away the stone, yet they went on with their Holy
Resolutions, to show us we are not to desist from doing good, though we find
huge Difficulties in our way, but to proceed and put our trust in God, that to
those who Love him, even every thing in Nature will cooperate toward the
expression of their Loves.

4. This Verse gives an excellent Proof of what was said last; for see, they no
sooner look to have the stone removed, but they find it done to their hands,
by the Angel as above, though they knew not who did it; and therefore here is
mention, this Stone was very Great, because we should not despair of overcoming
any the greatest Difficulties in the way of a willing Soul to serve Almighty
God.

5. See, they lose no time to ask, or wonder how the stone was gone, their
minds were wholly bent on the end of their journey, and they minded not so
much the rubs in the way, as to stop, and say, here we expected a rub, but go
on courageously to the end, as placing their happiness in that, not in the
mediums thereto, which they pass over, as good Christians ought to do, with a
zeal, that carries them still on unto the end of their Aims: Observe they are
again punished for want of Faith, by missing Christ, and finding only a young
man (that is, an Angel) sitting upon his Tomb, which was all open, and had no
Body in it; And probably this Angel was Gabriel, whose name imports fortitude,
and therefore he was the witness of this last Act of Gods Power, showed in the
redemption of Man, as he was the first that brought to the Virgin Mary tidings
of the same Christ his Incarnation, when upon the news thereof she did
conceive: but this Angel appears for many other respects; to show unto the
Mary's it was he, that had removed the stone out of their way (as our good
Angels ever do all temptations out of ours) to show, that as the Jews
exteriorly kept the Sepulcher, so Angels did wait upon it within; Lastly to let
the armed Jews see, the unarmed Servants of Christ were too hard for them, when
he pleased to assist his naked Servants, against the most strongly armed Men or
Devils in Hell: But there is yet further mystery in this Angels sitting, when
another Evangelist (St. Luke) says he was standing, for that imports as much as
sitting too, in the Hebrew Phrase: so this Evangelist says, Cap 7. ver. 37.
that Mary Magdalene stood behind the feet of Jesus, washing them with her
Tears, and wiping them with her Hair, which yet imported, she did either kneel
or lie down; so standing there imports she was present when Christ sat at the
Table, and did as above: besides, by the position of sitting, is here signified
the firm and fixed Faith, wherewith Christians ought to believe the mystery of
the resurrection; and again by sitting on the stone of his monument is
mystically told us Christ's Faith was placed upon the stone of his Church, or of
the head thereof; or that as stones are heavy and press hard upon us, so by
this stone was signified how heavily death lies upon all mankind, and yet
while the Angel sets upon it, he declares that Christ has crushed and pressed
down death, as this Holy Spirit does the stone of his Tomb: again, his sitting
on the right hand of the monument shows Christ is to set in Heaven at the right
hand of his Father, and from thence shall come to judge the quick and the dead:
he is covered with a white robe to betoken both his own Angelical Purity, and
the Purity of Christ's Sacred Humanity; for St. Matthew. says, the Angels face was
bright as lightning, to show Christ's Deity, and his Garments white as snow, to
show the Purity of Christ, which had taken away all the Stains and Ordures of
our Sins, and rendered us white as snow in the sight of his heavenly Father. It
is no wonder that they were astonished to see this young man there, and to miss
the Body of our Savior, which they sought; for assuredly they either found
there (or met) the soldiers running away all in a fright, since the Angel did
appear even unto the soldiers to fright them: and the women not knowing any
other intention in the Angel then to do the like to all that came to this place
(then delivered into the custody of Angels) they with reason fell also into a
mighty fear, which yet was mixed with a kind of hope, whilst they did not run
away as the soldiers, but rather stood in a middle state between hope and
fear, astonished indeed, but not frighted at the sight, wondered at it, but did
not wander from it, nor can a good Spirit appear so affrighting, but withal he
brings a kind of Comfort to all that see him, if they be Gods Servants.

6. And hence it was, this Angel said immediately to these Holy Women, be not
you dismayed (you who have had no hand in Christ's death) my terror is to those
only, to you I come a Comforter, as knowing you come to seek, not to slay; to
Embalm, not to Kill; to Adore, not to Scorn; as those that crucified him, and
that guarded his Sepulcher did: Hence we that truly seek Jesus crucified, must
cast away all fear in the pursuit of him, as these Mary's were bid to do, and
if we find him not in one place or action, we must seek him out in some other,
but never cease our religious inquest, till we find him: the Angel here boldly
names Jesus crucified to show he was his Servant, though others had lately
Butchered him, and Reviled him, yet that some durst have his name in their
mouth to revere him: he is risen, as who should say, Christ his rising from the
Grave was as our waking out of sleep only, or as the Spring that shows the
Winter Tree, is still alive, though esteemed to be dead; not but that he was
truly dead and buried, but that his resurrection is to him as easy, as our
awaking is to us, by the least noise, when we are asleep: he is not here,
imports he is not now dead, as you thought here to have found him, when you
brought your ointments to anoint his Blessed Body, and that you may be sure I
tell you truth, behold the empty place, which lately his Sacred Body filled,
here indeed it was, he did lie, but here he lies no more, be your own eyes
witness, that I tell you Truth.

7. Go therefore, lose no longer time in looking here, tell the Disciples, see
how woman now is made the Messenger of Life to the Apostles, that were
afterward to preach it over all the world, whereas woman before brought the
tidings of Death to all mankind, that so the same who had deceived Adam, by
Death, lurking in the Apple of Life, should undeceive us again by bringing news
of Life rising from the Grave of Death: So Good is God, he makes the
Instruments of Woe become the Messengers of Bliss: But it is worthy our remark,
why the Angels first said, tell the Disciples, and then by name should say,
tell Peter too; This was spoken indeed like an Angel, who had known Peter's Soul
so humbled at his having denied his Lord and Master, that he durst not now
repute himself worthy of the honor any longer to be reckoned amongst the
Disciples of our Savior; whence St. Gregory says, he is called again to that
Dignity by name, lest he had despaired upon his Negation ever to be reputed a
Disciple again; though others (and not perhaps without reason) read this place
as spoken thus, tell the Disciples in general, and particularly the chief of
them Peter, for though he were permitted to fall, (being the Head of the rest)
yet it was, that he and his Successors should learn to have compassion upon
others, having seen the Example of Humane Frailty in the chief Pastor of Gods
Church, that since the Sword of spiritual Power was put into their hands, they
might also have reason to show mercy, and not to retain other men's sins being
penitent, fi^ding their own were remitted upon Repentance; and it was not
without Reason that Christ foretold his Apostles, he would rise again, and
appear to them in Galilee, because he knew after his Death the Apostles and all
the rest of his Disciples, or Friends, would be both afraid to meet together in
Judea, and that the Jews were so malicious against Christ, as they would not
suffer so great a number of his Disciples as Christ had above the eleven
Apostles, to appear amongst them, much less to make assemblies: Again, the
Apostles were most of them Galileans, and so Christ knew, they would be
retreating to their own homes, when he was gone, or soon after, if he rose not
presently; Lastly he had himself done many miracles in Galilee, and therefore
chose to get belief of them all at once, by this one above all the rest, his
rising from the dead to Life again; besides, Galilee imports as much as
transmigration, and Christ passing from Death to life, chose to do it in a
place proper to the mystery, which was yet redoubled by his appearing to
multitudes at once in Galilee, to show he found the Jews no longer worthy his
abode among them; and so he passed from them to the Gentiles, where he had left
many Disciples besides those Twelve he chose Apostles, and whereof Judas was
turned Apostata, and dyed despairing; so when the Angel said to the Mary's, Go
tell his Disciples, he meant, tell all his Friends (who are many) in Galilee,
and St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15. v. 6. seems to say, that at the first apparition of
Christ in Galilee, there were more then five hundred of his Disciples or
Friends, and such as believed religiously of him, whom therefore he rewarded by
making them undoubted witnesses of this (most doubtful and much controverted)
Truth, his rising from the dead.

The Application.
1. THe scope of all this Gospel is to prove the real Resurrection of our
Blessed Lord, (and by that means the Immortality of Humane Souls) so to wean
them from their Temporal desires, and plant their Loves upon Eternity, the
doubt (if not the ignorance) whereof, made them embrace the Transitory
Pleasures of the World, and laugh at those for fools who thought of any
happiness or misery to come, when this life had an end, by Death:

2. Hence when the Apostles preached our Saviors Resurrection, it was held a
scandal to the Jews and a folly to the Gentiles, because it brought the tidings
of Eternity to men that knew not any thing before, but fleeting time, and so
for want of hoping in eternal Happiness, by leading holy Lives, fell headlong
in a trice to everlasting Misery, by living viciously, according as the Royal
Prophet said, They lead their days in Jollity, and in an instant they descend
to Hell.

3. As therefore when our Savior died, good men began to think it folly to be
good, because their Virtue was not able to maintain them living still: So when
he rose again, bad men began to fear they might as well revive to misery, as
happiness; and consequently were more easily reclaimed from Vice, and brought
in Love with Virtue: so that Eternity, we see, is made a special Root of
Christianity, when even a desire to live eternal^y is held a motive strong
enough to work a Sanctity into our Souls.

Since Holy Church makes it her rule to day, that as by Christ his Resurrection
the door was open to a blessed Eternity, so our desires thereof, may be preserved
in us, by him that gave them to us, by his prevenient Grace. On White, or Low
Sunday.
The Antiphon. Joh. 20. v. 26. AFter eight days, the doors being shut, our Lord
entering in said unto them; Peace be to you, Alleluja, Alleluja.

Verse. Tarry with us, O Lord, Alleluja.

Resp. For night draws on, Alleluja.


The Prayer.
GRant, we beseech thee Almighty God, that we who have accomplished the Pascal
Feasts, may retain the same in our Manners and Lives, by thy bounty inabling us
so to do.

The Illustration.
WE heard last Sunday the Churches Prayers were now to run in a peculiar
Channel of Life-giving Waters, those of the Resurrection of our Lord: See
therefore this days Service sliding sweetly down that stream; but in this
Prayer I find a Phrase so strange, as needs a gloss to make it understood,
though it speak plain English too: for how can we retain a thing that's past?
(as is the Paschal Feast) and yet this is it we pray for to day; and not only
to retain this feast in our memories, but in our manners and our lives: sure
then the meaning is, we must retain those good desires, which we besought God
to prosecute in us in our last Sundays Prayer, and which, as by his preventing
grace they were afforded us, so by his continued bounty we now beg ability to
continue, or retain them in our manners and lives. Now albeit this makes the
Prayer above to be, as it were, a recapitulation of the last Sundays Prayer
(since the Octave Day is a closing up, one and the self same Feast that began
seven days before) yet we must find a deeper sense in this days Prayer, such
as petitioneth, we should retain the Virtues, which did occur to the
accomplishment of the Paschal Feast, as the good desires to those Virtues: and
if we look back to what those Virtues were, we shall find them to be sincerity
and verity, or rather in a word, perfect Sanctity, such as might make the old
Leaven in us of sin, to be White Manchet of Sanctity, as if it were nothing for
us to make yearly Memory of Christ his Death and Passion, and of his
Resurrection (for in these two Mysteries consist the Paschal Feast) unless our
selves did remain ever dead unto sin, and ever alive to God, by virtue of our
resurrection in his holy grace; assuredly this must be the sense of our Prayer
to day, for this is truly to retain in our manners and lives the Feasts of
Pasche that are past, when we make our selves Paschall Lambs, by the
Sincerity, and Sanctity of our lives, and manners. For thus we shall first by
our Faith overcome the world, and next by our good works give the testimony of
Gods Holy Spirit being in us, which this days Epistle so much insisteth on, as
the effect of our [Faith,] and of our [Victory] over the world by the same
[Faith.] And to the Gospel this Prayer is literal; whilst it beggs we may
retain in us that Paschall Feast, which is the whole scope of this days
Gospel, telling us how our Savior appeared in confirmation of his
Resurrection to his Apostles, and in the narration of Saint Thomas his
infidelity, exhorting us to a firmer [Faith] in that, and in all the other
mysteries of our Redemption. To conclude, this day is called White, or Low
^unday, because in the Primitive Church, those Neophytes that on Easter Eve
were Baptized, and Clad in white Garments, did to day put them off; with this
admonition that they were to keep within them a perpetual candor of Spirit,
signified by the Agnus Dei hung about their necks, which falling down upon
their breasts, put them in mind, what Innocent Lambs they must be, now, that
of sinful, high and haughty men they were by Baptism made Low and little
children of Almighty God, such as ought to retain in their manners and lives
the Paschall Feasts which they had accomplished. * And thus we see an ample
performance of our design, taking this Prayer in the true sense it has.

The Epistle, Ep. 1 Joan. cap. 5: v. 4, etc.
4 Because all that is borne of God, overcommeth the world. And this is the
victory which overcommeth the world, our Faith.

5 Who is he that overcommeth the world, but he that believes, that Jesus is
the Son of God.

6 This is he that came by water and blood Jesus Christ: not in water only, but
in water and blood. And it is the Spirit which testifies, that Christ is the
Truth.

7 For there be three which give Testimony in heaven, the Father, the word, and
the Holy Ghost. And these Three be One.

8 And there be Three which give Testimony in earth: The Spirit, Water, and
Blood. And these Three be one.

9 If we receive the Testimony of men, the Testimony of God is greater; because
this is the Testimony of God which is greater, that he has testified of his
Son.

10 He that believes in the Son of God, has the Testimony of God in
himself.


The Explication.
4. THe Evangelist had in this Epistle, (and in the immediate verse before told
us,) The love of God consisted in keeping his commands, and that his commands
are not heavy, and this for diverse reasons, because compared to the grievous
weighty precepts of the old ceremonial Law they are nothing in a manner
difficult at all; For there were (as Rabbi Moses did reckon them in his third
Book,) two hundred and eighteen affirmative, and three hundred sixty five
negative precepts of the old Law; which in the Law of Grace are reduced unto
ten, and those no other, then even any reasonable man would exact of a creature
toward God, and of one man toward another, for a quiet civil and honest
neighborhood; and though to corrupted nature, mortification may seem hard,
yet to sound nature it is sweet and appetible, at least as medicine is unto the
sick person: and as grace is the balsame, that renders our corrupted nature
sound again, so taking grace into the consideration as a help, more powerful
then any impediment, it is most true the Commandments are easy, to a gracious
soul, to any one that has in him the fear or love of God; whence the
Evangelist inferres, that as by grace we are borne a new, to, in, and of God,
so by this regeneration our feeble nature is made able enough to overcome all
the world, all the enemies and obstacles man has between him and heaven,
which is the inheritance of Gods children; whence Saint Bernard says
excellently well in his first Sermon upon this day, it is an argument of our
heavenly regeneration, or new birth, when we overcome temptations; as therefore
we are first borne children of God by Baptism, wherein we receive the infused
virtues of Faith, Hope, and Charity, so by contrition and confession after
actual sin, we are as it were newborn to God by his holy grace conferred
on us again, and bringing back with it all those virtues and graces we had
lost by reiterated sins. But we are specially to note, that this Text says,
every thing that is borne of God overcommeth the world, not every man, because
it is not by any natural thing in man, that he does overcome sin, but by
that which is supernatural, to wit, Grace, Faith, Hope, Charity, and whence
the Apostle says immediately, and this is the victory which overcomes the
world, our Faith; by the victory he means the cause of our victory, or the
overcommer it self of the world; whereupon Saint Leo, Saint Cyprian, and
others said oftentimes, a faithful soul is far greater then the world, and
one who is in heaven, looks upon the earth as on a contemptible point: so that
it was most truly said of Saint Mark cap. 9. verse. 23. All things are
possible to him that believes; nay we see a strong and lively Faith has in it
a kind of omnipotency, when it commands, as it were, that to be done, which
none but God can do. And what was it that brought the Infidel world, and all
the Monarchs thereof to the subjection of the yoke of Christ, but Faith? how
then every way wa^ it true, that Faith is the Victory, or the Victrix rather,
that overcomes the whole world; for by Faith we captivate our stubborn wills to
reason, and so quell, as well the inward, as the outward enemies to Christ: and
how do Martyrs else by dying conquer death, as Christ did on the Cross? but
by dying for the Faith, and in the Faith of Christ.

5. None else indeed can do it; for in believing this we are forced to oppose
all other that deny it, and if in that opposition we lose our lives, rather
then our Faith, we get the Victory of all the world, that persecutes us for it,
and of death it self: for he that believes this, hopes in Jesus, and hoping
calls upon him, and calling him to aid loves him, and loving him takes courage
to defy all his Enemies, which are the world, the flesh, and the devil, and
in scorning them gets force to resist them, and in resisting obtaines grace to
overcome them.

6. This is the Messiah, that Ezechiel cap. 36. v. 25. and Zachary cap. 13. v.
1. foretold should come in water and blood alluding to the water of holy
Baptism, and to the blood he shed upon the Cross; (and to verify this, both
blood and water, issued out of his pierced side, as he hung upon the Cross) as
also of tears and blood in his circumcision, in his Prayer in the garden, and
in his whipping at the Pillory, in memory of all which, in the sacrifice of the
Mass, water is mixed with the wine that is to be consecrated. By the Spirit
testifying Christ to be verity, is understood the holy Ghost descending, and
confirming the Apostles in grace, and in belief of all that Christ had said
unto them, as if not only a true man, but God and man had told them, and
consequently verity it self, for God is no less then very verity. So Saint
John rests not content to have given us the double Testimony of blood and
water, without he had added also the sumnity or height of all Testimony, the
pure Spirit of Almighty God. Nor are they out of the way, that understand this
place to be meant also of the testimony of the inward spirit, or inspiration of
the holy Ghost, revealing, as it were, to man internally this truth, by a
special favor of holy unction, of whom it is said, 2 Ep. Joan. cap. c. 2. v.
20. 27. He shall teach all truth, and that his unction teaches us in all
things.

7. This for is a proper illative, he having said before, the Spirit bore
testimony, that Christ was verity, since the Spirit is one of the three in
heaven, that give testimony beyond all exceptions, namely Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, which is the very spirit that is mentioned, testifying as above in
Christ his behalf; so the scope of this verse is, that all the three persons
of the Blessed Trinity give testimony to man and Angels, of Christ his being
the Messiah, the Son of God, sent to redeem the world: The Father in his
Baptism and Transfiguration, the Holy Ghost by coming down upon him in the
shape of a Dove, and by coming (as sent from heaven by him) after his
Ascension, to confirm his Apostles in grace on Whitsunday, the Feast of
Pentecost, and the word, or second person abundantly in all the mysteries of
his life and death: and all these three are one, not in essence and divine
nature only, but even in their Testimonies of him, they all concur in one
and the same Truth.

8. Saint John having cited three divine, or increated testimonies of Christ
his Deity, adds also three created testimonies of the same Truth, the spirit,
water, and blood, which three, (to make a perfect Analogy between this double
Trinity) he says, are all one, meaning they have all one root, the Sacred
Deity, in which they are sanctified. The water represents the Father, the
Blood, the Son, the Spirit, the Holy Ghost: for as water was the first
principle of all sublunary things as in the first of Genesis, the creation
declared, so is the Father the creator of all the world, and as Christ by his
own blood saved us, so his Holy Martyrs by their blood, give testimony of him;
as the Holy Ghost taught all truth to the Apostles, and their successors, so
that Spirit of Truth in the Holy Church, bears testimony of his infallible
veracity, by whose holy Spirit she remains infallible. Take then this created
Trinity thus, by Water Baptism, by Blood Martyrdom, by the Spirit the charity
of God diffused in our hearts; and these three are one; (in way of Testimony)
or testifying all one thing, the Deity of Christ, that he was true God, as well
as man. So they are not one in nature, (as the increated Trinity is) but in
office or Testimony they are all one and the same, yet may we say, they are
even in nature all one too, if we make the division thus; that these three
human testimonies were all one in Christ, as he was man, that is, the water and
blood out of his side, and the spirit his human soul, which he dying gave up
to testify he was a true man; and all these three may be said one, as being
several parts that integrated one whole Christ.

9. This verse begins with an argument of similitude, importing if we believe
men, much more ought we to believe God, not that it implies, as if the
Testimony that holy Church gives of truth were a humane Testimony only, but
yet creditable (even upon that account,) and undoubted (upon an other) that
though men speak, yet God dictates the Truth unto them, and so the Doctrine of
the Church is not only the Doctrine, nor Testimony of men, but also of God
assisting them, and thence it makes human-Divines, or Divine-Men: so in short
the sense of this verse is, whither the created or increated Trinity bear
testimony of Christ his Deity, it is the testimony of God himself, either
being, or working infallible Truth, whence Saint Peter 2 Epist. cap. 1. v. 21.
Says well. The holy men of God spoke, inspired with the holy Ghost. * So were
those signs, when Christ suffered, in the Sun, Moon, Rocks, etc. Signs of
the creator speaking in the creatures.

10. For many reasons this is true, first because he has a thing testified by
God, secondly the testimony of God about that thing for none but God could
reveal, that truth of Christ being the Son of God, (This was told Saint
Peter, and thence he was called by Christ Blessed? Matthew. c. 16. v. 17.)
thirdly because this testimony is faith it self, the greatest gift of God,
lastly because by this gift of Faith a man is regenerate, and made of the
devils Son, to be the Son of God. The Priest asking first the baptized if he do
believe Christ, and that professed, then baptizeth immediately.

The Application.
1. THe Illustration upon this Prayer, gives a great help to the present
Application of this Text, unto our best advantage according to intention of the
Holy Church: for seeing by the Paschal Feast we understand the virtues that
were proper thereunto, we must not exclude the magazine of virtues which men
have been hoarding up since Advent, (but especially those in Lent) toward
making us more capable of the benefit of our Saviors Resurrection: because it
is no less virtue to conserve what we have gotten, then it was to get the
thing acquired: and we shall then best conserve those virtues, when by
frequent Acts thereof (as occasion is administered) we make them perfect in us,
and when our selves are perfected by them.

2. Now to show the Church observes a method in her services, as the three
Theological virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, are the maine roots of all
Christianity, and of all other virtues whatsoever: therefore from this time
till we come again to Advent, where we first began the Rules of Christianity,
there are three seasons set a part for these Three Theological virtues, which
are the three last mysteries of humane Redemption, the resurrection, whereby we
are to perfect our Faith, the Ascension whereby we are to perfect our Hope, and
the coming of the Holy Ghost, whereby we are to perfect our charity; as shall
be said at large of each when they occurr.

3. Suffice it for the present that this Epistle in the front thereof and quite
throughout commends unto us the exercise of our Faith, as the most proper
virtue now required at our hands, since we see the mystery of the Resurrection
was a thing so hard to be believed, that it cost our Savior forty days pains
to make it good by frequent apparitians in diverse places unto diverse persons,
for he had else ascended up to heaven as soon as ever he arose from his grave,
had it not been matter of huge difficulty to make the world from thence believe
that he was God, as well as man, because he was risen from the dead; and that
as he being man did rise again, so they should do that were men too; the good
to everlasting Joy, the bad to everlasting pain; no marvel then our Faith in
the Resurrection be called the victory which over comes the world in the sense
of the expositors as above, because it was a thing unheard of, that the dead
should rise again; so that Faith is here recommended to us, for the virtue
which the Scribes and Pharisees were too blame not to allow of at all, but
conceived good works without faith, were enough to save their souls, as in
like manner the Heretics of this Time are equally too blame, to think that
faith alone is sufficient without good works, whereas Catholics are taught,
both are absolutely necessary, and therefore, Pray as above, that we may
retain in our lives and manners, (that is to say, in our good works) the
faith we have in the Resurrection of our Lord.

The Gospel, St. John c. 20. v. 19. etc.
19 Therefore when it was late that day, the first of the Sabbaths, and the
doors were shut, where the Disciples were gathered together for fear of the
Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and says to them, Peace be to you.

20 And when he had said this, he showed them his hands and side. The Disciples
therefore were glad, when they saw our Lord.

21 He said therefore to them again, Peace be to you. As my Father has sent
me, I do also send you.

22 When he said this, he breathed upon them: and he says to them, receive ye
the Holy Ghost.

23 Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them: and whose you shall
retain, they are retained.

24 But Thomas one of the twelve, who is called Didymus, was not with them,
when Jesus came.

25 The other Disciples therefore said to him, we have seen our Lord. But he
said to them, unless I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my
Finger into the place of the nails, and put my hand into his side; I will not
believe.

26 And after eight days, again his Disciples were within: and Thomas with
them. Jesus comes, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said,
peace be to you.

27 Then says he to Thomas, put in thy finger hither and see my hands, and
bring hither thy hand, and put it into my side: and be not incredulous but
faithful.

28 Thomas answered and said unto him, my Lord and my God.

29 Jesus says to him, because thou have seen me, Thomas, thou have believed:
Blessed are they, that have not seen, and have believed.

30 Many other signs did Jesus in the sight of his Diseiples, which are not
written in this Book.

31 And these are written, that you may believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of
God: and that believing you may have life in his name.


The Explication.
19. That this apparition of Christ was his first to his Apostles, and to them
(for fear) assembled, (all, but Thomas) together in a Chamber in Jerusalem, is
most undoubted by this Text; which yet may seem to clash, with what the Angels
said to the Mary's, as Saint Mark cap. 16. v. 7. reports in the close of last
Sundays Gospel: For by that verse it seems, the Mary's were to go after the
Apostles into Galilee, as if they had been fled for fear from Jerusalem; and
as if Christ had promised his first apparition, after his resurrection should
be in Galilee: but upon deliberate examine, it will be found the Angel spoke
of that apparition in Galilee as the most celebrated, because it was before so
great a number, as well of Disciples, of Christ his friends) as before his
Apostles, who were not only his chosen servants, and his friends also,
designed to be employed in a higher service, namely that of Apostolate. So this
considered, there is no scruple of contradiction in the Evangelists, if here we
find Saint John say this apparition of Christ to his Apostles assembled (ten
of them) together in Jerusalem was his first of all, though afterward they
fled for fear into Galilee, and had again the honor to be present, when
Christ did there appear to above five hundred at once, as Saint Paul avoucheth
1 Cor. 15. v. 6. besides it is evident by the Text of this verse, that this was
Christ his first apparition to his Apostles, because it was late that day,
namely on Easter day on Sunday the first of the Sabbath, so called from the
dignity it had to be made (ever after) the first day of the Christian week, and
so their Sabbath day, as bringing them news of the eternal rest, which Christ
his resurrection (upon that day) had purchased unto them: and if we observe the
story, as Saint John relates it, there was reason why it should be late that
day, for first, the Mary's were to go from the Tomb to the City; then Mary
Magdalene running away before the rest seems first to have met Peter and John
only, and coming back with (or after) them, (who run to the Tomb to see if
it were true, that Mary had told them) and returning afterward to get together
their whole number of Apostles if they could, (though with sear of the Jews,)
to consult what was to be done by them, and in the mean time Mary coming back
to the Sepulcher, and weeping there, had the honor to have our Savior appear
unto her, and then to go open mouth to the Apostles, and to tell them, she was
not now to seek, but had found her Lord, and that he had told her he was to
ascend to his heavenly Father; so before all this was done, the day must needs
pass a pace away, and therefore no marvel, it was late, when our Savior
appeared, the doors being shut, where the Disciples were gathered together,
probably in the same room where Christ (with them) made his last Supper. This
place argues Christ may be in the Sacrament without extension of Parts, as well
as he could with his whole Body enter into the room where his Apostles were,
and had the doors close shut upon them, for fear of the Jews, whatsoever the
Heretics pretend to the contrary; this being as strange a Penetration, as the
other is a Transubstantiation, and a Celation or Covering the Order of his
Corporeal Parts, not amassed nor confounded one with another, how ever, not
requiring such extension as is naturally requisite to their dimensions; since
it is as easy for God to keep his real Body under the Sacramental Species
without commensuration to place, as it was for him to pass with his whole Body
thorough the walls without division made by his miraculous Penetration of their
Parts: being therefore they must grant this, because his Apostle says it, how
can they (with modesty) deny the other, which himself avouched, when he said,
Take and eat, this is my Body Mark cap. 14. v. 22. Luke cap. 22. v. 19. and
which his Apostles took and believed in the Sense that now the Roman Churches
believes and defends it, against all the opposers of that most sacred Truth.
But observe the first salute of our Savior, saying peace be to you, which is
to say, all good betide you; fear no more, I have fought your battles, and
bring you the tidings of a victorious peace, as who should say, his coming
hither was not upon his own account, but ours; So he tells them, now his
business is done, their peace is made in Heaven and Earth.

20. He showed how they still remained perforated, boared thorough, as with the
Nails and Spear that had pierced them, while he hung upon the Cross; what more
powerful Argument of the Truth of his resurrection? what more convincing proof
that it is a Piety for Christians to revere the memory of his Sacred wounds,
when the first thing he showed to oblige us to love him after his resurrection,
were the Wounds he received for us in his bitter Death and Passion. The joy
which followed in the Disciples upon seeing these wounds, was not that he had
received them, but that those notwithstanding (and his Death to boot for the
sins of mankind) they saw him propitious, merciful, sweet, benign unto them,
that they did not see him come to reproach their flight from him, nor Peter's
denying of him, but to comfort them, to consolidate their Faith, and in them
the Faith of all Christians in this now undoubted Truth, that as he became man,
was crucified, dead and buried for satisfaction of our sins, so now he arose
from Death to Life, to give all mankind an assurance, that the work of their
redemption was finished, and their salvation secured (if they would themselves)
hence it was the Apostles were glad to see our Lord risen and alive, to confirm
all his former Doctrine, maugre the Jews malice against him, and their belief
that they had put him to such a death, as he was past all power of reviving.

21. While he repeats peace to them again, he shows the abundance of his
goodness flowing still from himself, and falling upon those he loves; and
further in testimony that these his Apostles were all in the rank of those he
loved most, behold he gives his own most ample commission, which he had from
his heavenly Father unto every one of them; while he sends them (in virtue of
the same Commission) to convert the whole world, as he himself was sent first
to redeem it, and by virtue of his Passion to convert it also, which yet he
would not do, to have the whole honor of it to himself, but gives to his
Apostles the happiness to be his instruments, his cooperators thereunto; as
himself was the instrument of his heavenly Father to the same purpose; and if
we observe the force of our Saviors words, in giving his commission of
Apostolate to these his chosen Servants, we shall find he does not only give
them the title and honor of being his Apostles, but of being even so many Sons
of God (by commission, not by nature) while he sends them even as his Father
sent him, to supply what was wanting of his Passion, as we have heard already
explicated once or twice.

22. And least being but men (not God as he was) they should fear to fail in
the execution of this high Commission. Lo, by his breathing on them he seems to
convert them into holy Spirits, and (if we may so say) even to so many Ho^y
Ghosts (by Commission or Office, not by Nature) in giving the Holy Ghost unto
them; For as by Spiration of the Father and Son the Holy Ghost proceeded equal
to both in Nature, so by this Spiration of Christ upon his Apostles, they
became equal in Spirit to him, ( sent, as he was by his heavenly Father, in
similitude of office, in-similitude of power) because he was God, as well as
his Father in similitude of end, to save the souls of men; in similitude of
works, of miracles, and lastly in similitude of Spirit of Love and of
affection, while their commission is given by way of his Holy and Divine
Insufflation or Inspiration, whence they were empowered even to dye for him, as
he was by the force of his own holy Spirit to dye for us, and by this
inspiration he shows, that as God (by breathing on Adam) gave him natural Life,
so he by breathing on his Apostles gives them a supernatural one, a life of
Grace: but we must note here the holy Ghost was not given them as they had it
before in Baptism, when they received justifying Grace, and Grace rendering them
grateful, nor as it was afterward to be given them by way of plenitude
containing the fullness when they were so confirmed in Grace, as that probably
they never sinned afterward, but as a thing here gratis given, and limited to
one special effect, namely to that of remission of sins, as is made evident by
the words in the following Verse: so here we may see gratuite grace may consist
with the state of sin, or power to absolve others sins, may be in a Priest, who
is actually himself in sin: Note also by this inspiration the same power of
remitting sins was given to St. Thomas, though absent, as well as to those
Apostles present (as Numb. 11. v. 26. we read the Spirit of Prophecy was given
in like absence by Moses to Eldad and Medad) for we do not see it repeated
after, when St. Thomas came in among them, though some think it was then he
received that power and not before: Note also, that by this ceremony of our
Saviors breathing upon the Apostles holy Church is grounded in sufficient
warrant, to use such ceremonies, as to her shall seem fit in Administration or
Collation of Sacraments.

23. How absurdly does Calvin wrest this place to power of preaching, rather
then he will allow man power of remitting sins, though it be given him by God
himself: This very corruption of so plain a place of Scripture argues, how
dangerous a thing it is, for men to read and wrest it to their own sense; since
the Act of Preaching is Teaching and Exhorting; the Act of forgiving sins is
the Act of a judging Power; besides, all men may at all times be lawfully
preached unto, be they in sin or out of sin; but all cannot at all times be
absolved from sin, nor any indeed, at any time but by Contrition, Confession,
and Satisfaction, either Actual or in Vote, if opportunity be given. It is
therefore an Article of Faith, that by these words our Savior gave to the
Apostles power to forgive sins; however it may be disputed, whether he had not
before (at his last Supper) made them Priests, when he said unto them, as often
as you shall do this (that is, as often as you shall Consecrate my Body and
Blood, or Eat and Drink them) do it in remembrance of me, Luke 22. v. 19.
because now whenever Priests are Ordained, it is done by their joint
prolation of the words of Consecration with the Bishop at Mass, after he has
said unto them, " Receive ye power to offer Sacrifice; and though here were
given by Christ the Faculties of Absolving to the Apostles, yet it does not
follow Priesthood was then given, since to this day we see many Priests that
have power to Sacrifice, and yet have not leave to Administer the Sacrament of
Penance (though even when they are made Priests, they receive Power to
Absolve, the Bishop, saying, Receive ye power to remit sins, unless it be in
case of necessity, as in the hour of Death, or that they are sure the penitent
be not in mortal sin, though it be also strongly argued that the very
jurisdiction of remitting sins is essential to the Order of Priesthood, as his
power of Consecration or Sacrificing is, and may validly (as before God) though
not lawfully (as to men) be executed without special faculty for that purpose:
hence also it is matter of Faith, that the Sacrament of Confession was at the
same time instituted by Christ; for the Priest cannot forgive sins, unless he
know them, and know them he cannot, unless they be confessed unto him, nor can
he tell, what to remit, what to retain, unless by the confession of the
Penitent, he find cause for his so doing; nor is the power of retaining sins,
a mere negation of absolution thereof, but it is a positive Declaration, that
they do not deserve pardon, and more, that if they repent not, they deserve
damnation, which is too positive a thing to consist in a pure negation of
absolution.

24. Some will have St. Thomas called Didymus, as signifying that he was a
Twin-born jointly with some other Brother or Sister, as Esau and Jacob were,
and for this purpose the Expositours upon the Eleventh chap. of Saint John v.
16. say he argued himself to be a Twin, of Grace with Christ and the rest of
his Apostles, when he said, Let us all go and dye with our master, because it
is noted to be usual in Twins to love each other most dearly, though sometimes
it happen otherwise, yet very rarely, as in Jacob and Esau it did: But others
will have him in this place called Didymus, as this word signifies various,
wavering, or inconstant, because he did now declare himself to doubt of the
resurrection, though he were told it by the Apostles for certain, after that
Christ had, as above, appeared to ten of them; if he had not also before heard
it from the Mary's, who, some say, brought news of it to all the eleven
Apostles assembled together in the room where they last supped with Christ, and
where they in a kind of faint hope expected his rising again according to his
promise; though it seems only two of them Peter and John ran immediately to
his Sepulcher with the Mary's, leaving the other nine behind in expectation of
the Truth, and Thomas in the interim more diffident of this Truth (then the
rest that remained) went out from amongst them, Whether to take his flight for
fear of the Jews, or whether to ask testimony of Christ's enemies, the soldiers
watching at the Sepulcher, rather then to trust the relation of his friends: be
these reasons real or conjectural only, certain it is he was absent when
Christ came first, and as certain that after the Apostles had seen him, he
would as little believe them as the Mary's, who first brought news he was risen
again; and for this cause he may be here styled Didymus, as it imports various,
or doubting.

25. See in this Act of St. Thomas four several sins, Incredulity, Pertinacy,
Pride, Irreverence; the first in preferring the test of Sense before that of
Authority, for point of Faith; the second, requiring so many Particulars and
Proofs by diverse Senses; the third presuming he deserved more condescending of
Christ to him, then had been to the rest of his Brethren; the last in daring to
make his own Finger the Judge, whether Christ were God or not, which is a work
of the Finger of God, of the Holy Ghost, not of Man, or of Flesh and Blood; for
if he might touch his wounds, it seems, he would then (and not till then)
believe he was risen, and consequently that he was God: so from First to Last
we see here a Proof of all these several sins in this one Act of the
incredulous Apostle.

26. 27. But behold Christ, who dyed to redeem us from sin and from the penalty
thereof, did not after his death disdain to condescend much unto sinners, when
for this Apostles sake (sinning as he did) he not only appears, but gives the
very redundant Proofs, that this incredulous Apostle had required, Note, that
by after eight days is not here understood the ninth day after Easter, but the
Octave day thereof; this very Sunday, for it seems Christ by his rising upon
Sunday (not on the Jewish Sabbath) declared he was resolved to make the
Christian Sabbath differing from that of the Jews; and so the Apostles being
again on the next Sunday after Easter assembled to show they were ready to
practice what Christ was pleased to ordain, the celebrating a new Christian
Sabbath, by joint and public assembly in Prayer, since here they were
assembled on that new Sabbath for that end, and since Christ by his second
apparition upon the new Sabbath, confirms his former purpose of altering the
Old. See the manner of his Second appearing like the First in all points, even
in the pledge of peace to sinful Thomas among the rest, to show his
indefatigability in reclaiming men from sin by all sweet means: though withal
he did this favor to St. Thomas with regard to the confirmation of all the
world in this mystery of his resurrection: By this offering, nay making Thomas
touch his sacred Wounds he cured the Wound of Infidelity in the Apostles soul,
and showed him he was God, as well as Man: that, was proved in the Corporal
touch of Thomas, this, in the Spiritual of Christ, touching the Apostles soul,
while he told him (for Christ knew his thoughts) how they had suggested to his
tongue those sinful expressions of his infidelity: and though some doubt,
whether the Apostle did really touch Christ, first, because Christ said not
unto him touch, but see my hands and feet, as also because Christ's Body was
then Glorious, and as impalpable, as it was impassible, yet it is out of all
doubt, he did really touch his sacred Wounds, because Christ said, bring hither
thy finger, and see my hands, that is, by touching of them see they are flesh
and blood, no phantasm, and again, put thy whole hand into my side; so it is
more consonant unto Christian Piety and Truth, to think Christ dispensed with
the impassibility of his glorious Body, making it palpable without being
possible (for proof of this mystery) then that the Apostle did not, nor could
not touch Christ his Glorious Body: again, for this very touch the hand of
Saint Thomas is kept, to this day, in Rome, together with the Holy Cross of
Christ, with the Title over his Cross, with the Nail and Crown of Thorns, to
show there is more reverence due unto his hand, upon the Title of this Sacred
touch, then to other Relics of Saints.

28. And upon this touch it was, that the Apostle cried out, my Lord, my God, I
see now, and (to my confusion too late, yet by thy mercy soon enough) believe
that thou art risen, and that thou art indeed my Lord my God, who did upon
the Cross receive these wounds for mine and all mankindes redemption; and
though the Apostle knew Christ dyed for all, yet he calls him here Emphatically
his Lord his God, as who should say, this grace and favor was to him alone, to
have so convincing a Proof made unto him, of that Truth he only among all the
Apostles then doubted of.

29. And lest the Apostle should Glory, that by this he might seem more in
favor then the rest, Christ tells him plainly no, That others who without the
help of Sense believed, were more happy then those, who for Sense-sake only
gave consent unto Faith: Besides, formally Saint Thomas did Believe more then
he did see or feel, that is, he believed Christ to be God, by feeling him to be
man, and not a Phantasm: So if we shall allow him to have had only humane
Faith of the resurrection by this sight; yet he had thence Divine Faith of all
the rest of his Doctrines, and especially of his Deity, whereunto he Attributed
the Power of his resurrection.

30. The reason why Saint John writ no more (on purpose to confirm this
Doctrine of the Resurrection) was because he thought the other Evangelists had
been large enough in that point, and because this was so pregnant a Proof, as
it alone was sufficient; so what he adds in his last Chapter, is rather to show
the effect thereof, by the multitude that were converted by it, then for any
other reason.

31. Here the Evangelist tells his Reason, why he writ this, viz. to render
Christ received, and believed to be the Messiah that was promised, and so God
as well as man: and when he says, we shall have life by believing in his name,
he means in his Person, in his merits, in his Passion; so that first we are to
believe him to be our Savior, Secondly, the Messiah, Thirdly, God, and the
only Son of his eternal Father, And lastly, that he will give to all that thus
believe (and do as he has commanded) life everlasting, eternal happiness.

The Application.
1. THe whole design of this Gospel being only to prove the Resurrection, and
by the reality thereof the Truth of Jesus Christ, his being God as well as Man;
we have hence to gather that the exercise of our Faith is here chiefly
required, and that so often as we read this Gospel, each one cry out with the
convinced Apostle, my Lord, my God, confirm in me that happiest Act of Faith
which believes (without the help of touch or eyes) that thou art my Liege Lord
as thou art Man, and have all Power given thee both in Heaven and Earth; That
thou art my God who have created me out of nothing, and redeemed me from worse
then nothing (my grievous sinful state) to make me more then all things under
Heaven, a saved soul.

2. Yet lest we should pay the duty of such a Faith without our reason leading
thereunto, see here apparent Proofs of the same real Body risen, which was dead
and buried, while the wounds are just the same that were received on the Cross:
see that this humane Person is withal Divine, whilst he gives power to pardon
sins, and to retain them if occasion be: see how he proves what the Epistle
taught, that by our Faith we overcame the world, when himself brings to his
believers the Fruit and End of Victory a happy Peace, and gives it his Apostles
as a Testimony, that it is the same Gods gift (now rising from the dead) who
brought it with him hither, at his Birth; only the Angels then delivered it,
and now we have it from his mouth Divine who well may give it us, now he has
vanquished all our Enemies, the World, the Flesh, the Devil, Sin and Death, and
gives this Peace both as Recompense and Fruit of Faith.

3. O happy Faith that brings forth such a Peace as sets us right to God, our
neighbors, and our selves; for if with any of the Three we be at odds, we can
have peace with neither of the other. O happy Faith! again that works in us by
Charity, and brings forth all the twelve Fruits of the Holy Ghost, with all the
other Virtues that accomplish Christianity, and integrate the Paschal Feast in
us which now we Celebrate, And consequently pray as above with holy Church that
we may keep these Virtues in our Lives and Manners.

On the second Sunday after Easter.
The Antiphon. Joh. 10. v. 11. I Am a good Shepherd, who do feed my sheep, and
for my sheep yield my life. Alleluja.

Verse. Tarry with us, O Lord, Alleluja.

Resp. For night draws on, Alleluja.


The Prayer.
O God, who by the humble abasement of thine own Son have raised up the
prostrate world, grant we beseech thee, unto thy Faithful people everlasting
Joy, that they, whom thou have taken out of the danger of Eternal Death, may
enjoy perpetual Felicity.

The Illustration.
AS we find in this Prayer the stream of the resurrection run strongly down
the Channel of the Church her service thus humbly praying, so we are minded
that the Paschall Feast, (which we must retain in our manners, and lives) is
here commemorated in one of the chief accomplishments thereof, the death of
Christ, since it was by his abasement unto death, that we are raised up to
life, and are imboldened to beg our joy may be perpetual, who (by his
temporal resurrection) are taken out of the danger of eternal death, to the
end we may not only joy therein for ever, but even enjoy perpetual felicity
thereby: But stay beloved! why do we now eclipse the glory of this Festival,
by mixing with it the memory of our Blessed Lords inglorious death? because the
Holy Ghost will have it so: first to show us that it was an abasement for the
Son of God to remain one minute out of the Kingdom of his eternal Father
(though he were never so much triumphant over death) upon death; as also to
indeer us the more unto Almighty God, who was content to give us glory by the
infamy of his Sacred Son, but was not satisfied to give us, being out of the
nothing we were, before he showed his omnipotency by creating us, unless he had
made his own Son by death, as it were, not to be, that so he might give us a
second being in grace, better then our first in nature; and unless our Saviors
temporal death might give us life eternal, free from all danger, and enjoying
perpetual felicity: yes, yes, the little Prayer above imports all this, and
infinitely more then all we can imagine, who are not able to reach the depth of
sense, that lies under the dictates of the holy Ghost; and such we know are
holy Churches Prayers; nor is there want of admirable sweet connection between
this Prayer, and the Epistle and Gospel of the day; for what does all the
former say, but that our Saviors abasement was our exaltation, when Saint
Peter in his Epistle tells us, we that are Christians, are called to [suffer
with Christ,] who gave us [example] by his sufferings to [follow his steps,]
even unto death for him, who did vouchsafe to dye for us. And is not this the
full sense of the Prayer? As for the Gospel, if we look with a regardfull eye
upon it, it is but the same sense in other words;) for while it runs upon the
nature of a Shepherd, it never comes unto the hight of his commends, until it
lays him low as death to save his sheep; so still it drives to that abasement,
which is our exaltation, and draws us sweetly on to dye for him, while it
gives us an example of confidence, that admits no fear; because there is no
security but in Trust; and who can we trust more safely, then him that knows
no [guile] our Savior Jesus Christ, who rather dies in us, then we can dye for
him; and if he dye, it is that we may live, and joy eternally with him, that by
his resurrection conquered death. Thus do the sparks of spirit fly from every
letter of the Holy Text, when they are struck against the steel of this days
Prayer; and thus the high dignity of Pastorate acquires a glory from the lowest
stoop the Pastor makes even that to death; so in a word our highest sanctity,
consists in our lowest humility, as this days Prayer, Epistle and Gospel do
all avouch.

The Epistle 1 Pet. 2. v. 21, etc.
21 For unto this are you called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving
you an example, that you may follow his steps.

32 Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth.

23 Who when he was reviled, did not revile; when he suffered, he threatened
not, but delivered himself to him that Judged him unjustly.

24 Who himself bare our sins in his body upon the Tree: that dead to sins
we may live to justice; by whose stripes you are healed.

25 For you were as sheep straying: but you are converted now to the Pastor,
and Bishop of your souls.


The Explication.
21. SAint Peter had before advised to bear patiently not only just
punishments inflicted on the faithful, to whom he writ (dispersed as they were
some here, some there, of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,) but
also to bear injuries with the like patience; saying, that to this Christians
were called, because Christ did suffer for us most unjustly, leaving us example
to do the like, if need were: and as there were three causes, which moved God
to become man, this last is one of them. The first was by his death to redeem
us, the second by his preaching to teach us; the third by his example to draw
us to imitate his sanctity of life: And to this last the Apostle now chiefly
exhorts in this place, as we see by the following verse, contrary to the
Heretics Doctrine who hold it needless, Christ having dyed for our sins,
that man himself use any mortification, or do any penance at all.

22. Nor could he do any, because he was God as well as man, and hence Calvin's
Doctrine teaching Christ was a real sinner, and that he was (in regard of his
sins) afraid to dye, and did sweat blood for fear thereof, were all most
abominable blasphemies; because though in Christ there were two natures, humane
and divine, yet there was in him but one person, so had that person sinned, God
had sinned, as well as man; since the actions are attributed to the suppositum,
or person, not to the natures contracted by the person: but see the Apostle
minds us, that Christ was not only free from sin of fact, but also of word,
and consequently of thought, which is by word expressed: nor is this marvel;
since [out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh] Matt. c. 12. v.
34. but certainly God was the most abounding in Jesus his heart, and so his
words were all holy, he being the very word of the eternal Father, to whom as
nothing is more proper then veracity, so nothing is more improper then falsity
or dissimulation, fraud or guile.

23: As indeed he was reviled, when they called him drunkard, raiser of
seditions, blasphemer, nay, conjurer or devil, as casting out devils in the
devils name, yet did not he revile those who used him so ill, nor did he
recriminate as commonly men do, that excuse their own sins, by casting other
men's faults in their dish; though in pure charity we read in Saint Matthew cap.
23. How roundly he did rebuke the Jews, to see if by a temporal check he
could preserve them from eternal pains of hell; which is a far other aim
then those use, who excuse themselves by way of recrimination of others; for
their end is not charity but passion or revenge: and when he might have
terrified the Judges, that unjustly did condemn him, he did not give them the
least threat, but gave himself up to the hands of Pilate his unjust judge; how
far short are we of following this example, whose whole endeavors are in all
our actions (even in those that are unjust) to justify our selves; whereas if
we would follow Saint Bernards counsel, we should find a remedy for all
evils, and injuries done unto us in the passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

24. The Apostle here assimilates Christ to the Emissary Goat in Levit. cap.
16. v. 21. Sent out into the desert, laden with all the sins of the people,
and so Christ came into the desert of this world, out of his Eternal Fathers
heavenly Palace, carrying all our sins upon his shoulders: (though by sins
here is not understood the fact or guilt thereof, but the punishment due unto
them) by the tree, is meant the Cross of Christ; whereon while he dies, he
represents us to his heavenly Father, as dead to sin, because he dies for us,
and for our sins: whereupon Saint Ambrose says divinely well, etc. It was not
our Life, but our Sin which dyed, when Christ our Savior dyed upon the
Cross. So we being dead by that means to sin, may live to justice, (that
is) in the sight of the just Judge may deserve Eternal life in heaven, for
living justly here on earth: O Sovereign Stripes! which bruising Christ's body,
do cure our Souls! more ulcerated with sin, then his body was with stripes.

25. Straying we were indeed from God, from virtue, from Salvation, from
heaven, and running to the devil, to vice, to damnation, to hell, had not
Christ our Shepherd ^^duced us to his fold again, by converting us to an
amendment of our lives, and winning us to follow the Footsteps of our heavenly
Pastor, and Bishop of our Souls: See Bishops are metaphorically called
Pastors, because as shepherds feed their sheep, so do Bishops by Doctrine and
example feed the souls of men, but Christ is eminentially called both, as
feeding souls not only by grace here, but with glory in the next world.

The Application.
1. HOw sweetly Holy Church to day mixeth the Lay man's duty with that of the
Priest, to show us that what in an eminent degree Christ taught his Apostles
(and consequently their successors, the Pastors of Gods Church who by office
have care of souls) in some sort at least the layty was to imitate; namely
that heroical, or rather that divine Act of Faith which is required to
Martyrdom. For albeit the Priest be bound to many duties, which do not oblige
Lay people, yet there is no man or woman whatsoever, that is not rigorously
bound to lay down life it self (the dearest thing they have) rather then deny
their faith in Jesus Christ.

2. Again however the Layman is not bound to that perfection of charity and
Justice which the Priest ought to have, nor to excel in many other virtues
essentially proper to the Priest as zeal of souls especially) yet this days
Epistle tells us, that every Christian whatsoever, stands obliged thus far to
imitate the perfection of Jesus Christ himself, as to preserve the proper
virtues of the Paschall Feast sincerity and verity, which is as much as to say,
some degree of saintity as was declared in the exposition of the Epistle upon
Easter day, and consequently if all be bound to saintity, none are priviledg'd
to sin, but every one is to avoid it, as is told us in the second verse of
this Epistle; none is priviledg'd to beguile, or defraud his neighbor, for
that is contrary to the Paschall sincerity and verity, which all the Lambs of
Christ are obliged unto.

3. To conclude, as all Christians are rigorously bound to a profession of the
Faith of Christ with hazard of their lives, so this Epistle instructs them all
in that particular duty of suffering for Justice in testimony of their Faith,
and for that purpose lays before their eyes, in what manner they are to
suffer, just as Jesus did, following his steps therein, Not reviling those that
revile them, not straying away for fear, but like believing Lambs to follow
their Pastor the Bishop of their souls; their Jesus, and their God to whom
they are converted by their faith in him, for whom they are to dye (if need be)
as he has died for them, and by his humble death, has raised them to the
hopes of an eternal life, and of everlasting joys therein.

Which ever living comfort they Petition for to day, emboldened thereunto by a
pious memory of our Saviors death and Passion; since from his Sepulcher (as
was said before) flow all the hopeful streams of our eternal happiness, for
the head and spring of Faith is our Saviors Resurrection from his grave. The
Gospel, John 10. v. 11, etc.
11 I am the good Pastor. The good Pastor gives his life for his sheep.

12 But the hireling, and he that is not the Pastor, whose own the sheep are
not, sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep, and flies: and the wolf
raveneth, and disperseth the sheep.

13 And the hireling flies, because he is an hireling; And he has no care of
the sheep.

14 I am the good Pastor: and I know mine, and mine know me.

15 As the Father knows me, and I know the Father: and I yield my life for
the sheep.

16 And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring,
and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be made one fold and one Pastor.


The Explication.
11. GOod Pastor is here taken for most excellent prime, or indeed only
Pastor, as from whom all others derive that name; because his death is real
life to his sheep, whereas the death of other Pastors is (...) a due sacrifice
for the dyer, and an example for the liver to follow, rather then to fly from
faith: so that Christ's life was not only given us, as an example, but as a
satisfaction for our sins.

12. By Hireling here mystically understand those Priests, who serve their
Flock more for love of their Fleece then of the Sheep, more for base gain, then
for souls salvation: as who should say, this very Act renders a man no true
Pastor, though by his place he be so: yet literally by hireling is understood,
those that are not really true Pastors, but usurp the places of them, Namely,
Heretics, who neither have Orders nor Mission, and yet live upon Tithes, as if
they were truly entitled thereto; for to such the souls of men do not truly
belong, however they take an usurped charge over them, and those men commonly
in time of persecution flinch, steal themselves away, and leave their sheep
(the souls they pretended right over) unto the tyranny of the devouring wolf,
the persecutor of Gods holy Church. Note the true Pastor is said also to fly
when he is silent, and does not rebuke his erring Flock: by the Wolf is
understood Heresy, or the Devil the father thereof, ravening and snatching
this man to luxury, the other to gluttony, a third to murder, and so disperseth
them from the Flock and Fold of orderly Sheep, making them wander, till they
fall into the pit that cries Vae soli, woe to the lonely.

13. "St. Gregory says, the Name shows the Nature, and so gives the cause by
giving the Name; for to be a hireling, is cause enough to fly from danger;
since it argues he loves his hire better then his cure, his profit better then
his Office; nor is he truly said to have care of his Sheep, but of himself, and
therefore by his flying from his sheep, he shows he had indeed no care of them.

14. See the mark of a good Shepherd, is to know his sheep and to have his
sheep know him; he knows their virtues to encourage them to more; he knows
their Vices, to dehort them from the same; and they know his Love and Doctrine
to follow both; since as his Love leads them freely, so his Doctrine leads them
safely; again, as a Pastor leads his sheep to new Pastures, so must the Priest
feed them with new Exhortations: as the Pastor keeps the Wolf from his Sheep,
so must the Priest his Souls from the temptation of sin and the Devil: as the
Pastor cherishes his Lambs more then ordinarily, so must the Priest cherish
his children with frequent Catechisms, and his new converts, even as children:
as the Pastor cures the Diseases of his Sheep, so must the Priest the
Infirmities of his Souls: Lastly, as the true Shepherd will fight to Death,
rather then be beaten from his Flock; so must the Priest (in persecution) dye
rather then fly from his Parish; and in case of Plague, the Pastor is rather
to run the hazard of it, then to leave the people unprovided of Priests; and in
this case particularly the Pastors are bound ex officio, by office to stay,
when Regulars, that only help ex charitate (out of charity, as it were) may
fly in point of danger, if they please, and that without sin.

15. See how he follows this mutual knowledge, comparing it to that wherewith
God the Father knows his Son, and that wherewith the Son again knows the
Father; as my Father knows me to be his natural Son, so he desires the Pastors
to know souls to be their spiritual children; and the souls again to know the
Priests for their spiritual Fathers: Note, the Similitude here shows Analogy,
but not Equality; since the Father knows not us to be other then his adopted
Children, as Christ has by his Grace regenerated us, and made us the adopted
Sons of his heavenly Father, while he says, he yields his Life, he means he
lays it freely down, not that it was, or could be by his persecutors taken from
him, as the lives of his Sub-Pastours, his Holy Priests may be; for though they
may dye willingly, when persecuted, yet they cannot be said to lay down their
lives as Christ did; for he came purposely to dye, and Priests may not seek
death, though they are not bound to fly it neither, when there is just cause
of standing to it for others good: again he is truly said to lay down life, as
being Author of it, so is not the Priest.

16. This verse alludes to the calling of the Gentiles, (besides the Jews,) to
the Faith of Christ, and indeed to the plenary conversion of all the Nations in
the world, to that Faith before the day of latter judgment; when all Nations
shall be of one religion, and unite themselves to the one visible head of
Christ * upon earth, namely the Pope Saint Peter's successor, not so as to say
every man of every Nation shall be converted then, for certainly Antichrist
will have corrupted many that shall dye in their errors, but so that some of
all Nations shall be converted: And if we say, this has been already verified
in the Apostles converting all the world, of whom it is said, Psalm. 18. v. 5.
Into all the earth has the sound of them gone forth: and unto the ends of the
whole world the words of them, perhaps we shall speak more literally to the
meaning of Christ in this place; for indeed in the time of Constantine the
great, by his conversion, (who was Emperor in a manner of all Nations) there
might be truly said to be one sold and one Pastor, namely the then Pope of
Rome, as by the whole second Chapter of Saint Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians
may appear, where three or four times he repeateth making you both one, that
i^, you Jews and Gentiles, both one Church of Christ, built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, viz. Christ Jesus.

The Application.
1. LAst Sunday we heard our Savior gave his Apostles Commission to pardon and
detain sins: now he tells them what manner of men they must be who are thus
empowered namely Pastors of souls, such as must feed and defend their sheep
with the same fatherly love as he the head Pastor did, even with the loss of
life if need be, which though it be an act of the highest charity in the world,
yet is it rooted in the unshaken Faith of the Pastor, and has for the primary
end the preservation of the like Faith in the sheep; according to that of our
Lord unto Saint Peter, Luc. 22. v. 32. That thou once converted, do confirm
thy brethren in Faith.

2. It is further worthy our remarke, that a good Pastors care ought to be (as
we see in the close of this Gospel) as well to gain other souls to believe in
Jesus Christ, as to confirm those who are already true believers; for it is by
his sub-pastors preaching and suffering that our Savior says, he must have
one shepherd and one fold, that is to say, all the world at last converted
from their infidelity, and made right believers. This still maintains the
Doctrine, that the end of Martyrdom is the Propagation of the Christian Faith;
since by the death of Martyrs, even Infidels are brought to the fold of Christ.

3. And since in the Epistle of this day, Priests are bid to follow the example
and steps of Christ in suffering, in this a Pastor is most like our Savior,
that his humiliation (for we cannot come so far as to exinanition) to a
natural death for the good of his sheep, is the raising of souls from their
death of Infidelity to a supernatural life, to that of Faith in Jesus Christ.
When therefore our Pastors are invited to dye for their sheep, it is to mind
us, how by our Saviors temporal death (which brought him to the lowest
humiliation) the whole world was raised to the greatest and highest hope of an
eternal life.

And therefore Holy Church most fitly Prays to day as above. On the third
Sunday after Easter.
The Antiphon, John 16. v. 20. AMen I say unto you, that you shall wail and
weep, but the world shall rejoice, and you shall be made sorrowful, but your
sorrow shall be turned into joy. Alleluja.

Verse. Tarry with us, O Lord, Alleluja.

Resp. For night draws on, Alleluja.


The Prayer.
O God, who unto those that go astray (to the end they may return to the way
of Justice,) do show them the light of thy verity, grant unto all those, who
by profession are esteemed Christians, that they may both eschew those things
which are contrary to this name, and pursue those which are agreeable to the
same.

The Illustration.
IT is admirable to see how many regards the Prayers of Holy Church have at
once, as in this (besides that of the Resurrection which transcends * all the
Prayers of the Church between Easter and the Ascension, and besides that which
is unto the Epistle and Gospel of the day, as shall appear anon) we see here a
special regard unto the faint-hearted Christians, who seeing Christ was dead
and buried, tottered in their Faith of his Deity, and went astray into a
thousand Meandrous doubts in point of Faith; for whose sakes, (that they might
return to the way of Justice by a right belief) Christ was pleased for forty
days together to dwell upon earth, merely to confirm the truth of his
Resurrection, not only infinitely doubted of, but even held impossible; and by
his dwelling here so long, to show them the light of his verity; which indeed
was never so brightly seen, as when it was made appear by his Resurrection,
confirming all the Truths he had taught the world before his death: now that
this Prayer reflects upon those tottering Christians, who lived then, when
Christ arose, as well as upon all us that succeed them, see the following words
point out such, when the Prayer beggs, that those who by profession are
esteemed Christians (as many were that yet doubted of the Resurrection) may
both eschew those things, that are contrary to this name (and nothing more
contrary, then to doubt of Christ's veracity, as these men did, who would not
believe he was truly risen, from death to life) and pursue those, which are
agreeable to the same, that is to say, may believe, and profess their Faith in
this particular, or else they must disagree from all he said and taught
besides, if they did not agree to this so important a truth, and article of our
Christian belief. But now to our maine design; see how this Prayer (like an
Invisible Soul) gives life to all the body of the Churches Service on this
day, whilst it tells us in general terms the duty of good Christians, which
more particularly is summed up in the Epistle and Gospel following: For what is
that which Saint Peter in the former says, more then this Prayer contains,
while he bids us walk here like [Strangers and Pilgrims, and refrain carnal
desires;] then that when we remember Christ his resurrection, we should follow
the light of that verity, to prevent our going astray after [carnall desires:]
what means the so much inculcated] good conversation among Gentiles] in the
Epistle, but that we who are Catholics, (and therefore by profession esteemed
the best of Christians) should give example of good life to all other sorts of
Christians, to all Gentiles, Turks, Jews, and Infidels, and should by the
example of Christ his obedience to his Parents, and to the powers of his time,
learn [to be subject to every humane creature,] 1 Pet. c. 2. v. 13. though
thereby we suffer even unjust oppressions, as our Savior did; this is to be
the good Christians, that by profession we are esteemed. This is to eschew
things contrary to that most honorable name, and to pursue what is most
agreeable thereunto, according as the Epistle exhorts us. To conclude, this
is also to bear patiently the vicissitudes of [joyes] and [sorrowes,]
mentioned in the Gospel, if [a while] we [See] comfort, and if [a while] after
we [See it not,] This is to be content, Christ shall depart from us, so the
Holy Ghost come amongst us in his room; This is to be like teeming women,
groaning here, and in [Travell] with the children of persecution, pain,
torments and death it self for Jesus Christ: and [rejoycing] when we are
delivered of the manly and heroic acts of virtue (the babes of grace) which
will bring us a comfort, that [no man can take from us] a peace of conscience
here, and a crown of glory in the world to come: So we see how home this
Prayer comes to all the whole Service of the day besides.

The Epistle, 1 Pet. c. 2. v. 11, etc.
11 My dearest, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, to refrain your
slves from carnal desires which war against the soul.

12 Having your conversation good among the Gentiles: that in that wherein they
misreport of you, as of Malefactors, by the good works considering you, they
may glorify God in the day of visitation.

13 Be subject therefore to every humane creature for God: whether it be to
King, as excelling;

14 Or to Rulers, as sent by him to the revenge of malefactors, but to the
praise of the good.

15 For so is the will of God, that doing well, you may make the ignorance of
unwise men to be dumb.

16 As free, and not as having the freedom for a cloak of malice, but as the
servants of God.

17 Honor all men. Love the Fraternity. Fear God, Honor the King.

18 Servants be subject in all Fear to your Masters, not only to the good and
modest, but also to the wayward.

19 For this is thank, if for conscience of God a man sustain sorrows,
suffering unjustly.


The Explication.
11. IT seems there were in those days feigned devotes of women, who under a
pretense of piety intruded themselves very officiously into the company of
Churchmen, but oftentimes it appeared their pretended piety was but carnality,
covered under a vizard of devotion; and it is with special regard to such
singularities, and dangerous conversation with women, that the Apostle here
speaks both to Churchmen, to those women, and to all good Christians in
general, beseeching (out of his humility) though he might have commanded them,
that they never let fall the memory of their being but strangers^ pilgrims,
mere passengers upon this earth, since they are members of Christ, who as a
stranger came into the world, when at his first birth he was ( stranger-like)
cast out of doors, and not allowed a place in any house to lay his head in; so
he was content to be borne in a manger, that by this means he might show us,
he came to look us out, who were stragled from Paradise (banished thence
indeed) and made (like strangers) wander over all the world. And seriously it
is a deep word, if well reflected on, for Christians here to call themselves
strangers, since they have here, no dwelling place, but are Citizens of the
heavenly Jerusalem, and all their life time being as a pilgrimage, through the
desert of this wicked world. The Apostle strongly persuades, when he bids them
take heed of setting their affections upon creatures here, for how absurd were
it, if a pilgrim or passenger, (whose life lay at stake, to be at such a place,
by such a time where he was promised a preferment) should yet dote upon some
miserable bondslave in the road, and thereby not only lose his way home, but
his preferment too; and bind himself Prentice to an eternal bondage or
slavery? And the Apostle speaks all this very pathetically, very briefly
under the notion of carnal desires, which are indeed the greatest enemies the
soul has, and do clap the Irons of captivity soonest and fastest upon her,
no vice so surely, so speedily inthralling souls, as carnality does. See
therefore how strongly the Apostles charms under this notion of Pilgrim; since
the very name shows the nature of the man, one that has no right at all to any
thing he sees; one that even to ease his own labor, makes it his study to keep
his right road, that longs for nothing more but to get home; that for this
purpose is content to toil and moyl continually, and never to take long rest;
that dares offend none he meets, lest as a stranger, all the natives rise
against him, to revenge the injury he did to any one of them. That looks on all
he meets as strangers to him, since he knows himself so to them; that gets
ready tacklings for his tedious journey, and casts off all things else as
cumbersom; that finding himself laughed at by most he meets with, especially all
youth, for the Exotic habit, which he wears, regards not their flouts nor
scorn,, but bears them patiently. Thus, thus the Apostle exhorts all Christians
to walk through the wilderness of this World: Note, by carnal desires (which
above all he bids them refrain) he means all the works of the flesh, all vice
indeed, gluttony, as overloading, venery, as over-wasting, anger, as retarding,
while others in revenge stop his journey: and so of all the other fleshly
works, as St. Paul enumerates them, Gal. 5.19. which shall be explicated on the
fourteenth Sunday after Pentecost.

12. Since by Gentiles here are understood all the Nations of the World, the
Apostle ties up Christians to a very good and a close guard, when he allows him
not to use the least miscomportment before any one man or woman whatsoever;
that so whom they cannot edify by their words, at least they may by their
example: by misreports he alludes here to the censure which the Gentiles made
of all Christians for wicked and lewd men, because they found a Sect of
Christians called the Gnostics, who were originally descended from Christians,
that did indeed live wickedly, and defended their errors with obstinacy: again,
they held Christians to be Cannibals and eaters of man's flesh, because in the
Sacrament they received the Body and Blood of Christ, and upon which gross
mistake Christians were persecuted almost three hundred years, by those who
hearing of the thing, did not understand the mystery: Now there is nothing
indeed that so beats down ill reports of men, as to see their good works, for
when those are considered, God is presently glorified, because those works
proclaim God to be within the men that do them. By the day of visitation, is
here understood literally the examine of those false reports before Judges, as
then Plinius (a Gentile) was a Judge in those days; mystically when by
comparing your good deeds with the bad ones of your Detractors, that day of
such examine may glorify God by the conversion of the wicked; lastly, when
notwithstanding you suffer upon false accusations even death it self, that the
wicked finding how strong God is in the just, may be converted upon this day of
visitation to the just, who dies temporally himself, that others may live to
God eternally.

13. This Illative therefore is aptly taken up after the precedent Exhortation:
For it was a calumny then laid upon the Christians by the Infidels, that they
as Subjects and Children of God, were exempt from all obedience to man. And the
Apostle brings in this subjection here, as one part of perfect conversation and
good life in Christians; and to show how little this misreport against
Christians was the Apostolical Doctrine; see here, the head of the Apostles
commands a subjection so large, that he will have it extend to all, from all
men, as part of the Christian Doctrine, that is, to all Superiors over all men
of what Religion soever; to show that none are, and ought to be more truly
obedient and humble, then Christians, who obey not only Superiors, but Equals
and Inferiors too, as St. Paul, Galat. 5.13. exhorts by charity of the Spirit,
serving one another. Note by humane creature, is here understood men, as it
were, made by men, or created by men, Superiors, who were before but Equals;
For as creation strictly taken gives being out of nothing, so in a large sense
(and here it is thus meant) creation of a king makes him to have a moral Being,
which before he had not. The like is of all Superiority Political: and to make
this subjection the more acceptable, he bids it be for Gods sake, because
though men choose men for Governors, yet God so ordains, that man by man shall
be governed; and therefore it is an act of Religion, to be obedient to man in
power, as to Gods appointed vicegerent; and hence it was that Lycurgus fained,
he had his Laws dictated to him by the Gods: next we are to look upon Princes,
as Gods Images, by St. Paul's advise, saying, who resists power, resists the
ordination of God, and for resisting acquires to himself damnation, Romans 13.2.
Again, it is by God, Kings (and other Magistrates) rule, Prove. 8.15. as who
should say, the obedience we pay to man ought to be in testimony of our
obedience to God, setting man over us, and requiring testimonies of our Love to
him by obedience to his vicegerents; that Christians obeying Infidels may gain
them to an obedience unto Gods commands. Finally, that Princes so command, as
they remember themselves to be Gods Subjects, however men's Superiors; and this
is to obey for Gods sake.

14. See here obedience to Captains, or any other Magistrates, is commanded as
to men sent by the Kings or States to govern; by punishing the bad, and
praising the good; for hence the Good receive praise, when Malefactors are
punished for offending them, and when they will rather suffer unjustly the
oppressing of the wicked, then do unjustly, or become themselves unjust.

15. This Verse encourages all men to be good, when the wicked have nothing
left to say for their excuse, why they are not good, because they see other men
good before their eyes, and that God has given grace to the good for a
confusion to the bad, in not following the like grace which God gives
sufficient to make all men good, that will follow the instinct thereof: by
unwise men are here understood wicked men; by ignorance is here meant affected,
rather then real ignorance, such as men pretend, when they seek excuses for
their sins.

16. As free, that is to say, being truly free, not only being like free men:
and by freedom, is here understood immunity from any subjection to sin, not
from subjection to men, who are lawful Superiors: for to claim exemption from
such subjection, were to make malice a cloak of Virtue, by pretending more
liberty then God allows his Servants, who are never more their own masters,
then when they serve him best: for to serve God is truly to reign over all
iniquity, that would inslave mankind.

17. This alludes to that of St. Paul, Romans 12.10. with honor preventing one
another; though by honor is here understood all good offices of Charity, which
while we do to Christians, we show that in them we do truly love and honor
Christ; by fraternity is meant the men, who are all true brothers in one faith
to God, who were in those days distinguished by their fraternities, and living
as children of one God all together in one brotherhood. By the fear of God, he
means here filial, not servile fear, such fear as consists with freedom, and
does not make men slaves. By honoring the king understand not only external,
but internal honor, such as is best paid by Prayer for the Kings prosperity,
as who should say, it cannot be happy to the people, if it be unhappy with the
King or State, under whom they live.

18. In this Verse the Apostle descends to the obedience which Servants ought
to pay their Masters, as well as that which Subjects pay their Princes, to show
he meant to recommend all kind of subjection, as well as duty to Princes. By
all fear, is understood fear of fault, fear of punishments, fear of scandal, in
fine all kind of fear of all offense whatsoever, as knowing we cannot offend
our masters without offending God; be our masters what they will, good or bad
men, we are not subject to their Vices, but to their power; here is also meant,
though they be of ferent Religions, as well as of different Dispositions.

19. By thank, is here understood thank-worthy, or doing a thing that is so
notable an effect of grace, as shows it can have no other root to spring from;
so by Grace, is here truly meant Glory or Praise, as who should say, we deserve
true Praise, if for conscience of God, (toward God) for Religion sake, we
sustain that sorrow which falls upon those who are unjustly molested; for
commonly this breeds affliction to most men, yet Christians ought to make this
their comfort or their glory and grace in the sight of God and men: For says
the Apostle in the next Verse, What glory is it if sinning you suffer; for
conscience to God may be understood, that God is conscious or knowing of our
unjust sufferings, and so in his justice will one day do us right: Again, for
conscience to God, is that by so doing we be clear in our conscience before
Almighty God; or lastly, and best of all, if need be, to dye for virtues sake,
rather then be beaten out of it by any threats whatsoever; and to this the
Apostle alludes: for many slaves that in those days became Christians, were by
their masters beaten some of them to death, and yet endured patiently the
tyranny of their earthly masters, rather then they would gall their consciences
toward God their heavenly master, by receding from that virtue which he gave
them, the grace to conserve even unto death.

The Application.
1. UPon what other account then that of the Christian Faith, can St. Peter
hope to make us believe? we that are made of the Elements of this World, are
Strangers and Pilgrims here, and are to refrain from the Pleasures of the
World; is it not because we believe that Jesus Christ has by his bitter Death
and Passion purchased us a better inheritance? is it not because at our Baptism
we make a profession of this our Faith, and renounce the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil? assuredly it is.

2. Again, from what other Root then that of our Christian Faith are we tied up
to so strickt a conversation amongst Gentiles, (amongst the mis-believers) but
because we that believe rightly are bound to do uprightly, and religiously,
when he is only counted a just man, who is a true believer, as we read, Romans
1.17. He is just who lives according to Faith (he means the Christian Faith)
where note the word Live^ imports outward Actions, for we do not otherwise know
whether a man be dead or alive, but by outward operations.

3. To conclude, whence is it else that the true children of God are obliged to
obey, even mis-believing Superiors? but because all Power being from God, those
that are his children must obey it, and are by the Principals of their Faith
(and of Christian Doctrine) obliged thereunto; for since the Ruler of our Souls
St. Peter the Vicar of Christ himself, does teach us this Doctrine, assuredly
he had it from that spirit who teaches all verity: and since the first Light
of Truth is that of Faith which brings all erring souls in to the right way to
Heaven ( the way of Justice grounded in Faith.)

Therefore we most fitly pray as above, that all who bear the names of
Christians may reject unchristian deportments, and do Christian actions, such
as the Light of Faith leads them to. The Gospel, John c. 16. v. 16. etc.
16 A little while, and now you shall not see me: and again a little while, and
you shall see me: because I go to the Father.

17 Some therefore of his Disciples said one to another, what is this that he
says to us: A little while and you shall not see me: and again a little while,
and you shall see me, and because I go to the Father.

18 They said therefore, what is this that he says, A little while? we know
not what he speaks.

19 And Jesus knew that they would ask him: and he said to them, Of this do you
question among your selves, because I said to you, A little while, and you
shall not see me, and again, a little while, and ye shall see me.

20 Amen, Amen, I say to you, that you shall weep, and lament, but the world
shall rejoice: and you shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into
joy.

21 A woman when she travaileth, has sorrow, because her hour is come: but
when she has brought forth the child, now she remembers not the anguish for
joy, that a man is born into the world.

22 And therefore you, now indeed you have sorrow; but I will see you again,
and your heart shall rejoice: And your joy no man shall take from you.


The Explication.
16. THis place is diversely understood, by some, of the day of Judgment, which
Christ calls a little while, because to God all time is but a moment; yet in
regard he had immediately before comforted the Apostles, that though he was to
leave them, he would send unto them the Holy Ghost, another Comforter, who
should teach them all truth, and that what ere he taught them, he should
receive it of him; therefore it is most probable our Savior here alluded to
his Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension, which being at hand, when he spoke
these words, and consequently he being by his Death to disappear a while, and a
little afterward (namely three days) he was to rise again, when they should
see him a while again, that was, for forty days, after which he was to ascend
unto his Father; probably I say, this was the most literal Sense of the Words,
a little, etc.

17. 18. No marvel if they understood not this Riddle, and so brok out into
these two Verses following, full of doubt, what his meaning might be.

19. He knew indeed they desired to ask him, being grieved and sad at the news
of his departure, yet were loath to be so bold; so he knowing their meaning,
not by any outward actions of theirs, but by his Deity, which did see the
secrets of their hearts, was pleased to satisfy them; and yet he did this by
sweetning their sorrow, with diverting them from one Riddle to another, opening
the first by the last, as appears in the next Verse.

20. Wherein he tells them, as in the two Senses above, Verse 16. That his
Disciples and all good men should here weep, while the bad men of the world did
rejoice, but that as the temporal sorrow of the just should be turned into
eternal joy, so the temporal joy of the unjust should be turned into eternal
grief; or rather that you who are my friends, shall weep to see me suffer and
dye, while my enemies the Jews shall rejoice thereat, you being sad in the mean
time, but as by my resurrection your sorrow shall be turned into joy, so their
joy shall be turned into sorrow and confusion; not for love to me, but for
shame of themselves.

21. For diverse reasons the sorrow of the Disciples at Christ's death was
compared to the pains of a woman with child, and their joy at his
Resurrection, to the joy of a woman delivered of a Son, after a hard labor:
First, because both these Griefs were very Bitter, Secondly, both Short,
Thirdly, both full of Danger, Fourthly, both converted into after Joy, suitable
to their Sorrows, Fifthly, because as the same child was first cause of pain,
so he is cause of comfort, the like of Christ dying and rising again, Sixthly,
both joys are excessive Great, whereas they take away all sense of Sorrow. So
here the Passion of Christ is in this Parable, supposed to be the labor or
travail of the Apostles, dolorous as a woman's in childe-bearing, and his
Resurrection is supposed to be as the Birth of a Son to them, after so hard a
labor as they were in, whilst all the world jeered and scorned them, for
hoping after so impossible a comfort, as it was thought, when the Apostle calls
it a scandal to the Jews, and to the Gentiles a folly. St. Augustine is so
acute upon this place, as to say Christ compared the Apostles sorrow for his
Passion, to the pains of a woman in labor of a Boy, and not of a Girl, because
those are the greatest labors of women: and again, he makes a special remark,
that the Text says here, the Mother forgets her pains, not because a Boy is
born, but a man, one that is to be the Support and Prop of her house, when her
self can no longer live; for says St. Augustine, Christ was, as it were, born
by his Resurrection to the World, not as a Child, but as a Man; conquering
Death, winning eternal Glory to himself and to all his Posterity, to all Saints
of Heaven, who are the Children of his Grace.

22. This Verse applies all the rest by way of Repetition to the Senses as
above, while it tells the Apostles, this shall be their Case about him, this
their Grief at his Death, this their Joy at his Resurrection, like the travail
and comfort of a woman first in labor, then delivered of a Son: But when he
adds this Close, That their joy no man shall take from them, he means neither
in this world, nor in the next; for such shall be their joy to see Christ
risen, who was dead, that even the menace of Death to themselvcs shall be
comfortable, out of their assurance, to share with Christ in the joy of his
Resurrection, if they partake with him in the pains of Death, by dying for his
sake. Whence St. Paul boasting said, who shall part us from the Love of God?
Nakedness, the Sword, Persecution? Romans 8.35. No, no, the love of Christ, and
hope of Heaven are comforts above all afflictions whatsoever: whence we read
of the Apostles that they went rejoicing from the bench of the Judges, because
they were held worthy to suffer contumely for the name of Jesus, Act. 5.41. And
this to show, that no man could tak^ away that joy which God gave them, as the
Text above has told us.

The Application.
1. IT is worthy our observation, that amongst so many passages as were between
Christ and his Apostles after his Resurrection, this days Gospel is taken out
of Saint John Evangelist, his Story of our Saviors Actions reporting what he
said to his Apostles immediately before his Death. For we see the Expositors
upon the first Verse of this Gospel tell us all that is here said, alludes to
the Death, Passion, and Resurrection of our Lord, as well as to his Ascension
and to the coming of the Holy Ghost. Then certainly our Mother Church reads us
this Lesson to day, with intention to draw from us such like Acts of Faith, as
our Savior desired the Apostles should make when he told them he was shortly
to dye, and shortly to rise again.

2. And since this Parable aims at raising consolation in the Apostles hearts,
out of the disconsolate Death and Passion of their Lord and Master, by virtue
of the Faith they had in his future Resurrection after his Death. Assuredly it
is now our parts that are Christians to make the Cross of Christ our chief
content, the Death of our Savior the only hope we have to live, and his
Resurrection the ground of our Faith, that by virtue of his Blessed and
Incorrupted Body risen from his Grave, our corrupted flesh and blood shall rise
again, and be made partakers of those heavenly Joys which he has prepared for
all that do firmly believe, in him, and live according to the Rules of
Christian belief.

3. Note, that amongst those Rules, a Principal one is read unto us this day,
of believing firmly that all the sorrows this world can afford us, are not able
to rob us of the future joys prepared for us in Heaven; if from erring Infidels
we become right believing Christians, and live according to the light of Truth:
The Faith of Jesus Christ, that is, if we do such Actions in Virtue of that
Faith, as We pray to day we may do: say then the Prayer, and see how pat it is
to this Doctrine of the Church.

On the fourth Sunday after Easter.
The Antiphon. Joh. 16. v. 5. I Go to him that sent me; but because I have
spoken these things unto you, sorrow has filled your hearts. Alleluja.

Verse. Tarry with us, O Lord, Alleluja.

Resp. For night draws on, Alleluja.


The Prayer.
O God, who make the minds of thy faithful to be of one accord, grant unto
thy people, that they may love what thou command, and desire what thou do
promise; that amongst worldly varieties there we may fix our hearts, where are
true joys.

The Illustration.
O Beloved, what a Prayer is here! what an elevated language does the holy
Ghost speak in to day! behold hold a whole Sermon in a few lines; what preacher
needs other Text then this Prayer, to dilate upon even till the day of
Judgment? shall I speak a big word upon this Prayer? be it but with us, as
this day we pray, and we are even with God himself; at our journeys end: and
why should we despair thereof? since in vain we are bid to pray for this, if it
were not (by Prayer) to be obtained. beg it then, beloved, on your often bended
knees, beg it earnestly, fervently, heartily, and doubt not but it will be
granted, for God does not feed us with fond hopes, of what he will not grant,
if we so a k it, as we ought. But stay, how comes it, that with so much plenty
of Spirit we find to day so little seeming connection with the Epistle and
Gospel, which yet I am confident will prove both as it were eminentially
contained in this admirable Prayer? And first observe how suitable it is for
holy Church to pray thus, when we are now in the time, that Jesus Christ
prepared his Apostles to be content to leave him, or at least, that he should
leave them. How often did he command them resignation on all occasions to the
will of Almighty God? was not this the very form of his Prayer? Thy will be
done in earth, as it is in heaven, Matthew. 6.10. Hence the Church begs to day,
that we who believe in Christ, may live all of one mind: and since it is
morally impossible, so many men should be consenting all in one; therefore we
see the prayer gives that to God, saying, it is he must make that to be, which
we beg; he must gives us grace, since we are all one in Faith, to be all of one
mind in the operations of that belief, which works by charity, that knows not
[thine] and [mine] but gives all to God, and takes only from his Holy Hand,
what he pleases to give back again. Next we pray, that we may love what God
commands, which in this case was (to the Apostles) that they might love to
leave our Blessed Lord, for so God had commanded, That they might desire what
he promised, which was the coming of the holy Ghost. That amongst worldly
varieties, there they might fix their hearts, where only true joys are to be
had. O! what a taking off their minds was this even from himself? whose
departure was one of the worldly varieties he would not have to trouble them,
but that they should upon the loss of the happiness they had in his society,
fix their hearts on a greater happiness (who but the holy Ghost could make this
good) upon the joys of heaven, which are true joys indeed; and this also shows
we are still sliding down the Channel of the Resurrection too in this Prayer,
as has been said. Blessed God! how good art thou to man, who have made him a
happiness greater then the company of thy sacred Son, whom yet we know is God
and man too? the reason was his Humanity here did shade his Divinity; but in
heaven his Deity shall outshine his Humanity, and so make us love man in him
for Gods sake, whereas here the Apostles did love God but for Christ's sake, as
he was man; and therefore this Prayer (as it speaks the Apostles parts) bids
them fix their hearts upon true joys indeed, those only that are in heaven,
being greater then any they could have in the society of Jesus Christ himself,
so long as he was upon earth: not that his Glory was less here then in heaven,
but that man is less capable to see God on earth, then he shall be to see and
enjoy him too, when he comes to heaven; and therefore he ought not to fix his
heart upon any content whatsoever upon earth, but still to keep it moving
toward a greater and a truer Joy. And thus having made way for the Application
of this Prayer unto our selves (by seeing how in the Apostles sense we ought to
say it;) let us close with our accustomed Application of it, to the Epistle and
Gospel of the day, or rather of them both unto it, which are, as it were,
eminentially contained therein. And first there is nothing so clear, as that it
is [a gift] of God to make us thus resigned; hence the Epistle breaks out into
that acknowledgement, saying, [ every good and perfect gift is from above
descending from the Father of Lights, with whom there is no transmutation, nor
shadowing of alteration; and who by his own sacred word has ingrafted in us a
filiation, that makes us be a beginning of his creature] that is, willing by
our resignation, to be made through his holy Grace, his better [creature] then
by nature we are. And so in brief to be those Saints, which St. James in his
Epistle sets before our eyes, and consequently those which the Apostles were,
when our Savior had prepared them for his departure from them, and told them,
they were not inquisitive enough after the heavenly joys, whilst they doted
too much upon his Humane presence, after he had made them believe, it was
expedient (even for themselves) that he left them, and that the holy Ghost came
to them, in his stead, to all those purposes that are recited in the Gospel
following; and to all which purposes we shall find this Prayer availing us, if
in this sense we say it often, and thereby take (as in a little Cordial) the
whole substance of the Epistle and Gospel of this day.

The Epistle, Iac. 1. v. 17, etc.
17 Every best gift, and every perfect gift, is from above, descending from the
Father of Lights, with whom is no transmutation, nor shadowing of alteration.

18 Voluntarily he bath begotten us by the word of Truth, that we may be some
beginning of his creature.

19 You know my dearest Brethren; And let every man be swift to hear, but slow
to speak, and slow to anger.

20 For the anger of man works not the justice of God.

21 For the which thing casting away all uncleanness, and abundance of malice,
in meekness receive the engraffed Word, which is able to save your Souls.


The Explication.
17. IT is prodigiously strange to see how much the Apostle here speaks in
Little, under these two terms of best gift, and perfect gift; for though the
simple and literal meaning be, that all which is good amongst men, is given
them from God, and all which is bad amongst them comes from the Devil, and from
their own concupiscence, yet there is a far deeper sense couched also here; and
first, under best gift, is understood not only the goodness of the thing
given, but the excellent good will of the giver, and even that, being as good
as the gift, adds much to the value thereof; for indeed as man has nothing of
his own to give, so he has no will of his own, nor desire to give any thing
that is good, but even that good will is Gods, and comes from God inspiring man
to do good unto his neighbor; but the sense is yet deeper by the reduplication
of perfection upon the goodness of the donation or giving, and of the gift
given; as who should say, Gods gifts are not only goodness in themselves, (by
being communications of his infinite goodness to us) but they are also most
perfect, both as their intrinsecal goodness makes them so, and as their
extrinsecal operations and effects do make us so likewise unto whom they are
given; since the end for which they are given, is, that man (by means thereof)
may be perfect as Christ was perfect: again, many men give oftentimes that,
which obliges others, and yet is not either perfect in it self, or properly
their own to give; neither of which can be wanting, when God is the donation,
the gift, the perfection, and all that can be imaginable to render a gift, or
the donation of it good and perfect, best indeed and most absolutely
accomplished. Again, by all gifts are here understood those of Nature, Grace,
and Glory, whereof each is from God so immediately, as none of them can flow
from any other fountain: since he is Natura naturans, as Divines call him, and
we Natura naturata, he is the Fountain, Origin, and first Principle of all
Natures, he is a simple and perfect Nature, in, and of himself, so fecund or
fertile, as he is able to branch himself out into an infinity of other Natures,
which yet shall all be as distinct from his own Divine Nature, as Creatures are
from their Creator, and from one another too. But the very truth is the Apostle
here reports, to the two latter sorts of gifts, namely those of Grace and
Glory; for he had before spoken much of Faith, Grace, Wisdom, and Patience, all
of them seeds planted in the souls of the Faithful, purposely to render them
the fruits of Glory in the next World. To conclude, Saint Thomas of Aquin will
have the word Datum, that is, the thing given, to mean the gift of Glory in the
next world; as who should say, all God gives here is to make us good, all he
gives in Heaven is to make us perfect; others (and they not unproperly) say, by
the best and most perfect gift here mentioned, is meant our Savior Jesus
Christ himself, who is indeed all goodness, all perfection; and so it is well
said, that when God gave us his only Son, how is it possible he must not with
him have given us all things? but we may also conceive the Apostle here gives
all Christians a general rule to ask of God nothing, but what is good and
perfect, because he can give nothing else, being himself all goodness and all
perfection. And since Christ was the best pledge of this goodness, and of this
perfection, that ever man was witness off, he coming from his heavenly Father,
it is by consequence true, that all the good we can hope for, must come from
the same Fountain, the same heavenly Father; who is therefore called the Father
of Light, because he is the Fountain of in accessible Light: and indeed by the
Father of Light, is here understood the whole sacred Trinity; First, because
God is ad intra, as Divines speak, meaning in himself, Majesty, Glory, and
Light, inaccessible, as was said above: again, as in this Trinity there are
three Divine Persons, so every one of them is properly called a light; as of
the Son we are told by the Nicene Council, that he is Light of light, or the
Light of the eternal Father, and consequently the holy Ghost is Light of
lights, proceeding both from the Father, and from the Son, whence holy Church
calls the holy Ghost lumen cordium, the Light of hearts; and St. Dennis
explicates the mystery of the sacred Trinity by light, in which are three
Properties, Light, Splendour, and Heat; for as light without its own loss
produces the other two, so the Father without his own loss begets his Son, who
is called Splendour patris, the Splendour of the Father; and from them proceed
the holy Ghost, called Love, which is not only a Heat, but a Fire of Charity
burning eternally bright between the three sacred Persons, Father, Son, and
holy Ghost: Secondly, because God ad extra, that is to say, without himself, is
the Origin of light, as he created Angels, the chief of whom being for his
excessive brightness called Lucifer; and the rest having power, each Superior
of them to illuminate his Inferior Angel. Also as he created man endowed with
the excellent light of reason, by which he was able to enlighten the souls of
those that are ignorant in the knowledge of Truth: Thirdly, as he created the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, all gallant lights useful to creatures in this world:
Fourthly, as he is the Author of all Supernatural lights, namely, of Faith,
Hope, and Charity, Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel, and all other Virtues
whatsoever, and Graces, that are the lights guiding our souls to eternal Bliss
amidst the mysty darkness of death and sin: Fifthly, as he is the Author of all
prophetical Spirits, foreseeing by the light of Revelation things to come.
Lastly, as he is the Author of the light of Glory, a creature so perfect, that
St. Thomas says, God cannot make it perfecter; his reason is, because it is
the medium to show us perfection it self, his own sacred Deity, and without the
help of this Glory elevating the powers of Angels and blessed Souls of men,
neither of them could behold this inaccessible light, which is God himself; but
whether this light of Glory may not be answerable to the more or less Grace in
Saints or Angels, and consequently an accident more or less intense or perfect
accord, to the exigence of every individual subject in which it is; we shall
rather leave to Schools to dispute with St. Thom. then presume here to
determine; with whom, that is with which Father of Light, with which sacred
Trinity, there is no Transmutation, no going from place to place, as all other
lights do, especially the Sun from East to West; nor no vicissitude of
over-shadowing, no Eclypse or Darkness by the Interposition of any thing
between God and his creatures, or by his recess from them, as the Sun goes from
us, and so makes night, called vicissitudinal darkness, and comes to us, and so
makes day, called vicissitudinal light; because it comes and goes by fits, by
turns, by changes, by alterations, whereas in God there is none of these to be
found; for his light does not come and go, he is not now Author of Grace, now
of sin, but all that comes from him is Grace, and if sin interpose, it is from
us that interposition comes: nor does his Glory to the Blessed fade at any
time, grow dark or dim, but keeps still the same fullness of luster, it has at
first: but God is so far from mutability, that he is from five remarkable Heads
immutable; First, by nature Immortal; Secondly, by quality (as we call it)
Unalterable; Thirdly, by place Immovable, because immense and filling all
place; Fourthly, by Will constant, ever the same in Resolution; Lastly, by
Operation, ever here with Grace, ever in Heaven with Glory working upon his
Creatures; and all these four last flow as from their origin out of his
Immortal and Eternal Nature; nay that which is most remarkable is to think, how
in all the vicissitudes and changes that Christ Jesus felt in himself for us
(as man) he was not the least altered as he was God, but therefore became man,
that he might encourage us to bear patiently, the changings and turnings of
corrupted nature, when he that was God exposed himself to the like, lest we
should despair of ever coming to an unalterable eternity of bliss from amidst
so great a privation of rest, as this perpetually altering world produced in us.

18. This verse proves God is not the Author of temptation or sin in us; since
he has freely begotten us to be his children, children of his own inaccessible
light: and this generation also is that best and perfect gift, which in the
verse above we heard came from God; but this word voluntarily is of deep sense,
and alludes to the difference wherewith God begot his own natural and eternal
Son, namely naturally and necessarily, so that he could not choose but beget
him from all eternity, coequall to himself; but our generation was gratuit,
free, voluntary, whereby we were in time begotten, and so, as God might have
chosen, whether he would or not, have gotten us to be his children of grace,
and not of nature, infinitely inferior, no ways coequall to him: again, by
voluntarily is understood not only gratis, but also by design, as it is
distinguished from hazard, fortune, chance; besides we are three several times
begotten; first by nature or creation, secondly by grace and regeneration in
Baptism remitting original sin, thirdly by grace and penance remitting
actual sin, though the Apostle here alludes only to the two last ways of our
regeneration, as is clear by what follows, saying we are thus begotten by the
word of truth, which is first understood, by the second person of the Trinity,
becoming man to save us, who were before Gods creatures, but the devils
children by the guilt of sin: and he is truly called the word of truth, who
is truth it self; secondly, the word of truth alludes to the promise of
redemption made by God to Abraham through one of his seed Jesus Christ;
Thirdly, the word of truth may allude to the Sacramental words, that are most
true, I Baptize, I absolve thee; fourthly and most literally, by the word of
truth is understood the word of the Gospel, which is called properly the word
of truth, as first taught for such by Christ, and afterward confirmed for such
by the Holy Ghost: lastly by the word is understood the good life and doctrine
of the faithful corresponding to the word of God, or Gospel of Truth, for thus
we are begotten also as by the word; so that we may see in this generation God
is our Father, his grace the seed, our Mother is a conformed will to the will
of God, her seed the consent to what our Holy Father calls unto, and lastly the
child thus begotten of these Parents is our inward or supernatural man, so
called from our better Parent God Almighty; and yet even thus happily brought
forth, you see the Apostle calls us, but some kind of beginning to be creatures
of Almighty God, that is, so his creatures, as we are also his children, though
by this word beginning is best understood the chief, principal, or first
fruits among men, such as are to share in glory with the first created Spirits
the Holy Angels: as if other men, that are not true Christians, could not hope
for this happiness: and of this sort the Apostle accounts these to whom he
writes this Epistle; by his creature therefore is understood only those
faithful souls, who shall finally live and reign with him in glory; for all
other creatures, though his, are not yet so excellently his as these; for these
are by special grace new creatures, that is, twice or thrice borne, or made
over such by nature or creation, by grace or Baptism, by penance and by glory.

19. Know you, that is to say, you know enough by what I have said to you upon
this subject of Christianity, as above, in general terms: now let me give you
a lesson or two in particular, let every one of you be swift, or nimble to
hear, (For as the wise man says, Prove. c. 1. v. 5. a wise man will hear and
be more wise) for he had observed many of them were so transported with finding
they had some gifts of grace, that they were always boasting of them, though
even to the interruption of others, that first had undertaken to speak of
Godly things to them, whence often they fell into passion and anger one with
another; and to all these the Apostle speaks particularly, exhorting them with
humility, rather to hear others teach them, then to undertake teaching others,
and not only to hear, but to follow the rules of their teachers; for he only
perfectly hears the word of God, who lives a life according to the doctrine he
hears; whence Saint Paul says, Romans 2. v. 13. not the hearers of the Law are
just with God, but the doers of the Law shall be justified; we note here, the
Apostle relates in all this exhortation to the attaining of those virtues,
which he had first recommended to them in the beginning of this Epistle, and in
particular to wisdom which he mentioned in the fifth verse thereof; so that,
as the property of wisdom, he commends attention to what others can say;
slowness to speak our selves and slowness to anger; and here he seems by
slowness of speech, to recommend unto Preachers that quality, and that they
affect not loquacity, but rather tardity of speech in their Sermons, as more
proper to imprint what they say, and to edify in the hearer; for it was
excellently said of Publius Mimus, he knows not how to speak, that cannot hold
his peace, but much better of Saint Augustine, Epist. 132. and in Psalm. 139.
in vain does he Preach the word of God to the ear, who does not himself
hear it in his heart; his meaning is, let no man preach the word, that has
not first heard what the Holy Ghost dictates to him upon it, by way of
meditation, or contemplation; besides Christ himself gave us this rule, of
whom we read, Act, 5.1. Jesus began to do and to teach, to be silently a good
man, before he did openly Preach to persuade others to be good. To conclude,
slowness to anger is advised, as the best guard we have to stand upon, because
nothing so much loses a wise man in the repute of others as choler, passion,
and anger, especially when it is frequent; and therefore the Apostle not
presuming it likely to be able to cut off that vice by the roots, advises at
least that we be wary of it, and not to fall unprovoked thereinto.

20. By the anger of man is here understood, that as God, when he does most
justice, (in the latter day of judgment) passes that final sentence without
anger; so to be here a just man, one must be free from anger too: but there are
diverse senses of this place among the expositors; some will have it to mean,
that God, to do justice, made not private men's anger the measure, but the
sentence of the impartial Judge amongst men; others will have it, as if anger
did not love but hate justice; but the most genuine sense (and to the Authors
mind) is, that anger generally hinders all justice, as if anger and passion
did obstruct all the ways to make a just man; note Saint Thomas gives an
excellent mark, to know how we may be angry, and not sin, when our anger
follows reason, and contrariwise whenever reason follows anger, there must
needs be sin, because anger is the chief agent, reason but the instrument,
whereas in the former way anger is the isntrumental, and reason the principal
worker; so by the anger of man is here understood the anger of the natural
man, for if it be of the supernatural, it may be such as Christ and his Holy
Saints had, when they were angry at sin, and yet meek to the sinners.

21. Many refer this verse only to the last thing spoken of, anger, as who
should say, since anger does not produce justice, it must needs work the
contrary effect, namely all injustice, amongst which is uncleanness and malice;
but yet this verse shall be much better referred to all that was said before
verse, v. 18. of our being by the word of truth begotten, since the Apostle
does close this verse, with telling us how to make our selves more apt to
receive the word of truth into our souls; or as who should say, since we are
begotten voluntarily by the word of truth, let us endeavor by all means to
preserve in us this regeneration, this inborne word in us, this filiation to
God, this adoption to glory; and by the name of uncleanness the Apostle here
alludes to concupiscence, drawing us from the life of this word unto the death
of sin; by the name of malice he alludes to the sin of anger before
inculcated, as hindering our justice, such as by meekness we produce in our
selves, and so preserve the inbred word, (our filiation to God,) which must be
our final salvation of our souls; by taking in, or receiving the ingraffed
word is here meant keeping it; for this was spoken to those who were already
Christians; and the allusion is pretty, which is here made to a graft; for as
by ingrafting on the body of an Apple Tree, the gardener (if he please) brings
forth a Plum or Pear, so the word of God ingrafted into our souls brings
forth the fruits of grace, which are the Seeds of better fruit, of glory: if
any ask what is this ingrafted word? we may say, it is God incarnate; for his
incarnation is as it were, an ingrafting, or inoculating God into the hearts or
souls of men; since as the graft is always of a better kind, then the Stock
it is ingrafted on, so the Divinity is much more sweet and fertile, then our
sour Crab of humane nature; whereas by the Hypostaticall union, God and man in
Christ became one person, as the Tree and the graft become one body, when the
Sap unites and cements them together; again, as all grafts are first cut from
their own homogeneall Stock, before they be ingrafted into another, so the
second person of the Trinity was taken (as it were) out of the hosome of his
eternal Father, to be ingrafted in the womb of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and so
was brought out of his heavenly, to be planted in our earthly Paradise, or
rather wilderness indeed, for such it was, when he came down to earth; and as
from the sour Stock of a Crab-tree, we must first cut a branch, before we can
ingraft a better fruit upon it; so was there cut off from Christ, his humane
hypostasis, and he made to subsist by the hypostasis divine: besides as the
graft, and the Stock are bound together, till they fasten into one another, so
by the hypostaticall union was the divine graft bound to our stock of humane
nature, that thereby God and man might grow into one person, consisting of two
natures; others will have this ingrafted word to be the Blessed Sacrament
united to our Souls: others understand it to be Christ crucified on the Cross;
others contend it is the word of God ingrafted by the Preachers into the hearts
of the Faithful.

The Application.
1. THe two first verses of this Epistle, point directly at the gift of Faith,
which is indeed the Best and most perfect gift, eminentially called the gift of
God: and is such a Light to our Reason, as can come from none but the Father of
Lights in it self, the Blessed Trinity, but as to us, we may say it comes from
the Father of our Light, (that is of our Faith) our Savior Jesus Christ: who
has indeed voluntarily begotten us by the word of Truth, the Holy Writ, the
Record of our Faith) whereby we have our first beginnings of being God
Almighties creatures.

2. The two next verses tell us with what Alacrity and Promptitude we should
hear this Sacred word of God: as also with what Patience we should bear the
Rebukes and Checks it gives our Consciences, when it reprehends our vices. In
plain terms we are told that to be Angry at any holy reprehension, is an
evident sign of our not being Right believers; since by our operative Faith we
are made just, as we have often been taught; and nothing is less consistent
with justice then Anger.

3. The last verse tells us what effects Faith ought to work in us, namely
Purity, Love, and Meekness, for without these we are not capable of saving our
souls by the ingafted word of God in us, which yet of it self, is sufficient
to save us, if received with that Purity which renounceth all mixture of
Heresy, Schism, or Infidelity; for these are the Obstructions to the unity of
minds which Faith works in the souls of true believers, making them
therefore all of one mind, because they are all of one pure and impermixed
Faith, (such as is only in the Catholic Church) and the effect whereof is to
make them therefore love even the hardest commands of that good God they do
believe in, and to covet ardently what he promises unto them in requital of
their love, who amongst all the allurements in this world fix their hearts only
upon heavenly joys, which are promised in the next world, not on such shadows
of joys as we possess here; in a word not to fix their hearts upon our present
loanes, but upon our future promises, for God here does not properly give us
any thing, how ever he lends us all we have, his gifts are for eternal
enjoyment, not for temporary uses only, Now that we may do this, see how
fitly Holy Church Prays as above.

The Gospel, John 16. v. 5, etc.
5 But I told you not these things from the beginning, because I was with you.
And now I go to him that sent me; and none of you asks me, whither go
thou?

6 But because J have spoken these things to you, sorrow has filled your
hearts.

7 But J tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go; for if I go
not, the Paraclete shall not come to you. but if I go, J will send him to you.

8 And when he is come, he shall argue the world of sin, and of Justice, and
of Judgment.

9 Of sin; because they believe not in me.

10 But of Justice; because I go to my Father: and now you shall not see me.

11 And of judgment: because the Prince of this world is now judged.

12 Yet many things I have to say to you: but you cannot bear them now.

13 But when he, the spirit of truth, comes, he shall teach you all truth;
for he shall not speak of himself: but what things soever he shall hear, he
shall speak: and the things that are to come, he shall show.

14 He shall glorify me: because he shall receive of mine, and shall show to
you.


The Explication.
5. TO understand what the Apostle means in this verse, we must know the
meaning of the foregoing words; and though many will have these things to report
unto what went before, namely our Saviors having told them they should be
persecuted and punished to death for his sake after he was gone; which he told
them of, that when it happened, the Apostles should not say, he had cheated
them by his vocation, or calling them to be his Disciples, and had not told
them, what would follow; so some will have these things now report to our
Saviors prediction of his Disciples persecution; but indeed they refer to what
follows, as is clear, by his saying, he told them not those things at first,
whereas he had long before told them of their persecutions, as we read Matthew.
10.17. Luc. 12. v. 12. But now he means these things that follow, namely his
leaving them, and his resolving to send them in his room the Holy Ghost, which
he did not so particularly tell them of, as now he does, being he is to part
with them, and so had need leave them the comfort of another comforter to come
to them in his place; for at first (meaning,) as long as himself was with them,
they had comfort enough; but now that he goes, he tells them these things, which
shall be comforts to them, (though persecutions) when he is gone: and the
following verses will clear it to be thus meant of these things, etc. though
this may also be understood, partly of their persecutions, and partly of their
comforts, because he now at parting, added some particulars of their troubles,
which before his presence took from them, as namely their being cast out of the
Synagogue, and that their persecutors should think they did God good service
by ill offices to them; for these, (while Christ was with them) fell all upon
him; so it was needless then to tell them of it: Thus others not unaptly upon
these things. And now J go to him that sent me; by now is understood (shortly
I shall go;) for these words were spoken a little before Christ's passion; so
he speaks, as if that were over; when he says, now (that I have suffered for
you) I go (by the way of that death, of my resurrection and ascension) to him
that sent me; to my heavenly Father; and none of you are inquisitive, or
curiously diligent enough to ask me questions about the place I go to, about
heaven and eternal glory, which is the end of all mine and your pains: see
here, our Savior seems to chide them, that they do not interrogate him
something more particularly about the Court of heaven, and the endless joys
thereof: since he knew this would be of huge concern unto them, and give them
exceeding comfort in their present afflictions: For Saint Thomas had in the
fourteenth Chapter, v. 5. Glanced at some such questions, but not it seems
enough, so here Christ tells them, they do not ask him, (meaning they ask him
not zealously enough) as who should say, we must not huddle over good things
to halfes, for that is, as not done, toward God, and our salvation, which is
not done enough to purchase them unto us.

6. But instead of asking me (what may comfort you yet to hear) you are sad,
for what you have already heard, that I am to leave you.

7. Be sad as you will, I tell you the truth, it is fit I go nay, it is fit
for you, as well as for me; thus some: but others better, who say, be not sad,
since it is truth, that my going, (which you make the cause of your sorrow) is
and shall be the greatest cause of your comfort, for unless J go, the
comforter (the Holy Ghost, who is Consolator optimus, the best comforter) shall
not come unto you; whereas, if I go, I will send him you: and the very truth
was, the Apostles were so carried away with an affection to the humanity of
Christ, that though they did (after his resurrection) believe and love his
Deity, yet it was with too much dotage upon his humanity; an excellent lesson
therefore was his abstracting the presence of his own person from them, that
their loves might be righter set, namely upon his Sacred Spirit, rather then
upon his blessed body: and by this let fondlings leave to doat too much upon
the persons of their Ghostly Fathers, lest they love them better then they
should, rather let them bear a mind of indifferency to the person of the
Priest, and love him more for his spiritual power, then for his humane person,
since we see, Christ weaned the Apostles from their humane affections to his
outward person. Again it was expedient for them that he went, to send them the
Holy Ghost, that so they might see the third person of the blessed Trinity was
perfect God, though not God and man, as Christ was; and this proof was made by
his own comforting them, even more then Christ had done; because without
mixture of creature: Lastly, the real distinction of the three divine persons
was by this mission proved; for mission in God, imports as much as generation
and procession; so the Sons mission (as to us) was the notion of his generation
by his heavenly Father, and the mission of the Holy Ghost was (to us) the
notion of his procession from them both, namely from the Father, and from the
Son: all which, as it was expedient, (indeed necessary) for us to know, so
for these reasons was it necessary for Christ to go; necessary I mean, toward
the accomplished comfort of the Apostles.

8. By the world in this place is understood properly the Jews and unconverted
Gentiles, for these shall be particularly accused by the Holy Ghost; telling
them, while they refuse to become Christians and true believers, they shall
have the guilt of conscience here to gnaw them in pieces, as it were and to
render them divide from themselves, while their reason shall be convinced by
the works of the holy Ghost in good men, that they ought to believe as the
right believers do, and teach, though their obstinate will resists this
reason, and makes them either pertinacious in Judaisme, or peremptory in
heresy and choice of their religions, rather according to their own dictamens,
then to the Doctrine of the Church; assisted in the delivery of truth by the
Holy Ghost, so far that hell Gates shall never prevail against it. Matt. c.
16. v. 18.

9. See here how Judaisme, Infidelity, or Heresy are called sin, by special
title to that ougly name, as who should say, these are the sins of sins,
these are the sins which the Holy Ghost shall fitst and chiefly lay to the
charge of all consciences, into which he comes, while the Text says, he shall
argue them of sin, for nor believing aright in Jesus Christ: which shall be
exteriourly by the Apostles and their successors Preachings and Miracles,
interiourly by the Sanctity of life in good Christians so evidently proved, as
it shall be without all excuse laid to them for a huge sin, not to believe all
that the Church teaches of our Blessed Savior, not to believe indeed what
Saint Peter said; (as we read, Actor. 4. v. 12.) There is no other name under
heaven given unto men, in which we ought to be saved, but that of Jesus
Christ; no sin therefore like that of infidelity, as alone damning without
redemption; for he that believes not shall be condemned. Mar. c. 16. v. 16.

10. Again he shall argue them of Justice, (that is he shall accuse them of
injustice) showing to the Jews, all their ceremonial rites and Laws did not
render them just: nor would all the moral virtues of the Gentiles (that were
infidels) justify them in the sight of God; because none could render them
just there, but Jesus Christ, who for that purpose went to his Father, to tell
him, these only shall thou justify, who believe aright in me, who renounce
the ceremonial Law of the Jews, the humane Law of the Gentiles, and follow
the divine Law that I have left them, who alone have redeemed them, and can
alone save those that keep my Law, that can make them truly just, in the sight
of men and Angels, and of God himself: it is very pretty what Saint Bernard
says of these words, Ser. 12. The Holy Ghost does argue the world of sin,
because it dissembles, of Justice, which it does not rightly order, while it
attributes the same to man, not to God, of Judgment, which it usurpes, while
it judges rashly, not only of it self, but of others too.

11. Lastly, he shall argue the world of Judgment is diversely understood; by
some, that the Holy Ghost shall show the world made a false judgment of Christ
his Miracles, holding them to be witchcrafts, or works of the devil, by
others, that he shall argue men of sloth, to be overcome by the wounded and
conquered devil, for want of diligence to resist him, by others of cousenage,
to put their hopes in the devil, who himself is damned, and can save no man:
by others (and those best of all,) that the Holy Ghost shall argue men of
Judgment, in showing them how justly they deserve damnation, who follow (for
their guides) the damned devil, and all his ways and works: and this when he
shall make the Apostles cast out devils out of the visible Temples, where they
were, as Idols, adored for God; and out of the invisible Temples (the souls of
men) whom they had possessed, both by their foul persons presence, and by the
guilt of enormious sin, cast out by Sacramental grace of holy penance.

12. Christ here alludes to the mysteries of Faith, the conversion of the
Gentiles, the foundation of the Churches, and Government thereof by his Vicar,
by the Bishops and Priests in a Hierarchical way; all which he left to be the
product of the holy Ghost, and things deeper, then for novices to be able at
first to dive into, in whose eyes the carnal and ceremonial Rights of the
Jewish Churches (or Synagogues rather) were too fresh as yet: and their souls
were not sufficiently illuminated to attend to higher matters, and those
altogether spiritual; whence we may gather that even the Apostles had (by the
coming of the holy Ghost) new lights, and did daily increase in the knowledge
of the mysteries of Faith and Religion, according to that of the Proverbs Cap.
4. v. 18. The ways of the just are like light, shining and increasing to high
noon day: whence the Primitive Church is compared to be, quasi aurora
consurgens, like the dawning of the day, Cant. 6.9. and proceeding brighter and
brighter daily, till she come to the brightness of the latter day, when all her
Saints shall enter like so many noon-time Suns into the kingdom of Heaven.

13. When (for the reasons above) he shall come, who is the spirit of Truth, he
shall teach you all Truth, that you are capable off, and that is fit you should
know, to guide your own and others souls to Heaven: For he shall not speak of
himself, but what he shall hear, since it is not what he alone says, but what my
Father and I say too, that he shall tell you; so all he says, shall be as we
all three determine, nor shall he speak (as men do) out of their fancy, no, but
just as I have taught you before, and as my Father and I will have him tell you
hereafter, not as fables, but as undoubted Truths, which are of eternal Verity:
so look how Christ said, [his doctrine was not his own, but his Fathers that
sent him;] in like manner the truth which the holy Ghost shall teach, is not
his own only, but jointly the Fathers and the Sons, from whom he does proceed,
and from whom he was sent: And he shall tell you things to come, by this is
understood the Apostles were to have the Spirit of Prophecy (as Actor. 11. v.
18, 20. v. 19, 21. v. 11. we may read) nor is St. John's Apocalypse other then a
continued Prophecy from one end to the other. Nor was it requisite, Christ his
Apostles should be inferiourly gifted to any of the Ministers of God in the old
Law; and this gave great comfort and encouragement to the Apostles, since
naturally men desire to know future things: by future things also venerable Bede understands things of Heaven, of Grace and of Glory, as who should say,
the Apostles shall not be only able to guide you here, but to set you safe
into a blessed Eternity, and future Kingdom, that shall never end.

14. He shall glorify me, when he shall confirm the world in the belief of my
being the Messiah expected, God and man, the Savior of the World: He shall
receive of mine, for he shall proceed from my Father and me, and receive the
Divine Essence (one and the same in all the three Persons of the Trinity) and
consequently his Will shall be mine, his Science mine, his Doctrine mine: where
note the Text does not say, he shall receive me, but of mine, because he is a
distinct Person from the Son; and though he receive not the filiation by his
procession, he receives the Essence of the Son, so that is to receive of him,
and yet not him, nor to be him: And thus he gave complete content to the
Apostles, seeing they did passionately love him, to tell them the Comforter he
was to send them, should supply his absence by teaching them, as he had done by
loving them as he did, since he received his doctrine from him, and his
affection too.

The Application.
1. THe whole scource of this Gospel is to beget belief in the Apostles, that
our Saviors departure from them was for their good, and that the Primary
effect of the coming of the holy Ghost, was to beat down the sin of Infidelity,
as who should say it were the sin of sins, not to believe in Jesus Christ, and
not to obey all his commands in virtue of that belief.

2. What should then be the Practice of us Christians at this time, but to use
all means possible to fortify our Faith, as the greatest Bulwork against all
sin whatsoever, and indeed what is it else but a kind of Infidelity not to do
according as we are taught by the rules of Faith? that is, not to make all our
actions tend to the sole will and pleasure of Almighty God? since if we did
firmly believe he would not forbid us any pleasure; but as knowing it were
hurtful to us, certainly we should refrain all forbidden things, and embrace
all that were commanded by him.

3. As when our Savior would have a Proof of Saint Peter's love, he bid him
prove it by keeping his commands: so if Christians will make it appear they are
all of one Faith, they must be consequently all of one mind, they must all do
as that one Faith teaches them.

And what that is, no tongue of men or Angels can better express, then is
declared in the Prayer above: let us say it then (beloved) fervently, and
practice it faithfully, so that we be right Believers, true Lovers, and happy
Saints.

On the fifth Sunday after Easter.
The Antiphon, John 16. v. 24. Ask and you shall have, that your joy may be
full; For my Father loves you, because you have loved me, and have believed.
Alleluja.

Verse. Tarry with us, O Lord, Alleluja.

Resp. For night draws on, Alleluja.


The Prayer.
O God, from whom all good things do proceed, grant unto thy humble
supplyants, that we may think on those things which are Right (thou inspiring
us) and (thou governing us) we may put the same in execution.

The Illustration.
WHat a home Prayer is here? that rectifies at once all our Thoughts and
Actions too (at least beggs a rectitude in them all?) and no marvel, for it is
now Rogation week we enter into, asking week, in which the Holy Church appoints
this Prayer: it is that week, when our Savior bid his Apostles (and in them us
too) ask, what they could wish, before he left them, to work out that
salvation, which he is going to secure them of in Heaven, according to their
working. And it is a Petition large enough to all purposes, for if we always
think and do rightly, we cannot fail of being saved; nor will it clog our
Savior in his ascending up to Heaven, that by this Petition all the world tie
themselves fast about him, since we know his own words, When I shall be exalted
from the earth I will draw all things to my self, Joh. 12.32. Again, it is no
marvel, since here we ask of God to inspire us to think on those things which
are good, that we first confess all good things proceed from him; for indeed
from our selves we know, there cannot come any one good thought: as little
marvel it is, that we beg, he will govern us, in putting our good thoughts in
execution, in doing the good, which by his Grace we think to do; for so little
are the good deeds we do our own, that it is both from God we are inspired to
think of doing good, and to put our good thoughts in execution. And yet so good
God is, that he accepts (as our works) what he alone inables us to do. When
will man do this? what master is there that does not look for the profit (and
honor too) of all the pains his servant takes? whereas God gives us not only
the honor of our own labors, but the profit also of his own pains taken in
our behalfs, whilst Heaven is given to man in consideration of the Death of
Christ. But we must see how this Prayer suits with the other parts of this days
service: and first with the Epistle of St. James, truly it is so suitable, that
it exhausts it entirely, while we pray, we may not only think well, but do
well also, as St. James in the first verse of this Epistle bids us, saying, [Be
doers of the word of God, not hearers onely] and the like is of all the other
Counsels given in this Epistle, for as they are the inspirations of the holy
Ghost, so we pray to day, we may be governed in the execution thereof. As for
the Gospel, which is all of asking, truly the Prayer is very pat to it, which
asks no less, then all that can be wished to save a soul, namely, always to
think, always to do well; and surely this Petition is (as the Gospel bids it
should be) in Christ his name, when we ask it, as professing Christ to be the
very God from whom all good proceeds, 1 Cor. 11.12. and when in that profession
(most pleasing to his heavenly Father) we secure our selves of the grant that
we demand, since when the Apostles understood and believed Christ was God, they
rested satisfied, that his recess from them to his heavenly Father was for
their good, and that by sending God the holy Ghost unto them, they should be
well repayed for the absence of God the Son; since God, who is every where,
cannot be absent any where: and thus ends the Feast of Resurrection, when the
last Prayer proper thereunto is a leave taking of Christ risen from his Grave,
and a preparation to his ascending up to Heaven, while we ask before he goes,
all we can want or wish when he is gone.

The Epistle, Iac. 1. v. 22, etc.
22 But be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your selves.

23 For if a man be a hearer of the word, and not a doer: he shall be compared
to a man beholding the countenance of his Nativity in a Glass.

24 For he considered himself, and went his way, and by and by forgot what an
one he was.

25 But he that has looked in the Law of perfect liberty, and has remained
in it, not made aforgetfull bearer, hut a doer of the work: this man shall be
Blessed in his deed.

26 And if any man think himself to be religious, not bridling his tongue,
but seducing his heart: this man's religion is vain.

27 Religion clean and unspotted with God and the Father, is this, to visit
pupils and widows in their tribulation: and to keep himself unspotted from
this world.


The Explication.
22. HE alludes here to the ingrafted word, mentioned in the verse before; and
by doers understands workers, according to the exigence of the said word, as
working sanctity and perfection into your souls; for that is the end of
hearing Gods word, to make it the motive and means of our perfection, since
Christ did not know better then he did do; nor did he teach more then himself
did practice; deceiving your selves, that is, saying Christ has done enough
for us, we need only now to hearken unto him, to believe in him, and be
baptized by him; for it is written, such shall be he saved, yes, if they
perform in deeds what they believe in their souls; but to frequent the
Churches merely to hear Sermons, and not to put in practice the Doctrine
there delivered, that is, to seduce our selves: for our Savior gave nor his
blessing to those only that heard, but to those that hearing kept his holy
word, obeyed his commands, followed the counsel given them by their good
Angels, their ghostly Fathers, or spiritual advisers: These (and only these)
make the hearing of Gods word a blessing to them.

23. By this comparison, Saint James makes the word of God to be as a glass to
a man, showing him the features and deformities of his soul, according as he
is truly in himself, good or bad; for that is the property of a glass, to
represent truly the object which is set before it; and the Apostle in effect
here says, those that run to Churches or to their ghostly Fathers, to hear
only what they say, and do not put in execution their Counsels, are like a man
(note, it is not said a woman too too frequently looking there) seeing his native
(his natural) countenance (not then his painted face) in a gla^s; for what
indeed follows of this mere sight? nothing, but (what is said in the next
Verse) forgetfulness, which cannot tend to perfection; and such an
introspection men make into their souls, by reading or hearing the word of God,
if there they persist, and do not study to perfect themselves thereby; and
truly the Law or Word of God is rightly called a Glass, because it represents
to us that image of perfect creatures, which God would have us to be; it tells
us what reward our Virtues shall have, what punishment our Vices.

24. The reason why a man sooner forgets his own face then another, is,
because he never sees his own but by reflected Species in a Glass, which are
therefore weaker and less vigorous, then if they came directly to his eye as
those of another man's countenance do, both directly, and more frequently seen
by any man, then his own. So no wonder, if a man see and consider himself never
so exactly for a time, that he soon forgets himself, and covets to see himself
again, whereas he much more perfectly remembers the Face and Features of
another person, then his own. Now though it be needless for a man to look much
into a material Glass, which can only show him the outward man, yet it is very
recommendable for him to look into the spiritual Glass of Gods Word, to read or
hear that often, thereby to see what is wanting to that ornament of Grace or
Virtue, which should render him a perfect image of our Savior Jesus Christ:
but besides this often looking on himself, he must be doing and practicing upon
himself, namely, adding this Virtue, taking away that Vice, or else he only
looks and forgets what he see, or what he should make himself to be. Note,
there are three kinds of hearers of Gods word; the lazy, the active the
contemplative; the first hear only, and forget (indeed contemn) the next
hear and obey; the third hear, and dye embracing it with all the powers of
their souls, and never let go their imbracement again; many are the Analogies
between a glass, and the word of God; for first, as in a glass is seen, not a
picture of a thing, but the thing it self by a reflected species, though not
by a direct one; so by the word is seen the will of God, nay, God himself;
(since the word of the mind is seen by the word of the mouth) as in a glass.
Again as flat or plain glasses represent the species equal to the object,
but unequal or round glasses represent them less then they are, and both the
further off, the weaker they represent them; so the word of God plainly,
sincerely, and without any crooked intention hearkened unto, or read,
represents truly the will of God unto us; but if we make this word a unequal
glass. (one swollen up with a bulk of pride or ambition to wrest it to our
crooked senses) then it represents the will of God abridged, shortened or
lessened, not entirely and plainly, as it is in it self: whence preachers
must learn to be sincere and faithful in the exposition of holy writ: Again
as concave or hollow glasses placed against the Sun are apt to cast a heat and
burn whatsoever combustible matter is near them; so the word of God looked on
with an humble eye, a dinted heart, (wherein it makes the hollow of a sweet
impression) sets on fire all the inordinate appetites to sin, burns up all
the stubble of vicious inclinations, and renders a soul burning bright in
flames of love to Almighty God.

25. By this verse it is clear, that the word of God is the glass here alluded
unto; because the Law of perfect liberty is that word of God, the Law and life
of Jesus Christ, whereby we are made children of God, not slaves to empty
ceremonies only, as they under the slavish Law of Moses were, he that has
looked fixedly, not slightly into the glass of perfect liberty, and has
remained in it, not made a forgetful hearer, this man shall be blessed in his
deed, because his deed shall deserve a blessing by being such, as this glass
represents it should be; note by perfect liberty is not here understood liberty
to do what we list, so we believe aright, (as Luther hence pretended) but
first, by liberty is here understood that which freeth us from the servility of
the Mosaical Law, next that which freeth us from the slavery to sin and the
devil, thirdly, that which freeth us from compulsion or fear, but leaves us
free to do well out of pure love to God, not for fear of hell; fourthly that
liberty which by resurrection we shall have from death, when we arise to life
everlasting: further by the close of this verse saying, that man shall be
blessed in his deed, is meant he shall have the blessing here of grace, in the
next world of glory; and that his blessing shall be given to his doing, not to
his contemplating what is to be done.

26. By this place Saint James alludes to what he said in the nineteenth verse
of this Epistle, of being quick to hear, and slow to speak, and not to be
angry, for by the laxity of the tongue the hands are, as it were, tied up from
action, and those men seldom do well, that are always talking or vaunting in
many words the little good they do in deeds, so that one kind of doing the
Law is a religious silence, (for religion imports as much, as a binding up of
the Law) which consists in observing or doing it, not in talking of it: by
the word, bridling our tongues is insinuated, as if the tongue were an unruly
beast, always running away from reason, unless bridled in; thereby; by
seducing his heart, is understood making it err; for a talking man seldom
deceives others, but often himself, since they see the sin of petulance in his
heart, and so regard as little what he says, as himself does what he speaks,
who is never doing well, whilst he speaks too much, (or ill:) and such a man's
religion is truly vain; by religion is here understood either that virtue of
religion, which makes a man render all his actions good toward God and his
neighbor, (and is the first of moral virtues, as charity is the first of divine
ones;) or true Christianity, profession of the true faith: for even that is
vain, if it be not, made avayling by good works annexed thereunto; though
here the Apostle his genuine sense is, that garrulity taints and spoils all
religion whatsoever, and powers a man's heart out in vanity of words, unless he
put the bridle of reason, and modesty upon his lips, to keep his tongue in
order. Religion therefore is diversely taken, either for the worship of God,
and so the first step to it is faith, for He that comes to God must first
believe, Hebr. c. 11. v. 6. Next religion extends it self to the observance of
the Law, and so it adds good works to Faith: Thirdly, it is called the
profession of Faith, as Christianity is the profession of the Law of Christ,
lastly by religion is understood taking vows to such a particular rule of a
religious order, as Saint Benedicts, Saint Francis, Saint Bernards, or the
like: now loquacity is contrary to all these senses; first as daring to speak
idly, rather then to hear the word of God and his worship well inculcated unto
us; next because oftentimes great talkers are violators of the Law of God, by
detraction from others or from their own integrity, speaking sometimes contrary
to their own thoughts, and so truly seducing their own hearts: Thirdly,
because Christians in the primitive Church were noted, by refraining from the
garrulity of the Gentiles: Lastly, because garrulity is diametrically opposite
to religious silence, a perfection much aimed at by all religious orders; so in
these senses, Saint James inveighs against much talking, or loquacity.

27. The Apostle here makes a very fit allusion to the Jewish, impure,
Ceremonial, and the Gentiles sordid and multifarious religion of adoring many
Gods, when speaking of Christian religion, he calls it a clean or pure one, in
respect of the former, that were indeed, the one, vain and unclean, the other
superstitious and injurious: nay, further he seems prophetically to allude
unto the impure and profane religion of the Gnostics, and Carpocratians, who
by their incestuous cohabitations, defiled the name of the pure Christian
Religion (forbidding such abominable commixtures) under the pretext of love and
charity to one another, not much unlike the family of love now extant, and that
such there were in those days Eusebius witnesses, Lib. 4. Cap. 7. And who can
tell, whether the Apostle his foreseeing eye (being the successor of Christ
Jesus in his Episcopal Sea at Jerusalem) did not also allude unto the Heresy
of Luther professing that vows of chasti^y were unlawful, as contrary to the
instinct of nature, that propends to increase and multiply individuals of
mankind or the humane species; which is a mere impure pretext of nature,
against the rule of grace, setting apart some Ministers of God, from the
unclean commixture of creatures, (whose primary end is multiplication) whereas
these of Gods Ministers are unity, and simplicity of adoring one only God, by
the pure and one only true religion, which takes root in one only God, and
his one only Sacred Son Christ Jesus, who consequently could be author but of
one only truth or religion, serving that one only God, whose only Son he
was, and consisting neither in the impurity of the Jewish ceremonial rites or
Law, nor in the multiplicity of the Pagans Sacrifices to their many gods, nor
in the sordid fictions of of lustful Heretics, nor in the Saracen or Turkish
adoration, now of Lucifer, now of Mahomet, for their guide or god, but in the
pure, simple, chaste and divine religion of Christ Jesus radicated in the
works of charity and mercy, in the love of one only God, and of all the
people in the world, whom we are to esteem our neighbors, and them to love, as
we do our selves, being according to their better part (their souls) Images
of God, as well as we our selves: which religion the Apostle contracts into
these few marks, of visiting Orphans, and Widows, and of keeping our
consciences clean from the ordure of this world; or filth of humane
conversation, by conversing altogether with Almighty God, or his holy
Ministers, (set apart from ordinary humane commerce) and these works he calls
clean and pure, because they are not mixed with any corrupt ends of sordid
lucre or gain, since no man can expect preferment or profit from such desolate
creatures as commonly Orphans and Widows are; so that the care of them must
usually proceed from pure charity and mercy: and this the Apostle calls pure
religion, as showing we love man purely for Gods sake, not for our own which
was then more necessary to be inculcated, as being indeed a new distinctive
sign of Acts proceeding from the instinct of God himself, since they were
unheard of before among men, who aimed only at selfe-interest in all their
proceedings, whence many were converted by seeing the mutual charity that was
among Christians, and in them, to all other persons of what profession or
religion soever: so the Apostle here insisteth rather upon the external then
the internal Acts of Religion, the works of mercy to man, rather then those of
direct duty to God; and yet from hence Heretics take occasion to blame
religious vows, and enclosure, as if they were acts of a false religion,
because not extending to take outward care of Orphans and Widows temporal
fortunes, not regarding what follows for the completing our Religion, namely
to keep our selves unspotted from the world, untainted by the contagion
thereof, according to the mark Saint John gives of Saints, Apocal. 14. v. 5.
They are without spot before the throne of God; whence this Apostle seeing it
hard to be without spot in this contaminating world, incites us at least to
endeavor by the purity of our intentions to render our religion pure from all
spot of this bespattering world: and for this reason man's heart is made broad
and open upward, close and narrow downward, to show all the touch we have of
earthly or worldly things, must be but as in a point, (where there is allowed
no latitude) but that our affections to God, and heavenly things, may open
wide, and be large, as we please, or can open our hearts thereunto.

The Application.
1. SAint James in this Epistle makes three divisions of his speech unto us.
The first is to tell us that our Faith must be Operative not Idle; and he
spends the four first verses of this Epistle in showing the futility of Faith
alone without good works; now because the works of Faith, are full of
difficulties, and in regard men usually undertake not hard attempts but for
hope of reward, therefore the Apostle closes his recommends of working Faith,
with the Hope of Beatitude attending it; saying, this man (meaning the working
believer) shall be blessed in his Deed. Nor is this link of Hope fixed now to
our Faith without design of Holy Church, in regard this being Regation week,
wherein we are to ask of our Savior all we can desire at his farewell from us
upon Thursday next when he is to ascend to heaven: the service of this Sunday
(which flames through all the serial days between this and Ascension) must
point us out what we are to be at all that interim, between our Savior
Ascending, and the coming of the Holy Ghost: namely a strong Hope in the coming
of that Holy spirit, and in all the promises made by our Savior of the
Heavenly fruits he should bring with him when he comes. Now since Regation
week imports as much as Ask and Have, and since we never Ask but what we
Hope to obtain, therefore it was necessary to fasten this day the first link
of Hope unto the last link of our Faith, that which tells us how to perfect our
belief, in good and saving works as above.

2. The following verse of this Epistle tells us the first work of our Faith is
Religion, and lest the Lay men should think themselves Masters in point of
Religion, see how presently Saint James prevents that mischief by bridling up
their tongues; as who should say Religion ought to be such as Faith begets, and
Faith being a thing the Laymen must hear, and learn, not teach; consequently
in point of Religion, Lay people must be silent hearers and no Preachers; least
Heresy seducing their hearts, their Religion prove vain; for want of
Rectitude according to the Rule of Faith, so that it is not every believer who
can lay claim to the True Religion, but such only as believing Right, make
profession of the true and right Religion, which is only that of the Catholic
Church.

3. The last verse of this Epistle gives us two summary marks of that which is
the true Religion, and consequently of those that are the right believers. Such
as are charitable to their Neighbor, and unspotted in their own lives, no way
contaminated with the ordure of this sinful world, not that sin makes men
therefore of a false religion, but that Sainctity declares they are of the true
one. O happy Christianity that is accomplished in Sanctity!

See then how the Prayer above keeps a due regard to all these three divisions
of Saint James his Epistle. To Hope linck't unto operative Faith; believing all
the good we pray for comes from God. To Religion (regulated by Faith) when we
beg we may not think erroneously, much less profess an error, but that we
may have God our Sanctifying Governor in our Faith and Religion, who was our
caller thereunto by his Holy Inspiration. The Gospel, John 16. v. 23, etc.
23 And in that day, me shall you not ask any thing. Amen, Amen J say to you,
if you ask the Father any thing in my name, he will give it you.

24 Until now you have not asked any thing in my name. Ask and you shall
receive: that your joy may be full.

25 These things in Proverbs I have spoken to you: the hour comes, when in
Proverbs J will no more speak to you, but plainly of the Father I will show
you.

26 In that day you shall ask in my name: and I say not to you, that I will
ask the Father for you.

27 For the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me, and have
believed that I came forth from God.

28 I came forth from the Father, and came into the world, again I leave the
world, and go to the Father.

29 His Disciples say to him, behold now thou speak plainly, and say no
Proverb.

30 Now we know that thou know all things, and thou need not that any man
ask thee; in this we believe, that thou came forth from God.


The Explication.
23. WHat that day is, may be doubted; for some understand it to be the day of
resurrection or of Pentecost, others the day of glory: those that are of the
former sense take asking here for interrogating by way of doubt, as those did,
that asked him Lord whither go thou? Io. c. 13. v. 35. or of Prayer to him,
as when he said to them, whatever you ask my Father in my name he will give
it you; but those of the latter opinion concerning the day, say it shall then be
needless to ask any thing, when they abound in glory; and in this sense Saint
Augustine understands these words. But in the words following it is clear the
Apostle means Prayer by asking; and brings in Christ comforting his Apostles
against the horror of his departure, by telling them, it shall be no loss to
them, that he leaves them, Since whatsoever they shall ask his Father in his
name shall be given unto them; and elsewhere he says, whatsoever you ask
praying, believe you shall receive it, to show it is not his meaning, they shall
be satisfied to all curious interrogations, but to all supplicatory Prayers;
Saint Augustine will have this reduplicative Amen to import as much as an oath
in our Savior, as if he had not only promised but sworn, they should have
whatsoever they asked his Father in his name: but every word in this verse is
worthy of a special remarke: so that first his promise of this was to the
Apostles persons, to whom he then spoke, as who should say, be ye of good
comfort, for I esteem so deerly of you (above all others) that whatsoever you
ask, shall be given you; though with this primary promise to them may stand a
Secondary promise to all good Christians, that they also asking so, shall
obtain as much. Again the word any thing or whatsoever imports first, that it
must be honorable for God, saving to them, and that it must be something, for
they must not ask nothing in his name, who is all things:) and whatsoever is
not honorable to God, nor conducing to their salvation is as nothing in Gods
sight, who regards not any thing else: then our asking or praying must be first
humbly, next reverently, then confidently, besides ardently, and last of all
constantly, that is with perseverance: And he bids this be done to his Father,
to show us the hope we may have to speed, asking his Father in his name, who
can deny his beloved Son nothing at all, and so for his, (if not for our)
sake, he will grant us all we ask in his Sons name. And here indeed needs
most explanation what is meant by asking the Father in Christ's, name, first,
the power of his sole name, in his Fathers ears, as who should say, what need
you my person longer with you, I leave you my name to supply my presence, take
therefore this name into your mouths, use it reverently upon all good
accasions to my Father, it shall avail you as much, as if I were with you to
intercede for you; next by his name we may understand his merits, his death,
his passion, as if putting them before his Fathers eyes, we need not the
comfort of his presence in our own sight; or we may understand by his name he
means his mediatorship; for, as he is God, he jointly gives with his Father
and the Holy Ghost all that we can receive;) but as he is our Mediator, so he
jointly asks with us, whilst we ask the Father in the name of his mediating
Son; we also may be said to ask in his name while we demand any thing in our
own names, that is as good Christians; for that name we take of Christ; nor do
we ask otherwise then in his name, if we go to our Prayers and tell the
heavenly Father, we come as from his Sacred Son to prefer such a request as
he bid us make; much like the Embassage that is made by the Ambassadors person,
but understood to be the business of the King that sends him: so by this way of
asking we can desire nothing, but what Christ himself does wish we had, and
consequently we ask it very properly in his name, it being answerable to his
will: But the most genuine of all these, is the second way, by that of Christ
his merits, for what we ask thus, is not given to us only by way of grace,
but it is granted by way of Justice, since it was merited unto us by Christ
dying for us, and wishing it unto us: and for this reason we end all our
Prayers with the close through our Lord Jesus Christ: Amen. The last remark we
are to make is upon those words, he shall grant unto you, that is to say, what
e're we ask as above, shall be granted, how comes it then to pass, we ask so
often, and so many things, and go without them for all this asking? the reason
is, that affirmative promises are commonly conditional: so if we ask, without
performing the conditions required, on our part, we cannot wonder that we
fail; and the conditions requisite to Prayer (on our part) must be those five
above enumerated, humility, reverence, confidence, fervor and perseverance,
whereunto if we add resignation, we do but secure our Petition the more by
making Gods will ours, when ours is his; where these are exactly performed, and
the name of Christ rightly used, there we cannot fear to fail: while it is
said he shall give you what ere you thus ask imports as well, he shall give it
a third person, for whom you ask it, as if you did ask it for your self; and
indeed if the defect be not on the third persons part, we shall sooner obtain
what we ask for others, then what we ask for our selves; because it is a
greater charity to pray for others, (and especially for our enemies) then for
our selves, since they may want our help but we can never lose our own reward
by helping them.

24. Because hitherto you have relied wholly upon me, and have not asked any
thing of my Father in my name, and indeed having asked of me ^ather as of man
then of God, you have in a manner asked nothing, because you asked not of him,
who was all things: but when I am gone, ask, as above, and you shall receive
what ere you so do ask; and ask, that your joy may be complete; As who should
say, you will begin to be glad, when I shall be risen, but if you ask my Father
any thing in my name, after I am gone, then you shall receive all things that
you want, and have your joys completed; here by Grace, and in Heaven by Glory,
both which I have purchased for you.

25. This Verse shows, what he spoke now was before his Passion, and so it was
Proverbial, Parabolical, or Enigmatical unto them, but the time would come,
after his resurrection, when he for forty days together would speak plainly,
what now they heard of but obscurely, and that when he was Ascended, the Holy
Ghost should come, and by a purer language (by the tongues of fire) should
speak all Love, all Light, all Clarity, all Truth unto them, and then they
should be capable of much more then now they are: yet there want not, who think
Christ by this place alludes to his displaying of his Fathers Glory in the
kingdom of Heaven, where they shall see all things clearly as they are, even
God himself, and shall therefore become like God, because they shall see him
face to face, as he is.

26. The day he means here, is when he shall be gone from them, and ascended up
to Heaven, and then, says he, I do not tell you, that I will pray to my Father
in your behalf, first, because the holy Ghost shall come, and by his
Inspirations and holy Grace, you shall make your own petitions so effectually
in my name, that I shall need no more to intercede for you; or because I shall
not need ask as I did, when I was upon the Earth, by way of suffering for you,
but by way of exhibition of what I have suffered. Thus one of the Fathers will
have it, that Christ did only pray for us on Earth, and that now in Heaven he
prays no more, but only shows his sacred Wounds to his heavenly Father, though
Cornelius a Lapide here concludes the better opinion is, that really and truly
he does there pray for us (as was explicated Romans 8. v. 34. by the said
Cornelius) but after another manner then here he did, where he both prayed and
suffered too, and there he prays without suffering. So the true Sense of this
place is, that he does not tell them, he will pray for them, though he means to
do it, and actually does it too, as often as desired, but that, if he did not
pray, they should not need his prayer, both because he had sufficiently
purchased to them the love of his heavenly Father for his voluntary vouchsafing
toward them, and because the holy Gbost was to finish the remainder of our
salvation by his Supplies and Magazines of Holy Graces; and in truth what
Christ once obtained for us by his Passion, we (losing the benefit of it by our
sin) are to attribute the recovery thereof to the special act of the holy
Ghost, not coming once only down (as to the Apostles to confirm them in grace)
but millions of times descending upon us, by the influence of his holy Gifts,
and so as often saving us (by the recovery of grace) as we make our selves
guilty of damnation, by relapse of sin.

27 See how this Verse in terms tells them, his Father needs not now be prayed
unto by him for them, since he has already purchased unto them abundantly his
Fathers love, and so made him soft to all they can desire by their own prayer;
and the reason why he so loves them, is, because they loved Jesus Christ, and
believed he was his heavenly Fathers Son, and come out from him to them; but if
any ask, why God loving us? (as here it is said, he does) for his Sons sake?
does not give us all we want without our asking? but requires our humble and
frequent Prayer. The Reasons are many; first, because it is suitable to the
Majesty of God, that all his Creatures do adore him, (and Prayer is the best
kind of adoration) next because it acknowledges our total and necessary
dependence on him, and our Indigence and his Liberality; Thirdly, the Dignity
of the things we ask, requires (on our parts) a frequent expression of our
esteem thereof, namely, Grace and Glory, not so cheap as to be given gratis,
however purchased once by Christ for us, but we losing our right to them by
sin, cannot too often petition for their recovery: Lastly, because by Prayer we
exercise the noblest Acts of Virtue, Faith, Hope, and Charity; the first
believing God can do all things, the next, hoping he will do all we can desire;
the last loving him as a Father, of whom we ask all supplies both for our
selves and others, as to his own adopted sons.

28. Here our Savior alludes not only to his temporal generation, by his
heavenly Fathers commanding him into the Womb of the Blessed Virgin Mary, but
to his eternal Generation also, whereby he was from the beginning, begotten,
coeternal, and coequal God to his heavenly Father; so that as his coming into
this world was his going (as we may say) out of his Fathers bosom to seek lost
man, in the Wilderness of our Earth; in like manner his leaving this world, was
his return with man found (in his sacred Person) into the same paternal bosom
which he came out of.

29. This argues he had answered now home to all their doubts and
interrogatories, by telling them he was the Son of God who came from him to
them, and was to return from them to him again; this was clear, naked and
simple Truth, no Proverb, no Riddle, no Parable at all unto them.

30. Now that thou have by this Answer told us clearly what thy meaning was, by
a while we should see thee, and again a while after and we should not see thee
again: and this not as asked by us, but as only revolved in our thoughts,
whereunto thou have now answered completely, and while thou do answer to the
thought, thou do convince us thou art from God, and come out from him,
since he only can come into, and search all the corners of our hearts, where
thou have been, and found, we would, but durst not, at first ask thee, what thy
meaning was by that Riddle, of a while you shall, and after a while you shall
not see me, because I go to my Father; in this therefore we believe thou art
God, that thou need not be asked, to tell us what we think, what we wish or
would have, since without asking, thou can tell us all, and give us more then
we can receive; this alone (were there no other) would suffice for argument
sufficient to prove thou come so from God, as thou art also God thy self.

The Application.
1. NO marvel this Gospel insists so much upon ordering the Apostles whom to
pray unto, and how to pray, since it is pointed out for Rogation, that is to
say, for Praying week, and since it is also appointed for concluding the
Doctrine of Faith in the Resurrection and Deity of Jesus Christ, by beginning
the practice of our Hope, which is best exercised in our Prayer. For however
all the forty days between the Resurrection and Ascension were dedicated by our
Savior to settle the Apostles (and others) in a right belief of Christian
Doctrine, yet we never till now did hear the Apostles declare the work was
done, and that they were satisfied and settled in their Faith of Christ his
being truly the Son of God, which yet they now profess in plain terms, saying,
Now thou speak plainly, this we believe that thou came forth from God, and
art his eternal Son that did become man, were born, have suffered, and dyed for
our sins, art risen from the dead, art to ascend too unto thy heavenly Father,
and art thence to send us the holy Ghost to be our continual Comforter,
Teacher, and Governor.

2. Say then beloved since the work of Faith is finished by their own
confession who were so hard of belief, what remain, but that we proceed to the
next thing required of a Christian, which is to Hope for the promises made by
Jesus Christ in whom we have so much reason now fitmly to believe? and since
Hope (as was said above) is best exercised by Prayer, let us now make it our
whole employment from this day forward until the coming of the holy Ghost to
pray in such sort as by our best Master we are here directed, that is to say,
to pray in his Name: and how we shall do that, the Expositors above have told
us excellently well, and that at large, so it is but looking back to know it.

3. To conclude, since all our Prayer must be accompanied with Faith, as Saint
James has taught us, Cap. 1. saying, If any man want (for example) wisdom (and
the like is of all other exigences) let him ask it of God; but let him ask in
Faith, not any ways faultering, since I say this Gospel mentions Faith with
Prayer.

See now beloved whether the Church to day do not most properly beg this Faith
concomitant to her Hope (or Prayer) when calling upon God as the Fountain
whence all good proceeds, she prays as above, That first her understanding may
be rectified, (which is the work of Faith, residing there) and that next her
Will may be ready to do what Faith and Reason dictate to be done, and this by
the gift of Hope infused for perfection of the Will, by captivating it to
Reason, elevated by the gift of Faith as our Christian Doctrine tells us. On
Sunday within the Octaves of Ascension.
The Antiphon, Joh. 16. v. 4. I Have spoken these things unto you, that when
the hour shall come, you may remember them, for that I spoke them unto you.
Alleluja.

Verse. Our Lord in Heaven. Alleluja.

Resp. Has prepared his Seat. Alleluja.


The Prayer.
OMnipotent Eternal God, grant us ever to have our wills devoted, and our
hearts sincerely bent unto the service of thy Divine Majesty.

The Illustration.
NO marvel, if the river of the Resurrection end in the speer of a Fountain
rising upward through the Conduite pipe of our Blessed Lords Ascension, and
follow him to Heavens gates; since we see, waters how low soever they fall,
will mount again as high, as their first Fountain is; thus Jesus being the
Head-spring of all Devotion, carries our lumpish souls along with him, as high
as Heaven, now he is seated there; Hence Holy Church to day requires, that
though our Savior has left us, we do not yet leave him, but follow him, how
high soever he goes; and how follow him? with a forcible speer of Piety, such
as may show, his will and ours are one, whilst our hearts are sincerely bent
unto his service, even as the Blessed Spirits are that sing perpetual Hymns of
Praise to his heavenly Majesty; and lest we fail of doing this, see how to day
we pray that we may do it, beseeching God to grant, our wills may be devoted,
and our hea^ts sincerely bent to the service of his Divine Majesty. O! could we
but reflect upon the Obligations we have indeed to serve him with sincere
hearts, we should never swerve from doing this, under a thousand fond
presumptions of our serving God, whilst yet we seek nothing but our own wills,
and not his service; nor is there any heart so hidden from others, that lies
not open to the owner of it, who can justly accuse himself of often making his
seeming good actions, causes of his own damnation, whilst he even persecutes
Almighty God under a pretext of serving him: O sincerity of heart! where art
thou? far from the lip that beggs it Matthew. 14. v. 8. (as now all Christians
ought, with the mother Church to do) And in this case it fares with us, as it
did with those of whom we read, Esaias. 25.13. This people honors me with their
lips, while their heart is far off from me; But could we by this hearty Prayer
so convert our hearts to God as to obtain these two Virtues only, Devotion in
our Wills, and Sincerity in our Hearts, we should need no other Ceremony to
Saint us, what ere were requisite besides to Canonize us; nor is this Prayer
less proper to the service of the day, then to the mystery of our Lords
Ascension; though I confess the root of their connexions lies too deep for
every one to find it out at first, but while Saint Peter bids us in his
Epistle, [above all things love one another] he sweetly tells us the non-
sincerity of our hearts is rooted there, and that we cannot sincerely love God
(whom we do not see) unless we do sincerely love each other, with whom we daily
do converse. Again he tells us, [ Charity covers a multitude of sins, 1 Pet. 1.
v. 22.] as who should say, whilst we pray for sincerity of heart, we pray for
charity, and having that Virtue, we not only cover all our Vices, but rise up
with it as high as Heaven, and then [we speak, as if we spoke the words of
God,] then [we honor and serve God in all thing^] (with perfect devotion of
our wills and sincerity of our hearts) when we serve each other with such
subjection, as if in every Christian, we had Christ to serve, and this (which
is a more near serving him) even at the gates of Heaven; where now he is, and
where we must always attend him, for our happy entrance, so soon as our will^
are truly devoted, and our hearts sincerely bent unto his service; which then
the Gospel of this day tells us, they will be, when taking them off from all
terrene contents we set them upon an expectation of higher comforts, of
heavenly consolations, from the Paraclete (the Holy Ghost) who is coming down
upon us, to give us all content indeed, to testify the truth of all our
Saviors Doctrine, and to give us grace, not only to bear patiently all
severest persecutions, but even to take content to dye for Jesus Christ, who
pleased to dye for us; and not to be scandailzed when the wicked persecute the
just under pretense of serving God therein, since our Savior did Apologize for
them saying, They knew not what they did, when they butchered him upon the
Altar of the Cross: and since he further tells us by St. John to day, the
wicked will do the same to us, we must (remembering what he said) seek to
conform our will to his, and to serve him by our patient suffering greatest
persecutions with all sincerity of heart; which that we may perform we pray to
day, as above, suitably to what our Pastors preach; and can we (by so praying)
do so too, then are we risen high as heaven-gates, with Jesus Christ.

The Epistle on Sunday within the Octaves of the Ascension, 1 Pet. 4. v. 7, etc.
7 And the end of all things shall approach. Be wise therefore: and watch in
Prayers.

8 But before all things, having mutual charity continual among your selves:
because charity covers the multitude of sins.

9 Using hospitality one toward another without murmuring.

10 Every one as he has received grace, ministering the same one toward
another: as good dispensers of the manifold grace of God.

11 If any man speak, as the words of God; if any man minister: as of the
power, which God admistreth. That in all thingt God may be honored by Jesus
Christ.


The Explication.
7 THe end of all shall come. This does not report to judgment, but rather to
the end of all those unlawful pleasures, which the Apostle found the Gentiles
prone unto, as believing that after death, there was no more remaining, to be
said or done, and consequently since they must have a total end by death both
of body and soul, they were resolved here to indulge unto themselves all they
could, and not to lose any pleasure they were able to purchase, while they
lived: To these he says the end of all shall come, meaning, of all you can
here delight in, and yet you will find, there is not an end of your being, by
your death; but as your actions while you live, are liable to the judgment and
scanning of men; so shall your souls, when your bodies are dead, be liable to
another manner of judgment; so he bids them be wise and take only lawful
pleasures, for they shall be called to an account of their unlawful ones, when
they least think of it; who dyed in that heresy of Gentilisme, believing the
soul to be mortal as the body was. But indeed the end which the Apostle here
means is most properly that which is now actually come, namely the last age of
the world, which is that of Christ and Christians, as who should say, the world
has stood now six ages complete, and is entered into the seventh, which is the
last: The first age was from Adam to Noe, and his flood. The second from Noe to
Abraham, the third from Abraham to Moses, the fourth from Moses to David, the
fifth from David to the captivity of Babylon, the sixth from that captivity to
Christ's coming, the seventh and last from Christ to the latter day of
judgment; whence Saint John 1. Epist. C. 1. v. 15. Says, Beloved, this is the
last hour; and Saint Paul 1. ad Cor. 10. v. 11. These things are written for
our correction in whom the worlds ends are found; meaning six ages of the world
are past in us, and now the seventh age flows away apace. Be therefore says
Saint Peter (alluding to this sense) wise, or, prudent, and so live every one
of you now, as if you were to close the actions of all the ages gone before
you, and to carry away a blessed Crown of glory with you, if you make your
selves secure of your happy end, by leading a holy life so long as here you
live; For in every one of you the whole world has an end, since this is the
last age of it; and since it is the end that Crowns the work, he bids us be
wise, and watching pray, that our end may be here holy to make our happiness
endless in the life to come which is to have no end; and here the Apostle
mindful of his own error bids us take heed we fall not into the same, who
remembers he fell asleep, when Jesus prayed in the garden; and to that sleeping
he imputes his revolting from his Master in his passion; so lest we by
surprising sloth; or by sleeping in Prayer be overtaken in our other actions,
he puts a watchfulness before our eyes, especially in Prayer; as the best
remedy to help us to stand upon a close guard in all our other actions; and
indeed the life of man, (especially of Christians) ought to be a perpetual
watchfulness; because our adversary the devil is always going the round, about
the walls of this world, like a ravenous Lion, [to seek whom he may devour]
asleep, 1 Pet. c. 5. v 8, or (which is all one) not standing the sentinel of a
watchful guard against him, which guard is then best when, we are found upon
it, Praying; nor is there indeed any armor more of proof against all
temptations, then a watchful Prayer.

8. Yet to show the divine virtues transcend the moral ones, Saint Peter in
this verse says, but above all, conserve among your selves mutual charity, by
which it is evident the Apostle here speaks of charity as it imports a love to
our neighbor, which then is in the height, when we are content to dye, to do
him good: Saint Bernard explicates this well in saying, we are all Cosins,
allied in blood, (meaning the blood of Christ our Father) equally shed for all
of us, that are his children and allies; and it seems Saint Paul ad Coloss. 3.
v 14. Concurres with Saint Peter in this Doctrine, even in the same terms in a
manner, saying, but above all things, I have recommended, be sure to have
charity, which is the chain or band of perfection; which our Savior sets out
in life-colours, saying, love one another, as I have loved you; and to
encourage us the more to this mutual charity the Apostle tells us, it covers
the multitude of sins, meaning all our sins whatsoever; for as Christ was said
to dye for many (importing all) and as many shall rise in the day of Judgment,
(intending all that then rise,) so by the multitude of sins is here meant all
sin whatsoever, since an act of perfect charity taking away affection to any
one sin, does even by that means blot all sin out of the soul: yet some will
have no charity able to this effect, but only the charity of God, which not
only covers, but takes away all sin, from those souls, whom he has
predestined to salvation; others contend it is the charity of Christ which
covers in his fight the sins of his elected Servants, by applying his passion
to them, and his holy grace, so efficaciously, as they shall (by this means)
cease to sin, but certainly neither of these senses can be that of the
Apostle, in this place, who expresses himself to mean mutual charity, and
that is properly between man and man, declared in Acts of mercy and goodness
toward one another: and this charity does not only cover the proper sins of
them that love their neighbor, but even the common sins of all their neighbors,
whom they love: our own, as we cannot love man for Gods sake, but we must love
God much more, and who ever loves God truly, not only covers, but flies and
hates all sin: our neighbors, because as hatred detects, so charity hides the
sins of our neighbors, as we read, Hatred stirs up strifes, but charity
covers all sins; Proverb. 10.12. it only remains to tell how many ways
sin is hidden by charity; first by being quite blotted out, as Saint Mary
Magdalenes were, to whom, much, (all) were forgiven, because she loved much,
Luke c. 7. v. 47. Next by palliating, when we out of charity excuse and make
the best of men's actions. Thirdly, when we do not only excuse them, but
actually bind them up, as Surgeons do soars to cure them, so we do, when
besides the excuse we make for our neighbors sins, we further oblige them by
doing good unto them, for the ill they have done to us: and this is an
efficacious way indeed to cure their soars of sin, as well as to cover them,
and by binding them to us, we do, as it were, our selves take upon us their
sins, and so God looking on our good, sees not their bad, whom we have rendered
grateful to him for our sakes, as Christ did render us all grateful to his
heavenly Father, when he took our sins upon him, and thus covered us from his
wrath and fury: Lastly, then we perfectly cover our neighbors sin, when we
do not only heal the wound thereof, but heal it so close, so perfectly,
that no scar remains, no memory is in us of the wrong he did us, nor is
suffered, (if we can help it) to be in any other, of like wrongs done to them.

9. By being hospitable without murmuring he means we should be so loving to
all, as we do not murmur that we are oppressed with the number of the needy,
or poor that want our help: and the Apostle here reflects particularly on the
niggardly minds of the Inhabitants of Pontus, who were extreme narrow in
their alms, and would extend the little they gave to very few, whereas he
would have charity large, and extended to all.

10. This verse shows how large our charity should be, when we are bid to give
alms, or do good to others, according to the proportion of grace that we
receive from God; and by grace is here understood, not that which justifies the
single man to God, but that which is gratis given to us, and so must be gratis
communicated to others good, and profit, not to our own end, for it is avarice
so to give, as we aim at receiving more from others, then we part with from
our selves: and the very words of the Text are against self ends, while they
bid us administer to one another, which is quite opposite to taking for our
selves: again as Gods graces to us are manifold, so must our administration of
them to others be, else we cannot give as we receive, which yet was the first
rule of this verse, telling us how to give.

11. Here the Apostle sums up all the kinds of charity under two, the one in
words, the other in deeds, or the one preaching, teaching, exhorting, the other
giving alms, visiting the sick, or doing all other works of mercy corporal;
and here we see the rule that preachers are tied unto, of speaking not their
own but the word of God, or what the holy Ghost shall dictate, not what humane
fancy shall suggest; and we see in the primitive Church the Holy Ghost inspired
some to exhort, others to sing hymns of praise, others to prophecy, and each
one this to do, with humility and meekness, not with pride and ostentation,
with zeal and fervor, not tepidly or dully, according to that of David, Thy
word, O Lord, is very hot even as fire: and what (by office) the preacher is to
do, (out of charity) the people are to imitate, and as they hear nothing
from, the Priest, but what belongs to God; so all their conversation should be
of God and of heavenly things, thereby to inflame one another to acts of Love
and praise of God. The rule of Ministry, we see, must be the same with that of
preaching; if we give, it must be as from God, not from our selves, because by
giving we intend to do good to others, and since all goodness comes from God,
we must be sure, to give rather in his, then in our own, or any other name: for
all gifts are originally from God the author of them all, and if we have any
thing to give, it is not our own, but is lent us purposely to share part
thereof to others, be it a gift of nature or of grace: That in all things,
(which we say or do) God may be honored and glorified, not we our selves
magnified, and how honored? by Jesus Christ. who first taught us this
perfection of referring all we say or do to Gods honor and glory; for before
Christ came, all was vanity and pride; nothing was done, but for humane ends,
for self respects or the like; whereas Christianity teaches a quite contrary
Doctrine, to refer all to God, and to arrogate nothing at all unto our
selves; Hence observe how besides Faith, good works are necessary to salvation,
which yet the Libertines and Sectaries will not allow of.

The Application.
1. LAst Sunday we were taught it was the proper duty of a Christian to
exercise continual Acts of Hope between the Ascension and the coming of the
Holy Ghost See consequently now, how the very first words of this days Epistle
set us upon the two prime Acts of Hope, Prudence, and watchful Prayer. The
first to show we are not to be foolishly beaten off our Principles of Faith
teaching us by practical Prudence to work out our salvation, in Hope we shall
not labor it in vain. The second to declare that Prayer without watchfulness
is of small or no account at all; since therefore, our senses ought to be shut
up in time of Prayer that the foul (free from distraction of all sense) may be
like to her self in the state of separation from the body, still fixed upon
Almighty God, as the blessed spirits of Saints and Angels are in Heaven.

2. Nor is it without some Reason, the method of this Book allows but ten
days only for the special inculcation and exercise of Hope. First because
Hope still goes on hand in hand with Faith and Charity and cannot fail if those
two be continued, since it is impossible firmly to believe in God, and
ardently to love him, without a constant Hope of enjoying him. And secondly,
because it seems mystically done of Holy Church to shorten the time of Hope,
thereby to make us see, God cannot be long from those that long to be with him,
and are in constant expectation of his coming; for we see that after only ten
days watchful Prayer (or exercise of Hope) our Savior sent the Holy Ghost to
his Apostles; not that he had promised it so soon, but that he could not find
in his heart to defer it any longer. And beloved if after the longest day of
Time we enjoy a blissfull eternity, how speedy a reward shall we esteem it to
be of our Hope and expectation? in regard the abundance of the gain will
recompense the longest delay thereof; much after that sort, as our Saviors
first coming did recompense the four thousand years expectation of his Birth
and Death for the Redemption of the World: when we here the Prophet Habacuc c.
2. v. 3. say in his name, I will come and I will not stay; nay though I delay
my coming, yet I will not tarry. Why? because when I come, I will reward beyond
all expectation.

3. Lastly we must not omit to mark that so soon as ere we Hope in God, we
ought to fasten Acts of Love unto that Hope, for so the second Verse of this
Epistle teaches us; hanging many links of Charity to that only one of Hope
presented to us here, as we may see whilst the whole Epistle (all but the
first Verse thereof which is of Hope) runs upon nothing else but ranking
Charity into her several Acts, that so the Holy Ghost (now every hour expected)
may find he comes where he is as well beloved, as hoped for: nor can we indeed
expect that he will enter into souls who love him not, who have not their Wills
devoted to him, who have not their hearts sincerely set upon his Service,
according to the Rule of Christian Doctrine. And for this purpose Holy Church
as having our Reasons now illuminated and regulated by faith

Prays, as above that our Wills (by the gift of Hope) may be devoted, and our
hearts (by Charity) sincerely bent unto the service of his heavenly Majesty,
Hope and Charity residing in the Will, as Faith does in the understanding. The
Gospel, John 15. v. 26, 27. and Cap. 16. v. 1. etc.
26 But when the Paraclete comes, whom I will send you from the Father, the
Spirit of Truth, which proceeds from the Father, he shall give Testimony of
me.

27 And you shall give Testimony, because you are with me from the beginning.

Chap. 16.1. These things have I spoken to you, that you be not scandalized.

2 Out of the Synagogues they will cast you: but the hour comes, that every
one which kills you, shall think, that he does service to God.

3 And these things they will do to you: because they have not known the
Father, nor me.

4 But these things I have spoken to you: that when the hour shall come, you
may remember them, that I told you.

The Explication.
26. NOte here though the Greek Heretics take hold from hence, to say the Holy
Ghost does not proceed from the Son, but only from the Father, because Christ
says the latter in express terms; yet the very truth is, that procession and
mission in the Divine Persons import all one thing, and therefore the Father is
never said to be sent at all, wherefore Christ saying he will send the Holy
Ghost, it argues his procession is equally from both, as his mission was. The
Paraclete is as much as to say the Comforter, whose coming is both to comfort
all Christians, and to give testimony to all the world of that Doctrine which
Christ had preached; he is called the Spirit of Truth, First, because he
proceeds from the Son, who is called the wisdom of his heavenly Father, as
also the Way, the Truth, and the Life; Secondly, because his coming made
manifest the Truth of Christ his Doctrine, of his being the Messiah, the Son of
God, the Savior of the World; Thirdly, because he is the truest and most
excellent Spirit, in respect of whom the Angels, the Souls of men, and the
Winds, are but Analogical Spirits, as being such only by participation,
whereas the holy Ghost is so by Essence; Fourthly, because for this third
Reason, he is worthy of all Faith and Credit; Fifthly, because he gives
Testimony of the New Testament, which was brought us by a Spirit of Liberty and
Truth, whereas the Old was brought by a Spirit of Servitude and Fear, being
only a shadow of that Truth, which was to come after it; Lastly, and most
properly, because he is the Author of all Truth, whence Christ said of him,
Cap. 16. he shall teacb you all truth.

27. See the infinite Dignity of the Apostolate, and of their Successors, the
Prelates of Gods Church, that they are joined in testimony of Christ his Deity,
and of all the other mysteries of Faith, even with the holy Ghost himself; and
yet the Heretics so undervalue Church Authority, as if it were only Humane
and Fallible, whereas indeed it is Divine, because supported by Divine Power,
promising it should be Infallible; and it is as little derogatory to God his
veracity, to say that failing man (supported by God) cannot err, as it is to
say, God cannot err in that he undertaketh, so the Infallibility is radicated
in God, however (by his gracious vouchsafing) it is also attributed to man, as
exercising the ministry of God, not otherwise.

C. 16. 1. Many take scandal here in diverse Senses, but the best and genuine
is, that they be not offended at their persecutors, when they shall find them
to oppose Gods holy Ordinances, and Ministers; and that for this reason, they
do not slacken in their Faith or Zeal, as expecting God should (being Good and
Goodness it self) defend them from evil, while (for his sake and for his Name)
they were doing well, and executing his commands; but should rather remember,
he had foretold them these things would happen, and that if his heavenly Father
permitted him (who was actually God) to be in his own sacred Person abused and
persecuted to Death, they should not (being but men) expect to have more regard
showed them by Gods enemies, then was showed to God himself; but should rather
conclude, he suffered for them, to give them example to suffer for him, and for
their own and others sins besides.

2. The Synagogue imports either the Congregation of the Jewish people, or the
place wherein they were to observe their ceremonial Rites in serving God; as
now the word Church signifies the believers in Christ, and the place where
Christians assemble to attend the Divine Service so by being cast out of the
Synagogue, imports excommunicated, as cast out of the Place or Society of men
serving God; for so odious were the Apostles to the Jews upon the account of
Christ Jesus their Master, that they were not esteemed worthy of the name or
company of Gods people: and Christ comforts them against this disgrace, by
making them the Heads of hi^ Church, who were not held worthy to be members of
the Jewish Synagogue: Further he tells them they shall have the honor to be
(as he was) offered up a Sacrifice for the sins of the people by the Jews, who
are so obstinately blind, as to esteem, they offer sacrifice to God for their
own sins, while they persecute the servants of Christ Jesus the Son of God; nor
does our Savior here only foretell the personal persecution of the Apostles,
but that also of all Christians, which was to continue till the worlds end: and
the causes of this persecution are many, The first, the Devils and his
Ministers malice, to see Saints prefer Gods Service before the respect even to
the proud Princes amongst men; the second, the destruction of Idols, by the
erecting a worship to one only God; The third, because it was presumed as
false as it was new, to preach a crucified man to be eternal God; The fourth,
because Christians do not only beat down the false Religions of the Jews and
Gentiles, but even reprehend the manners and proceedings of those, who profess
such false worship of God, as the Jews and Gentiles did exhibit; The last,
because the Devil and his adherents persuaded the world, that all the miseries
of Famine, Plague, War and Death which befell mankind, were just punishments
of God inflicted on them, for letting Christian Religion be professed; and
this, says he, they will do to you, because

3. They neither know my Father nor me, that is, they will not know either of
us; for this is not an excusing, but an accusing phrase of Christ: so this
ignorance was not alleged as extenuating, but as aggravating their fault: and
our Savior animates the Apostles to suffer these temporal Scorns with as much
neglect, as a Prince would do, who coming singly to Town without any visible
attendance or retinue after him, should be refused entrance and kept out as a
private person; for instead of being angry, he would comfort himself, with the
redouble honor it would be to him, to have these people let him in with their
excuses and apologies for the affront, as soon as his train appeared to
testify what he was; and such a Train of holy Saints every Christian ought to
believe will follow him, to make the world (with shame) cry him mercy, for
affronting him, whom God himself esteems and loves.

4. The reason why I tell you (or foretell you rather) these things, is not to
disanimate, but to hearten you to suffer them with alacrity, because I shall,
as surely, help you out of these briars, as I have told you, that you should
fall into them for my sake: and if you remember, I foretold you this, you shall
need no other comfort in your afflictions, for you know sufficiently who I am,
your Jesus, your God, and when I tell you, I shall give you the honor of
suffering for me, be confident, I shall not fail to attend you with a Crown of
Glory for your Martyrdoms.

The Application.
1. THe two first Verses of this Gospel run wholly upon the Hope our Savior
put his Apostles in for the coming of the holy Ghost: and so do fitly now
exhort us to the practice of that Virtue, according as we have been taught we
must, between Ascension and Whitsuntide. And what more comfortable exercise can
we desire, then to expect the holy Ghost to come, and take possession of our
hearts on Earth, while Jesus is gone to take possession of our Mansion House in
Heaven. A happy and a hopeful parting from our Ascending Savior, when we are
left in expectation of our Descending Saintifier.

2. In the three next Verses our Blessed Lord ties the strongest link of
Charity (that of dying for the Faith) to this above of Hope: so is the Gospel
suitable to the Epistle of the day. Just in this sort he welcomed St. Paul to
his conversion, promising to show him what he was to suffer for his holy Name.
O admirable spirit of Almighty God! making that to his Saints a ground of Hope,
which were to sinners the greatest Motive of despair! How comes this to pass?
but only as the Royal Prophet says, Because thou (eternal God) have
singularly placed me in Hope, that is to say, have made thy servants contemn
this tempting world, and life it self, the sweetest thing on earth, in
expectation of an everlasting life, or (to use thy words divine) merely for the
Hope of Israel.

3. The last Verse of the Gospel is Preparative to the Apostles both to Love
and Hope, That as he died for love to them, so they should be content to dye
for love of him, and for the Hope of Heaven: Especially when they remember, he
that foretold their Sorrows, told them of the Joys they should beget; such as
no man should deprive them of, such as no time should ever waste. O how apt an
exercise is it for Christians now to Hope and Love?

Which that they may do; they are fitly taught to pray present as above. FINIS.
THE END Of the Second PART.
On the first Sunday in Lent.
The Prayer.
O God, who do purify thy Church with an annual observation of Lent, grant
unto thy family that what it endeavors to obtain of thee by fasting, it may
finish the same by good works.

The Secret.
WE solemnly immolate the sacrifice of our Lenten beginnings beseeching thee O
Lord, that together with the restraint of our fleshly feastings, we may temper
also our harmefull pleasures.

The Post-Communion.
MAy O Lord the holy tasting of thy Sacrament restore us, and purged of the old
creature, make us pass into the fellowship of this saving mystery.

On the second Sunday in Lent.
The Prayer.
O God who do behold us void of all strength, guard us we beseech thee
exteriourly and interiourly, that we may be defended from all corporal
Adversity, and purified from the evil contagions of our souls.

The Secret.
APpeased we beseech thee, O Lord, to intend unto these present sacrifices,
that they may both further our Devotion and our Salvation too.

The Post-Communion.
WE humbly beseech thee Almighty God that whom thou have refreshed with thy
Sacraments, those thou will gracious grant to serve thee with their good
behaviors.

On the third Sunday of Lent.
The Prayer.
WE beseech thee Almighty God look down on the desires of thy humble people,
and extend the right hand of thy Majesty in our defense.

The Secret.
MAy this Host, O Lord, cleanse we beseech thee our offenses, and sanctify
the Bodies and Souls of thy Subjects, for the offering this Sacrifice unto thee.

The Post-Communion.
WE pray thee, O Lord, mercifully to absolve us from all our guilts and
dangers, since thou have made us partakers of so great a Mystery.

On the fourth Sunday of Lent.
The Prayer.
GRant we beseech thee Almighty God, that we who through the merit of our own
actions are afflicted by the Consolation of thy Grace may be comforted.

The Secret.
WE beseech thee, O Lord, vouchsafe (appeased) to be intent unto our present
Sacrifices, to the end they may advance both our Devotion and our Salvation too.

The Post-Communion.
GRant unto us we beseech thee, O merciful God that we may Celebrate with
sincere Duty and always with faithful Souls receive thy Sacraments wherewith we
are incessantly replenished.

On Passion Sunday.
The Prayer.
WE beseech thee Almighty God, propitiously behold thy Family, that thou
giving we may be governed in Body, and thou reserving we may be preserved in
Soul.

The Secret.
WE beseech thee O Lord that these thy Gifts may unloose the fetters of our
Iniquity, and restore us to the Gifts of thy mercy.

The Post-Communion.
O Lord our God be present with us, and whom thou have recreated with thy
Mysteries, defend with thy perpetual Supplies.

On Palm Sunday.
The Prayer.
OMnipotent everlasting God, who have caused our Savior to take humane Flesh
upon him, and be crucified, for mankind to imitate the example of his
Humility, grant propitiously that we may deserve to have both the instructions
of his Patience, and the fellowship of his Resurrection.

The Secret.
GRant we beseech thee, O Lord, that the offering we have made in the eyes of
thy Majesty, may obtain us the favor of Devotion, and acquire unto us the
effect of a blessed Eternity.

The Post-Communion.
BY the operation, O Lord, of this Mystery may our sins be purged away, and our
just desires be accomplished.

On Easter day.
The Prayer.
O God who this day by thy only begotten Son, have opened unto us the door
of eternity by the destruction of death; prosecute, we beseech thee, in us
these good desires, which thou preventing have afforded us.

The Secret.
REceive we beseech thee O Lord the Prayers of thy people, with the oblations
of their Hosts, that the entrance into these Paschall mysteries (by thy
contrivance) may avail us for a help to our eternity.

The Post-Communion.
Pour into us O Lord the Spirit of thy love that whom thou have filled with
Paschall Sacraments, thou may make them by thy Piety unanimous.

On Low Sunday.
The Prayer.
GRant, we beseech thee Almighty God, that we who have accomplished the
Paschall Feasts, may retain the same in our manners and lives, by thy bounty
inabling us so to do.

The Secret.
ACcept we beseech thee O Lord the offerings of thy exulting Church, and to
whom thou have given cause of so great joy, grant the fruit of perpetual mirth.

The Post-Communion.
WE beseech thee O Lord God that these sacred mysteries which for the security
of our reparation thou have bestowed upon us, may be made both a present and a
future help unto us.

On the second Sunday after Easter.
The Prayer.
O God who by the humble abasement of thine own Son, have raised up the
prostrate world, grant, we beseech thee, unto thy faithful people perpetual
joy, that they whom thou have taken out of the danger of eternal death, may
enjoy perpetual felicity.

The Secret.
MAy this ever sacred oblation confer upon us a wholesome benediction, that what
it does in mystery it may perfect in power.

The Post-Communion.
GRant unto us we beseech thee Almighty God that receiving the favor of thy
inlivening we may always boast of thy bounty.

On the third Sunday after Easter.
The Prayer.
O God, who unto those that go astray (to the end they may return into the
way of Justice) do show them the light of thy verity, grant unto all those,
who by profession are esteemed Christians, that they may both eschew those
things which are contrary to this name, and pursue those, which are agreeable
unto the same.

The Secret.
BE it granted unto us O Lord, by these mysteries, that mitigating terrene
desires, we may learn to love heavenly things.

The Post-Communion.
THe Sacraments which we have received, we beseech thee O Lord, that they may
repair us with spiritual food, and defend us with corporal helps.

On the fourth Sunday after Easter.
The Prayer.
O God, who make the minds of the faithful to be of one accord, grant unto
thy people, that they may love what thou command, and desire what thou do
promise: that amongst worldly varieties, there we may fix our hearts, where are
true Joys.

The Secret.
O God who have made us partakers of the highest Deity by the commerce of this
revered sacrifice, grant we beseech thee, that as we know thy verity, so we may
with meet behavior follow the same.

The Post-Communion.
VOuchsafe us O Lord God thy presence, that by these mysteries which we have
faithfully received we may be purged from sin, and delivered from all dangers.

On the fifth Sunday after Easter.
The Prayer.
O God from whom all good things do proceed, grant unto thy humble supliants,
that we may think on those things which are good, (thou inspiring us) and
(thou governing us) we may put the same in execution.

The Secret.
REceive O Lord the Prayers of the faithful with the oblations of their
sacrifices, that by these offices of pious devotion we may pass into eternal
glory.

The Post-Communion.
GRant unto us O Lord who are filled with the virtue of the heavenly Table,
that we may desire those things which are right and receive what we desire.

On Sunday within the Octaves of Ascension.
The Prayer.
OMnipotent Eternal God, grant us ever to have our wills devoted, and our
hearts sincerely bent unto the service of thy Divine Majesty.

The Secret.
MAy the Immaculate Sacrifices purify us, O Lord, and afford unto our souls
the Vigor of supernal Grace.

The Post-Communion.
BEing replenished with thy holy Gifts, grant unto us we beseech thee, that we
may always remain in thanksgiving.

FINIS.
THE THIRD PART Of the first TOME.

On the Feast of Pentecost, OR, On WHIT-SUNDAY.
The Antiphon. ACTS 2. v. 1. ON this day are complete all the days of
Pentecost. Allelujah. This day the holy Ghost did appear to the Disciples in
fire, and gave unto them gifts of graces, sent them over all the world to
preach and testify, that he which shall believe, and be baptized shall be
saved. Alleluja.

Verse. The Apostles did speak with diverse tongues. Alleluja.

Resp. The wonderful works of God. Alleluja.


The Prayer.
O God who on this day have taught the hearts of the Faithful, by the
Illumination of the holy Ghost, grant unto us in the same Spirit, to relish
those things that are right, and ever to rejoice in his consolation.

The Illustration.
IF we look back to the three last Sundayes-prayers, we shall find them all, as
it were, preparatives to this, which we now make to day, of relishing those
things that are right, and rejoicing in the consolation of the holy Ghost. And
indeed our B. Saviors whole life and death had no other aim, then by making
God man, to winn man into an affection of deity, and of being content to become
God, and when by the last mystery of humane redemption (as far as lay on our
Saviors part) his glorious Ascension, we were brought to devote our wills, and
our hearts affections sincerely to the service of Almighty God; now we are led
into that holy School, and unto that heavenly Master, where we shall be taught,
how to set our hearts right to his heavenly Majesty; and this by the
Illumination of the holy Ghost: which that we may do the better, see how to day
we pray, that in the same Spirit we may relish those things which are right,
and rejoice in the consolation thereof: as if in this School flesh and blood
were to have no place, which had so far, (and so long) misled us; and indeed
the very Apostles themselves, so long as they looked upon Jesus Christ, as man,
they did not relish the pure service of Almighty God, they were not set right
in their hearts affections, they doted upon flesh and blood, and so fell into
the errors thereof: S. Peter of denying Christ in his afflictions, S. Thomas
of doubting of his Resurrection; but we never heard, that after the coming of
the holy Ghost, any of the Apostles fell into those or any other errors in the
rectitude of their service toward Almighty God; but were always in the right,
and took content in nothing that was wrong, or swarving from the doctrine of
their Master our Savior Jesus Christ: And why this? Because the holy Ghost,
who was the Spirit of Truth, had possessed them, and taught them all truth, and
made them not only relish it, but disrelish all things that were contrary
thereunto.

Nor is it without reason, that erring man in his most solemn prayer should beg
the grace of God, to relish what is right; for we never please our selves with
what we do not relish, nor do we ever relish what displeases us; whereas to
relish what is right, is to relish at least what is pleasing unto God, however
it does oftentimes nor please our selves: and therefore in this grand day, when
we are to be weaned from the nurse of flesh and blood, and brought into the
school of Spirit, and are to ask our Master a boon, now we see his hands full
of bounty and benevolence, we are taught to beg that we may relish and take
content in whatsoever is right toward God, be it never so averse to our
selves; because our teeth being set on edge with flesh and blood, and our
mouths quite out of taste with Spiritual food, nothing is of more import to
us, then that we may relish such meat, as we must hereafter live and nourish
by; Spiritual consolations, not earthly delectations any more, for the first,
set us (and our hearts affections) right to God, the last, draws us headlong to
death. Now it will be the least of our cares to day, to adjust this prayer unto
the Epistle, since this is altogether of the coming down of the holy Ghost into
the school of spiritual comfort, where he is to read his lessons to men's
hearts, as this prayer tells us, and as we read Jerem. 31.33. I will write my
law in their hearts; whence it is, holy Church to day takes the Antiphon out of
the Epistle, rather then out of the Gospel; and yet rather makes it, then takes
it, for though the sense be the same, nevertheless the letter is not so: which
perhaps was mysteriously contrived, to show, that as soon as the holy Ghost
came down to teach, the Church was able of her self to read a lesson to her
children; and immediately we see S. Peter preached: but indeed as the Gospels
ever tell us the stories of our Savior's life, so the Acts of the Apostles
tell us the history of the holy Ghost, first that of the fact, when, and how he
came, next that of the effect, how prodigiously he wrought in the hearts of
those he did descend upon: so the Epistle being to day out of the Acts of the
Apostles, is (as the gospel of the holy Ghost) made the place whence Preachers
take their texts, or whereunto at least they drive the design of all their
Sermons. And to this the prayer is apparently suited, yet it is not therefore
unsuitable to the Gospel also of the day: wherein S. John tells us (in our
Saviors name) he that loves me observes my words, which is in effect to say,
does relish my words, does relish that which is right; for nothing more right,
then the word of God; since we may take that for verity and rectitude it self,
especially being taught us by the holy Ghost, who, this Gospel tells, was to
come purposely to teach us truth, the truth of that word, by the Illumination
of his holy Spirit, and was to make the often dead letter of that word to be
the life of our Souls: for so it must needs be, when it brings us that peace
which it promises, namely another manner of peace then the world gives, which
is always mixed with war; for whoever relisheth what is right, has a true
peace within his conscience, and so is at no variance or war at all. In a word,
the Gospel being out of the story of our Saviors Life, tells us the effect of
this fact, the fruit we shall receive by the coming of the Holy Ghost, by
relishing those things that are right, and by rejoicing in the consolation of
this holy Spirit, that comes to read lessons of Divine Love unto our hearts,
and to wean us from the humane affections we have unto creatures, and
consequently this Gospel wants no adjusting to the Epistle and Prayer of this
solemn day, but makes good still our main design in this book.

The Epistle. Acts 2.1, etc.
1 And when the days of Pentecost were accomplished, they were all together in
one place.

2 And suddenly there was made a sound from heaven, as of a vehement wind
coming, and it filled the whole house, where they were sitting.

3 And there appeared to them parted tongues, as it were, of fire, and it sat
upon every one of them:

4 And they were all replenished with the Holy Ghost, and they began to speak
with diverse tongues, according as the holy Ghost gave them to speak.

5 And there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men of every nation under
heaven.

6 And when this voice was made, the multitude came together, and was astonished
in mind, because every man heard them speak in his own Tongue.

7 And they were all amazed, and marvelled, saying, Are not, lo, all these
that speak, Galilaeans?

8 And how have we heard each man our own tongue, wherein we were born?

9 Parthians, and Medians, and Elamites, and that inhabit Mesopotamia, Jewrie,
and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia.

10 Phrygia, and Pamphylia, Egypt, and the parts of Lybia that is about
Cyrenee, and strangers of Rome.

11 Jews also, and Proselytes, Cretensians and Arabians: we have heard them
speak in our own tongues, the great works of God.


The Explication.
1. THat is to say, Fifty days after the Resurrection; for as the Christian
Pasche is a fulfilling that Feast of the Jews, which was a figure thereof; so
likewise the Christian Pentecost is a fulfilling of the like figure of the
Jewish Pentecost, or of the delivery of the Law upon Mount Sinai, by the like
confirmation of the Christian Law, upon the Mount Sion, when the holy Ghost
descended purposely for that end: But as the Jewish Pasche was on Saturday,
(which was their Sabbath) so was the seventh Saturday after, their Pentecost,
and the Christian Pasche being the day after (which was Sunday) makes the
seventh Sunday following to be the Christian Pentecost, both to show Christ did
abrogate the Jewish Sabbath, by rising on Sunday, and the Jewish Pentecost, by
sending the holy Ghost the seventh Sunday after, which proves that the
Christian Religion, as it was successive to the Jewish, so it did abrogate the
same. By those that were here, (in the place of the last Supper) assembled, we
are not to understand only the Twelve Apostles but also the Blessed Virgin
Mary, and all the rest of the Disciples and friends of Christ, then in
Jerusalem, to the number of about one hundred and twenty, as S. Luke recounts,
and S. Augustine gives a very pious reason for this number, saying, What Christ
did promise only to his twelve Apostles, he performs into a ten-fold
multiplied number; for ten times twelve make just one hundred and twenty; so
Christ to show his liberality made his promise good ten times over; and indeed
it is usual in Almighty God to better the expectation of his creatures.

2. The mystery of this noise or sound was, that thereby the Jews might come
together out of curiosity to see what the matter was, when they heard a sudden
clap like thunder, just over the place where the Apostles were assembled; and
likewise to raise up the hearts of those within the place, to heaven, expecting
hereupon something of consequence to follow: it was sudden for two reasons,
First to show it to be a voluntary and free gift of grace, such as could not be
merited by any our previous preparation thereunto: Secondly, to show the
efficacy of that holy grace, working to all purposes in an instant, as we see
it did in S. Paul, and S. Mary Magdalene, both instantaneously converted from
notorious sinners, and made eminent Saints: whence S. Ambrose says truly,
commenting upon the first of S. Luke, The grace of the holy Ghost brooks no
delayings: This sudden sound came from heaven, to show that as Gods throne was
there, so he came by his holy grace to call and to carry the Apostles, and all
good Christians thither: it came like a huge high wind, to show the effects it
was to have, when the voices of those it sell upon were heard all the world
over, from one end to the other, as was prophetically foretold by holy David,
Psalm. 18. Now we are to note, the holy Ghost has appeared several times in
several ways, as first like a Pigeon or Dove upon Christ baptized, to show
the columbine simplicity of grace and good works: next like a Cloud in the
Transfiguration, to show the fertility of Christian Doctrine, falling like a
fruitful rain upon the barren souls of men, and covering them from the nocive
sin of lustful desires. Thirdly like a Breath, to show the manner of
Christian conversion was to be by aspiration, or breathing of the holy Ghost
upon our hearts, and giving us thence a spiritual life; and this was when at
the last Supper Christ breathing upon his Apostles said, Receive ye the holy
Ghost, to remission of sins: Joh. 20.22. Fourthly (as here) both like fire
and wind; the first to show the holy Ghost did inflame the hearts of men to the
love of God, and burn up in them all the stubble of their terrene affections;
the last, to show the efficacy that the Apostles preaching should have to
convert all the world; and like a whirlwind blow down the resistance of
Princes and Potentates, as so many Towers standing in their way, and also blow
all infidelity, all heresy, all sects and schisms quite away as so much chaff
and dross in respect of solid doctrine: not that there was a real wind, but
yet a real sound, or rather an effect as of a real wind, for had the wind
been real, (being so great) it had overthrown the house, and done mischief to
those within; and indeed the Text says, it was a noise, like the coming of a
high wind: nor was it marvel, God could produce a sound without a wind for
as the fiery tongues were not real tongues. but only similitudes thereof, so
was this noise no real wind, but only a likeness of it. The whole house was
filled with this noise, to show all their hearts who were within, should be
filled with the Holy Ghost; for thus the Text affirms immediately, saying,
verse. 4. and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost. Note; it is said they
were Sitting; both to show the rest and quiet Gods holy Spirit brings with
it, and to show that prayer of expectation (and such this was) is perhaps best,
when it is performed sitting: thus S. Bernard (a great Saint) was noted to
proceed in his deepest meditations.

3. By parted tongues is here understood tongues divided amongst many, not in
themselves, as commonly Painters make them, thinking thereby to express the
activity of fire, rising up in many-pointed flames: but the reasons why the
Holy Ghost would have the form of a tongue to declare his coming, are many:
First, because the Apostles were by this coming confirmed to be the Preachers
of the Gospel; and the proper instrument of a Preacher is his tongue. So the
gift of tongues was first expressed by the species of a tongue: (where we are
to note, this gift includes three properties, the first the knowledge of
languages; the next, the true signification of the words of different
languages; the third, a volubility of tongue adapted to the several
articulations requisite to several Languages, and consequently a prudence to
use all these in a right way) The second reason is, because a tongue has a
great affinity with a word; as therefore the Holy Ghost was the Spirit of the
Word, so he came in the species of a Tongue: and as by the word of the mind is
produced the voice of the tongue; so from the Divine word did proceed the Holy
Ghost: whence the Apostle 1 Cor. 12. verse. 3. says, no man can say Jesus, but
in the Holy Ghost. The third, as the tongue distinguishes tastes, so does the
Holy Ghost truths from falsehoods, heavenly from earthly things; insomuch, that
St Paul tells us, The Animal man does not perceive the things of the Spirit, 1
Cor. 4. Lastly, because the tongue is both the best and worst instrument of
man, Proverb. 12. Death and life are in the hand of the Tongue: and Prove. 16.
It is in man to prepare his heart, but the government of the tongue is from our
Lord; wherefore there was great reason to have the gift of the Holy Ghost, to
tame, rule, and sanctify the tongues of men. As for the tongues themselves,
whether they were true fire, or true tongues, is questioned; yet resolved best,
that they were not truly fire but only fiery forms, like unto tongues; as some
air condensed and made into that form, and illuminated so as to seem fire, but
not to burn, because it was to set upon the heads of those it fell upon. Of
their pyramidal form we give many reasons: First, to show the Spirit of God
only penetrates all deep and hard mysteries. Secondly, to show it penetrated
the very hearts of those it fell upon, and made them cordially love Almighty
God. Thirdly, it made them aspire from earth as high as heaven. Fourthly, that
the very tongues of those who had this gift should penetrate the hearts of men
to their conversion. Lastly, to show it should give them the discretion of
spirits, that had this gift, to distinguish betwixt good and bad inspirations
in themselves, or in those they were to direct spiritually. And these tongues
were rather fiery, then of any other kind, to show, God is all a flame of Love,
as Deuteronomy. 4.24. Thy God, O Israel, is a consuming fire. And therefore as the Law
of Moses (showing Gods Will) was given with the Circumstances of Thunder and
Lightening; so the Law of Christ now was to be confirmed by the holy Ghost with
like signs, to show it was the Will of the same God, abrogating the former,
and constituting this new Law. Secondly, as all the old Prophets were
authorized by circumstance of fire: Isaias his lips being touched with a coal
of fire, became as we read, Chap. 6 ver. 6. like fire; and his words seemed all
fiery too: and Elias being carried up in a fiery Chariot into heaven, 4 Reg.
2.11. and of Hieremias it is said, from above he sent fire into men's bones, and
thereby instructed them, Thren. 2. v. 13. and Ezechiel foretelling of Christ
his Chariot supported by four Cherubims, of whom he says, Chap. 1. v. 13.
Their looks were like fire coals: all which were but types of the more
univocal fire, that did accompany the election, confirmation, and conversation
of the Apostles, true Prophets of the new law, and foretellers of heavenly
things. Thirdly, to show Christ his law was a law of love, of charity, of
celestial fire: Fourthly, to show the effect of this love was to produce the
fire of love divine in all Christian souls: Fifthly, to show the spirit of God
was searching as fire, the most subtle worker, and penetratour that is in
nature. The reason why these fiery tongues were said to sit in the singular
number, not plural, upon the Apostles, was to show that though the tongues
were (and must be) many, for each to have one, yet the Spirit giving them was
one, and not many, namely one only God. And this Spirit was rather expressed
setting then otherwise, to show the constancy of Gods holy grace and gifts in
those he pleases to bestow his special favors on, and their ease and rest in
the possession of that Spirit: as also, that the holy Ghost was to rest in the
hearts of the Faithful to the worlds end.

4. They were all replenished; whereas before they had received the grace of
God, now they had the plenitude thereof, not all alike, but some more, some
less, according as was requisite to their callings: No marvel then, if the
Apostles being full of grace and the gift of tongues, they could not contain
themselves, but say The Things which we have seen and heard, we cannot but
speak: nay, so much they spoke, that some believed they were drunk with new
wine; and so it was indeed with the wine of the heavenly grape, the holy Ghost,
not otherwise; and as they were enforced to speak the praises of God by the
irrefragable impulse of this holy Spirit, so they spoke to all purposes, that
is, to the capacity and understandings of all hearers, of what nation soever,
for they spoke all kind of languages or tongues: which some will understand, as
if each Apostle speaking a several language, among them all they had all
languages: others conceive that they speaking only in their own Syro-Hebraean
tongue, all the several nations understood them, as if their languages had been
various, (as in this manner S. Vincentius Ferrerius preaching in Spanish was
understood by several nations, as Italians, French, Flemish, English, etc.
each conceiving they heard him in their native tongue,) grounded in these words
following, v. 11. We hear them speaking in our tongues. But the true sense is,
they did really and truly speak (upon occasion) all languages, by the gift of
Tongues bestowed on them: first, because so says the text, they spoke in
diverse tongues. Secondly, because the miracle had been else wrought in the
hearers, not in the speakers. Thirdly, the gift or real diversity of tongues
was prophesied by Isaias chap. 28. In other tongues, and in other lips will I
speak unto this people: therefore it must be fulfilled, as was affirmed so to
be by S. Paul, 1 Cor. 14.21. I give my God thanks, that I speak with the tongue
of you all. Besides Christ in S. Mark cap. 16. v. 17. did promise this gift,
saying, They shall speak with new tongues. Fourthly, because so the Church has
ever taught us. Fifthly, else many miracles must concur to one work, as in
the speaker and the hearer too. Though this does not deny, but the Apostles
might as well by one language speak intelligibly to all hearers of several
nations, as S. Vincentius did: To conclude, as they were sent to all nations,
so assuredly they had the gift of all languages, as also the B. Virgin, S. Mary
Magdalene, and all the one hundred and twenty then present had the same gift:
yet so as they did not use it, but as the holy Ghost inspired them to speak
upon just occasions; and then in such manner as was most excellent, and best
suiting to all purposes, because the works of God are ever perfect, Deuteronomy. 3^.4.
and this was such: so that it is credible, they never made use of this gift,
but to Gods honor and glory, at least they ever surely aimed thereat, how be
it as humane creatures they might err in some circumstantials of their
actions, as S. Paul reprehended some excesses in that kind, especially in women
speaking in Churches by this gift of tongues.

5. This diversity of nations was there, upon occasion of the legal Feast of
the Jewish Pentecost, as above, whereunto great conflux of nations was usual,
as Exodus 23.17. it was commanded; but more then ordinary in Jerusalem, it being
the Metropolis or head City of the Jews, and the seat of their chief Synagogue:
so by dwelling is here understood making some stay for a time only, not being
constant Inhabitants. By religious, is understood only devout men, not such as
now (by vows) receive that denomination: though with all this confluxe of
people was credibly now more then ordinary, because God had so ordained it, to
celebrate the better this Christian Pentecost, by the avowment of all nations,
witnessing the prodigious truth of this unparalleld miracle, of the descent, or
coming of the Holy Ghost in way of fiery tongues.

6. By the voice, is understood that of the sudden loud wind drawing many to
the place, and that wherewith the Apostles spoke, which argued there was a
grace more then ordinary, accompanying their speech, after this gift of tongues
was bestowed on them: so as the multitude of Nations (representing the whole
world in little) assembled suddenly at this place, and was stricken with
admiration and indeed confusion of mind, some thinking one thing, some another;
some trembling to see Christ so glorified now in his Apostles and Friends, who
had by them been persecuted to death; others not knowing what was the reason,
but inquiring; in fine all severally stricken upon several conceits they made
of the prodigy, every one hearing ignorant men and strangers speak in their own
language, or tongue.

7. This Verse shows, that was the main cause of their amazement, seeing the
Apostles who were Galilaeans, (men given more to study the Sword, then the
Word) speak the different Languages of all other several Nations in the World.

8. As by this Verse appears they did.

9. 10. 11. There were two Elams, one in Persia, the other in Media, and
probably Elamites of both were here. There is little to be said of this
enumeration of so many nations and people here assembled, only to observe many
are specified, to show more (indeed all) were present; that is to say, some out
of every Nation: and though those of Jewry be named in the ninth verse, and
Jews again in the eleventh, yet it is to be understood the latter were the
Jews dispersed over all the world, as well as those living in Judea, and the
Gentiles by nation, Jews by profession, who were therefore by another name
called Proselytes, (Adventitious Jews.) But we are here to observe, these
Nations did not hear the Apostles speak (as some said of them) like drunkards,
nor any vain or idle things, but only the wonders of Almighty God: such as the
Prophets had foretold, Christ taught, and were never till now understood nor
believed: And probably they began here to preach the Incarnation, the Nativity,
the Life and Death, the Resurrection, the Ascension of our Savior, the reason
of this prodigious coming of the Holy Ghost, as sent by Christ, the mystery of
the Blessed Trinity, and all things else, that were the main heads of Christian
doctrine, and otherwise appertaining to the splendor of the Church of Christ,
and to the abrogation of the Synagogue or Jewish Church.

The Application.
1. THe Illustration upon the Prayer, and the Explication of the Text render
this Epistle so clear, that little more needs to be said, then to mind the
Christian Reader, that as by our Saviors first coming to us God was really
made Man, so the coming of the Holy Ghost is with a desire to make man become
in a manner God: but with this difference amongst others, that God so assumed
humane Nature, as he did no way desert, nor lessen his own which was Divine^
whereas Man to be Deified, must relinquish and divest himself of his humanity,
at least of his humane addictions and affections, and must call upon the Holy
Ghost to create in him a new breast, a new heart, if not a new soul too.

2. And really it seems to have been the chief aim of Jesus Christ to work upon
the souls of men but in part only, that is to elevate their Reasons, and to
illuminate their Understandings by the gift and light of Faith* leaving it to
the Holy Ghost to perfect the same souls Wills, by Charing^ by adding the
heat, the Fire of Love to the Light of Fa^^ (...) hence it is our Savior said;
he came to send Fire into the world, and what would he else thereby, but that
this fire should burn? burn up he meant the old man with all his stubble of
sin, and consume even his affections unto vice, by setting his heart wholly
upon virtue, upon goodness, upon heaven, upon glory, upon blisful eternity,
upon Almighty God; as amiable objects indeed, whereas all things else are but
like Foyles to the beauty and loveliness of these: such as never satiate a
soul; which the Royal Prophet does confess, saying; I shall then (and surely
not till then) be satiated, when thy Glory shall appear.

3. Hence it is we see the Apostles turn immediately from Leverets to Lions,
from persons afraid of the Jews, to look Princes in the Face (maugre all their
persecution) from ignorant and illiterate Fishermen, knowing and learned
Doctors, Teachers in fine to all the World, convincers and confounders of all
humane Learning that stood in opposition to their doctrine Divine: and all this
in an instant without learning any other Lesson, then to dilate, to open the
affections of their Hearts unto the Holy Ghost; where (by the Illustration of
his holy Grace) he reads unto them in a moment all Divinity, by only teaching
them the Art of Divine Love; by only giving them indeed the grace to love God
only, and what is lovely in the eyes of his heavenly Majesty. Stay beloved, if
this be all, why may not we hope once a year at least to learn as good a
lesson? It Is but renewing every year (as on this blessed Day) the solemn vows
we made in Holy Baptism; it is but reiterating now those good purposes we make
some times of the amendment of our lives; it is but dilating and opening our
hearts to this holy Spirit, and begging of him that he will there work in us
what we cannot work our selves, the new creation of a new Will in us, by our
renunciation of the old, and this by the Illustration of his holy Grace, which
alone is able to light and lead us up to heaven, which alone is able to teach
us all Truth, and afford us all the comfort that our Hearts can wish.

The Holy Church would otherwise surely pray to day for some thing else, which
yet she does not, in the Prayer above.

The Gospel, JOHN 14. v. 23, etc.
23 Jesus answered and said unto them, If any love me, he will keep my word,
and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and will make abode with
him.

24 He that loves me not, keeps not my words. And the word which you heard
is not mine: but his that sent me, the Fathers.

25 These things have I spoken to you, abiding with you.

26 But the Paraclete the holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he
shall teach you all things, and suggest unto you all things, whatsoever I shall
say unto you.

27 Peace I leave to you, my peace I give to you: not as the world gives, do I
give to you. Let not your heart be troubled, nor fear.

28 You have heard that I said to you, I go, and I come to you. If you loved
me, you would be glad verily, that I go to the Father: because the Father is
greater then I.

29 And now I have told you before it come to pass: that when it shall come to
pass, you may believe.

30 Now I will not speak many things to you. For the Prince of this world
comes, and in me he has not any thing.

31 But that the world may know, that I love the Father; and as the Father has
given me commandment so do I. Arise let us go hence.


The Explication.
23. THis answer of our Savior was to the interrogatory of the Apostle Judas
Thaddaeus, the brother to St. James the lesser, demanding ver. 22. why Christ
was pleased to manifest himself to the Apostles only, and not to the whole
world; because he said to them, The world does not see me, but ye see me; which
though spoken in the present tense, was meant in the future, alluding to what
the Apostles did after see in him, namely his Passion, Death, Resurrection and
Ascension: And the reason why he did manifest himself to them and not to the
world, was as St. Austin observes, because they did love him, but the world did
not so: and this I premise to show, that what follows here, alludes to this,
as to the effects which the love of God procures in those that do truly love
him: as this Gospel begins to day with an effect of love, keeping Gods
commandments, which taken as here it lies in this Gospel, is rather an
absolute assertion, then a relative answer to a question; and yet in truth it
was the answer that Christ gave to the question of St. Jude, as above in the
immediate verse before, whereunto Jesus answers, saying, If any love me, he
will keep my word; as who should say, as I loving my Father, keep his command,
of coming into this world to manifest his glory to you that love him, (and by
you to all the world) though not immediately to them all, as I mean to do to
you: So do not think that after my Resurrection, when the Holy Ghost shall come
down and inflame the hearts of many Infidels and Gentiles with the love of God,
that then I shall only manifest my self to you alone that are my Apostles, and
now are only those that love me; no, no, then I shall be so manifested to
others, that they will love me as you do; and this shall be the testimony that
I give you thereof, that their love shall be such, as by virtue thereof they
will keep my Commands, my words will be to them dear, as now they are to you:
and as you receiving the holy Ghost, receive with him both my Self and my
Father, (for we three are all one inseparable Substance or Essence however
distinct and several Persons) just so shall the whole Blessed and undivided
Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, enter into the hearts of all that love
me, and keep my Commandments or my word: and consequently to them as well as to
you shall I be then manifested. And in this sense you see this verse is an
exact answer to the question of S. Jude, which otherwise seems a mere
disparate, or an incongruous reply to that interrogatory. And from hence we may
perceive how hard it is to understand the true sense of almost any part of holy
Writ, unless we see clearly the connection it has to precedent or consequent
parts thereof: so what S. Jude meant of his personal or visible manifestation
to these few only that were eyewitnesses of his Actions, he means of his
spiritual or invisible being made known to all the world by his Faith, and
doctrine received and embraced amongst them through the preaching of the
Apostles and their Successors. But we must note, that coming or going of God
(who is at all times in all places by reason of his immensity) is not to be
understood, as if he did come or go from one place to another; but he therefore
is said to come or go, because he operates, or operates not, at all times, or
in all places alike: for his operation is his coming, and so every new
inspiration of grace we have, is as if God made a new visit unto us, within
the temple of our souls, where he delights to be: and though he be never
separated from us locally, (since he fills all place) yet he is said to come a
new into our hearts, every time we produce or exercise a new act of love unto
him; and if we continue one Act all our lives, then he does all that time
operate within us, and so consequently is said not only to come unto us, but
even to live with us, to dwell indeed within us: which happiness we cannot
receive from any one single Person of the Blessed Trinity, but we must own it
to them All three, since where one Person is, of necessity there all the three
Divine Persons are also, be it by presence, or by operation.

24. Here we see clearly the cause of our well doing or keeping Gods commands,
is our loving God, and consequently the cause of our not doing well, is our not
loving him; to which purpose St. Gregory hom. 30. says excellently well: To
know whether we love God or not, ask our Tongues if they speak well of him, ask
our souls if they employ their thoughts upon him, ask our lives if our actions
be directed to his honor and glory, if they be doing what he has commanded,
or avoiding what he has forbidden. When he says, The word he speaks is not
his, the meaning is, it is not only his, but also his Fathers, because himself
is the word of his Father, and consequently as his nature is common with him
and his Father, so is his operation too; wherefore what he says to us, his
Father says to him, because all he is himself, is to be his Fathers word.

25. These things have I spoken to you, abiding with you: while I was with you,
I told you these things; not that they abide by you, or that you understand
them, but it suffices for the present I tell them to you, though you
understand them not; you will penetrate these, and much more, when the holy
Ghost shall (telling you the same) confirm you, that he and I are both one God,
one Spirit, one Goodness, one Truth.

26. It may seem strange here that Christ says, his Father shall send the Holy
Ghost to them in his name, whereas Chap. 15. the same Evangelist tells us that
he said, he would send them the same holy Spirit himself in his Fathers name:
but the very truth is, these two seeming several speeches are both to one and
the same purpose: for as the Holy Ghost does proceed both from the Father and
the Son, one coequal Spirit and God with them both, so is he equally sent by
them both; whence these are not contradicting but cohering Truths, telling at
several times, what is most certain true. But there are diverse senses of these
words, in my name; as first, the Father is said to send the Holy Ghost in his
Sons name, as by the Sons means, whose spiration as it is jointly concurring
with the Fathers to the procession of the Holy Ghost, so by him (jointly with
him) the Father sends the Holy Ghost unto us. Secondly, in his name imports in
virtue of his merits deserving for us the happiness of this comfortable
mission, or missive comforter. Thirdly, in his name is as much as to say, in
his place, to supply his visible presence by an invisible comfort equal
thereunto, that he may finish the work of humane salvation, which Christ began:
and hence it follows, he shall teach you all things, namely to understand what
Jesus told you, and what he will have you further to know, for establishing his
Church over all the world; and he shall suggest and prompt to you all things
whatsoever I shall say. This place is liable to several senses; as whether the
holy Spirit shall suggest more unto them (for government of the Church) then
Christ told them, because he spoke much, which they could not then understand;
or whether his suggestion shall only be an exposition of what they heard
before, and were not able to penetrate the bottom of it: but truly the last
sense seems most genuine, because of that which follows, namely his
suggesting what Christ shall say; (what he has unintelligibly already said,
and shall afterward intelligibly by the Holy Ghost say unto them;) yet this
sense may be verified, though we do not take suggestion to be as a help to
understanding, but to memory, as generally the Expositours conceive of it; as
if the suggestion of the holy Ghost were a renewing the memory of the Apostles
toward calling to mind, and (upon recalling) better understanding the meaning
of what Christ had said, then they did when they heard him speak, what was now
revived in their memory by the prompting or suggestion of the Holy Ghost: But
since in other places the Expositours have declared, Christ did not tell the
Apostles all that, which he meant they should do by the instinct of the Holy
Gbost, especially for framing and maintaining the Hierarchy of the Church, nor
for expounding the mysteries of Faith; therefore if we take here this
suggestion in a larger sense then generally Expositours do, we shall not err;
as, if we extend it to the holy Ghost prompting unto them, what our Savior
shall say to him, and by him to them, now that he is in heaven: for as Christ
says his doctrine is not his own, but his heavenly Fathers, so it is certain
the suggestions of the holy Ghost are not his own, but Christ his doctrine,
whether delivered before by himself, and so renewed in the memory of the
Apostles by the holy Ghost, (as all Expositours allow) or whether now only
spoken immediately to the Holy Ghost by Christ, and by mediation of that holy
Spirit to us: for assuredly there are many things especially concerning
government of the holy Church suggested by the Holy Ghost to the now present
Governors thereof, which were not spoken by Christ to his Apostles.

27. By Christ his peace, is here meant that which St. Paul Philip. 4. told us,
did exceed all humane sense; and this he calls his, so peculiarly, as indeed it
can be properly no bodies else, but his own; since he has purchased it for us,
by his having ended all our war with sin, death, and the devil, all such war,
as can endanger us; (if our selves be not cowards and cease to fight) for this
assurance we have, as long as we fight we conquer, and in conquering possess
that peace, which by the Battle of temptation, the devil sought to wrest away
from us; that sweetness, that tranquillity of soul, which a good conscience
brings with it at all times, and to all persons whatsoever. This is the peace
Christ gave, and this he gives not as the world gives peace, which is rather
perturbation; for the more we have of worldly peace and ease, the less we have
of true tranquillity of mind, which is then most perfect, when we are most at
strife with the world, and other enemies to Christian peace. St. Augustine has
an excellent saying to this purpose: He cannot be at peace with Christ, who
has any contention with a Christian who is a member of him. But the most
genuine sense of this place is, that he gave the Apostles his own peace,
immunity from all sin, which only can be the breach of peace with God; And
therefore he closed this verse with these words, let not your heart be troubled
at my going from you, the presence of my peace shall supply for the absence of
my person.

28. You have heard I say to you, I go, (when I dye) and come, (when I rise
again) and when I am so come back (to take away your grief for my departure by
death) if then you did love me, you would rejoice at my leaving you again,
because I then am to go, (not to dye any more, but) to live eternally with my
Father in glory, and to share out part of that glory to you also: But he gives
another, and a deeper reason, why they should (if they did love him) rejoice at
his going to his Father, namely, because his Father is greater then he, can
protect him and his friends from all those persecutions, which the Jews raised
against him and them; not but that he could have protected them himself from
these, but this he says, as accommodating his speech to them, to make it an
argument which they themselves should yield unto, as convincing to those that
did love him. And though from these very words the Arrian heresy took fastest
root, denying the Deity of Christ, because he said, his Father is greater then
he; yet without all reason, for no such thing follows; since his meaning was
in this place, that his Father, as God, was greater then he, as man, (for so he
was even less then Angels) being it was only as man that he went to his
Father, who, as God, was never from him, nor could be: And so Christ as God,
was greater then himself as man; much more then was his Father greater then he
in that true sense he spoke this in: though according to humane sense and
reason, the Father, as God, is also greater then the Son as God, because he is
the origin of the Son, or his beginning, how ever the Son be equal to him in
essence and power; so it is a majority in our understanding at least, though
not in the thing understood. But the Arrian heresy was grounded on a mistake
of the Analogy between divine and humane generation: for though amongst men the
Father is many ways better and greater then the Son, as for example, because
he is older then the Son, and was in being before him; again, because he (a
tall Father) begets at first, a little son; besides, his Son is a thing
numerically, nay substantially distinct from the father; lastly, because the
Father had liberty and could have chosen, whether or no he would have begotten
a Son: yet in God all is quite otherwise; for there is no priority nor
posteriority, no majority nor minority, no numerical nor substantial difference
in Deity between the Father and the Son, though there be a numerical difference
in their personalities; neither is there any liberty, but an absolute necessity
of the Sons generation, and of his being coaeval, coequal, and ab^olutely one
and the same essential, numerical, and necessary God with his eternal Father.

29. The belief he here ayms to gain is that of his Deity, and of his voluntary
(not coacted, or enforced) death, for the sins of the people: so that which he
foretold here was his Death, his Resurrection, his Ascension, and his sending
the holy Ghost unto them after he was ascended, that when they see all things
happen, (as he had told them) they might undoubtedly believe he was the
Messiah, the God-man that came to redeem and save the world.

30. So after he had thus prepared them for all events, he told them, he would
not say much more unto them, because the devil (whom he calls the prince of
this world) comes, (was at hand in his ministers the Jews) to persecute him to
death: and he therefore calls him prince of the world, because by sin the world
inslaves it self unto him; he is come to take me, and yet he has no power in
me, because I have no sin to give him the least right over me; but I freely
give my self up to his tyranny over me, that I may redeem the world from his
usurpation and Tyranny over them; nay the very injustice he does to me, shall
confiscate all the right he has over others.

31. That is, to show the world that I love my Father, and do as he commanded
me, therefore I dye, and give my self into the hands of my enemies. Hence it is
asked, how it can be true which is said of him by Isaias 53. he was offered
(for sin) because himself was so pleased; since it was not by his choice, but
by his Fathers command, that he did suffer, insomuch that if he had not
suffered, he had sinned in an act of disobedience? and though pure man may
choose to do or not to do as he is bid, and so truly does either, yet Christ
who was God as well as man, could not choose, and so seems enforced: for if man
in him had sinned (by reason his two Natures made but one Person, and actions
are of persons not of natures) then God had sinned as well as man, because God
and man were in Christ but one person. But we must conceive in one person of
Christ there were two states or conditions, the one of a viatour, or passenger;
the other of a comprehensour, of one impatriated, or in glory: that is to say,
the one of a traveller, of a man banished from home, or in his journey
homewards; the other of one possessed of his own, restored from banishment,
arrived at his journies end, and being at his rest: So Christ, as a viatour or
traveller had liberty of choice to suffer or not to suffer; though as he was
(by his hypostatical union to the word, and by his Beatifical Vision consequent
to that union rendering him in glory) in the state of those who are finally
blessed, he had no choice, but did all things as necessarily as the Blessed do
in heaven, who cannot choose to do otherwise, then love and obey God in all
things that they do: and yet even so they may be said to love God freely too,
because they are understanding creatures, and free will is radicated in the
understanding, for nothing that has not reason has will, and the root of
willing is the understanding; therefore though the will be necessitated, upon
supposition that the soul is at home or in glory, and cannot choose but love
God as long as she sees him, yet that love is radically free, because it was a
free act of the soul departing from the state of a viatour, and so retains the
nature of freedom, as being rather a continued then a new act of free will.
And in this sense Christ (even as in his state of bliss) might be said here
freely to suffer, because as he was at the same time a viatour, he did suffer
freely, and uncoacted; for the necessary continuation is rather a reward of the
former act, then any new act at all: besides this necessity is rather
extrinsecal to the act, as being radicated in the immutability of the object,
and of the glory representing to the sight that object, then intrinsecal
thereunto, otherwise then as continuation of an act is intrinsecal unto it
self. For as the Act of separated souls is necessarily unalterable, (like those
of Angels) so the last Act they had, when they were united to their bodies
remains eternally, and is not unproperly said to be the same Act continued for
all eternity; and therefore free for ever, because at first freely produced,
when the soul was in state of a viatour, and out of that issued into the better
state of an impatriated spirit: nay though Purgatory intervene, yet that remora
alters not the nature or freedom of the Act, because souls there retain their
love to God, wherewith they dyed, however they suffer for former infirmities of
their life past.

The Application.
1. WHat may be to our special and present use in this Gospel is, to observe
that Holy Church culls it out as the most proper to the now flowing Feast of
Pentecost, though spoken by our Savior to his Disciples before his Passion,
(as appears ver. 29. above) but with intention they should then make memory and
use thereof, when they had received the holy Ghost; as consequently we must do
at the celebrating this Festivity. The main scope of this Gospel is exhorting
us to believe, and love; and telling us the sign of true love is to keep the
word of God, and that the effect of this love will be to draw down into our
souls the Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, as delighting to live in
the hearts of those who love the Son of God, and show their love by keeping his
holy word.

2. But here is a special style observable in this Gospel, very profitable to
be reflected on; which is that our Savior seems here only to relate, or speak,
(as v. 25. and 26.) and to leave it to the Holy Ghost to suggest and teach the
true meaning of what he said; as if it were a speech too profound for his
Disciples to dive into, without the help of the holy Ghost. If then our B.
Lord, the wisdom of his eternal Father, and consequently the best spokes-man
in the world, would not (what ere he could) speak so plain to his Apostles
themselves, as to be understood by them before the coming of the holy Ghost to
explicate his meaning, how absurdly shall it be done in those that are ignorant
Laymen, to dare to understand or interpret holy writ?

3. Hence we must infer that we are bound, in the first place, to believe the
holy Ghost to be coequal God with the Father, and the Son who sent him since
none but God can be of Gods counsel, and tell men the meaning of Gods holy
word. Again, we must infer that it is the love of God, who now must teach ^s
the meaning of Gods holy word; and that they are our Wills, our Hearts which
now must be instructed, more then our understandings, for these the wisdom of
God, our Savior taught by the sight of Faith; those the love of God (the holy
Ghost) now teaches by the fire of charity: so that however Faith Rectifies,
yet it is charity must saintifie the soul; how ever Christ Redeemed us, yet he
was pleased to send the holy Ghost to save us, by his sayntifying grace: and
alas what had it availed us once to have been by God the Father Created, once
to have been by God the Son Redeemed, if we were not more then once by God the
holy Ghost sayntified; as often indeed as by sin we are made incapable of the
benefits of our Creation or Redemption? Come therefore Holy Ghost, come
teaching, come inamouring, come comforting, come sayntifying, come saving
Spirit into the open hearts thou have of Christians ready to receive thee,
ready to be inkindled with the flames of thy most holy Love.

And Praying to day as above most fitly to the sense of this Holy Text. On
Trinity Sunday.
THis Sunday is both the Octave of Pentecost, and also the First Sunday after
it; therefore this week we have the Epistles, Gospels and Prayers of two
Sundays for our entertainment, and these both (if I mistake not) the most
delightful of any in the whole year.
The Antiphon. Matthew. 28. v. 19. THee God the Father unbegotten, thee only
begotten Son, thee Holy Ghost, Comforter, thee holy and undivided Trinity with
all our heart and mouth we Confess, we Praise thee, we Bless thee, to thee be
Glory world without end.

Verse. Blessed art thou, O Lord, in the firmament of heaven.

Resp. Both praiseworthy and glorious for ever.


The Prayer.
ALmighty Everlasting God, who have granted to thy servants, in confession of
the true Faith, to acknowledge the glory of the Eternal Trinity, and in the
power of Majesty to adore unity, we beseech thee heartily, that in the
firmness of the same Faith we may ever be defended from all adversity.

The Illustration.
NOw the mysteries of our Redemption are complete, by the contribution of all
the Three divine persons of the Blessed Trinity thereunto; as of the Father
sending his only Son to dye for us; of the Son coming and actually dying for
our sins; and of the holy Ghost descending and sanctifying us with his holy
grace, to make us sin no more; it is most necessary, we should close up the
said mysteries with a peculiar feast of the same Blessed Trinity, and so put a
glorious crown upon the work of our Redemption; while we begin to work out our
salvation from the first root thereof, which is our Faith in the most Blessed
and undivided Trinity: a mystery so unheard of before Christ had taught it to
the world, that even to this day it is the hardest thing which can be told to
men, and the thing which the blessed Angels that behold it, do not comprehend;
how the Divine Nature can be personally Trine, which nevertheless is
essentially but One. In admiration whereof St. Paul, in this days Epistle,
breaks out into a Triple Trinity of his expressing this Triunity, saying, O
depth of the Riches! of the wisdom! and of the knowledge of God! Lo the
first: Who ever knew the sense of our Lord? or who was ever of his Counsel? or
who gave first unto him, and it shall be restored again? Lo the second; For of
God, by God, and in God are all things: Lo the last of his Triple expressions;
alluding all of them to the Blessed Trinity, as by the Expositours of this
Epistle we shall find, and consequently must acknowledge it to be included in
the Prayer above; As also the Gospel is, expressing how our B. Lord sent his
mission of Apostles with commission to Baptize, and teach all the world the
mystery of this Blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. So we have this
day the best of harmonies in the mystical music of this book, while we find
all three parts of holy Churches service to day so neatly woven into one; the
Epistle, Gospel, and Prayer all singing forth the praises of the most Blessed
and undivided Trinity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, three Divine Persons, and
one only God. Hitherto the mysteries of our Redemption were all upon Gods
transient works about his creatures; now we come to the immanent actions of the
Sacred Deity within its own Essence: and these are operations so hidden from
created knowledge, as our best comportment will be with St. Paul rather to
admire then search into them: suffice it, Christ who has revealed this
mystery, has proved himself to be God by his works amongst men; and being God
must needs be essential verity, and so can neither be deceived, nor deceive,
even when we take him upon greatest trust. We must therefore follow him, as
Scholars do their masters, before they understand them; and we shall find (as
children do) our understandings bettered by giving trust unto this heavenly
Master; and at the latter day we shall with the Blessed in heaven see, as we
have heard of this prodigious mystery; that is, we shall with our intellectual
eyes behold the Triunity thereof, which yet while we behold we cannot
comprehend. And indeed it is admirable to see how in the dark of this profound
mystery we find light to illuminate the whole world, whilst the light of Faith
breaks out of this blessed cloud; since in believing this one thing, which we
know not, we are taught to know almost all things else that we believe: as the
Apostles in virtue of this belief were bid immediately to Go and teach all
nations, that is, they were to go in the light of this Faith, and teach all the
world both it and all things else belonging to their souls salvation. And how
to teach them? by first Baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost: By the name we have the unity, by the persons the
Trinity of God taught unto us; and that teaches us all the rest, which we are
implicitly told in the close of this days prayer, when we beg a firmness in
the Faith of this mystery, as the shield that must defend us against all
adversity whatsoever, by teaching us to bear off all the blows of Infidelity,
after we see Faith to be an elevated reason which secures us: Points of
Religion are not therefore against reason, because they are sometimes above it.
O what a seeing blindness is this, when we believe of God what we do not know!
I can liken it to nothing more, then to the means wherewith our Savior cured
the blind man's sight, by putting dirt into his eyes: just such is the darkness
of knowledge in this mystery to the light of Faith it brings into our souls. To
conclude, since the report between the prayer and other parts of this days
service is even literal, we need no labor to make it appear suiting with our
main design of this book, showing a harmony between them all.

The Epistle. Romans 11.33, etc.
33 O the depth of the riches, of the wisdom, and of the knowledge of God! how
incomprehensible are his judgments, and his ways unsearchable!

34 For who has known the mind of our Lord? or who has been his counselor?

35 Or who has first given to him, and retribution shall be made him?

36 For of him, and by him, and in him are all things: to him be glory for
ever. Amen.


The Explication.
33. Here we are first to note, that height and depth how ever seeming to
differ even in their natures, as well as in their names, are oftentimes taken
both for one and the same notion; as for example, that which we in our climate
call depth or profundity, (as relating to things below us) to the Antipodes
that same thing is height or altitude above them, namely the Hemisphere or arch
of the heavens under the earth to us, which is over the earth to them; and the
arch of the heavens over our heads is, as it were, under the earth to them:
again, if any of the Antipodes should from the footing he has upon the earth
fall with his head from us downward, he would seem indeed to fall, and yet that
fall would be his rising up toward heaven; and the like fall to them, would
our rising seem to be, if from our footing we departed hence up toward heaven:
in like manner we call a deep Well high, and a high Well deep. So by depth of
the riches of God is here understood the height thereof; though for him that is
all in all there is neither depth nor height, however for want of better
expression we use such terms; wherefore the Apostle here under one term
expresses both depth and height of Gods riches; as who should say, O deep
height, O high depth of the riches of Almighty God! And though St. Ambrose. and
S. Augustine so point this verse, as they join the depth both to the wisdom
and knowledge of God, and in them make up the depth of his riches; yet St.
Chrysostom, Origin, and others (following the Greek and Syriack pointings of
this sentence) seem to attinge the sense of this place more home,
distinguishing the sense, and meaning it to be tripartite, not single, that is
to say, attributing the depth equally to the riches, the wisdom, and knowledge
of God, as it were three things equally high, and equally deep beyond humane or
Angelical understandings: for first, the riches here mentioned report to the
infinite mercies of God insisted on by the Apostle, saying in the two and
twentieth verse, God has concluded all in incredulity, that thence he might
show his mercy unto all; by making the incredulity of the Jews the cause of
his mercy turning to the Gentiles, and so converting them to the right Faith;
as also some Jews shall be converted by the exemplarity of the Gentiles
becoming good Christians: Secondly, the three after questions in this Epistle
show these three are to be read distinct, and so understood; namely, who knew
the mind of God? who was of his Counsel? who first gave to him, and it shall be
restored? And we are to note by riches the Apostle understands the mercies of
God, whereby he makes us rich, in all gifts of grace and glory, as appears
Ephesians. 1. v. 7. where the Apostle says we receive mercy according to the
riches of his grace. The true and genuine meaning therefore of this place is, O
profound depth of the mercies, wisdom, and knowledge of God! of his mercy,
extended to all Nations; of his wisdom, making even the incredulity of the
Infidels to be the motive to convert Nations; of his knowledge, penetrating all
future, present, past and contingent things at once. And indeed these three
points are the scope of all the Apostle aims at from the ninth to this
eleventh Chapter to the Romans; for it was a special design of God to send his
Sacred Son poor and abject amongst the Jews, who had he come in a splendid way,
would have been undoubtedly received by them: but if we ask the reason, why God
would do this, there is no better can be given, then in brief, O the depth of
Gods riches and mercies, of his wisdom, and of his knowledge! This is the
Abyss that calls upon the Abyss; in fine this is a reason above all reason,
but that, which being increate it self, creates the reasons of men and Angels
as short of it self, as finite things are short of infinite, as creatures are
short of their Creator. The Apostle ends this verse with an extatical
admiration of Gods incomprehensible Judgments, and investigable ways; that is
to say, the counsels, means, works, and reasons of his providence, who alone
can cull Good out of evil; as he does, convincing all Nations of incredulity,
that thence he may make one the motive for his mercy toward the other, as was
said above.

34. How are we lost in our judgments, when we see the wicked prosper, and the
just afflicted? when we value humane abilities, which in sight of God are
follies? because we do not know the sense, the mind of God in these his
permissions, nor how contemptible a thing the wisest man under the cope of
heaven is in the sight of God; of whom Zeno said well, "that the pastime or
sport of God was man: as if God made but a Tennis ball of man, or of the
wisdom of men, tossing him up and down at pleasure to the wonderment of us
poor mortals; Whence the Abyss of humane misery calls upon the Abyss of
Divine mercy, and, as S. Augustine says, the Abyss of humane ignorance calls
upon the Abyss of the Divine knowledge or science. How well then does the
Apostle say, who knows the mind of God? or who was ever of his Counsel? that
is, as Isaias said Chap. 40. v. 13. who ever gave him counsel, or who did he
ever make acquainted with such counsel as he gave himself, in all internal and
external operations? whence no man must dare to ask, why leaving the Jews, he
turned to the Gentiles, or the like.

35. This place is remarkable; for it is not asked who ever gave God any thing?
but, who has first given him any thing, which before he had not received from
him? that so he might be able to make God his debtour? truly no man; and for
this reason S. Paul says well, what have you, that you have not received? and
if you have received it, why do you glory, as if it had not been received by
you, but were your own? Yet such is God Almighty his mercy to mankind, that
even this impossibility in man to make God his debtour, by giving him any thing
(that was not his own before,) does not hinder man of the honor to have God a
debtour to him: But then we must understand this saying safely, and take heed
we make not God our debtour for any gift or loan of ours to him, but merely for
his own promises to us; and those his promises, though he were graciously
pleased to make them voluntarily unto us, yet he binds himself by virtue of his
own promise to be our debtour, for the performance of his words unto us: to
which purpose St. Augustine spoke home in these words, upon this place of the
Apostle Sermon. 16. Pay unto us, what thou do owe us, because we have done
what thou have bid us to do; though even what we have done were thy deed too,
because thou did help us to do it.

36. And for further proof of this doctrine the Apostle proceeds, saying, of
him, by him, in him are all things; that is to say, not only the essence or
being of every thing, but also the operations thereof, since the operations of
creatures are likewise creatures too, as well as the things themselves that do
operate, and so both have equal dependence on Almighty God: so that all things
are of him, as of their first maker; by him, as by their directour, disposer,
and perfectour; in him, as in virtue of his assistance they are made, do
operate, and are conserved. But St. Augustine, and with him the torrent of
Fathers observe, that what is said to be of God is appropriated to the Father,
what by God is attributed to the Son, and what in God is reporting to the holy
Ghost; that so to the whole sacred and undivided Trinity we may refer the
honor and glory of all being and operation of creatures: insomuch that even
from the Apostles time, the close of prayer was made in this sort, Glory be to
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and by the Council of Nice was added
thereunto, as it was in the beginning, and now, and ever world without end,
Amen. For though here be ground of distinguishing Persons, yet there is none of
dividing essences or natures; and therefore the Apostle telling us here of our
obligation to the Blessed Trinity, concludes saying, not to them but to him be
glory for ever; that is, to the one only undivided God, who is nevertheless
distinguished into three several Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: A very
apt close for the Epistle on Trinity Sunday.

The Application.
1. WE have hinted in the Illustration above at the deep design of holy Church
in closing up the grand work of humane Redemption, (and the Octave of the holy
Ghost) with a Feast made sacred to the B. Trinity; wherein our Faith seems to
be chiefly and wholly exercised, because there is nothing so hard in Christian
doctrine as to believe the Trinity of the sacred Triunity: Now we may presume
to affirm further, that albeit from Pentecost to Advent, the main aim of
Christian duty be the exercise of charity, in producing frequent acts thereof;
nevertheless it was fitting to begin the practice of charity with an act of
Faith, to show the difference between our love of God on Earth, and our love of
him in Heaven: for there, Faith shall cease, that Love may increase, and be
alone the Total duty of the Blessed; but here, Faith must increase, least Love
decrease in us: Hence it was not only fit that this our first act of charity
to day should be to God, but that it should be also accompanied with the
strongest act of Faith imaginable, which is this we now produce in making
profession we believe God to be Trine and One.

2. Now not to break the order of the service, that I mean of charity, (the
main employ of every Christian between this and the holy time of Advent) see
how (by way of commemoration at least, of the first Sunday after Pentecost,) we
have regard to such another Prayer, and such another Gospel (whereunto I have
added here the Epistle also, though not read in open service) as do mainly
point at charity; so shall we see in their perusal anon, when these (proper to
the day) are done.

3. And lastly, least this Act of Charity we are now to exercise should be
defective, (being an act of love to God alone without relation to our
neighbor) see how we are taught to perfect it as well with an act of hope, as
with an act of Faith: since the main scope of holy Churches prayer to day is to
declare so strong a Hope in her believing, and in her loving God, that she puts
it as a hopeful shield before her against all Adversity whatsoever, to be firm
in her belief of the most Blessed and undivided Trinity.

Say then the Prayer above, and see how well it suits unto this doctrine
thereupon. The Gospel. Matthew. 28. v. 18. etc.
18 And Jesus coming near spoke to them, saying; All power is given to me in
heaven and earth.

19 Going therefore, teach ye all nations, Baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

20 Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and
behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the world.


The Explication.
18. THe Evangelist in this Chapter recounts the apparition of Jesus in Galilee
to a great number of Disciples and friends, as well as unto the Apostles
amongst them, who were now so far fled from Jerusalem, where formerly they had
seen him, after he arose from his grave: and so confirmed them in the truth of
this mystery, that though in the precedent verse St. Matthew says, some of
them doubted of this truth, that Christ was risen, yet the meaning is not, that
any of the Apostles doubted thereof, but some others, to whom Christ had never
appeared before, as now he did, to confirm the truth of his resurrection. And
Jesus coming near, not to those doubting persons, but to his Apostles; saying,
as this days Gospel begins, All power, etc. But we are to observe, though S.
Matthew seems in this chapter to conjoyn the power of Mission given by Christ
to his Apostles unto this story of his Apparition to them and above three
thousand more in Galilee, since he resolved to end his Gospel in this eight and
twentieth chapter and write no more; yet the very truth is, those words were
not spoken by Christ consequently to this apparition, but afterward upon the
Mount Olivet, when at his Ascension he gave the Apostles Mission over all the
world for his valediction or last farewell unto them: and in testimony that
this was an Act of high Jurisdiction, he tells them at the same time, All power
is given unto him both in heaven and earth; so they need not doubt, but he that
gave them this Mission to all Nations, this commission to preach unto them, and
to Baptize them, had ample authority for his so doing, and would by his grace
from heaven second their labors over all the earth, and make them fruitful to
the final salvation of all Nations, which was a convincing testimony of his
being plenipotentiary between God and man, or having plenitude of power both in
heaven and earth. But we are further here to note, that this plenitude of power
was not now so given to Christ, as if he had not had it before; for the Word
was no sooner Incarnate, then this power was begun in him, though he was not
pleased to mention the accomplishment or perfection thereof, until by his
death and passion he had merited the same, and therefore suiting to him, not
only as he was God, but as he was man, the Messiah, or Savior of the world,
and to him alone; for to no man else was the amplitude of this power competent;
nay the very participation thereof is above all merit of any pure humane
creature: however to Christ the fullness of it was but due, by reason of his
being one person with God, who as Creator of heaven and earth had consequently
full power over them both; so as he could by the Ministry of his Apostles
preaching, subject unto himself all the Nations of the earth, as stooping to
the power of his Faith and Doctrine; and afterward in heaven reward this their
Faith, this their subjection to Christian discipline with crowns of eternal
glory, to show he was chief commandant in heaven also, having purchased the
same by his bitter death and passion, and so being able to make eternally happy
in this his glorious Kingdom whosoever he pleased.

19. We are here to observe, when Christ bids go, it is not (nay it cannot be)
in the power of any mortal man to forbid the Ministers of Christ from going to
convert nations: So this Mission is Divine, not humane, and gives Commission to
execute Gods Laws, maugre all men's prohibitions. Go, says he, to show us,
labor, pains, travel, diligence are the marks of those who preach the word of
God: nor is this labor limited to any one time or place, but extends it self
to all times, to all nations. Go, says our Savior, teach all nations, nay he
adds, therefore go, that is to say, Go, because I send you, that have all power
both in heaven and earth, go, teach ye all nations, as I have taught you:
Whence it follows, the command of learning was imposed upon the people, while
the precept of teaching was laid upon the Apostles and their successors; for
in these latter it is indeed that Christ after said, he would be with them unto
the end of the world; that is, in assisting their Successors he would be with
them. And very great reason it is that an obligation of hearing should fall
upon the people, when a command of preaching was imposed on the Priest: for a
Scholar is acorrelative to a Master, as a Son is to a Father; since no man can
be an actual master unless he have an actual Scholar, nor can any man be a
father, that has not a child. And that it was a command given with an
obligation to be put in present execution, see how Christ ties himself to an
actual assistance thereof even to the worlds end. And as he bids them go and
teach all nations the principles of Christian doctrine, namely those of the
Catholic Church; so he bids them Baptize all those whom they instruct and
teach, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: to
show them the true mark of a Christian is his belief in the Blessed Trinity,
which is one only God, and three Divine Persons distinct each from other,
called Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Nor can there be indeed a more succinct
method of this deep mystery, then is here expressed, when the command of
Baptizing in the name, and not in the names shows the unity of God, and denies
the plurality of Divine nature or essence; and yet the specifying of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost shows the Blessed Trinity, which is in that sacred
unity: Whence we see the word Trinity does import a Triunity, or an Unity of
nature in a Trinity of persons; whence our Savior saying by the mouth of his
Apostle, 1 Epist. Joh. c. 5. There are three that bear testimony in heaven, the
Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost, adds immediately, and these Three are all one;
that is to say, these distinct persons are one indistinct and undivided nature,
essence, deity; so as, though there be three divine persons, yet is there but
one only God. And no marvel if upon Trinity Sunday both the Epistle and Gospel
report unto this sacred mystery; for it is indeed the highest article of our
Faith, the first and main principle of Christian Religion. But to conclude this
doctrine

20. See how the beginning of this verse tells (besides this mystery) what the
Apostles were commanded to teach the world, namely to do all whatsoever Christ
commanded them to deliver, as the Will of God; that is to say, as well to do
good works, as to believe aright, and to profess that Faith which was preached
unto them: and how ever Luther and Calvin pretend, the Church of Christ and the
right administration of the Sacraments thereof, and of the divine Services had
failed for many hundred of years together, before they arrogated to themselves
a kind of new Apostolate forsooth; yet it is from hence confidently asserted by
the unanimous consent of all Catholic Doctors and Divines, that there neither
has been hitherto, nor ever shall be hereafter, till the day of doom, which is
the consummation or end of the world, any failure in the Church of Christ, nor
in Christ his perpetual assistance and presence with his ever visible Church:
insomuch that he is ever visibly present in his perpetual visible rulers of the
Church, and invisibly in his continual-assisting grace; and hence it is
evidently proved, that albeit no successors of the Apostles had those ample
prerogatives which they enjoyed, yet their Ministry is so the same that the
Apostles was, as Christ is said even to perpetuate the Apostles in their
successors, and his presence with them in his presence with their followers;
and in his assisting them as constantly as he did assist their predecessors,
though perhaps not as amply, nor as efficaciously at all times: For how else
can it be true, that Christ said to his Apostles, he would send them another
Comforter, that should assist them eternally, not in their persons, but in
their successors to the worlds end? For the same are the gifts of Christ and
of the Holy Ghost, as far forth, as they are both one and the same God. Nay
more, Christ is even visibly remaining with the Ministers of his Church in the
holy Eucharist or B. Sacrament of the Altar, his blessed body and blood being
exposed perpetually to the receiving and adoration of the people: more, he is
visibly with us in his Priests, who are his visible instruments to administer
the Sacraments, and offer sacrifice unto the sacred Deity; for though the
Priest be the instrumental, yet Christ is the chief and principal Priest
himself; it being proper to him to be both Sacrifice and Sacrificant: so as in
seeing the accidents of bodies, we are said consequently to see the things
whose accidents we see; in like manner by seeing the Sacramental species, we
may be said to see the Sacrament, the body and blood of Christ, whose accidents
they are after consecration, though the same species before were the accidents
of bread and wine. To conclude, we may as truly say, Christ is visibly with his
Church to the worlds end; as we may say a man's soul is visibly in his body,
that is to say, perceptibly, so long as a man lives and has motion: for look
what the soul is to the body, the same Christ is to his Church; so that as the
soul is the bodies natural life, Christ is the supernatural life of the soul
believing in him, and making her self (by that belief) a member of his Church:
for as the soul makes the body move, so Christ makes his Church to do,
according to that of S. Paul, Philipp. 2. he works all in all according to
the purpose of his own holy will; and again, he it is that gives a will to do
good, and a power to put that will in execution, and to perfect by him, what
was undertaken for him, as being to his honor and glory.

The Application.
1. IT is no marvel that to day we hear inculcated to us an explicit act of
Faith in the Front and body of this Gospel, while Hope and Charity are only
recommended to us in the close thereof, and that but implicitly neither;
notwithstanding (as our design of piety is laid in this work) Charity is the
chief virtue to be practiced from this day until Advent. This is I say no
marvel, the very name of the day requiring this preference to Faith, and the
nature of the Feast enforcing it besides; for since the proper object of Love
is Goodness, (seen or understood) and since the Blessed Trinity is not here
seen at all, but by the light of Faith; therefore all the understanding we can
have of it on Earth, is first to believe, and next to love it; according as the
Gospel intimates, where Jesus by the virtue of Plenipotentiality given him both
in heaven and earth, sends his Apostles first to Teach the whole world, the
mystery of the B. Trinity, by Baptizing all Nations in the name of the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, and thereby obliging them to believe explicitly these
Three distinct Persons are all but one simple and single God; whereas he bids
the said Apostles, (here at least) but implicitly to hope in, and to love the
sacred Trinity, in as much as he commands their Teaching all Nations to observe
all his Commandments whatsoever, which yet are not observeable but for pure
love of the commander, and for pure hope of his recompencing our obedience unto
his commands. Who so reads the Gospel, will soon see this to be the whole scope
thereof.

2. What then remains for further application but that by an actual confessing
this true Faith, we actually glorify the eternal Trinity? and that in the
Power of each Divine Persons sacred Majesty, (namely in the Power of the Father
creating us, in the Power of the Son redeeming us, in the Power of the Holy
Ghost sayntifying of us) we adore the Unity of these Three Persons Deity, since
none but God can create, none but God can redeem, and none but God can
sayntifie a soul?

3. O Happy Christians, who by firmly believing this to be their obligation to
the sacred Trinity, can neither want motive enough for Love of God, nor ground
enough for Hope, that by this Act of Faith they shall be defended from all
Adversity! since the true victrix over all our enemies is as St. John tells us,
1 Ep. c. 5. our Faith, which overcomes the world, and consequently all
Adversity.

Say now the Prayer above, and see how patt it is to what we here are taught.
On the first Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Luke 6.37. JVdge not, that you be not judged; for in what
Judgment you Judge, you shall be Judged, says our Lord.

Verse. Let my prayer, O Lord, be directed

Resp. Even as Incense before thee.


The Prayer.
O God the strength of those that hope in thee, be propitiously present to our
prayers; and because without thee mortal infirmity is of no ability, grant the
assistance of thy grace, that in doing what thou do command, we may please
thee both in will and work.

The Illustration.
ALbeit this Sunday is never served, but with a commemoration made thereof upon
Trinity Sunday, (which it always falls upon, and whereunto with great reason
it gives place in the public Solemnity of holy Churches service;)
nevertheless we are not forbidden in our private devotions to make use of the
comfort, which this prayer (adjusted to the Epistle and Gospel proper
thereunto) will afford us; since the Gospel and the Prayer are both read to day
by way of Commemoration of this first Sunday, as above; and since the whole
Mass of this Sunday is said at the pleasure of the Priest, (no double feasts
occurring) between this and Thursday next, which is the Feast of Corpus
Christi: and in regard there is a world of sweet devotion in the exposition
both of this Epistle and Gospel, I hope it will encourage all good Christians
to read, both what is written upon the Blessed Trinity, and this Sunday too,
before next Sunday come: since it is but this week of all the year, that they
will have so much to read, and which (if I mistake not,) will seem but little
neither, it is all so sweet. But because the task of reading will be double, I
shall abridge the gloss of the Prayer, and suffice my self to show the
constant connection between this and the other parts of holy Churches Service to
day, by summing up the Epistle and Gospel, as both teaching perfect charity,
while they extend it to the love of our enemies; and as being both abstracted
in this prayer, which after an humble acknowledgment of our own weakness,
confessing all our strength is from Almighty God, without whom our mortal
infirmity is of no ability, petitions the assistance of his grace, that in
doing his commands, we may please him hoth in will and work. And truly all his
commands are included in these two precepts of charity, so much insisted on
both in the Epistle and Gospel; namely that of loving God above all things, and
our neighbors as our selves; which then we shall do perfectly, when we love
our enemies; because this love will make us indeed have no enemies at all, and
so be as little troubled at what injury other men can do us, as we should be at
our selves, if by chance we were causes of our own mischiefs; for though we
might be disturbed a little thereat, yet never so much, as to loose our
charity, or to hate our selves; nor consequently can we hate our enemies, if we
once arrive at the perfection of that commandment, which bids us love our
neighbors as our selves. Which that we may do, this is very aptly made the
Churches Prayer to day, begging Gods assisting grace, that in doing his
commands, we may please him both in work and will: in work, by executing his
commands completely and perfectly; in will, by doing them readily and
cheerfully. And it is worthy our remark, that on the same Trinity Sunday, where
we have the deepest mystery of Faith recommended by holy Church, we should have
also the highest act of Charity inculcated unto us, that so we might see the
firmness of our Faith to day petitioned, consisted in the operation of our
Love according to the same Faith; and that Christian perfection is never
attained, till we arrive unto perfect Charity, which is the nerve that links
together the members of the Churches mystical body, and unites them all unto
their head Christ Jesus, as the sinews of natural bodies knit together the
members thereof. So still we see our design of connection between all the parts
of Churches Service made good.

The Epistle. 1 John 4.8, etc.
8 He that loves not, knows not God: for God is Charity.

9 In this has the charity of God appeared in us, because God has sent his
only-begotten Son into the world* that we may live by him.

10 In this is charity; not as though we have loved him, but because he has
loved us, and sent his Son a propitiation for our sins.

11 My dearest, if God has so loved us; we also ought to love one another.

12 God no man has seen at any time. If we love one another, God abides in
us, and his charity in us is perfected.

13 In this we know that we abide in him, and he in us; because he of his
Spirit has given us.

14 And we have seen and do testify, that the Father has sent his Son the
Savior of the world.

15 Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God abides in him,
and he in God.

16 And we have known and have believed the charity, which God has in us. God
is charity: and he that abides in charity, abides in God, and God in him.

17 In this is charity perfected with us, that we may have confidence in the
day of Judgment; because as he is, we also are in the world.

18 Fear is not in charity: but perfect charity casts out fear, because fear
has painfulnesse. And he that fears, is not perfect in charity.

19 Let us therefore love God, because God first has loved us.

20 If any man shall say that I love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar.
For he that loves not his brother whom he sees; God whom he sees not, how
can he love?

21 And this Commandment we have from God: that he which loves God, loves
also his Brother.


The Explication.
8. St. John in this Epistle ver. 7. had said, every one that loves is born of
God, and knows God; now he gives the reason thereof in this eighth verse,
proving the same a contrario as Schoolmen say, by an argument from the
contrary assertion: he that loves not, knows not God, because God is charity
or love: not but that we may speculatively know God without loving him, but
practically or experimentally we cannot know him, unless we actually love him:
For example, all men know speculatively that honey is sweet, but they know it
practically only when they taste it: And though the same argument holds in all
Gods attributes, as in his power, in his wisdom, etc. (since he is omnipotency
and omniscience) yet St. John argues thus only upon his charity, because the
subject he now undertakes is the commends of Charity. Again between lovers,
love is the main thing they delight in; and much more is it so betwixt God and
us, for he does not only love us, (and so is our lover) but is himself love,
nay if we say, he is the love, by which we love him too, perhaps we shall not
say amiss; and S. John being wholly inamoured with the love of God, breaks
into the recommends of charity, as the virtue himself was most excellent in,
and wherein he would have us most to excel. So for the groundwork of what this
Epistle is to dilate upon, we see it begins thus, God is charity, both
Essential and Notional: Essential, as it is the nature of the Deity; Notional,
as it is distinguishing the persons, and so signifies personally the holy
Ghost, who by love proceeding from the Father and the Son, is called the love
of them both, uniting them and him all in one indistinct essence, distinguished
into three distinct persons: now the true reason why God is called charity is,
because he is goodness it self, which is charity communicative and diffusive
of it self.

9. But this next shows clearly why St. John calls God Charity; because he
appeared so to be, by sending his only begotten Son into the world, that we
may live by him, (alluding to the like in his Gospel, chap. 3. v. 19.) who by
Adam were all dead. And this love he showed us, as an example for us to give
our selves to him by again.

10. For in this, that is to say, in our re-dilection or retaliation of love
for love, consists charity, which can never be in us to God but reciprocal
between God and us, though in us to others it may be not mutual, and de facto,
in very deed, in God to us it was so, when he loved us before we loved him; for
it was impossible we should have loved him before he loved us; and therefore we
are enabled to re-love him, because his previous love to us inkindled our
subsequent love to him. Whence the Apostle says, our charity does not so much
consist in that we love God; as in that God loves us, and makes us thereby able
to re-love him, because he sent his Son a propitiation for our sins. St.
Augustine says briefly (and excellently well) upon this place, tract. 9. God
loved the impious to make them pious, the unjust to make them just, the sick to
make them whole; and why may not we add he loved them that hated him, to make
them love him, for sending his Son a Sacrifice for his utter enemies? O how
contrary is this to the course of the world, which is to revenge our selves on
those that love us not! O how truly is it said of God, Esaias 55.8, 9. My ways
are not like your ways, but exalted from them, as high as heaven from earth!
yet S. Paul shows us, we may follow God marching above us, as high as heaven is
from earth, when Romans 9. v. 2 he desired to be Anathema, accursed to save the
Jews his persecutours, and consequently his utter enemies.

11. If is here a causal, not a doubting or conditional particle; as who should
say, because God has thus loved us, we must therefore love one another. In
like manner And was taken causally, when Christ said to his disciples, as in
his Gospel, Joh. 13. v. 14. I have washed your feet, being your Lord and
Master; And you must wash one another feet; that is to say, because you must,
etc. Hence learn to humble your selves to your fellow servants, since I your
Lord your God have humbled my self to you. And we may note the deep art of this
phrase in St. John, who rather says admiring, If God has thus loved us, then,
because God has thus loved us, etc. to show it does not follow, we can render
equally to God, we can love him, as well as he can love us; So it is not said
therefore love him again; but rather if God has loved us, and we must love one
another; as who should say, since we cannot retaliate love for love to God, let
us at least love one another, let us for his sake, love our neighbors as our
selves, since he dyed equally for them as for us: for as S. Matthew tells us
Chap. 25. v. 40. what you did to the least of my brethren, you did to me. And
indeed since God cannot personally want any thing, that we are able to give
him, he has afforded us this means to relieve him (as wanting), when we
relieve the necessities of our neighbors. So the sense of this verse is
strong, and even enforcing us to love one another: Since God so unlike to us,
so much above us in perfection has stooped so low as to love us; how much more
ought we, that are all one like another, to love each other; since like
naturally runs to like, and naturally loves what is like unto it?

12. This verse corroborates the explications of the former, as saying, though
God be in himself Invisible, yet if we love our neighbor, God is by his Divine
and indivisible virtue of charity united to us, and made, as it were, one in,
and with us; whereby our charity is rendered perfect: nay even the Invisible
God becomes as it were visible, both in us, by the visible charity we show to
others, and in our neighbor whom we love, as the visible image of the
invisible Deity. But we shall do well to see upon this occasion, how these
words are safely expounded, God no man ever saw: For which purpose turn to the
exposition upon 2 Cor. 12.4. on Septuagesima Sunday, declaring what S. Paul saw
in his rapture: but for present let us take it with the common sense of
Expositours; that no pure man ever in this world or in heaven can with corporal
eyes see God his essence or divine nature; though Cornelius a Lapide presumes
to say, Christ being both God and Man did see his own divinity: whence neither
Moses nor St. Paul did thus see him; and that sight the Blessed have of him in
heaven is more by way of grace, then of nature, and this indeed more with the
souls understanding, then with the bodies eyes. To conclude this verse, a
thing is then perfect, when it consists entirely of all its parts; and charity
we know to be tripartite, consisting of our love to God, which alone is not
perfect, unless we love our neighbor also as we do our selves; for these are
both integral, and essential parts of perfect charity: And while we have
charity thus perfected, then though we see not God, yet he both regards, and
abides in us, by reason of this divine virtue of charity, uniting God to all,
and all to God again. Besides we perfect even the charity we love God with all,
when we extend it to our neighbor too; since we cannot love one another for
Gods sake, but we must love God more then we did before. Lastly, when the text
says his charity, we may understand it, as if truly the charity of God to us
were perfected by our loving each other; since while we do so, God abides in
us, and his charity is thereby perfected; not so, as to make it more in it
self, but to make it more in us, and to appear also more to others, which is a
kind of perfection too: and in particular charity is perfected by loving our
enemies, which being a love none but God has taught us, God in this has
appeared more perfect to us, then in any thing else he ever did; because he
became a propitiation even for us that were all his enemies, before his charity
(perfected in us) made us his friends, and him our Savior, and so finally gave
him an opportunity, who was in himself all perfection, to receive (in our
esteems at least) an addition to his innate perfection, if not a new perfection
by our imperfection; which is another way of verifying, what St. Paul says 2
Cor. 12.9. of virtue being perfected in infirmity, then was showed when that
text was expounded 1 Cor. 12.9. upon Sexagesima Sunday. St. Austin upon this
text, tract. 7. shows a fine progress of Charity in perfection: The fire of
our charity first seizes upon our neighbor, and afterward extends it self
more abroad: it first helps our Brother, or our kindred, or friends, next some
stranger, but at last our enemy. And tract. 8. Love him, who is now come to
dwell within you, that by his more perfect possessing you, he may render you
also perfect.

13. And this next verse shows us a sign, how to know when he is within us;
namely, when he gives us of his Spirit of loving one another, even our enemies;
for by this it is evident he is in us, who only taught us that which only
himself could do: and it follows evidently, that whenever God is in us, we
are in him, because wheresoever God is, he unites the place so to himself by
his immensity, as the place or subject he is in, rather is said to be in him,
then he in it. And consequently if we feel his Spirit in us, that is, if we
love each other, especially our enemies, we may boldly conclude that not only
God is in us, but that we also are, and remain in him, so long as by such
dilection his Divine Spirit aboades in us. 1 Cor. 6.17. he that adheres to God
is one Spirit with him.

14. 15. Which doctrine the Evangelist finds both so solid, and so sweet, that
in these two verses he proves it to be as really intended by him, as it is
pretended, taught, and professed by the Catholic Church: for, says he, we
that have seen can, and do testify that God sent his Son to save the world;
and by confessing Jesus to be his Son, we remain in God, and he in us; we in
him by Faith; and he in us by the gift of that Divine virtue, which can slow
from no other source, but his infinite goodness and bounty; as St. Paul says,
Phil. 3.17. Christ by Faith dwells in our hearts. This S. John inculcates
with special regard to Ebion, Cerinthus, and others, who at that time denied
the Divinity of Christ: so for proof hereof he exposes himself, and all the
College of Christ his Apostles and disciples, who as ear and eyewitnesses
were ready to testify the same to all the world, as they all did by their
glorious Martyrdomes.

16. In this verse the Evangelist gives the same testimony for the charity of
God being in us, as he did in the fourteenth verse for Christ the Son of God
being in the world; that so we may be fully possessed of that Truth, and
inamoured on that virtue which he himself is even transported with, and cannot
speak but in commendations of, being, as it were, all on fire therewith. For if
we mark him, his words fall from him all circular, like balls of fire: From God
he comes to Christ, from Christ to charity, from charity to love of our
neighbors, thence back to Christ again, now to his charity; and all to show he
moves only in the circle or orb of Love, and cannot wheel himself out of it,
but winds all his speech into pleasing Meanders of that subject, wherein to be
lost is to be sound, because who is not found in the labyrinth of charity is a
lost soul: and therefore St. John having gone into this Maze by the clew that
leads through all the Meanders of it, God himself, (as this Epistle began, God
is charity) must needs come out with the same clew again, which is charity both
to God and man; wherewith he closes this Epistle, to show us, he has been
through all the turnings and windings of love, or else he could never have come
out the same way he went into this re-selfing circle of charity, which this
verse delightfully winds us into, and brings us out again: for if God be
charity, who remains in it remains in God, and God in him, as a circle remains
in a ring, and a ring in a circle; but with this difference, we in him, as in
our increated, he in us as in his created Temple, where he most delights to be;
we rings in him, as in the circle of his Immensity, he circled in us, as his
Immensity is capable of being in a ring of creatures.

17. The amorous Evangelist having told us much before, how even the increated
charity is perfected (in our esteems) by juxtaposition to our imperfections;
now he tells us, how our created charity is perfected in us, by our trust, and
confidence in God, even when creatures may pretend most to diffide in him, at
the day of Judgment; and he gives a strange reason for this confidence,
because as he is (meaning as God and Christ is) we also are in the world: So
here In this, etc. imports either that to this end charity was given us, not to
fear him our Judge, who had given us the grace to love him; or that really this
is the perfection of charity in us, that as he loved us, without fear to take
upon him our infirmities or imperfections, and gave himself wholly into our
hands to be even his Judges; so we must love him, by assuming as many of his
perfections as we can, and by freely making him our Judge, without fear of
receiving any hard measure at his hands, if we can truly say, we love him with
all our hearts, as he loved us when he was adjudged to death by us: Or as St.
Augustine says, In this signifies, it is a true sign that our charity is
perfect, if as the Just and Saints in heaven covet the day of Judgment, so we
also do, that God may thereby be glorified before all the world, what ere
become of us, because we in that case are in the world, as God, as Christ was
in it, perfectly loving, and so not fearing us, though he see cause enough of
fear amongst so many Traitors, if he had been capable of harm; so if we can
arrive to love God thus perfectly, we may truly say we are as he was in the
world, without fear, even of Judgment, because we have no cause to fear
corruption in him, as he might have had in us; and therefore may come with
more confidence to his tribunal, then he did to ours, that is, may be in this
world as he was, without fear, because we are in love: for the Evangelist here
proves two effects of perfect love, the first is confidence in God, both living
and dying; the second is casting away all fear.

18. As in terms this verse avoucheth the second, having declared the first
immediately before; so that as charity produces confidence in us, this
confidence expels fear out of us, and thus becomes, as Aristotle says,
cause of the effect, in being cause of the cause thereof. But we shall do well
to examine what fear it is, that charity expells, least by not fearing
Judgment, we fall into the error of hereti^ks, who presume they are certain of
their salvation. By fear therefore is here meant despair, such as dejected
consciences use to have, whereas none such enters into those that have perfect
charity: Secondly, he alludes to that fear which in Eccles. 5 v. 5. we read of,
even for remitted sins be not without fear, which yet a perfect lover needs not
fear, but this is said to imperfect lovers of God: Thirdly, he means servile
fear, such as makes us serve God merely for fear of hell; not filial fear, for
that is compatible with (nay essential unto) perfect love, as we read Eccles.
1.28. who is without fear (namely filial) cannot be justified; because who ever
truly loves, is ever afraid to offend his beloved: Fourthly, this fear is
worldly or humane, such as men have to loose their estates, or friends
affections, when to preserve these temporal trifles they hazard the loss of
eternal blessings: Fifthly, this fear is scruple, whereas perfect charity
abandons all scruples, and proceeds freely and frankly in her Actions according
to that of St. Paul, Romans 8.15. You have not received the spirit of servitude
again in fear, but the spirit of adoption of sons, wherein we cry Abba, Father:
Lastly, Charity banisheth all fear of punishment, although it allows fear of
the fault, that may deserve punishment; for the souls in Purgatory are not
troubled at their pains so much, as they are to have deserved them by their
faults, which they are even willing to expiate: so when he concludes this
verse, saying, fear has pain, he means fear in these senses as above; such as
is said of war, that the fear of war, is worse then war it self; and all fear
which brings pain is opposite to charity, that brings ease and content along
with it, not solicitude, nor anxiety, which shuts up men's hearts, whereas
perfect charity opens and dilates them.

19. 20. 21. These three last verses are as it were recapitulatory and winding
up the clew or thread of this amorous discourse, which lead us into the
delightful maze of love, and has brought us out again, according as we heard
in the exposition of the sixteenth verse; adding here, it is not only a
counsel, but a command from God, that we love one another, that we love our
neighbor, lest men should pretend it were enough to love God only: whereas
indeed all the scope of St. John in this Epistle has been to draw us to a love
of one another, by showing how God has loved us all without respect of
persons, and taught us to love even our enemies, lest we should excuse our
selves from that complement of perfect dilection, which is a friendly loving of
our enemies, to show we have no enemies at all, but our own sins; the only
things (if we may so call them) that we are, or can be allowed not to love, and
indeed may perfectly hate them, nay the more we do hate them, the more we shall
love our neighbors, as finding we have no enemies of any, but of our selves.
Note, the Evangelist tells us we are liars, to say we love God, if we love not
our Brother, because love is a passion leading us by the eye, to the
embracements of the objects that we see before our eyes: if therefore a man
looking upon God Almighties picture, which himself has made (as he confesses)
like himself, and do not love that picture which he sees; how can he love the
prototype or original thereof, God himself whom he sees not? And truly the
Logic of this discourse is convincing, because love is first rooted in the
object seen; if therefore we do not love that object of God, which we do see,
how can we without a blush be so impudent, so irrational, as to say, we love
the object which we do not see at all? as well a blind man might tell us, he
sees and loves darkness, which is nothing but a privation of sight and light.

The Application.
1. HAving now given (for respect to the B. Trinity) the religious preference
this day to our first Act of Faith, when according to the order of holy
Churches services charity is held forth unto us as the chief virtue we are to
exercise (without intermission) from hence forward until Advent Sunday; see
now with how strong a flame of love the beloved disciple of our Lord opens his
loving heart to day, whilst his whole Epistle to us, from the very first verse
to the last, is nothing else but a continual eruption of the burning charity
within his loving breast. O how necessary is it then for us to strike out of
our flinty hearts some sparks of love at least to day! who knows but in time
with frequent lesser acts we may at last produce the greatest, that of love
unto our enemies? see how the eleventh verse above does animate to this;
bidding us love each other, as Christ has loved us. Alas what was there in us
but enmity to him, when he began to love us? were we not all at that time
children of wrath? Search then beloved out to day the man, or men you least
affect, nay those (if any be) that bear you hatred, and so are brothers of
wrath, show but a smiling countenance to them, in testimony that you look upon
them, as Jesus looked on you, when least you loved him, when most you hated him
indeed; then shall you best apply the present Text to your emolument.

2. Do not say you hate dissimulation, that you cannot smile on him you love
not, or on him that hates you, lest you seem base and abject minded, lest you
make your enemy insult the more to see you fawn upon him: Fie fie, beloved,
these are but the subtle arts of him that is our common enemy: by these devices
he deludes us into hell, and robs us of our best inheritance; this is to do as
holy David says, To search excuses for our sins.

3. Say rather with St. Paul, I can do all things in him that strengthens me:
say, though this be against thy own corrupted nature, yet it is most suitable to
his, who took upon him thy infirmity, that he might help thee with his
fortitude. Hope then in heavens helping hand, hope in the Holy Ghost, hope in
his holy Grace: he came but lately with a magazin of Love to leave thee store
enough to love thine enemies; if thou can not at the first both smile, and
love, do thee but that, and hope he will do this, who can do more, the holy
Ghost I mean; show by the deed thou have a wish at least to do it willingly,
that he may by his holy grace give thee a will to execute this hard command of
his, to love thine enemies, as he has loved thee, frankly, freely, willingly.
Let no man say this is a good, but not a proper counsel now: When is it more
proper.

Then when we pray as above, that we may do it? Then we best apply the Text to
us, when we apply our selves to do as it commands, as holy Church by reading it
commends. The Gospel. Luke 6. v. 36. etc.
36 Be ye therefore merciful, as also your Father is merciful.

37 Judge not, and you shall not be judged: Condemn not, and you shall not be
condemned: Forgive, and you shall be forgiven.

38 Give, and there shall be given to you good measure, and pressed down, and
shaken together, and running over shall they give into your bosom. For with
the same measure that you do mete, it shall be measured to you again.

39 And he said to them a similitude also: Can the blind lead the blind? does
not both fall into the ditch?

40 The disciple is not above his master: but every one shall be perfect, if he
be as his master.

41 And why see thou the mote in thy brothers eye; but the beam that is in
thine own eye thou considerest not?

42 Or how can thou say to thy Brother; Brother, let me cast out the moat out
of thine eye; thy self not seeing the beam in thine own eye? Hypocrite, cast
first the beam out of thine own eye; and then shall thou see clearly to take
forth the moat out of thy brothers eye.


The Explication.
36. WE have seen how perfect charity was inculcated by St. John in this days
Epistle; now St. Luke begins his Gospel in a style suitable thereunto, when he
recommends the love of our enemies, under the notion of mercy: And indeed when
he bids us be merciful to one another, as our heavenly Father is merciful; what
else can he point out unto us, then the dilection of our enemies? since God the
Father his first mercy was shown to none else, but those that were his utter
enemies, mankind, for whose redemption yet he sent his sacred Son, a sacrifice
and a propitiation for the whole mass of humane nature, to show the height of
his perfection in this his act of mercy; which was indeed so great, that hence
it is, his mercy is said to have surpassed all his other works, Psalm. 44.9. And
that we do not mistake in expounding mercy here for love of our enemies, we may
avouch St. Matthew, Chap. 5.43. who speaking to the same sense as St. Luke does
here, (though not in the same words) brings in our Savior saying; You have
heard, that it is said, thou shall love thy neighbor, and shall hate thine
enemy; and v. 44. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, do good to them that
hate you, and pray for your persecutours and those that calumniate you; and v.
48. he concludes this subject thus, Be ye perfect, as your heavenly Father is
perfect: as who should say, St. Lukes mercy here recommended, is the dilection
of our enemies, and who so loves them, is not only merciful, as God is
merciful, but by that means is perfect also, as God is perfect; in such sense
as the Expositours interpret St. Matthewes perfection, and S. Lukes mercy,
which are here all one, because love or mercy to our enemies is indeed the very
height of perfection in us; and so it is the greatest, that ever did (to us)
appear to be in God, if yet any of his attributes can be one greater then
another. When therefore we are bid be merciful, or perfect, as God is, we are
to understand it thus, that Christians are to proceed further in perfection,
then all other people, who though they received the precept of loving their
enemies in the very law of Nature, as we read Exodus 23.4, 5. if thou meet thine
enemies Ox or Ass astray, bring it home; yet were so blind as not to practice
(indeed not to see) it, as appeared, when the Scribes and Doctors of the Law
delivered a Tradition quite opposite to this, teaching, (as our Savior says
above) Hate your enemies: and for this reason to undeceive them, and to show
the world their error, that had antiquated the law of nature in this
particular, God himself makes it a signal mark of his perfection, and
recommends it to us, as the height of perfection in us, above which he requires
no more at our hands, and for which he likens (if not equals) us unto himself
in perfection. I say, likens us, because that is the true sense of this Text,
bidding us love our enemies perfectly, and not slightly, but with all our
hearts, as God loves us, who dyed for our sakes, that were all his enemies:
and this perfection therefore is divine, not humane in us; because we may bear
a kind of civil respect of love to our enemies, and yet not love them
perfectly, as God loves us; whereby we only attain to this divine perfection
of mercy and love, which likens us to God himself: And though by the first,
it is true, we become Gods children in nature, by the last we become his
children in grace; and so of regulated nature, make our nature sayntified too,
which gives it the finishing and life-colour of perfection or similitude to
God: though when we are greatest Saints here, our perfection is but initiated,
or begun; since here we can at most but curb, but tame concupiscence, whereas
in heaven it shall be extirpated quite and clean, and then we shall be
perfectly perfect, as God is, while our here beginnings, shall be there
finished by the burnish of Glory, polishing the works of Grace wrought in our
unpolisht natures.

37. How excellently well does this follow, since we are always apt to fall
upon judging and condemning our enemies! Yet it is not Judiciary, but rash
Judgment, that is here forbidden; since the former is the main virtue that
supporteth government over all the world, but the latter is a vice as much
destroying order, as it were to see the delinquent leap from the bar to the
bench, and in stead of standing to receive his own sentence from the mouth of
Justice, pronounce a peremptory sentence on his Judge: for so shall all those
be to us at the latter day, whom we by our rash Judgments here condemn of any
fault, wherein they are not guilty. Now the reason is, because Judgment is an
act of Jurisdiction, not only declaring, but punishing of crimes; and
therefore restrained to some Magistrates only, not allowed to any that are
mere subjects, such as we all are to Almighty God, and consequently none of us
can lawfully sit as Judge over the actions of our neigbours; no not the Priest
himself out of his Confessionary or Tribunal Seat, where the Penitent must be
his own accuser too, or else cannot be judged by the Priest. The like is of
condemning, as of Judgment, which seem to differ only as the Judges
declaration of the crime does from the condemnation of the Criminal, by the
prolation of the sentence against him, and assignation of him over to the
punishment of the Law, answerable to the Fact for which he is condemned. But
why it is said, Judge not, and you shall not be judged, Condemn not, and you
shall not be condemned, will not easily be understood; for by this means no
delinquent would ever suffer, unless he were so insolent, as to condemn his
Judge, (or another body guilty as himself:) We must not therefore take it in
this sense, but rather thus; Judge not falsely of another, and you shall not be
condemned of such false judgment; Condemn not your neighbor falsely, and God
will not condemn you for that particular guilt of false condemnation; or, make
the best interpretation of other men's actions, and God will make the best of
yours also, when he comes your Judge. Yet we have an excellent example in the
Adulteress, escaping even the just sentence of the old law, by our Saviors
bidding those that were without sin, to cast the first stone at her, whereby
every man slunk away, and none was left to execute that severe law upon her:
and sure, it is to this example the Evangelist alludes, when he forbids rash
Judgment in us, under the notion of our own being to come to Judgment also,
and of our hope to escape well at the dread Tribunal of Almighty God, if we
endeavor to clear our own seen consciences, rather then pass a Judgment upon
the unseen sins of others. But the close of this verse puts a period to this
difficulty: Admit others do offend God, or you, yet judge them not, condemn
them not, forgive rather on your parts, and by this means you shall obtain from
God forgiveness of your offenses to his Divine Majesty. O who would not
forgive a trivial fault in hope to gain thereby a pardon for his own heinous
offenses?

38. Give you temporal alms, and you shall have given to you spiritual
treasures; not only according to the small proportion of your gift, but
according to the good measure of God, whose hand is always full, and who never
gives his gifts to halfes, but does press down his graces upon us, and shakes
a world of his favors together, even until they run over; and inables us to
spare others part of his holy gifts to us, whilst his Divine Majesty pleases
to make sinful men, instruments of sanctity in others. And that for temporal
Alms we receive spiritual treasures, the following words of this verse
declare; saying, those abundant proportions shall he given into your own
bosoms, (which are the Vessels of spiritual gifts and graces, as other men's
hands are the receptacles of our temporal Alms:) and what follows tells us,
that according to the measure of our Alms we shall receive a measure of
graces; for little alms a little grace; though in comparison of temporal gifts
with those that are spiritual, the least grace is a pressed, shaken, running
over measure in respect of a little alms: if therefore our alms be great, by
this account the graces proportionable thereunto, will be infinite, which is in
part declared, when we are told, charity covers a multitude of sins. So the
sum of this verse is to exhort us to giving alms, according as we will hope
for our own sins to be forgiven, and for the grace of God (covering our sins)
to make us able to sanctify others, whilst we add to our temporal alms an
addition of spiritual instruction, both by the exemplarity of our lives, and by
our teaching the ignorant (if need be) their duty toward Almighty God; as this
lesson we shall always teach when we give Alms, that it is God who gives,
while our purses are open to the relieving of the poor, since God has placed
the portion of the poor in the rich man's hands.

39. This similitude was here aptly introduced, because it is alluding to that
which went before of rash Judgment one against an other; since it is the part
of a Judge to be himself clear of all the faults he condemns others of; to be
indeed the eye of the people, (or rather ever in the peoples eyes) so they will
never run in danger of the Law, but follow the conduct of their leading Judge
in the part of Innocence and Justice: But if they will take upon them to be
Judges of other men's actions, then they put out, as it were, their own eyes,
and become blind guides of others, and consequently both fall into the ditch of
danger, if not into the bottomless pit of hell fire.

40. This simile follows fitly upon the former, for as a guide is a kind of
master, (in the way he guides others,) so if the guide be blind, the guided
who follows not so much in virtue of his own eyes, as in belief of his guides
knowledge, must needs perish in that trust reposed in his guide, if the guide
do perish missing his way, by his own blindness. So a master in that art he
undertakes to teach, must needs be supposed better versed then any of his
scholars are in the same Art; for so long as he is able to teach, he is a
master, and so long as others learn they are scholars; and consequently in
this sense, no scholar (as he is a scholar, or a learner) can know more then
his master; all which notwithstanding absolutely speaking, the man that is at
first but a scholar in an Art, may arrive at last to a perfection in that Art
much above his master, but this must be by his own better industry, or by some
other greater helps, then any his master was able to afford him; and then he is
no scholar (as to that particular wherein he excells his master) but rather
his master may (in that) become his scholar: So when it is said every one
shall be perfect, if he be as his master, it is understood, in that which the
master can teach, and wherein the scholar was to learn, not in any other
particular. And truly this place is a good incitement toward humility, in
those who think themselves grand masters and knowing men, for even such may
stoop to learn some special truths or experiments of far less knowing, or
less experienced men then themselves; and in these smaller acquisitions the
greater men must be content, not only to learn, but even to esteem they
acquire a kind of perfection, by what they have thus learned, from those who in
other matters are hugely their inferiors.

41. Here the Apostle looks back to the rash judgment he had before
forbidden; as who should say, why do thou censure, judge, or condemn little
faults in thy neighbor, being thy self guilty of far greater? Is this mercy?
is this perfection? is this to love thine enemies? no, it is to tyrannize over
thy friends, who give thee better example then thou followest, though they are
not themselves free from fault: For by the more and beam are here understood
the faults on both sides; the mote being the little fault in one man's eye,
rashly judged of by him that has a beam, a greater mote, or fault in his own
eye. And this example was well made in the eye, which never sees it self, but
is always looking upon other objects, and censuring them for deformed or
beautiful, according as they please the eye: just so do those who judge rashly
of others, and never cast an eye into their own consciences. And since we are
aptest still to be thus rash over enemies; therefore the perfection of charity
was under the notion of mercy premised, before this subject of rash judgment
was fallen upon by the Evangelist.

42. The Evangelist neatly winds up all the bottom of doctrine (this day
intended to us) upon the button of mercy, which then lies smoothest, when it
is showed toward our enemies; and then indeed we show both mercy to them, and
discretion toward our selves, when we spare censuring their little faults, by
introspection into our own much greater: besides we run upon impossibilities,
when we pretend to see moats in other men's eyes, that have beams in our own,
which take away all our sight from us; and therefore in this verse the
Evangelist asks how we can with any front or confidence go to look moats in
our neighbors eyes, that have beams in our own? The intent of this question
is to make us absolutely forbear all rash judgment, since we see the sight of
our own reason is quite taken from us, by our irrational trespasses against
the Law of God; for upon the matter, every sin is an act against nature,
because it propends to the nothing, out of which our nature was educed, when we
were created to be always doing something in honor and glory of our Creator.
And least we should not apprehend the Evangelist to be in earnest, when he
beats down this common error of the world, this correcting others in things we
are our selves more faulty in then they, this tyrannizing over our enemies by
taking advantage of their small faults; he calls it plain hypocrisy in us to
go about censuring any body else, until we have purged our selves of all
faults, especially of all that are greater then those, we hypocritically
reprehend in others; as if we were free from any such, who yet abound in many
far greater then they are which we rebuke our neighbor for. To conclude, by
this Art the Evangelist cuts off all rash judgment for ever, since he forbids
it till we have less faults then those we find in others; which no pious soul
will ever judge of it self, and consequently she will forbear all rash
judgment, which being commonly practiced upon our enemies (under the mask of
hypocrisy, to rectify their errors) then we shall hope we may begin to love
them, when we see we must not reprehend them rashly, as for the most part men
are prone to do. So adding these instructions of perfect dilection which the
Gospel affords, to the former given us in the Epistle, the doctrine proves
complete; and we (if perfect in it) shall hope to be perfect, as God is
perfect, who sent us his sacred Son to perfect us in such heavenly doctrine, as
this is.

The Application.
1. WE have seen sufficiently the drift of the Expositours upon this present
Text, how they all conclude under the notion of mercy to recommend unto us the
love of enemies: and that no doubt because the strongest act of Faith, should
be accompanied with the most perfect act of charity, as in the Illustration
above was observed: but the rather, because as this day closes up the Feast of
Pentecost, by making the Octave thereof sacred to the B. Trinity; so we being
supposed to have received newly the Holy Ghost into our Hearts, should at this
time especially give demonstration of it by producing the best act of charity,
thereby to show how strongly his holy peace does operate on our rebellious
wills.

2. And then assuredly we shall be able to work by the holy Ghost most
strongly, when we put all our Hope in his assistance, when we acknowledge our
own impotency, and have recourse to his Omnipotency; and when we humbly beseech
his goodness to give us his holy grace, that our first act of love after his
departure from us may be such as aims at least at the highest charity, which
is the love of enemies.

3. It is St. Austins special counsel (and that which commonly all ghostly
Fathers give their Penitents) that we set upon the amendment of our lives by
proposing to our selves some one virtue, which we will endeavor to perfect in
us, and by that means to conquer the opposite vice thereunto; no way doubting,
if we can arrive to the perfection of any one virtue, (though we spend our
whole life therein) but that we shall dye Saints, and get the victory of all
sin whatsoever, by being perfect masters of any one virtue. If we will give
holy Church leave to choose for us, (and surely she is best able to make the
best choice) behold to day she chooses charity for the virtue she would
recommend, and the best act of charity, the love of enemies: why should we be
faint-hearted? be it that beloved; what if we begin imperfectly to do as we are
bid? even against our wills? we shall in time be willing doers of God
Almighties will herein;

If with holy Church we now begin to practice that for which we pray to day; to
perfect our actions by the perfection of our wills, by doing good willingly for
the love we bear to God and his Commandments.

On Sunday within the Octaves OF Corpus Christi.
The Antiphon. Luke 14.21. GO out quickly into the high ways and streets of
the city, and compel the poor and feeble, blind and lame to come in, that my
house may be filled. Alleluja. Alleluja.

Verse. He has fed them with the fat of wheat, Alleluja.

Resp. And has filled them with honey out of the rock. Alleluja.


The Prayer.
MAke us, O Lord, equally to have both a continual fear and love of thy Holy
name, because thou do never leave them destitute of thy government, whom
thou do instruct in the solidity of thy Law.

The Illustration.
WIth great reason this Prayer begs that we may equally fear and love the name
of God, since it is a Prayer as well adapted to the day of our Lord, (being the
second Sunday after Pentecost) as unto the now flowing Feast of the Blessed
Sacrament, in the Octaves whereof we are at present: And since all Sundays are
days set apart for the service of God, we do most properly on this day pray,
that we may ever sayntifie his holy name with equal fear and love unto the
same: which is as much as to say, we should never receive the Blessed Sacrament
(now exposed in all Churches where Catholic Religion is freely practiced) but
that we should as well have a regard to the fear we ought to have of Christ our
Judge, as to the love we ought to bear to the name of Jesus our Lord and
Savior; who is most properly so called now, because in the Blessed Sacrament,
we are in a manner actually saved, by having heaven come down to us, even
before we are able or fit to go up to heaven: And therefore this prayer beggs,
we may as equally at least, love God under his best of names, (that of Jesus)
by which he is now exposed unto us in the B. Sacrament; as we must fear him
under his severer name of our Judge, if we now fail of such equal love unto
him. O happy Christians! who at the same time when they are bid to fear Christ,
are taught to love Jesus; and consequently their love and fear must be as
equal, as Christ Jesus is to Jesus Christ. But the reason why we beg this
equality of fear and love is, because Christ does never leave destitute of his
government, those whom he instructs in the solidity of his love, that is,
Christ our Judge will sweetly rule us, if he find we do solidly love him: and
we were last Sunday taught the solidity of that love did consist in loving God
above all things, and not only our neighbor, but also our enemies as our
selves: which lesson was then given as a preparative to this Feast now flowing
in the Octaves thereof; and alluded unto in this prayer, teaching us in brief,
what the Epistle and Gospel tell us more at large: The first, that who loves
not, ought to stand in fear of that death which he abides in by not loving: Nay
more, so confident must our Love be, that we must rather not fear to dye for
our neighbor, then we must dare not to love him: and to this we are incited by
the example of Christ, whose love made him dye for us, that were his enemies:
Again, we are told this love must be real and true, not verbal only; and that
it cannot be so, if we relieve not our neighbor in his necessity, when we are
able so to do: This argues indeed, that we are not left destitute by our
Governor Christ Jesus, who instructs us in this solidity of love from one end
of the Epistle to the other. And since it is the general consent of all
Expositours, that the Supper mentioned in this days Gospel is a figure of the
Blessed Sacrament; sure that is a mystery as full of solid love, as is
expressed in the Prayer above, teaching us never to go unto this Supper without
equal fear and love: and so the Prayer stands excellently well adapted both to
the Sunday, to the Feast, to the Epistle, and to the Gospel of the day: For if
we can, by saying this prayer fervently, obtain the equal fear and love which
it petitioneth; assuredly in recompense thereof, Almighty God will so govern
us, as we shall not for humane ends excuse our selves from our duties to his
Divine Majesty; but shall come so religiously to the Supper of the Sacrament
here, as we need not fear being shut out at the last Supper of eternal rest in
glory, which again the Expositours will have the Sacramental Supper to be a
sign of. And thus as well every sense, as every letter of this Gospel is
included in this most admirable prayer of holy Church.

The Epistle. 1 John 3.13, etc.
13 Marvel not Brethren, if the world hate you.

14 We know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
Brethren: He that loves not abides in death.

15 Whosoever hates his brother, is a murderer; and you know that no murderer
has life everlasting abiding in himself.

16 In this we have known the charity of God, because he has yielded his life
for us: and we ought to yield our lives for the Brethren.

17 He that shall have the substance of the world, and shall see his Brother
has need, and shall shut his bowels from him; how does the charity of God
abide in him?

18 My little children, let us not love in word, nor in tongue, but in deed and
truth.


The Explication.
13. THe Evangelist had in the precedent verses told us the difference between
the children of God, and those of the devil; and how there was mortal enmity
between the one and the other, instancing in Cain killing his Brother Abel, for
no other cause then envy to him, seeing the sacrifice of Abel was acceptable to
God, and his was not; in regard Abel was a child of God, and Cain a child of
the devil, and so no marvel if his offerings were not acceptable to God
Almighty: But the Apostle proceeds further, and bids Christians not wonder, if
the world hate them because of their good deeds, since, for that reason Cain
(representing the malignancy of the world) hated Abel, who was a figure of a
good Christian, offering grateful sacrifice to God: besides, the Apostle here
alludes to what he had said in his Gospel, Chap. 15.18. If the world hate you,
know it hated me before it hated you; and therefore here he concludes, they
should rather expect, then wonder at it, if they found the world did hate them,
since no Son can hope for love from him who hates his Father; and the foregoing
Verses of this Epistle were all upon our happy filiation with God. But we may
observe the causes remarkable, why the wicked (for those are understood by the
world, so called from the greater part thereof, that are wicked indeed) do hate
those who are good: The first is, the dissimilitude betwixt vice and virtue,
which begets a hatred, as similitude begets love and affection: for we see all
worldlings puffed up with pride and ambition; contrariwise all good Christians
are meek and humble. The second is Envy; for wicked men seeing they cannot
arrive at purity and sanctity, envy those who do attain thereunto. The third,
because the good men do further reprehend the vices of the wicked, as the holy
Ghost does inspire them, in imitation of his example, whose coming shall argue
the world of sin, as we heard, John 15.8. The fourth, because the world sees
good men fly the company of the wicked. The last, because their affections are
contrary, one doting upon the world altogether, the other wholly inamoured on
Almighty God; so they must needs be as opposite, as two Contraries are, as heat
to cold, as dry to moist, and labor to overcome each other; but with this
difference, that the good man labors the conversion of the bad, the bad man
endeavors the perversion of the good.

14. The Apostle does not here say we know by any divine Faith, or certain
knowledge, as heretics will needs interpret this place; but only by moral
certitude, we know, that if we love one another for Gods sake, we must needs
love God much more; and, as by sin against him we dye, so by love of him we
detest sin, and are by that means translated from the death of sin, to the
life of grace in this world, and to the life of glory in the next. So that all
the certitude we have of this, is the testimony of our own consciences, telling
us we are not guilty of any defect either in our love to God, or to our
neighbor: Yet because St. Paul, 1 Cor. 4. v. 4. no sooner said he was not
guilty, then he added yet in this I am not justified; the Catholic Church
teaches our assurance of our being in the state of grace is only moral, not
divine. And three signs there are of Justifying grace inhabiting within us:
The first, if we perfectly hate sin; The second, if we mortify the flesh; The
third, if we have zeal to our neighbors good, such as St. Paul had, saying,
Who is sick, and I am not distempered with him also? 2 Cor. 11. insomuch, that
here St. John presumes to say, he that loves not, remains in death; that is,
if when he is bound to show his love either to God, or his neighbor, he does
it not, he remains in death, in the guilt at least of that past sin which he
committed, by omitting to do his duty when he was bound to do it; out of which
guilt since there is no going but by the help of grace, therefore he is said to
remain in death, until by an Act of love he revives from the death of that
guilt, which he remained in by not loving, when he was bound to do it; Nay, the
death of our body is but a shadow of death, to that of our souls; so the
Apostle needs not scruple to say, men living in sin remain in death, because
they are truly dead to grace and glory, as long as they continue in their sin,
be they never so vigorousl^ alive in body.

15. He is a murderer of his own soul, because (as was said above) he that
loves not, remains in death: Where note, not to love is esteemed to be as bad
as to hate; and consequently, who hates his neighbor, actually kills himself,
and in effect his neighbor too, though not in Act: not unlike him that
coveting his neighours wife is an Adulterer in will, though not in fact. Yet
others will have this hatred to be only murder in disposition, not reduced
into act; but who so loves danger shall perish in it; and therefore to dally in
such dispositions is to endanger at least perishing in them. Let no man wonder
the Apostle should say, he that murdereth has not life everlasting in him,
when he that is in this world freest from all sin, has not here everlasting
life abiding in him: whence it follows, by life everlasting is here understood
that life of grace, whereunto everlasting life and glory is due; whereof none
can have so much as a hope, so long as he remains in hatred or murder as above.

16. Not content to instance in less then the highest perfection, the Apostle
here tells us, what is perfect charity, perfect dilection; to lay down our
lives for our neighbors souls, as Christ did his for ours: But not so as we
can loose our spiritual life, to gain the like life to our neighbor; no this
is against the rule of charity, which ever regards it self: but reserving our
spiritual, we may loose our temporal lives to gain our neighbors souls. And
not only may, but are here exhorted thereunto, if we say commanded, the text
will bear it, in case we see our neighbors soul in danger, unless we venture
our lives. And in some cases men may, and are bound to hazard at least their
own, to save another life: as first, a soldier may rather choose to die in
the place, then yield to his enemy the advantage of that ground his commander
trusted him to defend; the like is of a citizen in defense of the whole city,
(for the part is not of equal regard with the whole) so Samson did, as we
read, Judge. 16. who oppressed himself with the ruin of a house, thereby to
oppress the Philistines also, and to save the people of God from their
captivity: and though they are not many examples of obligation, yet we have
many of election, showing diverse have died to save the life of their friend,
diverse have rendered themselves captive to redeem others from bondage, diverse
have lost their lives to preserve the chastity of others, as esteeming the life
of grace in their neighbor more precious, then that of nature in themselves.

17. Having showed in the precedent verse, that we are bound in some cases to
pour out our bloods for our neighbors; no marvel if here it be concluded, he
cannot have charity who seeing his neighbor in necessity, shuts up the bowels
of his mercy from him, and will not allow him any relief. And yet because this
is so usual a thing, therefore to confound those who have such stony hearts,
the Text compells them to the necessity of doing the lesser, upon all
occasions, by showing before, they were obliged to a much greater act of
charity, upon some particular emergencies: as who should say, though it be hard
to lay down your life for another, yet it must be easy to lay down your purse,
or some equivalent relief, if you will merit the name of a Christian, and give
proof by your acts of mercy, that the author of mercy is within you, and that
your self do live spiritually, by relieving your neighbor corporally: Whence
most Divines hold, a man is bound in conscience to give alms more or less, and
that not only in extreme, but even in common real necessities; as of meat,
drink, clothing, housing, or the like, grounded in that of Eccles. chap. 4. v.
1. Child, defraud not the poor man of that Alms, which is due unto him from
thee: for indeed the portion of the poor is in the rich man's hands, and God
gives riches, to the end rich men may have the merit of poverty by giving their
goods away, and poor men the benefit of riches, by what they receive out of the
surplus of others. And because it is too long for my present purpose to enlarge
upon this point, I refer the reader to the fourth book of Salvianus dedicated
to the Catholic Church; wherein he shows how great a sin it is for
Churchmen to enrich their kindred with the Churches treasure; and for rich
persons of the world to starve Christ in the persons of the poor, while they
feast the devil in the excesses of the rich, by leaving their estates to such,
as will not make at least pious uses thereof. I do heartily therefore recommend
this Author to all those rich persons, who find flesh and blood prevail more
in them, then piety to the poor; for if I be not much mistaken, they will
thank me to have done this charity to them, who thought perhaps they did not
stand in need thereof, but their minds may be other after reading the solid
piety of this learned Author Salvianus upon this particular subject.

18. Lo here the word is opposed to the work, the tongue to truth, as if we did
want charity, that only gave good words to the poor without alms; or as if
they wanted truth, who fed the poor with words of comfort only, when they were
able truly to satisfy their hunger, and would not. Not but that he is truly
charitable, who instructing feeds the soul at least, when he cannot feed his
body; but that to do both is the duty of a Christian, when both may be done,
and where both are wanting. So the meaning of this text is, that our charity
ought to be real, and not verbal only, to be operative, not idle or lazy:
for here the tongue is opposed to truth, as dissimulation to sincerity; and the
word to the work, as empty air to a purse full of money, or as froth is to beer
or wine. To conclude, hence we are taught further, that we must not only be
effectually charitable, but also we are bound to be affectionately so; for it
little avails to give alms, unless we also love the poor whom we relieve, and
therefore love them, because we relieve Christ in them: and unless we give
thus, we sell our selves for popular applause, by giving away our substance to
purchase the empty air, the shadows of vain commends, and so lose a divine
blessing, (as to the children of God) to get a moral one, as to be esteemed
humane fathers of the world.

The Application.
1. HItherto it has appeared how exactly holy Church recommends unto us the
practice of charity; and truly this days Epistle confirms us in the same
practice, while it runs wholly upon the subject of love, so high, that it
seems to exceed even the last sundays act of charity commanding then to love
our enemies, because now it exhorts us to do more then love them, when v. 16.
it invites to die for them also, if need be, (which yet a true love of enemies
involves) as our Savior did for us to show his love unto us.

2. And least we should pretend to love, and not do it really, see how the
master of this Art S. John Evangelist, in the last verse of this Epistle bids
us take heed we do not feign the part we ought to act in earnest; for he tells
us, it is not enough to say we love, unless we do it too; no, he obliges us to
love in deed, to love in truth, lest we seem to mock Almighty God, by giving
out we mean to act the best part of his sacred son his loving unto death,
those he pretended once to love; according to that of the Evangelist, Christ
when he loved his people, he loved them to his end, that is, he died for love
of them.

3. Hence we may safely say, those are unworthy of the gift of love, who have
not in their hearts and eyes, the holy fear of God; as truly those can never
have, who dare to mock his sacred son by their dissembling love, that is not
real. No Christians, no, we are not yet in heaven where we cannot err; here
we must carry fear before our eyes, lest losing it, we lose our labors too;
for without this holy fear we cannot work out our salvation, nor can we hope to
please his heavenly majesty, unless we fear his power, who is as well our
Governor, as our God: and as we must love his Deity, so we must fear his
Government.

Whence it is holy Church most properly prays to day as above. The Gospel.
Luke 14. v. 16. etc.
16. But he said to him, A certain man made a great supper, and called many.

17. And he sent his servant at the hour of supper to say to the invited, That
they should come, because now all things are ready.

18. And they began all at once to make excuse. The first said to him, I have
bought a farm, and I must need^ go forth and see it; I pray thee hold me
excused.

19. And another said, I have bought five yoke of Oxen, and I go to prove them;
I pray thee hold me excused.

20. And another said, I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come.

21. And the servant returning told these things unto his Lord. Then the master
of the house being angry, said to his servant, Go forth quickly into the
streets and lanes of the city, and the poor, and feeble, and blind, and lame
bring in hither.

22. And the servant said, Lord it is done as thou did command, and yet there
is place.

23. And the Lord said to the servant, Go forth into the ways and hedges, and
compel them to enter, that my house may be filled.

24. But I say to you, that none of those men that were called, shall taste of
my supper.


The Explication.
16. THis parable is almost the same that was mentioned, Mat. 22.2. only there
in a different way, time, and place, as under the name of a dinner; and here it
is brought in under the name of a supper. And there are diverse senses made upon
this supper. Some call it a parable of the Incarnation, life, and death of
Christ; and thus S. Matthew seems to take it, calling it a dinner as to the
Church militant, and a supper to the Church triumphant. Others apply this
parable unto the Blessed Sacrament; and those make God the Father, master of
this feast, his sacred Son the feast it self, made of his blessed body and
blood; and in favor of this opinion the holy Church at this time reads this
Gospel, as alluding to the flowing feast of Corpus Christi: But yet for all
that the literal sense of this Gospel alludes to the last supper of heavenly
glory; for that is the true supper, which ends the laborious day time, and
begins eternal rest that never shall have end: so, though many may be cast out
of doors after the dinner of the Church militant, yet none can be cast out,
after they once enter to this triumphant supper. And for that cause the most
genuine sense of this place alludes, as S. Gregory says, hom. 36. to the
society of eternal sweetness and glory. Where note that great signifies here
all the degrees of greatness, such a supper as none could be greater, either
for the rarity of the dainties, and banquets thereof, or for the splendor and
duration of it: whereof S. Paul 1. Cor. 2. v. 9. says, Eye has not seen, nor
has ear heard, neither has it ascended into the heart of man, what things God
has prepared for them that love him. And to this supper he called many: by
many are here understood no less then even all the Jews, who were the true
Church, and people of God, and were called by the Patriarchs and Prophets, by
John the Baptist, by Christ himself, while he lived amongst them.

17. But by his servants whom he sent, are properly meant the Apostles, left by
him to convert these Jews as well as other nations: And by the bower of supper
here mentioned, is understood the resurrection of our Savior; for then (and
not till then) were all things ready for this great supper of glory, because
then he brought with him from his grave a multitude of blessed souls, who
therefore were in Paradise (as he promised the thief to be that very day he
died) because they were in his impassible presence, that is to say, when he was
pleased to allow his body the benefit of all the gifts due to glorious bodies;
so though they were not in the final place of eternal rest, until they did
ascend with him to heaven, yet they were set at the table of glory with him,
and were carried up sitting at this feast, into the great presence chamber of
the sacred Trinity, the Empyreall heaven: and after his Ascension, his servants
the Apostles went round about the world to invite more, and to tell them the
great supper of glory was now ready for all, that would go to it such way as
th^se inviters would lead them, namely in the high rode of professing and
observing the faith and law of Christ.

18. By all excusing themselves is here literally understood the Jewish nation,
whose eye was no further bent upon religion, then as they expected a Messiah,
that should make them all rich; so grossly they understood the heavenly riches
promised by the Messiah, as they believed them to be temporal estates: And
therefore here the first excuse is made by plea of necessity, to look after
worldly wealth, represented by the purchased village, which was said to be
newly bought by him, that was content to sell the kingdom of heaven for a patch
of earth. But Saint Gregory hom. 36. in Evang. notes the ill manners of this
civility, when the excusant says, I pray thee have me excused; for he calls it
pride in the action, though it seems humility in the voice, because he
disdained heaven, and preferred earth.

19. The second excuse insists upon an other notable addiction of the Jews to
worldly wealth, namely their huge great stocks they gloried in upon their
grounds; which we read Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Job abounded in, and which
were looked on as the greatest blessings God could give: so, in regard of
earthly stocks of Cattle, they contemned the greater stock of Glory in the next
world. But St. Gregory, in the place last cited, will have these five yoke of
oxen allude to our five senses distracting us from all heavenly objects.

20. St. Gregory, cited as above, understands this place of carnal sin, the
greatest impediment between a soul and glory of all others; for here the
excuser asks no pardon, but boldly says, he cannot come: it seems he that
could not wish he were able, was wholly unable, as well as he was absolutely
unwilling, while he did not say, he would come another time, as the former
excuses might import, but absolutely professed, he could not come; he had,
sure, as little will as power, and therefore he might have added he neither
could nor would. Though others more favorably say, this place alludes only to
the excessive use of the lawful marriage bed, which then is used in excess,
when it is made a pretense to hinder us from the service of Almighty God: And
S. Ambrose expresses much to this sense in few words, saying, The love of
earthly things is like a birdlime upon the spiritual wings of our souls,
hindering her flight up to heaven. But S. Augustine applies these three excuses
to the three things, that include all sorts of worldly pelf, concupiscence of
the flesh, concupiscence of the eye, and pride of life: The first excuse
reports to the pride that man had to see himself Lord of a Manor; The second
to concupiscence of the eye, to see a rich stock of cattle cover his grounds;
The third to concupiscence of the flesh, that made this his excuse from going
to heaven, as if he did not hope for greater pleasure there: and indeed riches
and pleasure are the chief impediments mortals have between them and eternal
bliss.

21. This place of the Parable alludes to Christ speaking of himself, as
servant to his heavenly Father, and telling him, the Rich men of the Jews were
all so transported with the love of the world, as they gave no ear to the
invitation of the eternal word, calling them to everlasting rest and glory; and
that then his Father bid him apply himself to the poorer sort of Jews, which
to effect was done, when S. Matthew Chap. 21. 31. says to the Pharisees,
Scribes, Doctors and high Priests rejecting Christ, The Publicanes and whores
shall go before you in the Kingdom of God; as also the last shall be first,
and the first the last. Others think this verified in the choice Christ made of
Fishermen for his Apostles, and of other poor Mechanics, rather then of
Scribes and Pharisees, as 1 Cor. 1.27. God chose the infirm things of this
world, to confound all the strength thereof, and fools to confound wise men;
and this to encourage the most contemptible creatures on the earth, to aim at
as great riches, as heaven can afford, if they live according to the rule and
law of Christ.

22. And here our Savior urges his heavenly Father, since all the poor people
amongst the Jews are not able to fill up the Court of heaven, that as yet
there may be more invited: and then he went aside from the Jews to the
Samaritans and Gentiles, converting them, and so inviting of them to his
heavenly Glory, which is the Supper here spoken of.

23. But we are here to note, that Christ looked upon these Gentiles, in
respect of his beloved people the Jews, as he would do upon men that have no
poor beeings in Towns or Villages, but are forced to shelter themselves under
the banks on high ways, and to covet the loan of hedges for their shelter
from winds and weather: and therefore being himself after his resurrection to
ascend to heaven, he sent his Apostles over all the world to find out such poor
Gentiles as these, who in respect of the Jews were not held worthy (in Gods
sight) to be esteemed as Masters of Towns, Villages, or houses, but were like
vagabonds; yet these not filling heaven neither, see how he makes provision for
relapsed Christians also, as men equally miserable with such vagabonds; and
those he will have by Ecclesiastical censures, nay by penal laws to be even
compelled or forced to return to their belief again: which yet is not a course
used to any but revolted Christians, such as once were in the lap of the true
Church by holy Baptism; and they indeed, as having once been children and
Subjects of the mother Church of Christ, may (upon revolt) be compelled back
again, whereas Pagans, Jews, or Infidels cannot be thus forced by penal laws,
but must (in a sweet way) be gained to a right belief through persuasion, not
compulsion.

24. This verse is only the excluding those from eternal glory, who being
invited to it, will not leave temporal riches, and pleasures to purchase the
Kingdom of heaven, but willingly wallow in the mire of worldly wealth, rather
then they will leave that, to enjoy eternal felicity and glory.

The Application.
1. AS this Gospel in the sense of the Expositours alludes to the Blessed
Sacrament; (whose Feast is now flowing,) so is it fit we should observe therein
such lessons as we are bound to learn and put in execution for our more worthy
receiving: which we may for brevity sake reduce to two; the one a reverential
awe, or holy fear of unworthiness; the other a fervent act of love and
charity; because in this Sacrament is not only the body and blood of our
Savior Jesus Christ, but the Majesty and power of Almighty God, indeed all the
three persons of the B. Trinity: so that to requite the love of him who made
his Body be our food, we are bound to come unto this Sacrament with acts of
charity; and to avoid the danger of unworthy receivers, we are obliged to come
unto it with all the fear and trembling we can; that is to say, by going first
to confession, and purging our conscience, not only from such sins as we are
guilty of, but even from inordinate affections to things that are not sin,
since we see in this Gospel, those who had only such affections were excluded
from the Supper that was a Type of this holy Sacrament.

2. Again, since it was an act of the highest wisdom (the second Person of the
B. Trinity) to contrive himself a Tabernacle in the souls of men, wherein his
infinite glory might take delight to dwell in hearts that had but a care to
keep themselves in his good grace; as the Priest says to day in holy office,
Wisdom has built her self a House, meaning (amongst other senses) Jesus
Christ has made himself a Tabernacle in humane souls that worthily receive
the B. Sacrament; it is but requisite we show some zeal to his wisdom, as well
as to his Love; namely, that we bring with us to this heavenly banquet such a
holy fear, as may give testimony we aim at a reverence to his infinite wisdom,
while we show a sign that we begin at least our selves to be wise, by the best
argument of humane wisdom, holy fear, according to that of Eccles. 1. The
beginning of wisdom is the fear of our Lord.

3. Nor will it be against the main scope of Christianity, (which is now
continually to perfect charity in us) while we join other virtues with our acts
of love: because though love must ever be included in all we say or do, yet
there is no virtue therefore to be excluded, but any one (or more) may well go
hand in hand with charity; nay, she indeed should never go alone, being the
Queen and Sovereign of all other virtues; so they do but usher her where ere
they go in her company, as to day we are taught to lead our charity into the
Church with a holy fear of our Lord.

For which purpose we pray to day that we may come unto this holy Sacrament,
with equal fear, with equal love: and that for the reasons alleged in the
Prayer, as was said in the application of this days Epistle. On the third
Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Luke 15.8. WHat woman if she have Ten groates, if she have lost
one groat, does she not light a Candle, and sweep the house, and search
diligently, until she has found it?

Verse. Let my prayer, O Lord, be directed

Resp. Even as Incense before thee.


The Prayer.
O God who art the Protector of those that hope in thee, without whom nothing
is valid, nothing holy, multiply, we beseech thee, over us thy mercy, that thou
being our ruler, thou our guide, we may so pass by the temporal goods of this
world, as not to loose the eternal of the next.

The Illustration.
SEe how in this excellent Prayer are summed up the contents of the Epistle and
Gospel of the day! how exactly do we in the beginning of this prayer observe
the counsel given us in the Epistle, humbling our selves under the mighty hand
of God, when we implore his protection over us, confessing that without him
nothing is valid nor holy in us; and that we have no other title to his
protection neither, then his multiplied mercies toward us, upon which mercy we
cast all our care, all our hope; and in confidence thereby to have him our
ruler, him our guide, we commit our selves to the combat against all our
enemies, which we are to encounter in our passage through this alluring world;
beseeching his Divine Majesty, that by our sober vigilance over our own actions
day and night, accompanying his never failing conduct, we may (maugre
opposition) obtain the victory, and receive the crown of Glory, which this
prayer petitions! Behold it also as well adjusted to the Gospel. For who does
not clearly see, that whilst he shall not with the Publican hang upon our
Saviors lips to hear his counsels and commands, but runs his own ways with
the murmuring Pharisee, he is presently a lost sheep, and falls into sin, if
not to heresy, as this parable imports; and so in stead of only passing by
the pleasures of this world, (as the Prayer above advises) he contrariwise
dwelling on them, in the swing of his own inordinate desires, indangers his
loosing heaven, unless the good shepherd leave his flock in the desert, by his
being content for a time to see them want the comfort of his pres^nce and
consolation, whilst he runs after his lost sheep, and with much care finding
him out, brings him with joy back again to the Catholic Church, if he were
gone quite out of it; or to Sacramental penance, if he were plunged into the
mire of other grievous sins, not schism, nor heresy? But to come more home to
our purpose, when^e is all this trouble to our Pastor, but because the sheep
do not with zeal and fervor say this prayer above; do not hope in God, but in
themselves; do not fly the roaring and the ranging lion, but run into his
Jaws; do not content themselves to feed in the pleasant pastures of holy
conversation, but run a hunting after the food of vain and worldly pleasures;
and consequently plunge themselves headlong into hell, unless by the mercy of
this heavenly shepherd, they be reduced to an amendment of their lives, and at
last rewarded with eternal glory? Whereunto it will hugely conduce to repeat
this prayer often, with such relation as we see it has to the other parts of
this days Service, that so the sheep may do, as the Pastor says: This is the
end of all preaching; This the end of all prayer.

The Epistle. 1 Pet. 5.6, etc.
6 Be ye humbled therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you
in the time of visitation.

7 Casting all your carfulness upon him, because he cares for you.

8 Be sober and watch: because your adversary the devil as a roaring lion
goes about, seeking whom he may devour.

9 Whom resist ye, strong in Faith: knowing that the self same affliction is
made to that your fraternity which is now in the world.

10 But the God of all grace, which has called us unto his eternal glory in
Christ Jesus, he will perfect you having suffered a little, and confirm, and
establish you.

11 To him be Glory and Empire for ever and ever, Amen.


The Explication.
6. THis verse exhorts to resignation unto the Divine Will in all occasions,
especially of adversity. No marvel, the hand of God is here called migh^y, when
it is omnipotent. See how we are wooed into our own felicity, when we are
exhorted to humility and resignation, as a means to our exaltation in the time
of visitation; which is to be understood, when God shall think fit to look upon
us with the eye of mercy.

7. It were an injury to Gods goodness for us to cast about for that which God
himself takes care for, that is, our souls good; the care of that is his, and
our rule of that is by him laid unto us; so in that affayre we have rather to
do what is commanded already, then to be solicitous about it, as if it were not
done: And to be solicitous of Temporals is an unchristian care, and therefore
often forbidden in point of perfection; however tolerated in regard of humane
infirmity: but moderate care is always allowed Christians in order to
Temporals, when anxious solicitude is forbidden them, by many texts of holy
writ.

8. Sobriety is the best companion of watchfulness, and therefore both are
recommended: And because our watchfulness is to be perpetual, therefore our
sobriety must be so too; but especially toward night, when our hearts only
are to keep the watch, whilst our senses are asleep; and this because the
devil is then most busy in temptations, when men are least able to resist,
having, as it were, but their wish awake, and their will asleep: hence all
spiritual men recommend temperance toward bedtime both in meat and drink:
hence the Completory begins always with this very verse, to put us in mind
with what purity we ought to go to bed; having our professed enemy always awake,
and ready to devour us, if he find us off our sober guard.

9. Happy we that by the least resistance are sure of victory against this
ravenous devil; for maugre all his malice, and all his power, he cannot hurt
us, unless we yield our consents to his Temptations. Here is added, that we
must stoutly resist him, and believing too, because so we get complete victory;
for by resistance we overcome him, by fortitude we bind him captive, by Faith
we take away all his arms and power, that is, by firm, stout, and constant
Faith. And again, our resistance will have the more force, because of what
follows in this verse: we never are left alone, but have always our fellow
Soldiers to help us in this Fight against our enemy, who never tempts us
alone, but all other good men at the same time, and we have share in their
greater resistance, by adding what our weakness is able to do.

10. This next verse comes yet more home to our comfort and assistance, telling
us, besides the help of our fellow creatures, we have the help of our
omnipotent Creator against this enemy of mankind; the God of all grace, who
having called us to everlasting glory, will not (if we help our selves) permit
the devil to snatch us away into his kingdom of darkness; so that being
designed for glory, we cannot fear the want of grace, for that is the seed, and
glory the fruit of Gods goodness in us. O who seeing how much Christ suffered
to purchase us patience, would not gladly suffer this little we are told must
be endured, if we will hope for victory? Let us therefore with the same zeal
begin to suffer, as we would desire the happy end of it, which is assured
victory and glory.

11. This last verse minds us that the victory is Gods, and the honor of it
his, though the reward (by his mercy) be our eternal glory too.

The Application.
WE have had hitherto the holy Ghost, the sacred Trinity, and the blessed
Sacrament to help us on in our long journey between Pentecost and Advent, which
we are to march all upon the feet of Charity: but now we must expect no more
such special helps; suffice it we have had last Sunday the corroborating
repast, whereof Elias his refreshment under the Tree in the desert was but a
type or figure, when yet he was told that little bread should enable him to his
journeyes end, although he had a great w^y to go, after that, before he came to
the mount Horeb: so beloved must our charity from this day forward march upon
the late refreshment of the blessed Sacrament, till we come in our annual
journey to the mount of Advent, the mount of expectation, the mount that leaves
us on the top of the highest mystery of our redemption, the Incarnation of our
Lord God; where his first stoop to earth, was our first step to heaven.

2. Now for as much as we shall in this march find charity sometimes handed on
by other virtues, (as last Sunday most properly by holy fear, suitable to her in
so long a journey, and through the many dangers which she was to meet withal
in the desert of this world) and because at other times she will be in a manner
out of sight, and carried on with the crowd of other virtues thronging, about
her to secure themselves by her, and to be her guard, (as they are bound) she
being sovereign to them all; we must not therefore think our design is ill
laid, and that our obligation cease as to the practice of charity, when in
the holy Text other virtues are more visible then she; for there want not good
Divines, who (grounded on S. Paul his definition or description at least of
this majestic virtue) affirm there is indeed no other virtue but charity, both
because God himself is called charity, and because in heaven all other virtues
are refunded into her; so that in these Divines opinions even Faith, Hope,
Humility, Patience, Obedience, and all other virtues whatsoever, are but
charity believing, hoping, submitting, suffering, obeying or the like, as one
and the self same man by the several faculties of his soul, by his several
senses and members of his body, is doing those exercises that such faculties,
such senses, and such members are necessary for. Be these Divines right or
wrong, it boots not to our purpose, more then thus, to let us see all our
actions are good or bad, according as they partake or want of charity, to give
them life, or to declare them dead.

3. This premised, see how humility, resignation to Gods holy will, sobriety,
vigilance, and a strong faith bring charity along this first-dayes journey
after the repast she had last Sunday as above. And though the Text tell her she
is to carry us through the ravenous Lions walk; yet we see the close of this
Epistle is, that the God of all Grace, the God of charity will secure us
through these dangers for his own glory, if we but love him, and will cast our
cares on him, and will rely upon his multiplied mercies, whereof we have daily
and hourly huge experience; if we will make him our Ruler, him our Guide, and
if we do not loose our charity to him our Creator, by wasting it away upon
creatures unworthy of our love, because we cannot grasp temporal felicities
without hazard of loosing eternal happiness: Yes, yes assuredly this ought to
be our duty now,

Whilst to this very purpose holy Church prays to day as above.

The Gospel. Luke 15. v. 1. etc.
1 And there approached Publicans and sinners unto him for to hear him.

2 And the Pharisees and the Scribes murmured, saying, that this man receives
sinners, and eats with them.

3 And he spoke to them this parable, saying;

4 What man of you having an hundred sheep; and if he has lost one of them,
does he not leave the ninety and nine in the desert, and goes after that
which is lost until he find it?

5 And when he has found it, lays it upon his shoulders rejoicing.

6 And coming home calls together his friends and neighbors, saying to them,
Rejoice with me, because I have found my sheep that was lost.

7 I say to you, that even so there shall be joy in heaven upon one sinner that
does penance, then upon ninety nine just persons that need not penance.

8 Or what woman having ten groates; if she loose one groat, does she not
light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently, until she find?

9 And when she has found, calls together her friends and neighbors,
saying, Rejoice with me, because I have found the groat which I had lost.

10 So, I say to you there shall be joy before the Angels of God, upon one
sinner that does penance.


The Explication.
1. O That we sinners would approach also to hear him in his preachers, and
teachers, who declare his will and word unto us.

2. Note the pride of these people, who having a law, not to touch any foul
beast, (much less to eat it) disdain also to come near foul souls to cleanse
them, and murmr at our Savior for it.

3, 4, 5, 6, 7. See how our Savior reprehends this Pharisaicall pride and
false devotion in these 3, 4, 5, 6, 7th verses following, by the first parable
of a shepherd having lost one sheep out of an hundred, etc. Where first we
must note the Rhemists expound, that Christ means himself to be the shepherd
he speaks of; the lost sheep to be a sinful soul, who straying from the safe
pastures of Gods Laws, and seeking food to her own fancy, runs headlong to
hell, unless our Savior go after her to bring her back again; having left
in the mean time the ninety nine in the desert, that is, seeming to go with
all his zeal away from them to reduce the lost sheep, and leaving of them in
the desert of their usual assistance only, which he never takes away, and
which in comparison of that extraordinary help he gives toward converting of
souls, or finding out any lost sheep, seems but a desert or barren help: But
having found the lost sheep, (having converted the soul again) comes back to
his flock, and brings them the increase of his assistance, not only in their
fellow convert, but even in them to behold his conversion. Note, our Savior
having found the sheep, does not drive, but bring it home upon his shoulders.
Alas! he will not tire him; O tender Go^ that he is unto us! This may mind us,
that all mankind was once this lost sheep, brought home upon Christ's shoulders
when he carried his Cross upon them, and was crucified besides, leaving the
nine quires of Angels (representing the ninety nine just) in the desert of
admiration, to see their God so lost, (in their conceits) to find out us that
were indeed truly lost, and strayed into the very jaws of hell and damnation;
and having brought us home, desires all his Angels to joy and congratulate
with him: Note that, as if his joy consisted in our salvation. O high
expression of his love to mankind! And when he says, that in heaven there
shall be more joy at the conversion of this sinner, (the salvation of a man
doing penance) then at the perseverance of ninety nine just, he insinuates,
the angels have a new actual content in the penance and saintity of man, which
being new seems greater then what they had before for all good men: one reason
is, because in every man that is by penance saved, they find their own losses
repaired, and the places of the fallen angels filled: But the main reason is,
because they see the will of God in this fulfilled, and they are in perfect
conformity to his sacred will.

8, 9, 10. By the second parable, the Rhemists say is meant holy Church,
lighting up her candle of new Missionaries and Preachers to find out the lost
soul, that heresy has perverted, and having regained, found the soul again,
invites her Priests to a congratulation with her. But S. Gregory hom. 34. thus
explicates both the parables, saying; Christ is as well meant by the woman, as
by the Pastor; For as he was God, he was the wisdom of God; and because upon
money there is printed an image, the woman, says he, lost her groat, when man
who was created to the image of God, by sin left to be like his Creator; but
the woman lighted her lanthorn, because the wisdom of God appeared in humane
nature, for a lanthorn signifies a candle lighted in it, and the light
signifies the divinity in man's nature: The lanthorn being lighted, the woman
swept her house, for straight as the divinity shined through flesh, man's
conscience was then strooken; and the house is swept, when by reflection the
guilt of any man's conscience is troubled, in regard an evil mind (if it be not
before by fear altered) is never purged from accustomary vices: The house then
being swept the groat is found, since whilst man's conscience is troubled, the
image of God is repaired in him: And who are the friends and neighbors, but
those celestial powers above mentioned, that are so much nearer the supreme
wisdom, by how much more they approximate unto it through the grace of their
perpetual vision of it? The woman therefore had ten groats, because there are
nine orders of Angels; and that the number of the elect might be filled, the
tenth, man, was created, who was not quite lost from his Creator by his sin,
because the eternal wisdom shining through humane flesh, found him out by the
light in the socket of his lanthorn. Thus he. What more patheticall! what more
rare!

The Application.
1 AS it is evident the Scribes and Pharisees here mentioned, wanted charity
whilst they grumbled at our Saviors conversation with Publicans and sinners;
so is it manifest that it was an act of highest charity in our Savior to seek
the conversion of those sinners by his conversation with them; and
consequently, while our Lord goes before us with the flame of charity, we are
taught to light all our works this day, at that heavenly fire.

2. In the second place, these following Parables of the lost sheep, and of the
lost groat, tell us we are to bring up in the rere of charity (as we march
along the desert of this world) the zeal of souls: for though this be a virtue
principally proper to Pastors and missionary Priests, yet in regard there is no
state of life in this world so desolate wherein men are not bound to have some
care of others, as well as of themselves, (if it be but to edify and lead them
on by their exemplarity of life) therefore every layman ought more or less to
zeal his neighbors soul, and to contribute toward the saving of it, in some
sort or other; though with intermission of his own devotions, if the neighbor
require his charitable assistance, at that time when he would else be at his
prayers.

3. To conclude, least even in the conversion of others souls pride or vain
glory run away with ours, we are still to keep the lamp of charity light at
home, burning within our hearts, for fear it be as S. Paul said a vain labor
to us though we gain all the souls in the world to heaven, if we loose our own
for want of regulating all our actions by the rule of love and charity, to God
first, (whereby we are secured) and to our neighbor next, that we may help him
too. Whence it is holy Church concludes her prayer to day, petitioning that
even in the best of Temporal goods, which is the searching after other men's
fools, (a work of Time, though a fruit of Eternity) we may be protected by
the God of Love, and may be ruled and guided by his charity, which will carry
us securely through all the allurements of Temporalitie, into a safe and
blissful Eternity.

Say now the prayer above and see how home it is unto this Application. On the
fourth Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Luke 5. v. 5. MAster, we laboring all night have taken nothing,
but in thy word we will cast our net.

Verse. Let my prayer, O Lord, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
GRant us O Lord, we beseech thee, that by thy order our course in this world
may be peaceably directed, and that thy Church may enjoy a quiet devotion.

The Illustration.
TWo things, beloved, we ask in this prayer; a peaceable flowing of the course
of this world, and an unperturbed devotion in the Church. O that we all had our
desires in this! or rather that we did all truly desire and pray for it!
doubtless we should then have it; since holy Church we see unfeinedly
petitions it, while by this days service she exhorts us to do the like. And
truly one main reason why we apply not our selves to a still devotion in the
Church, is because we are neither at peace with one another in the world, nor
are content to let things flow in that channel, which God has ordered them to
glide in; but are ever striving to have all things go, as we our selves desire:
For what Christian lives that has not some grudge or other with his neighbor?
to say nothing of all the Christian Princes now at wars among themselves,
leaving the Turk and other Infidels to incroach upon them, to perturb the quiet
devotion of the Church, and laugh us all to scorn besides. But it remains to
show how this prayer exhausts the Epistle and Gospel of the Mass to day. The
Epistle tells us, what order Almighty God has set the world in; and this
prayer beggs, the same course may flow peaceably, according as God has ordered
it; that is to say, neither one man should jarre with another, nor those other
creatures, which God has subjected to man should repine at their subjection.
And I would to God man kept his course as peaceably as all other creatures
under him do theirs: I would to God, he did as resignedly undergo those little
sufferings he is here subjected unto, as they deserve to be undergone, in hope
of the huge reward they are to have, if patiently and peaceably endured: see
how to day we pray, that we may do this. What prayer then more suitable to this
Epistle? The Gospel tells us, how sweetly Jesus Christ founded his Church to
day upon the persons of the Apostles, whom he calls to be the pillars thereof:
It tells us with what devotion S. Peter followed the first call of our Savior;
it shows what miracles accompanied the Apostles being called to this ministry;
it declares with what peaceable piety they followed our Savior, and left all
they had in the world to dedicate themselves to his devotion: What else does
the prayer to day close withal, then a petition, that the same miraculous
Institution of the Church may be continued by a like miraculous preservation of
it, in the self same quiet and peace of piety, as it was instituted with? (for
it is indeed a miracle to see it so preserved; nor is the goodness of God
less seen in this, then in the other) and thereby shows that this is not a
prayer of one day; but ought to continue and be the incessant prayer of holy
Church unto the worlds end, that so it may appear to be the same sweet Spouse
of Christ in the end, which it was in the beginning of the foundation thereof:
and for this purpose holy Church we see makes it her annual prayer, so must we
make it our annual practice, to pray in this conformity to the preaching and
prayer of our holy mother.

The Epistle. Romans 8. v. 18. etc.
18 For I think that the passions of this time are not condign to the glory to
come, that shall be revealed in us.

19 For the expectation of the creature, expects the revelation of the Sons
of God.

20 For the creature is made subject unto vanity, not willing, but for him that
made it subject in hope:

21 Because the creature also it self shall be delivered from the servitude of
corruption, into the liberty of the glory of the children of God.

22 For we know that every creature groaneth and travelleth even till now.

23 And not only it, but we also, having the first fruits of the Spirit, groan
within our selves, expecting the adoption of the sons of God, the redemption of
our body.


The Explication.
18. HEnce heretics take their rise to deny merit of good works, but in vain;
for the Apostle only means, that humane actions, as humane, are not
proportionable to the glory, to that reward we purchase by them; and in that
sense only denies our sufferings to be able to merit heaven. But this
notwithstanding, our humane actions as they are elevated by the grace of God,
in virtue whereof they became good and meritorious, and are by that means dipped
in the passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, so they are in some manner
proportionable to the reward they purchase; in as much as they are so, the
effects of grace and not of nature, and consequently may merit, to be rewarded
with eternal bliss or glory; because grace is, as it were, the seed of glory,
and so what grace produces, is capable of glory: Thus finite actions become
capable of infinite reward; thus one hours martyrdom is capable of eternal
glory: the like of other good works.

19. This verse shows the greatness of the longing that creatures have after
heaven; when it seems to make the creature, expectation it self, whilst it
says, the expectation of the creature expects, rather then the creature
expects. Again, by creature in this place is understood not only all
mankind, but even all other creatures below man; for in man, as in the abstract
of all their perfections, they are, as it were, made happy, when he is rewarded
by having God revealed to him face to face, and by his enjoying him for all
eternity: as who should say, All corruptible nature has then the full of their
expectation, when corrupted man is invested with incorruptible glory: And then
they are truly the sons of God, when they are in glory; an honor which the
glorious Angels have not, because their nature was never assumed by the nature
divine, and so though they are creatures of glory, in nature more perfect then
we, yet are they not children of God so properly as men are.

20. This verse shows that angels are not understood by the word creature,
since as they are in fruition and not in expectation, so they cannot be liable
to the vanity, which here men (and all creatures under them) are subject unto
in them, who are God knows too too vain: By vanity therefore understand here
mutability, labor, corruption of all those creatures that God has made
subject unto man (and therefore the text adds not willingly, of their own
accord) for the time of his being in this world; but in hope to be freed from
that subjection, when man is made immutable, and stands no more in need of this
vanity or mutability in other creatures. Or we may understand this vanity to be
that which is in man himself, whereunto he is made subject not willingly, but
by being guilty of the sins of his first Father, punished with his own
mortality or corruption in all his progeny, who yet have hope in Christ, to be
made free from it, and to become immortal.

21. In this verse is understood, that not only man, but in him all other
creatures under him (that is the creature it self) shall not by the gift of
nature or grace, but by that of glory be freed from all mutability and
subjection, and rendered sharing in glory with the children of God, that is,
with men who become his children by their eternal glory.

22. This verse rather shows the pain that other creatures are in under man,
then that which he is in himself; as who should say, they did cry out in
continual labor, till in man's glory they were delivered.

23. By this verse S. Paul means, that not only himself and the other
Apostles, who are the first fruits of all Christians, but even all Christians
themselves groan within themselves, expecting as well the perfected adoption of
glory in them, as that of imperfect adoption which they have already of
Baptismall Grace; because (this notwithstanding) they may (nay often do)
perish, but the other coming, then they have the full of their expectations,
and not till then. For the desire of man is never satisfied, until the glory
of God appear in him.

The Application.
1. IT may seem a strange piece of divinity in S. Paul (or a mistake of his
sense in me) to dissuade men from sin by the Rhetoric or voice of inanimate
creatures; as if either they could speak at all, or yet speak more pathetically
then holy men and blessed Angels, for we see how often those do speak in vain
to sinners to amend their lives; But who so shall have read the Expositours
above upon this present Text, will see they do incline to this divinity, that
our sins are so weighty as they make the whole world groan beneath the burden
of them, ready to split indeed, and unable to keep the course of Nature, being
so often interrupted in that course by our unnatural proceedings; every sin
being more or less an act against the law of Nature it self, as well as
against the law of God, because all Natural operations of the creatures are
glorious to the Creator, whereas every sin is inglorious, and thence
offensive to the Divine Majesty.

2. Hence it is S. Paul begins this Epistle first, to those whose charity and
love to God gives them a sense of sin, and to those who are willing to amend
their lives by taking patiently the present punishments of sin; such as are
indeed but the natural effects thereof neither, as sickness, sorrow,
persecution, death it self, Not condign to the glory that shall be revealed in
those who bear with patience the present Passions of Time; so S. Paul styles
those effects of finne, and animates the just to bear them patiently in hope of
Heaven, a reward so great, as will render all those heavy burdens light.

3. But the Apostle speaks in other language here to sinners, such as wanting
charity, have no sense of God, or of future happiness; these he makes the
dumb world speak unto, in the 20. verse especially of this epistle, bewailing
the unwilling subjection the whole creature is in to sinful man's vanity, and
looking on her hope to be freed from this general subjection by the particular
salvation of some few saints of men, though not until their corrupted bodies
be made as incorruptible by glory at the latter day, as their souls are already
by that glory blessed. Yes beloved, this is the genuine sense of holy Text to
day; it tells us all the Fabric of the world is like to split, it tells us how
dumb creatures cry out shame of man to force them so against their nature to
concur to sin, it shows the bestiality of sin when beasts themselves that
never do commit it are ashamed of beastly man, are sick and weary of him, are
tired in being forced to serve him in his sinful ways, and beg their own
salvation in the just at least, (in which sense holy David said, Thou O Lord
wilt save both men and beasts) to confound the sinner, who pursues his own
damnation, even to the Torment of the creatures that are not capable of sin
and yet detest it, out of an innate desire of honoring Almighty God in all
their operations; and so detest it too, as they are ready to rebel against the
man of sin: in so much that holy Church in her charity makes her petition
proper to the sense above; as if she were afraid least man's unnatural ways of
sin should force nature out of that order God has set it in, of serving man,
and pluck a war of all the other creatures in the world on all man kind, to
the disturbance of the Church in her devotion and piety, which at least she
begs may be quiet and unperturb'd.

Say but the prayer above and see how patt it is to this purpose. The Gospel.
Luke 5. v. 1. etc.
1 And it came to pass when the multitudes pressed upon him to hear the word
of God, and himself stood beside the lake of Genesareth.

2 And he saw two ships standing by the lake; and the fishers were gone down,
and washed their nets.

3 And he going up into one ship that was Simons, desired him to bring it back
a little from the land: and sitting, he taught the multitudes out of the ship.

4 And as he ceased to speak he said to Simon, Launch forth into the deep, and
let loose your nets to make a draught.

5 And Simon answering said unto him, Master, laboring all the night, we have
taken nothing; but in thy word I will let loose the net.

6 And when they had done this, they enclosed a very great multitude of fishes,
and their net was broken.

7 And they beckened to their fellows that were in in the other ship, that they
should come and help them: And they came and filled both ships, so that they
did sink.

8 Which when Simon Peter did see, he fell down at Jesus knees, saying, Go
forth from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord.

9 For he was wholly astonished, and all that were with him at the draught of
fishes which they had taken.

10 In like manner also James and John the Sons of Zebedee, who were Simons
fellows. And Jesus said to Simon, Fear not, from this time now thou shall be
taking men.

11 And having brought their ships to land, leaving all things they followed
him.


The Explication.
1. THis Verse shows the power of our Saviors preaching, which drew after him
multitudes of people: it shows also the sweetness of his doctrine, and
exhorts us Christians to flock in like manner after the preachers of his word,
the Priests of holy Church, to press upon them, as these did upon Christ, with
zeal, not curiosity. By the lake of Genesareth is understood the world; for as
that lake was ever infested with huge winds and tempests, so is the world
continually filled with the noises of huge distractions, huge troubles, huge
temptations, huge dangers of eternal wrack; against which it is a good
safeguard to run after the preachers of holy Church, and by their exhortations
to have these tempests laid.

2. By the two Ships may be understood the two sorts of Missioners, those who
are such by office, and those who of charity are coadjutours to the former. By
the Fishers being gone down to wash their nets, is intimated unto us that we
cannot expect to catch souls to God, in the muddy and foul nets of humane
Invention, but in the washed and clean net of the divine word; as also, that
those who will hope to gain others to God, must have themselves pure souls:
this is intimated by the story that tells us here, when Christ came with
intention to call these Fishermen to be his Apostles, he took them in the best
outward preparation to make them good spiritual Fishers, that is, when their
nets were clean.

3. His going into Simons ship argues, that he made S. Peter's chayr his Pulpit,
out of which himself preached, when he converted S. Peter; and by him and his
fellow Apostles the whole world. By his desiring Simon to go off a little from
the shore, (when he that was Lord and master of heaven and earth might have
commanded it) is insinuated, that he did not desire his Vicar S. Peter, nor his
Successors should dominear over their flocks; but by sweet entreaty draw them
to what is fit to be done. By drawing off from the land is intimated, that a
preacher should be in his pulpit, as in another element from the world, that
is, not so much as near the filth of it, but in the clearer element of a better
state of life and manners then the people: and yet the preacher must not stand
at too much distance neither from the people, but be near, that they may hear
him, and that he may come upon all occasions to help them. Christ's sitting and
the peoples standing to hear him preach argues the authority of the master, and
the reverence the scholar ought to bear unto the word of God. Many great
Princes have formerly used this piety; now every ordinary layman looks for a
chayr to sit even when the preacher stands.

4. As soon as he had done preaching he sets Peter a fishing; to show, that
after the Word of God is delivered unto us, we ought to labor the putting it
in execution according as we are taught. By going into the deep to fish he
intimates, that preachers after their Sermon ought to fall into deep
meditations and praises of Almighty God, and beg that he will enable them to
return to the like work again, after that in the deep of contemplation they
have prepared themselves for it: But then the end of this verse tells the
preachers, they must cast out their nets for fish, that is, they must so preach
and converse with the people of the world, as to gain them, like Fishes into
the net of Gods service; and it is a huge honor for the people to be thus
caught or taken, drawn out of the waters of confusion and sin, into the net of
order, discipline, and grace.

5. S. Peter's reply argues his huge Faith, which overcame his diffidence after
his whole nights lost labor: And this nightly vain labor argues the
fruitless preaching of those Priests, who go to that office out of self
conceit or vain glory; (as all do that have no true vocation) But then to go
when Christ, not only bids us, (as here) but accompanies too, that is to obey
as S. Peter did, and to have like hope, as he had, rather in the assistance of
the commander, then in the own abilities of the preacher.

6. See the effect of this Faith and obedience, what a multitude of Fish it
brings in: whereof some are permanently content to be so happily brought in to
Gods Church; others (as Heretics, Schismatics, Apostates) break the net, will
keep within no law of God or holy Church, but give law to themselves, or rather
take liberty to live without all law: So by this net we see is understood the
bounds of the Catholic Church.

7. By their beckning to their fellows in the other ship is signified their
exclamation, and noise of admiration (to see so huge and unexpected a draught)
was so great that they could not hope to be heard, but by signs made means to
be understood to desire help. And by this their desire of help we, that succeed
them, are taught never to presume, that we alone are able to comply with the
great calling of Apostolical Missionaries, but shall do well to require help of
any devout neighbors or fellow Missioners. By these that came to help them we
may piously understand, that not only our fellow Fishermen of the Clergy, but
also the religious orders of Gods Church were prefigured, who are indeed
excellent fellow-Missioners, or Fishers to help to catch souls to God, and
come when they are called as coadjutours to those who by office have care of
souls, which were both hinted in the second verse of this chapter: see the
gloss thereon, as above. O that we could once see this happy, this brotherly
concurrence in Gods service! then would the ship of Christ his holy Church
almost sink, that is, be full fraighted, as she could possibly sail, and then
we might hope she would enter safe into the harbor of eternal rest, when the
labors of her militant state would be converted into the repose of her state
Triumphant.

8. 9. 10. Only Peter of all the rest (astonished as they were at the miracle)
expressed himself more then others did thereat; fell immediately at our
Saviors feet to adore that power which had wrought this miracle: and for this
his singular Faith and humiliation, see him exalted and made head of all the
Church; to show, we cannot out do Almighty God in goodness; his rewards are
never short, but always above our works. And it is worth observing, that S.
Peter here desires Jesus to go from him, because he is a sinner, and does not
deserve the honor of his presence: A high expression of humility in him, and
of his reverence to the person of his Lord; as if he had rather lose the honor
of Christ his presence, then so great a Majesty should be dishonored by so
unworthy company, as his, and all the rest that were, as the ninth verse says,
all astonished at the greatness of the miracle, in such an unexpected draught
of Fish; whom our Savior comforts up in the tenth verse, and bids Peter cast
off his fear, because he should be from that time a fisher of men, of souls,
which he should bring in as great shoales to heaven, as these fishes came to
his net.

11. What marvel they left all to follow so good, so great a Master, who did
not alter but exalt their trade, by innobling their draught, which was formerly
food only for men's tables, but henceforward they should take Fish that should
be served up to the table of the King of heaven, of God himself?

The Application.
1. THe sum of this Gospel is the demonstration of our Saviors charity to his
Apostles, and of his like love to all the world by their Ministry, whom he
professes here to make Fishers of men, converters of souls, by their teaching
and preaching, according as himself instructed them in that art by his own
Sermon to them, and to the multitude that followed him. So we are not here to
seek for charity, where so high an act of love is exercised, that of saving
souls by preaching to them the word of God.

2. But what we are to observe here is, that the Apostles left all they had in
the world to follow Christ, and to seek after souls; so that hence we see
Church men, especially Pastors and missionary Priests, who by office have the
care of souls lie upon them, are to renounce all other cares or thoughts
whatsoever, are to divest themselves of all worldly cloggs or interest, and to
dedicate themselves wholly and solely to their Pastoral Functions.

3. Nevertheless they are not to rob the world of their suffrages, prayers,
and sacrifices; for in them, they are still to have a memory of the whole
world, and to beseech God that he will bless and prosper every private
condition, every peculiar state, and all the general ranks and orders of the
Universe, that it may be in each, with every one, and through the whole, as God
in his Goodness and Wisdom has ordained; with Kings as best is for their
Majesty's, with States as most conducing to their safety, with subjects as
befits them best; and that so Temporalities may be ordered by Almighty God
himself, as the Spirituality be not interrupted nor molested, but that all
Churchmen may be free to pray, to preach, to sacrifice, and give the
Sacraments to all; as though the world would never be in order if the
Churchmen were disordered, or not allowed peace and tranquillity in their
devotions.

Sure this must be the meaning of the Text, when it is the petition of the
Prayer to day. On the fifth Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Matthew. 5.24. IF thou offer thy gift at the Altar, and shall
remember that thy Brother has ought against thee; leave there thy gift before
the Altar, and go first to be reconciled to thy Brother, and then coming thou
shall offer thy gift.

Verse. Let my prayer, O Lord, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
O God who have prepared invisible good things for them that love thee, infuse
into our hearts the desire of thy love: that loving thee in all things and
above them all, we may attain unto thy promises which surpass even all our own
desires.

The Illustration.
SEe, see beloved, how little those that profess to love God ought to set
their affections on creatures; when by this Prayer they are told, the good they
ought to aim at, is as invisible to them here, as God himself is to our
corporal eyes, though in that God are contained all things that are good and
worthy of our love: See, how because we cannot naturally love that which we see
not, we are bid to beg it as a boon of God, that we may at least desire to love
him, and that this desire may be by him infused into our hearts; so that loving
God in all we do see, and above all we can imagine, we may thereby hope to
attain unto the fruition of that Invisible good we see not, which yet we are
created to enjoy, and which is so great, as it surmounteth all our own most
vaste desires. A gallant and an easy way to heaven, by only loving what is
only worthy of our love, the Invisible God, who is the Author and giver of
all that can be good, visible or invisible. And since we may easily loose the
hopes we have of attaining our spiritual good, we are by this Prayer taught to
love nothing visible, that may endanger us to loose the invisible treasure
which is hoarded up for us; that is, not to love any thing visible, but as it
relates to what is invisible, namely to Almighty God, and as thereby we may
honor and glorify God by loving it: which rule can never be observed by
loving creatures, but even equally to their Creator; and yet commonly we love
them, and dote upon them much more, God help us: whereas if we follow the rule
of this Prayer, we shall not only cure that disease in us, but further, attain
to the height of perfection and sanctity; which consists in loving God above
all things, and all things else for his sake, not for their own respects; since
we cannot lawfully so much as love our selves, but only in order to God. O
admirable solidity of devotion! O admirable profundity of spirit in the prayers
of holy Church! Let us now see, how this Prayer is adapted to the Epistle and
Gospel. Excellently well to both: For what is the Epistle else but a rule of
perfection, which this Prayer begs we may observe? what else is the Gospel but
a rule of more perfection in us Christians, then ever God required at the hands
of his chosen people the Jews? and what is this Prayer but a petition of the
highest perfection and sanctity, that any Christian can hope to arrive unto? so
sweetly does holy Church adapt her Prayer unto the doctrine of her preachers;
that so the layity may in little carry away, what the preachers deliver to them
at large.

The Epistle. 1 Pet. 3.8.
8 Be ye all unanimous in Prayer, having compassion, lovers of the fraternity,
merciful, modest, humble.

9 Not rendering evil, for evil, nor curse for curse; but contrariwise,
blessing: for unto this are you called, that you may by inheritance possess a
Benediction.

10 For he that will love life, and see good days; let him refrain his tongue
from evil, and his lips that they speak not guile.

11 Let him decline from evil, and do good: let him enquire peace, and follow
it.

12 Because the eyes of the Lord are upon the just, and his ears are open unto
their prayers: but the countenance of the Lord upon them that do evil things.

13 And who is he that can hurt you, if you be emulatours of good?

14 But and if you suffer for justice, Blessed are ye. And the fear of them
fear ye not, and be not troubled.

15 But sanctify our Lord Christ in your hearts.


The Explication.
8. St. Peter here recapitulates some of the chief virtues, which make a
perfect Christian. No marvel he begins with unanimity, be it in prayer, or
otherwise in all common Actions, because this virtue is radicated in the B.
Trinity, the ground of all Christianity; for there the three distinct Persons
are not only all of one mind, but of one essence too: in imitation whereof
Christians are taught to be all of one mind, all aiming still in every action
at the honor and glory of one only God, as the Angels do. The Apostle puts
compassion next, to show that each Christian should be as sensible of his
neighbors sufferings, as his own soul is sensible of the pain in any member of
his own body. This virtue flows indeed from the former unanimity, for where
there is but one mind or soul, as it were, there must be one and the same sense
or compassion. And this virtue of compassion extends as well toward our being
sensible of each good in our neighbor, (and zealous to imitate it) as of any
evil we see in him, out of a zeal to remedy or cure the same. So excellent is
the unity of Christianity. Hence also flows the next virtue, lovers of the
fraternity; to show that the grace of our Religion teaches us to imitate the
perfection of nature; so to love one another, being Brothers in grace, as we do
that are Brothers in nature. When we are bid Be merciful, it is as if we were
told our compassion must be even from the Bowels of our hearts. Modesty and
humility are well jointly recommended together, because they are indeed
inseparable companions, as it were; and so in this exterior virtue modesty,
(rendering the whole person exteriourly grateful) and in her inseparable
companion humility, S. Peter closes up his enumeration of virtues; ending with
humility, because that is indeed both the basis and summity of all others; for
as it must be the first, (as captivating man's proud reason unto Faith) so if it
go not hand in hand up to the top of perfection with other virtues, even with
charity the Queen of them all, that great Queen cannot stand fast in her
throne, but upon the feet of humility.

9. S. Peter here forbids not the flowing of Justice, or execution of just
revenge, when it is legal; but only private retaliation of evil for evil; and
exhorts that each private person bless and not curse those which do him
mischief: because as the end of all our temporal evils is eternal Bliss; so we
must (in hope of that for our selves) Bless those that do us evil. O rare
perfection of Christianity!

10. By these three next verses taken out of David's mouth, S. Peter proves,
that to repay evil for evil is our natures propension, but bids us forbear, as
we will hope to have our own evil deeds toward God forgiven, and the little
good we do rewarded with eternal life: called here seeing good days; for those
are chiefly good which shine with glory over our heads; though the days of
grace here are not deprived of that Epitheton too. We are therefore bid refrain
our tongues, because when they be loose and unbridled, that alone begets bad
days unto us; every one judging him to have a bad heart, that has a bad or an
unbridled tongue: and how can the lips of an ill tongue speak other then guilt,
when they betray the guiltiness of their own heart?

11. The declining evil and doing good is an abstract of all Christian duty,
and a perfect rule of Christian perfection. It Is reason to bid us seek peace
and follow it, as being the special gift of our Savior, which he brought with
him from heaven at his birth; and then the Angels bestowed it amongst us; the
holy Ghost did the like at his coming too, and Christ at his going, left it as
his Farewell, as has been said before, yet is not here unseasonably repeated.

12. By the eye of our Lord understand the piercing knowledge of Almighty God,
whereby he sees into the secrets of all hearts, and seeing them lovers of
Justice, hears all the prayers they make unto him, and grants them all they
ask: By his Countenance, understand here that displeasure he shows at the
latter day unto the wicked, when he pronounces the sentence of damnation
against them; for how ever he does not damn every man in his actual sin, but
differrs his justice till the latter day, yet he looks on their iniquity that
do sin, with the same displeasing countenance, as at the day of Judgment; when
it will be a greater torment to behold the displeasure of that countenance,
then to suffer hell fire. O that we could in all Temptations to sin reflect on
this Truth, so should we avoid the fact, that will merit this effect!

13. A happy shield against evil to emulate virtue and goodness. Emulation
here imports a vehement zeal and fervor of soul toward virtue; not a faint
velleity or wish of it, but a strong will and action too; and so makes a strong
shield not only against all vice, but even against all mischief: for S. Austin
says well, no body is hurt, but by himself; by his own sin; therefore if all
men be emulatours of virtue, they are sheltred from all evil or hurt from
others: And this one of the Churches prayers in Lent assures us of, that no
adversity shall hurt us, if no iniquity dominear over us.

14. Doubtless those are Blessed that suffer for justice, since Jesus Christ
who is verity it self, has numbered those among the Blessed, nay among those
who actually are possessed of heaven; as if a patient suffering an unjust
persecution here, were a heaven to the sufferer, even whilst he is in durance;
and as if God were not content to reward that kind of suffering with future
Bliss, but with a present Beatitude. After which follows well the end of the
verse, that we should nor fear, nor be troubled at our unjust persecutours;
because by our patience we are, as it were, out of their power, which aims
only at our affliction and vexation; and failing thereof, leaves us free from
fear of any mischief they can do us. S. Laurence on the Gridiron was a good
proof of this.

15. It follows, we do then sanctify Christ in our hearts, when they are
wholly set upon him, and regard not any mischief hell it self can do us, when
our hearts are inflamed with the love of God, and of Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Application.
1. THe Illustration upon this Prayer tells us at how great a height of
perfection S. Peter aims in the Text of this Epistle, when no less then an
absolute sayntity, is the rule he gives for Christianity. And this is evident,
whilst we see the Apostle exhort not only to all manner of positive, but even
to negative sayntity withal; not only to have us do all sort of good, but to
have us decline all kind of evil whatsoever; not only always to do well, but
also never to do ill; not only finally to be Saints, but never to be sinners,
after we have once the happiness to be Christians.

2. And to this purpose he lights up all the lamps of virtues which you see him
recommend to day unto us: advising that our charity march always through the
wilderness of this wicked world as men do rest by night in deserts, when to
secure themselves from the ravenous beasts that hunt their prey by night, they
make a ring of fire round about them, and so sleep securely: now in regard we
have a Noonday devil hunts our souls by day, as well as night, therefore S.
Peter circles us about not only in the never dying fire of brightest charity,
(which the devil hates and flies) but with the lamps and torches of a many
other virtues burning bright about us, so to prevent us from the Fiends midday
incursions, as well as from his seizures in the night, because the least light
of virtue, the least glimmering of saintity dazels the eyes of this foul fiends
iniquity, and makes him run away.

3. Now in regard all men are apt to dwell upon their present objects with
delight, and to delude themselves that every sin they do commit, has an
apparent goodness in it at the least, of pleasure, or of profit; therefore to
day, lest we should be deceived with semblances of that which is not true, lest
we should run after the folly-fires of the devil as after virtues, or follow
his flying light of seeming saintity, and so lose the society of real virtues
in the desert of this world; holy Church makes her prayer particular against
allurements of all appearing good, whilst she draws our thoughts and eyes to
things invisible; as if nothing we see were worthy our beholding, nothing that
we have worth our possessing; and so persuades us altogether to covet what we
have not yet, to wish for what we see not, to hope for what is promised, as
being far above what ever is, or can be here possessed.

And that we may do this she begs in the prayer above (as a special gift) of
God, to give us a desire of loving him unseen, and the Invisibles that he has
promised us, surpassing all our own desires, as far as they do our
possessions. The Gospel. Matthew. 5. v. 21. etc.
21 For I tell you, that unless your justice abound more then that of the
Scribes and Pharisees, you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

22 You have heard that it was said to them of old, Thou shall not kill: and
who so kills, shall be in danger of judgment.

23 But I say to you, that whosoever is angry with his brother, shall be in
danger of judgment: And whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca; shall be in
danger of a Council: And whosoever shall say, Thou fool; shall be guilty of
the hell of fire.

24 If therefore thou offer thy gift at the Altar, and there thou remember that
thy brother has ought against thee:

25 Leave there thy offering before the Altar, and go first to be reconciled to
thy brother; and then coming thou shall offer thy gift.


The Explication.
21. THeir justice was only an outward show of virtue; a ceremonious
observance of their own, rather then a religious keeping the Law of God;
whereby they became servile to one another, rather then children of God: and
therefore Christ tells us, that unless we become more just then they were, we
cannot be saved; unless our internal eye look directly at Gods honor, rather
then at man's will and pleasure, we cannot enter into heaven, which is the
kingdom of God, and not of man: so our justice must be internal and real,
not only externally apparent, as theirs was. This our Savior proves by
examples out of the letter of the law, (as they took it) without regard to the
spirit thereof, as we observe it, or as we should at the least.

22. This is clear by what follows, for the Pharisees never expounded the law
forbidding murder, further then as to expose the murderer to the sentence of a
temporal Judgment, and death: but in the Christian sense not only the
murderer is (...) guilty of eternal damnation, but even he that shall without
murdering, as follows,

23. Be passionately angry with his brother, meaning so angry, as to seek
unjust revenge upon him in any way of violence at all, much less of murder;
he shall be guilty of the severe judgment of God, and not only of man: for,
if his anger be a mortal sin, it shall suffice to damn his soul; (if he die
unrepentant of the sin) if but a venial sin, yet it shall suffice to make
him guilty of Gods adjudging him for it, at least to the temporary hell of
Purgatory fire; a far greater punishment then to die by sentence of the law of
man. But if he shall in his anger call him Raca, (express any outward contempt
or scorn of him) he shall be guilty of a Council. This alludes to the order of
justice among the Hebrews, who punished faults of injustice by three several
sentences, according to the quality of the fault, and by three several benches
of Judges: The first fault was called pecuniary, or injury in money matters;
the Judges of that were but three: The second was murder, whereupon three and
twenty Judges sat: The third was heresy, idolatry, blasphemy or the like,
whereupon seventy two Judges sat: Our Savior, who waves the first, alludes to
the second and third, to show the perfection of his law; and compares the
excess of a contemptible expression to our neighbor, besides our anger
against him, (for so is understood by Raca) to the severest of all the three
judgment seats of the Hebrews, which was that they called Council, when they
were to consult, how severely they should punish the offender for this heinous
fault; as if God did esteem himself contemned, when any that bore his image was
vilified by us. So that in the balance of Christian perfection, any the least
sin of anger is venial; the expression of it in ill terms (as Raca) is
doubtful, and worthy of Council, whether venial or mortal; any notable
expression (as fool) is doubtless mortal, and so damnable, if it be so
expressed as that thereby we really desire to exasperate and provoke our
neighbor to indignation against us: for if in jest it is otherwise; if it be to
such persons as we may jest withal; but if to our betters, there such jests
are odious, and not to be used by any means.

24, 25. These verses close up the difference of perfection between the
Pharisaicall and Christian Laws: the former taught that by sacrifice, and
oblations at the Altar into the hands of the Priest, all their sins were
expiated, whether they made satisfaction to the parties offended, and injured
by them, or not. This our Savior beats down, and forbids us to hope for pardon
from him, by any our sacrifices or approchings to the Altar, and to Priests,
unless we make our selves worthy to partake of our own offerings to God, by a
previous justice done unto the world; unless, having abused thy brother by
Raca, or fool, (as above) thou first ask him pardon; much more must we do
justice, if the injustice has been yet greater. The reason of this is, that
justice is always of necessity, sacrifice many times of devotion only: Where
note, this doctrine of our Savior is not only (as some pretend) a counsel,
but indeed a precept, because reconciliation is necessary by way of precept,
sacrifice not always so; and because God is never reconciled to us, whilst
our neighbor is justly offended at us. Note, this precept obliges only, when
with discretion it can be fulfilled, when without scandal, (amongst other
obstacles;) so that you may receive, though you have given a private offense to
one absent, without going from the Altar to ask pardon, provided you resolve to
do it, when you meet the offended, and be actually then sorry for it; yes, you
may in such case receive, and are not bound to discover your guilt to others:
but without this internal sorrow, and purpose of a real external
satisfaction, (in time and place convenient) there is no offering sacrifice to
God, at less danger then of sacrilege, in pretending a pledge of peace, (for
such is a sacrifice) where God sees there is no peace at all.

The Application.
1. BY the drift of this Gospel it will appear I made no streined application
of the prayer above unto the genuine sense of the Epistle; for what else is the
whole scope of this Gospel (which must ever be the same with the Epistle) but a
putting out of the Ignis fatuus, of the feigned saintity of Judaisme by the
true fire of Christian charity? much as the sunbeams falling on the dimmer
light of brightest fire, seem to extinguish it, and make the flames thereof
invisible.

2. The Scribes and Pharisees forbidding murder under the servile fear of
humane judgment unto death, was (in regard of true Religion) like the dim
light of fire placed in the beams of the Meridian sun: The Son of justice
Jesus Christ forbidding murder, not so much for fear of death, as, for fear of
putting out the fire of charity to God, and to our neighbor, and of taking in
our hands the Glowworm of wrath and anger, a passion that seems to have a
flame indeed, but it is a flame of hypocrisy, of Ignis fatuus, of folly-fire
only, not of real virtue.

3. To conclude, see how the Gospel strikes it yet more home, when even the
seeming flame of sacrifice and offering at the Altar is a cheat to charity, is
a Pharisaicall but not a Christian duty of Religion, unless we light the lamp
of brotherly love withal; unless we be at peace with one another, we cannot
hope to have a peace with God. O beloved, who so short-sighted now as not to
see appearing saintity is nothing worth unless it be as real as it seems to
be? Philosophy teaches us this lesson of Christianity; A thing is good when it
is made so by the integrity of its cause, good every way: so is it with a
Christian, he is good to God, when he is made so, by being also good unto his
neighbor; but he cannot be so, while he offers sacrifice to God with his hand,
and to the devil with his heart, at the same time: such is our receiving the
blessed Sacrament before we are perfectly reconciled to all the world; it is
not the visible good action of receiving that makes a good Christian, unless
his invisible good intention make him so, that is, unless he privately forgive
all the world; and resolve at least, publicly to do it when first he meets
with any man that he has odds withal. So still we see the reality of our
goodness consists more in the invisibility, then in the outward appearance of
it, and for this cause

Holy Church, in her prayer upon this days Gospel, begs an affection to the
Invisible God, to the yet unseen good things which he has promised, as if all
we see were nothing worth in comparison of things invisible which we are
promised. On the sixth Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Mark 8. v. 2. I Have pity on the multitude, for that behold
they have now attended me three days, neither have they what to eat, and if I
shall dismiss them fasting, they will faint in the way.

Verse. Let my prayer, O Lord, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
O God of virtues, to whom all belongs that is best, ingraft in our breasts the
love of thy holy name, and grant in us the increase of Religion, that thou
may nourish those things which are good, and being so nourished maintain
them by the practice of piety.

The Illustration.
HOw properly do we to day petition that the love of Gods holy name, may be
ingrafted in us; who are (as the Epistle tells us) baptized in that holy name,
and in virtue of the said Baptism, are not only dead, but even buried with
Christ to sin, and raised to a newness of life, by a new resurrection with
him into a state of grace! How singularly home does the next petition of the
prayer come to all the rest of the Epistle; when we beg in the second place the
increase of Religion in us, whereby we do truly live to God in Christ Jesus,
as in the close of the Epistle we are said to do! How excellently also does the
third petition of the prayer exhaust the whole Gospel of this day; whilst it
begs a nourishment in us of those things that are good, when the said Gospel
runs all upon miraculous food and nourishment, which our Savior gave to day
unto four thousand persons that had constantly followed him, for three days
together in the wilderness! This nourishment (beloved) is dully given us in
the Blessed Sacrament, whereof this Gospel was but a figure according to the
exposition of the best Expositours of Holy Writ: For look how to day four
thousand persons were corporally fed with multiplied loaves; so are millions of
souls daily fed with the body of Christ, multiplied under millions of
consecrated hoasts: and as by this food is chiefly nourished in us all that is
good; so by the practice of Piety (as the prayer petitions in the close) is
maintained in us what by the aforesaid blessed Sacrament is nourished: as who
should say, in vain we take this spiritual nutriment, if after it we do not
maintain the grace it gives us, by the continual study and practice of Piety:
wherefore to make this Prayer accomplished, we beg in the close thereof, that
God will maintain in us (by our practice of Piety) the good nutriment we
receive by the blessed Sacrament. Thus we see how admirably the Prayer is
adapted to the other parts of this days service; and withal we are taught,
that the perfection of a Christian life consists in the continual practice of
Piety and devotion.

The Epistle. Romans 6. v. 3. etc.
3 Are you ignorant that all we which are baptized in Christ Jesus, in his
death we are baptized?

4 For we are buried together with him by Baptism into death: that as Christ
is risen from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also may walk in
newness of life.

5 For if we become complanted to the similitude of his death, we shall be also
of his resurrection.

6 Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin
may be destroyed, to the end that we may serve sin no longer.

7 For he that is dead, is justified from sin.

8 And if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live together
with Christ.

9 Knowing, that Christ rising again from the dead, now dies no more, death
shall no more have dominion over him.

10 For that he died, to sin he died once; but that he lives, he lives to God.

11 So think you also, that you are dead to sin, but alive to God in Christ
Jesus our Lord.


The Explication.
3. TO be baptized in Christ, is to be christened according as Christ has
commanded, in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; to be baptized in
his death, is as much as to say, in representation of his death, and that our
Baptism has force and virtue from the merits of his death and passion; and
signifies, that as Christ died on the Cross to this natural life, so the
baptized die to sin, and live to Christ, which is a life opposite to that of
a sinner.

4. This verse adds more to the Analogy, saying, we are not only dead to
sin in Baptism, but thereby also buried with him, in proof of our death to
sin. So that the Trine Immersion used in Baptism alludes to the three days
that Christ lay buried in his grave, as our sins in Baptism lie drowned
under the water thereof: And for this cause holy Church makes a solemn Baptism
yearly on Easter eve; to show, that thereby those who died and were buried with
Christ, do also rise with him, by the glory of his heavenly Father, (that is,
to glorify him) to a new life in him: in testimony, whereof the baptized have
a white garment cast over them, called the Chrisome, to show the purity of
their souls; and are advised to carry the same inward purity with them to the
tribunal of Christ, as a proof of their fidelity to their vow in holy
Baptism of renouncing the world, the flesh, and the devil, so to conserve
their purity or newness of life; to the which the Fathers exhort earnestly,
when they inculcate the frequent memory of our baptismall vow; which they
ground in these words, so we also may walk, importing, so we may persevere in
that purity.

5. See how this verse insists further upon the consequence of our spiritual
resurrection even in this life, by our spiritual death and burial as above;
showing that our newness of life by Baptism, is like the ingrafting us into
the stock or tree of Christ, whence we are to receive all our future sap or
nutriment: so that as his death (to natural life) was the way to his
resurrection; in like manner our death (to sin) is the way to our
resurrection with him: and as we see graft^ following the changes of the tree
they are ingrafted in, seem in the winter to die with it, in the spring to
revive with it; so do we by Baptism in Christ seem to die with him in the
winter of his passion, but revive in the spring of his resurrection.

6. Then we know indeed our old man to be crucified with Christ; when the new
man lives in him. By the old Man understand custom of sinning renounced by
Baptism; by the body of sin understand here the whole mass of our sins;
by the destruction of it understand, not the palliation of it only, by
imputative Justice, as heretics do, but the absolute death thereof by inherent
justice, infused by baptismall grace into our souls.

7. And this sense is confirmed by the next verse, saying, he that is dead
(meaning to sin) is justified from sin; lives by the infused Justice, which
has killed, and not only covered sins in the baptized.

8. This verse imports our future life eternal, which we firmly believe we
shall enjoy with Christ, if here we die with him to sin.

9. The sense of the precedent verse is confirmed by this following, that tells
us, death shall as little reign over us in the next life, (if we truly die to
sin in this) as it did over Christ once risen from his grave: and yet withal
alludes to the constancy we ought to have in good works, even in this life;
that having once had the happiness to live spiritually here, we should disdain
to die again by relapse into sin, and so to let death dominear ever us, whom
once we had slain by grace. Note here the strange goodness of our Savior, who
being God, was content to let death once dominear over him on the Cross, that
we might for ever after triumph with him over death.

10. Here Christ is not to be understood to die to sin, as we do, but to die
for sin, not his own, but ours; and that once, for all our sins. Where he
is said here to live to God, understand with God, a blessed and immortal life;
as also, that by so living he may perpetually praise and glorify Almighty
God; since as he died for sins abolition, so he lives for Gods glorification.

11. It Is reason we should think our selves dead to sin, when by Baptism we
renounce it; and living to God, when by the same Baptism we live in him. But
it is a high expression of the alteration which the Apostle exhorts unto, in
advising us to think we are dead to sin: for as dead men have no motion at
all; so we ought not to move the least step toward sin, when once we are by
Baptism dead unto it: and therefore it follows well, that all our vital
motion should be toward God, toward his honor and glory in Christ Jesus;
lest we fall back from the life of grace, to the death of sin; which we can
never do, if in imitation of Christ's life we square ours. For that is
understood by living to God in Christ, glorifying God, by following the
footsteps of his Son our Savior Jesus Christ; who so lived after his
resurrection that he never died more, and desires we may so live in grace, as
never to die in sin again, being once freed from it by holy Baptism.

The Application.
1. IT stands with all the reason in the world, that where the increase of
Religion, and Practice of Piety are petitioned, there should be laid the
groundwork of Religion to build an increase upon: see how this whole Epistle
is (for that purpose) nothing else but the very basis and foundation of
Christian Religion; our death to sin, by holy Baptism; and our resurrection
to the life of Grace, by the practice of Piety; which practice will increase
Religion in us, according as we do petition.

2. If any ask what is the best practice of Piety, whereby we shall most
advance and increase Religion in our souls; I shall conclude confidently out of
this holy Text, that the greatest men and saints of Gods holy Church must be
made such by becoming Infants and children again, by going backward, (if we may
so call it) and down the hill of Humility, by retreating to the holy Font where
first they received life to God; since it was of such that our Savior said,
Let the little ones come to me: and so important he made their coming, as
Matthew. 8. v. 5. we see he excludes from Heaven all that do not make themselves
as holy Infants in his sight; saying, Unless ye become like these little ones,
you shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

3. To conclude then, This Text exhorts all good Christians to become as new
born Infants, coveting the milk of their mothers breast: 1. Pet. 2. v. 2.
desiring rather to live babies of grace, then men of sin: endeavoring a
daily growth of that love to Gods holy Name, which was ingrafted in their
breasts in holy Baptism, by that God of virtues, to whom all belongs that is
best; from whom all those best graces, virtues, and gifts proceeded which were
bestowed upon us at the holy Font; Namely, Original Justice; (for the primary
effect thereof a rectitude to God, when we were adopted his children, who
before were slaves of the devil) The three Theological virtues, Faith, Hope,
and Charity; The four Cardinal virtues, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and
Temperance; The seven gifts of the Holy Ghost, Wisdom, Understanding,
Counsel, Fortitude, Knowledge, Piety, and the Fear of God; As also Penance,
Religion, and all such other virtues as being supernatural like these, are not
acqui^able by any humane endeavors and ther^fo^e ^he habits of them are held
(probably) to be all infused in holy Baptism. So that it is by the work of
Charity, properly called the practice of Piety, by the exercise of these
virtues in the frequent Acts thereof, that we increase our Religion, and
nourish what is good in us; and rightly called Best in God, from whom all
goodness flows, all virtue springs as from the proper fountain thereof.

Say now, beloved, does not holy Text being all upon Baptism, and the effects
thereof, give a fit occasion for holy Church to pray to day as above? The
Gospel. Mark 8. v. 1. etc.
1 IN those days again, when there was a great multitude and had not what to
eat, calling his Disciples together, he says to them;

2 I have compassion upon the multitude; because lo three days they now
endure with me, neither have they what to eat.

3 And if I dismiss them fasting into their home, they will faint in the way:
for some of them came afar off.

4 And his Disciples answered him, whence may a man fill them here with bread
in the wilderness?

5 And he asked them, how many loaves have ye? who said, seven.

6 And he commanded the multitude to sit down upon the ground. And taking the
seven loaves, giving thanks he brake, and gave to his Disciples for to set
before them, and they did set them before the multitude.

7 And they had few little fishes: and he blessed them, and commanded them to
be set before them.

8 And they did eat, and were filled: and they took up that which was left of
the fragments, seven maundes.

9 And they that had eaten were about four thousand: and he dismissed them.


The Explication.
1. IN those days, signifies here about that time, and does not determine
exactly any day; For what was now done, was not the work of one only day, but
of diverse, wherein many people had flocked together to behold our Savior and
his prodigious works; as also to hear him speak, and preach unto them; so
attractive was all he said or did: as we see here, they were even careless how
to subsist; when our Savior himself was the first that proved solicitous about
them* And by calling his disciples, he shows us example to consult with our
Brethren, and not to rely only upon our selves in difficulties.

2. In this second verse he tells his Disciples, he had compassion of the
multitude, that had row endured with him three days, and had not what to eat.
Blessed God! how tender is thy heart to those that suffer purely for thy sake!
as these did; if yet their suffering were not rather a content to them, then
otherwise: For it is not, says S. Chrysostom, that they had fasted three days
without refection, but that they had now nothing left to eat; yet happily some
amongst them had nothing at all, and did really in zeal fast three days, and
therefore.

3. As in the third verse is said, if they had been dismissed fasting they
might have fainted, having some of them far to go home. See here the reward of
perseverance in good works: how our Savior requites but three days
susteining, with a miraculous banquet. And indeed his aim was more at feeding
their souls by the miracle, then their bodies by meat; however his disciples
understood him to mean only a corporal repast unto the people, when they
replied, as follows,

4. In order to the corporal food, that it was not to be hoped for in the
desert or wilderness. This incredulity our Savior permitted in his disciples,
both for their own and the peoples greater satisfaction afterward, when beyond
all humane hope he had provided a feast in the desert for his servants, as God
had done for the Jews, when even Moses their leader despaired of it, as the
disciples now did.

5. The Interrogatory in this verse argues not any his ignorance of the number
of loaves that were amongst them; but he asks the question, that by the answer
thereunto, those who before knew not the number of them, should (by knowing how
slender it was) admire the miracle the more that followed; when out of the
mystical number of seven loaves, four thousand persons were fed: For mystical
they were, as having relation to the seven Sacraments, which are so many
several conduit-pipes of Gods grace into our souls, whereby they are
spiritually fed, as those four thousand men were temporally with seven loaves:
they Were figures also of the sevenfold grace of the Holy Ghost, giving to us
seven special virtues; three Theological, four Cardinal in holy Baptism: as
also of the seven gifts beside of the same holy Spirit.

6. That the ground was the Table whereon our Savior made his feast is no
marvel; for so in the law of nature men sat at meals, to show the superfluity
of costly tables was as little agreeable to God, as the excess of their dishes
also were: and therefore here is only bread and fish to feast upon; since
nature being content with little, grace will not make her any means of
excess. That he brake, and blessed the bread before it multiplied, argues the
virtue of his Benediction to have caused the multiplication: so in the
beginning of the world, he blessed the creatures, which he bid increase and
multiply, to show their multiplication was the fruit or effect of his
Benediction. That he gave not the bread himself to the people, but to his
disciples to distribute, argues his breaking to the world the bread of his holy
word, not immediately by himself, but by his Apostles and their Successors.

7. The addition of fishes to the bread of this banquet, argues that Priests
must always add unto the word of God, the pulpe or pap of good life; that so
our food may be in all kinds nourishing to souls.

8. That hungry people did eat their fill no marvel, when God allowed plenty.
That they took up the scraps, was to instruct us never to permit the least of
Gods Blessings to be wasted or lost, (much less the least of Gods words, here
signified by the crumbs falling from the Preachers mouth.) That there were seven
basquets full of fragments no marvel neither, since there were seven loaves at
first; and so it was fitting the Blessing of multiplication should appear in
each, by the relics of every one of them; as also to show, that all Alms to
the poor are rewarded with abundance remaining to the giver,

9. This verse only recounts the number of those who were present at the
feast, and shared in the miracle; who were not dismissed, till each of them
were satisfied and had their fill, to show that God leaves none of his servants
unrewarded, for their pains of loving and following him wheresoever he goes.

The Application.
1. IT is admirable to see the fecundity of Gods holy Spirit: how aptly the
Prayer above corresponds to these two Texts that seem far differing from one
another, yet are both driving at all the same ends of increasing Religion in
us, and of nourishing the good things it bestows upon us by the practice of
Piety. Which Piety we see was a special gift of the Holy Ghost, infused into us
in holy Baptism, and for the which we can no ways be answerable to Almighty
God, but by the continual study or practice of it: and doubtless this Piety is
then very well practiced in one particular thereof, when men frequent the
Blessed Sacrament, which is the truest nourishment of goodness in us that can
be imagined.

2. Nor is this other then a genuine sense of the present Texts, both of the
Gospel and of the Prayer to day: For all Expositours agree, that this miracle
alludes to the Blessed Sacrament, whereby not only many thousands but infinite
millions of souls are fed, and thereby nourished in the perfection of that
Religion, which by holy Baptism (as above) they made profession of. So that
here by the practice of Piety we are to understand the frequent Communion.

3. True it is, we were told upon Sunday within the Octaves of Corpus Christi,
that this Communion was then given us (as the figure thereof was given under
the Juniper Tree to Elias) for a food sufficient to carry us through the long
way we had then to go, before we came to Advent, but that notwithstanding, we
may receive it as frequently as holy Piety moves us thereunto: For this
advantage the substance has above the shadow, the thing figured above the
figure of it; that what was once done to suffice for the nature of a figure,
may be often exercised in the thing figured, because the love of grace is
perfected by the frequent exercises of those acts that do confer grace; whence
it is, that holy Church obliges us once a year at least (and that about
Easter) to receive this Sacrament as a viaticum unto us, for the journey we are
to make in the long way of virtue all the year after. Nevertheless, by way of
practicing Piety, our pious Mother allows the frequent Communion besides,
permits us to eat of this heavenly food, (this bread of Angels) as often as our
devotion moves us thereunto, by permission of our Ghostly Fathers; (not
otherwise) which to those that have many worldly businesses may be every month
or three weeks, it being now thereabouts since the Octaves ended of the Blessed
Sacrament, that now we have a memory of that holy mystery again, and may be a
good ground for Priests to regulate this devotion by: yet this may be more or
less frequent, as the discretion of the ghostly Fathers shall order; according
to the progress their penitents make in virtue by this, and other Practices of
Piety: For to permit more frequent communion to those that do not daily advance
in virtue, were rather to give way to a dangerous singularity, then to the
practice of a profitable Piety; since more regard must be had to a worthy
receiving, then to the frequency thereof.

Say now the Prayer above, and see if both it, and the Gospel be not exactly
exhausted by this special Practice of Piety, called frequent Communion. On the
seventh Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Matthew. 7.18. A Good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, nor an
evil tree good fruit: Every tree which yields not good fruit, shall be cut
down and cast into the fire.

Verse. Let my prayer, O Lord, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
O God whose providence is so disposed as it never can be frustrated, remove we
humbly beseech thee, all things that are hurtful, and grant whatsoever may be
beneficial unto us.

The Illustration.
This prayer doubtless is very well suited to the present calamitous times we
live in, when we have no other helm to steer us out of the sea of troubles we
are in, but that Providence we now call upon; which is so disposed, as (however
we seem tossed in the waves of destruction) it will infallibly bring us to the
safe port of salvation, if we sail or hold our course according to that
Providence: since it is most certain, that God Almighty never intends our ruin
by the miseries he permits to fall upon us, but rather our salvation, if we
bear them with conformity to his holy will. But we must find the prayer adapted
to this present Epistle and Gospel too, else we fail of our design. You will
have anon the literal sense of both expounded; but we must now prosecute our
further aim of making it appear, this prayer is, as it were, an abstract of
them both. In which holy Church would teach us how to cast our selves upon the
providence of God with a perfect resignation to his divine will: as who should
say, O God, we know thou have environed mankind with a world of internal and
external evils, yet thou that art omnipotent can remove those evils, or
things which are hurtful, out of our way, and can afford us all that is good
and beneficial to us, since we doubt not but thy goodness has a desire to
save each of us; and consequently have so disposed of us in thy saving
Providence, as (notwithstanding all the evils that environ us) thy will of
saving us shall not be frustrated. No, not maugre all the internal evils
mentioned in the Epistle, of our own flesh and blood propending us to
perpetual sin; nor all the external evils mentioned in the Gospel, of
ravenous wolves, of false prophets, who under color of saving our souls seek
to swallow them up into the mouth of hell. For as against our internal evils,
we find helps in the Epistle, domestic, easy helps, such as S. Paul is almost
ashamed to name, our own flesh and blood captivated only to the rule of reason
and grace: in like manner we find helps in the Gospel against our external
evils, false prophets or teachers, when we are in the Gospel taught how to
distinguish them from true and safe guides, by looking into their lives and
works, which are compared there to fruits of trees; that is, if their lives be
good, we may safely follow them; if bad, we must avoid them. And certainly, as
we have no internal enemy greater then our own flesh and blood ill regulated,
so we have no external greater then false prophets, ill teachers, since the
Laymens lives ought to be squared unto the lives of their spiritual leaders;
and when any of these are false guides, it is like the corruption of the best
thing, which always is the worst corruption. O how fitly then does holy Church
to day (reflecting on these internal and external enemies or evils) mind
Almighty God in this prayer of that his never-failing providence, when to
secure us that it be not frustrated in us, she bids us deprecate all those
evils that may endanger it, and beg all those helps that may conduce unto it!
Say then, beloved, this prayer with this relation to the Epistle and Gospel,
both which it sweetly sums up unto you; and say it with such a fervor of
spirit, as it self imports; that is, beseeching God to look upon us as lost
souls amidst so many dangers as he has placed us in, unless he use his own
omnipotent power, to make good in us his saving Providence: For then God hears
best, when we pray with most earnestness; and when we cast our selves wholly
upon his care and Providence which can never be frustrated.

The Epistle. Romans 6. v. 19. etc.
19 I speak a humane thing, because of the infirmity of your flesh. For as you
have exhibited your members to serve uncleanness and iniquity, unto iniquity:
So now exhibit your members to serve justice, unto sanctification.

20 For when you were servants of sin, you were free to justice.

21 What fruit therefore had you then in those things, for which now you are
ashamed? for the end of them is death.

22 But now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, you have
your fruit unto sanctification, but the end life everlasting.

23 For the stipends of sin, death: But the grace of God, life everlasting in
Christ Jesus our Lord.


The Explication.
19. St. Paul calls it well a humane thing or motive, when he moves us to piety
by the argument of requiring no more care in us to serve God, then we used to
serve our selves. And as by iniquity he understands all sin, so by justice he
understands all virtue, which does sanctify us.

20. That is to say, by making sin your master, you had cast off all the yoke
of duty you ow to justice (the mistress under whom you ought to serve God.) So
free to justice, means slavery to injustice in this place, which is a very ill
freedom indeed.

21. It Is clear enough, we reap no fruit from sin, but shame and death.

22. As clear it is, that when we renounce the bondage we were in to sin, we
then become servants to God; and have for the present fruit of our service
sanctity, and for the future an eternal and blissfull life.

23. That is to say, the natural and due reward of sin is death; but life
eternal is not so due to Saints, because it is a huge grace of God that they
obtain heaven, when they have done all they can to gain it: And in this place
the Apostle calls it grace, or a reward given to virtue by the singular favor
and mercy of God: And he calls this grace life everlasting, because, under the
notion of life he includes all that is good and happy; and because he will
confront it with death, which is the reward of sin, to make it more grateful
by being compared to so ungrateful an opposite as death is unto life.

The Application.
1. IT is evident, S. Paul in this place speaks to the Lay People amongst the
Romans, not to the Churchmen; for he requires a far greater perfection of
them then of the Layity, to whom he indulgeth here as much as humane frailty
can expect, when he makes the Infirmity of their flesh, the strength of his
argument to persuade them to the fruits of the spirit (their sanctification) by
the works of charity. For without charity there can be no saintity.

2. As therefore all sins whatsoever are reduced to the works of the flesh, so
all virtues are reduced to the works of charity, which is the spirit of God,
working in us counter to the flesh; that still producing slavery, shame, death,
and damnation; this, freedom, confidence, life everlasting, and salvation.

3. Now in regard Almighty God has made no flesh at all of his spiritual
counsels, and in regard we see his wisdom has so ordained that the life of
man is a perpetual warfare between the spirit and the flesh, (as this Epistle
tells us from the first to the last of it) and lastly, in regard he has
provided us one sole Chieftain sufficient to quell all the enemies of the
flesh, his holy grace, his love, his charity, which alone is able to secure
souls from all the assaults of their triple enemies the world, the flesh, and
the devil; therefore holy Church, as stricken with an admiration at the wonder
of it, to see souls saved upon so huge an odds, as three such enemies to one
poor man, (or three millions to one rather, considering every one of these
three principal enemies have millions of instruments to damn a soul by) and
not knowing what else to attribute this unto, then to the admirable Providence
of Almighty God, who has so contrived, that those whom he has chosen to be
his amongst the multitudes of men, shall make their very dangers their
security, their very sinful flesh the instrument of their saintity, and
salvation by the sole helping hand of charity; Therefore, I say, it is the
Churches prayer gives this prodigious work to the sole Providence of Almighty
God, and begs that by this never-failing Providence all lets to our salvation
may be taken away, and all helps possible afforded thereunto.

The Gospel. Matt. 7. v. 15. etc.
15 Take ye great heed of false prophets, which come to you in the clothing of
sheep, but inwardly are ravening wolves.

16 By their fruits you shall know them. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or
figs of thistles?

17 Even so every good tree yields good fruits, and the evil tree yields
evil fruits.

18. A good tree cannot yield evil fruits, neither an evil tree yield good
fruits.

19 Every tree that yields not good fruit, shall be cut down, and shall be
cast into fire.

20 Therefore by their fruits you shall know them.

21 Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom
of heaven: but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven, he shall
enter into the Kingdom of heaven.


The Explication.
15. BY false prophets are here understood any that undertake to teach or
preach false doctrine: By their coming unto us is understood they are not sent
lawfully, but pretend mission: By the clothing of sheep is meant their false
pretense of sanctity, liberty of conscience, expounding Scripture, and the
like; whereas they inwardly are wolves that devour souls under pretext of
saving them.

16. Their fruits are commonly licentiousness of life, obstinate heresy,
schism from the true Church: These the thorns of their pretended vines, the
thistles of their pretended fig trees.

17. That is to say, a true prophet or teacher teaches good doctrine, and
leads a good life; a false teaches bad lessons, and lives lewdly too.

18. This is parabolically spoken in order to the will of man, and so holds not
ever, but for the most part, unless taken in the compounded sense; that is, a
good will, whilst it remains good, cannot produce evil fruit, though it may
cease to be good, and then produce evil.

19. What is here said in the future tense, is in the third chapter of S.
Matthew spoken by the Greek Text in the Present tense, as who should say, every
tree that yields not good fruit, is presently cut down and cast into the fire;
as if it had cut it self down, and cast it self into the guilt of hell fire
by mortal sin. And it is only Gods infinite mercy, that whilst we yield
bad fruit, (whilst we sin mortally) we are not presently damned; for so we
deserve to be. And in the same third chapter the hatchet is said to be placed
at the root of the tree, to cut it instantly down; meaning, Christ is come,
whose Law is ready to pass upon us, whose sentence is ready to be pronounced
upon every mortal sin, (for then we are spiritually dead) and after death
judgment is instantly ready; nay our own guilty consciences do even
immediately pronounce our sentence of damnation, unless God give us grace to
repent and amend, by producing good fruits again.

20. If they live well, and do good works you may know they are true teachers;
if not, they are false ones.

21. See the modesty of our Savior Christ, who rather names his Fathers will
then his own, although they are always both one and the same God, and both
equally produce the same effect of salvation, if equally observed and obeyed.
But to the first part of this verse; it is not every one that calls upon God, or
undertakes to preach his word, that is saved; no, he must bring forth the good
fruit above required: and what is that good fruit? the will of God; he must
square himself and his actions thereunto, and then he shall be saved, by crying
only or knocking at heaven gates: nay we need not cry, nor knock at all, if
we bring a key to open the door, if we have cast our own inordinate wills into
the form of the will of God, and so made unto our selves a key to open heaven
gates withal, to enter whenever we die.

The Application.
1. AS in the Epistle above Saint Paul bid the Laymen beware of their greatest
internal enemies or evils, (their own flesh) so in this Gospel Saint Matthew
bids the same Lay People take great heed of their most dangerous external
enemies, the false Prophets, meaning false Teachers and Preachers of Gods holy
Word. We are therefore (as in the Illustration was observed) by this days
doctrine, armed against all enemies whatsoever, internal or external, by the
prudence of holy Church, collecting at once all the motives that may be to
increase our love and charity to Almighty God, in showing us how his infinite
Providence has secured our way to Heaven, by pointing out every danger that we
can encounter in the way.

2. And as the Layman has no better guides to heaven, then those that preach
and teach the Word of God unto him, that catechize and instruct him in the
Principles of Christian Doctrine, that offer sacrifice to God for him, and
administer the Sacraments of God unto him; (because with these guides it is he
trusts his very soul) so in regard there are that do usurp this office of
Prophets, of Teachers and Preachers to the very bane, poison, perdition and
damnation of souls, it was hugely necessary the divine Providence should arm
us against this worst of evils, by giving us a rule to know these impudent
usurpers by, these false Prophets from the true ones: which knowledge we shall
have by looking on the fruits of one and the other: them that bring good fruit
we are to follow, them that bring forth bad to fly.

3. Now because holy Church has not made the Layman absolutely Judge in this
particular, therefore while her Doctors (preaching on this Text) give all the
signs of true and false Prophets, she contents her self the Laymen have
recourse to God Almighties Providence herein; and that they only follow those
who make their works answerable to their Doctrine, who do as well as teach the
will of God: For as they only are true lovers of him who keep his
Commandments, so such only are to be the Laymens guides. And to the end they
may have such, and may be freed from others, They pray to day this may be an
act of God Almighties special Providence over them, to take away all hurtful
things, and grant them all availing ones to their salvation: but especially
this most availing of all the rest, to send them true Prophets, good and holy
Priests, such as may teach them as well by the exemplarity of their lives, as
by the verity and soliditie of their Doctrine; for as the Text commands us to
beware of others, so the Prayer (by consequence) must beg for these.

On the eighth Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Luke 16. v. 3. WHat shall I do, for that my Lord takes from me
the Bailiff-ship? To dig I am not able, to beg I am ashamed: I know what I will
do; that when I shall be removed from the Bailiff-ship, they may receive me
into their houses.

Verse. Let my Prayer, O Lord, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
GRant us O Lord, we beseech thee propitiously, the spirit of thinking always,
and of doing what is right; that as we cannot be without thee, so we may live
unto thee.

The Illustration.
O Beloved, what an excellent Prayer is this! How deep! how sweet! how alone
able to save us, if said with the same spirit that taught it; and if performed
as well as said! For if we neither think, nor do amiss, how can we ever sin?
and consequently how fail of being saved? Again, if we only subsist by the
preservation of Almighty God, (as is most true) how can we presume to live unto
our selves, and not unto him? As therefore our being is purely and only by
him, so ought our living to be purely and only to him, not (as it is, God help
us) to our selves, as if we had been our own makers, or could (for the least
minute) preserve our selves; how daring so ever our comportment is, as though
we were our own and not God Almighties creatures, Idolizing daily to our
selves, sinning hourly, and provoking God to undo his own handy work, by
damning (not annihilating) of us, were not his mercy above our malice, which
malice only can attempt our annihilation. I need say no more of the excellency
of this Prayer; for whilst I strive to amplify it by other words, I do
contract it rather, then enlarge it; which is more patheticall and significant
in the short method it observes, then any ampliation (even by the tongues or
pens of Angels) can make it: and shows us, That as God is but one simple
essence in himself, yet contains within him all the variety that is possible in
infinite millions of creatures; (or worlds indeed) so he can, if he please,
contract into one word, the sense and meaning of all the languages of the
world: and truly much is contracted in this Prayer above. I shall therefore say
no more in commends of it, but only show how rarely well it suites with the
Epistle and Gospel following; how as it were eminentially it contains them
both: the former, in begging first the spirit of always thinking and doing
right, that so we may be and live to God, as the Epistle advi^eth; which you
see quits us of all obligation to our selves, and ties us up to the duty of a
spiritual life, and of a corporal death, both which are petitioned in the
Prayer: the latter, in showing us how to prevent the danger of such like cheats
to our Lord and Master, which the Gospel mentions, by prepossessing our
thoughts with a right address of them to our masters pleasure and profit, and
consequently by preventing our actions toward him to be unjust, when we
acknowledge we cannot be at all, but such creatures as he makes us; and thence
we can have no hope to be preserved by him in a wicked being, which he never
gave us, nor can we expect he should preserve us in it: so the Prayer
concludes, begging we may live only to him, who only is the author of our
being.

The Epistle. Romans 8. v. 12. etc.
12 Therefore, Brethren, we are debtours; not to the flesh, to live according
to the flesh.

13 For if you live according to the flesh, you shall die: but if by the
spirit, you mortify the deeds of the flesh, you shall live.

14 For whosoever are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.

15 For you have not received the spirit of servitude again in fear: but you
have received the spirit of adoption of sons, wherein we cry, Abba, (Father.)

16 For the Spirit himself gives testimony to our spirit, that we are the
sons of God.

17 And if sons, heirs also: heirs truly of God, and coheirs of Christ.


The Explication.
12. THis therefore is S. Paul's inference or conclusion upon the premises;
wherein he had said we were by Baptism regenerate, born again, not of flesh,
and blood, but of Christ; in whom the Baptized must live as he did in spirit,
not in flesh, and so consequently are no longer debtours to flesh, but to
spirit, and must no longer live to the flesh, but to the spirit.

13. By the spirit is here understood Christ and his grace, not our own souls:
for though our bodies live by our souls, yet our souls must live by Christ,
who is their life; and we must by conformity to his will mortify both our own
bodies and souls too, if we will live spiritually in and by him; we must dye
to concupiscence and inordinate desires, for till then they are not mortified,
but live in us, and we by them live fleshly, not spiritually.

14. To be led by the Spirit signifies, that Christ should act in us, not only
we in our selves; and then we are true Sons of God, when we are led by him, by
his holy Spirit, who is our life, as he was S. Paul's, when the Apostle said
Gal. 2.20. he lived, now not he but Christ in him. But here S. Austin plays
prettily upon the word acting: We must, says he, act our selves, and yet let
our action be from him rather then from us; for then we act well, when he makes
us act, when our action is radicated in him, and squared to his holy will: So
here to be led, argues the impulse of his holy Spirit, and the voluntary
cooperation of our action too; for then, says S. Austin, we are led by his
Spirit, when we do as we ought to do.

15. The spirit of servitude or servile fear was that which God led the Jews
withal, fear of temporal punishments; but we are led by a better spirit, that
of love, and so must serve God for love of him, rather then for fear of hell,
and as his adopted children rather then servants; so much nobler is our
condition, then that of the Jews. And this spirit of adoption is no less then
the holy Ghost himself communicated unto us, as v. 6. was said on Sunday within
the Octaves of Nativity. For as God gave his own Deity to Christ, when he made
Christ the Son of God; so the holy Ghost gives us himself, to make us also the
Sons of God by adoption, in virtue of our Saviors Passion: whence we have the
privilege to cry out to God, as children do to their Parents, Abba. (that is
to say Father) O high dignity! able to raise any loyal soul high toward so
good a God.

16. By the Spirit himself is here understood both Christ, in whom alone we are
said to live; and also the holy Ghost: whence the Greek text says, The Spirit
gives joint testimony, not only testifies, as the Latin Text has; to show,
that however the Word and the Spirit make two persons of the B. Trinity, yet
they both are but one God with the eternal Father. O how excellently are we
assured of this happy filiation, when both the heavenly Father looks on us as
such, and his eternal Son together with the holy Ghost testify and avouch us
so to be!

17. This last verse tells us, we are not only sons of God, but his heirs
also, and not only his heirs, but his coheires with Christ: and indeed it is
fitting, Gods children should have a better birth right then the children of
the world; whereof commonly one only is heir, but here all are coheires of
Christ at least.

The Application.
1. THe Expositours upon the first word of this Epistle tell us, it is by the
tie of our Faith plighted, of our promise and covenant made to God in holy
Baptism that, Therefore we are debtours only to the Spirit: And with great
reason, since every man remains a debtour only for such bonds as he has tied
and bound himself by to his creditours. Now because God Almighty did foresee,
how apt a man would be to flatter himself, that he was bound by the Law of
Nature to pamper that flesh which he had received from his Natural Parents, and
consequently might loose his soul by so pampering of his body; therefore he was
mercifully pleased, by making man enter into better bonds, (those of holy
baptism) to cancel all his former debts to any creature whatsoever, and to
make him become new debtour, only to that holy Spirit which was both his
Creator, (and so had more right in him then his fleshly Parents had) and also
his Regeneratour, and so begot him to a spiritual life, or being, which his
first begetters were not able to confer upon him.

2. But S. Paul, not content to tell us in this Epistle that we are only
debtours to the Spirit, and the reason why, (because of the bond we entered
into at holy baptism of loving God above all things, and of living wholly unto
him) proceeds to animate us toward the performance of this debt, by showing us
the gallant effect thereof, namely, that it makes us as well the heirs as sons
of God, and not heirs only, but co-heires of Christ.

3. Now in regard the Preachers office is to tell us how to pay this debt, how
to live spiritually, and by so living to secure ourselves of this ineffable
co-heiretage; (which office the Expositours upon this holy Text have at least
in part supplied) therefore it remained only that our holy Mother the Church
should make us such a Prayer, as might be most suitable to this doctrine; and
none so suiting it as that, which begs our thoughts may be rightly such as
suggest to operations answerable to our being, spiritual altogether: That so,
as it was a pure act of love in God to adopt us here his children in Grace, we,
by re-loving him (that is by living according to our better being) may be yet
further adopted his children in Glory, and thus may be made the co-heires of
Christ indeed.

Say now the Prayer above, and see beloved, if it be not most apposite to this
holy purpose.

The Gospel. Luke 16.1, etc.
1 And he said to his disciples, There was a certain rich man that had a
Bailiffe; and he was ill-reported unto him, as he that had wasted his goods.

2 And he called him, and said to him, what hear I this of thee? render account
of thy Baili-ship; for thou can no more be Bailiffe.

3 And the Bailiffe said within himself, what shall I do, because my Lord
takes away from me the Baili-ship? dig I am not able; to beg I am ashamed.

4 I know what I will do, that when I shall be removed from the Baili-ship,
they may receive me into their houses.

5 Therefore calling together every one of his Lords debtours, he said to the
first, how much do thou owe my Lord?

6 But he says, An hundred pipes of oil: And he said to him, take thy bill,
and sit down, quickly write fifty.

7 After he said to another, But thou, how much do thou owe? who said, An
hundred quarters of wheat: He said to him, take thy bill, and write eighty.

8 And the Lord praised the Bailiffe of iniquity, because he had done wisely:
For the children of this world are wiser then the children of light in their
generation.

9 And I say to you, Make you friends of the Mammon of iniquity; that when you
fail, they may receive you into the eternal Tabernacles.


The Explication.
1. THis parable shows, that all Christians bear office of Trust in Gods
Church, and are only to administer his goods, not to waste, or use them as
their own; and this is meant, whether they have goods of nature, or of grace,
they are to account for all to him: And our accuser here mentioned is the
devil, who justly lays waste to our charge, as well when we use not Gods gifts
well, as when we use them ill. So still Christians must do good, and not only
decline evil, else they lie liable to the devils accusations.

2. O how clement a Master do we serve! how gently he rebukes, when even in
Justice he is bound to take an account of our perfidiousnesse! Where he says,
now thou must not be longer Bailiffe, is understood, I cannot in justice let
thee be longer in trust of my goods, then whilst thou do administer them
faithfully. An excellent lesson to keep us close to our duties.

3. We see here the accusation is not false, the Bailiffe pretends not that, he
confesses his guilt when he asks what shall I do? since he cannot hope for
longer trust from his master. This puts us in mind of our miserable condition
at the latter account, in respect whereof it follows, there is no ability in
us to labor amends by further service; for then the time, as well as the power
of further labor is past: and to beg relief of any other master is a shame to
man, that had so good a master of Almighty God, whose favor he has lost for
ever.

4. This verse shows the Bailiffe had resolved with himself to cheat his
master; so to provide for himself by their means, whom he had favored to his
masters prejudice.

5. 6. 7. These verses need not explanation, as showing only how much he
cheated his master of.

8. Note, the word Lord here is taken for the Bailiffes master, not for our
Savior, as some mistake it: and truly the context proves as much; for our
Savior undertakes to tell this story, as in the person of another man; so he
cannot mean himself, when he says the Lord, but must needs mean the Bailiffes
real master did praise his own Bailiffe of iniquity, that is, did commend the
invention or manner of the cheat, not the cheat it self; and said that the
children of this world used more wisdom and prudence in their worldly ways,
then the children of light. This may put us in mind, how ill it is that we
study more to damn, then to save our souls.

9. This verse cleares the sense of the former to be spoken in the name of the
master to the Bailiffe; for here Christ, having told us that masters sense, now
makes profession to speak in his own name in these words, I say unto you give
alms, do good deeds unto the poor with your Mammon of iniquity, (your
treasures) for by virtue of these alms the poor may plead your admittance into
heaven, and obtain (by their intercession) that your alms may cover a
multitude of your sins. So this is a parable speaking properly to rich men of
this world, who are not true Lords of their own estates, but owe them to God,
and have the portions of the poor in their hands; and own all their treasure,
but as Lords of iniquity, as heapers up of wealth, which they have cheated the
poor of; and when they pay them not by Alms, they lie liable to the like
censure of this Bailiffe, (to render account) for they are such to God.

The Application.
1. THis Gospel being wholly Parabolical, we are at the greater liberty to make
our applications thereof, according as we can best avail our selves by it,
further then what by the Illustration and Explication above is already done.
First therefore, albeit this Parable aims directly at rectifying the
inordinate excesses of Rich men, who abuse the trust God has reposed in them
of relieving the poor, when they lavish away their estates vainly, and do not
(by their charities) pay the poor men's Portions, which are included in the rich
men's revenues: yet we may very properly here mind the Priests of Gods holy
Church, that as they are indeed the chief Bailiffes of their heavenly Master,
trusted with more of his Estate and Treasure then all the world besides,
namely, the receiving and distributing his holy graces; (the livelyhoods of
their own and other men's souls) so when they waste these Treasures, either by
their own idle mispending them, or by their undue dispensing them to others,
especially by palliating the sins of the people, and flattering them with
needless dispensations from their Christian duties, (never valid but when
really necessary) then are they most properly such ill Bailiffes as this Gospel
specifies.

2. Secondly, in regard there is no Layman free from the Bailifship of a huge
(though lesser) trust also reposed in him by Almighty God, of all those rich
graces, virtues, and gifts which are bestowed upon us in holy Baptism;
therefore every Layman (as well as the Priest) may piously fear he plays this
ill Bailiffes part; and that chiefly out of this root, his giving way to unjust
thoughts, such as propend him to unrighteous actions, by not being rejected,
but disputed with, until the temptation of sordid gain or pleasure overcome
him, and make him unjustly act that, which at first was but unrightly thought.

3. Now this evil holy Church hopes to amend in us by prayer adapted to the
Bailifship we are entrusted with, absolutely of our own souls, and partly of
our neighbors too, (in point of edification to him at least) whereby we are
charitably to contribute also to his salvation: which we shall then perform in
act, if our thoughts be first set upon the doing it. Thus we see, how the debt
we owe of charity to our neighbor, puts us in mind of the greater debt we owe
thereof unto our selves, and to Almighty God. And by this charity it is we are
best able to perform what we this day

Pray for, with holy Church; that by always thinking thus charitably right we
may do uprightly, we may live spiritually to that good God, without whom we
have neither spiritual, nor yet corporal Being.

On the ninth Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Luke 19.46. FOr it is written that my house is the house of
prayer, to all Nations; but you have made it a den of thieves. And he was daily
teaching in the Temple.

Verse. Let my prayer, O Lord, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
LEt the ears of thy mercy, O Lord, be open to the prayers of thy suppliants;
and to the end thou may grant the things desired to those that ask, make them
ask such things as to thee are pleasing.

The Illustration.
BLessed Jesu! that the holy Ghost should teach us perfection of prayer, in a
language arguing imperfection in Almighty God; mutation from his not bearing,
to the opening of his merciful ears to the prayers of his Suppliants! Whereas
his eyes being always open to see our actions, his cars cannot be shut from
our petitions; since we can as little speak, what he does not hear, as we can
do, what he does not see. It is not therefore because he at any time hears us
not, but that we deserve not to be heard sometimes, (even when we pretend to
pray) that we are taught to beg his open ears to our petitions; and that, if we
will hope to be heard, we must ask such things as are pleasing to his Divine
Majesty, rather then what is desired by us: wherefore we were taught by our
Savior himself to pray, that the will of God might be done in earth, as it is
in heaven; which in effect (though in other terms) we pray to day, when we
beg, that to the end God may grant what we desire, he will make us ask such
things as are pleasing to his Divine Majesty. Yes beloved, this is the full
scope and sense of the prayer above; and by this we see, it is one and the same
spirit, that now dictates the form of prayer to holy Church, which our blessed
Savior had, when in the garden he gave us the most excellent method of
praying, called to this very day our Lords prayer: only this we find peculiar
now, that all prayers of holy Church are so set after the style of our Lords
prayer, (which alone includes all the requests we are able to make) that they
are adapted to peculiar emergencies, and do specially relate unto the present
service of the day: As for example, the prayer above now does unto the Epistle
and Gospel of the Mass, in regard they both mind us of the severe punishments
inflicted both upon the Gentiles, and the Jews, who in their prayers run
after their own inventions, and made their sacrifices (which should appease the
wrath of God) to be the highest provocations of his fury; as the Idolaters,
fornicatours, and murmurers did: whereof S. Paul here minds the Christian
Corinthians, who it seems were also inclined to make idols of their own
desires, rather then to adore (in true spirit) the living God, or seek his holy
will: as also S. Luke in the Gospel tells us, the whole city of Jerusalem was
ill addicted; wherein were not only slain twenty three thousand persons at the
sacking thereof by the Romans, but even in the destruction of that city, the
whole nation of the Jews was dispersed and overthrown, for persecuting Jesus
Christ, because he came not to them according to their own desire, according as
they had fancied to themselves the Messiah should come, in power and glory, in
riches and abundance; the very thought of which iniquity in the Jews made Jesus
weep, as S. Luke tells us, so soon as he saw the most splendid and opulent city
of the whole universe near to her destruction, for want of following such
instruction, as we have in this days prayer; for want of conformity to the
will of God; for want of desiring and asking those things, that were pleasing
to the Divine Majesty. And to show how short they were of using this form of
prayer, we see he went immediately to the Temple, and chased out those from
thence, who made the house of prayer a den of thieves; of such as under color
to sell necessaries for the sacrifices of the Temple, sold their God himself
for hope of sordid gain; who therefore were called thieves, as robbing God of
his honor, even in that place which was sacred to his service, by seeking more
their own profit then his glory in that place. Say now, beloved, was it not fit
the Church should make her prayer to day, in the style above, when all the
service of the day runs upon examples of severest punishments upon those,
whose prayer was of another tenor? and is it not most behooffull we should
pray in this sort, since these figures are professedly made mention of for our
examples, that whilst we hear of them, we may beware their case become not
ours? Assuredly it is. And this being declared, I make account our souls are
well armed, because well warned, resolved heartily to pray in this manner;
least for not so praying, we be punished, as those formerly (in this kind)
defective were.

The Epistle 1 Cor. 10. v. 6. etc.
6 And these things were done in a figure of us; that we be not coveting evil
things, as they also coveted.

7 Neither become ye idolaters, as certain of them; as it is written, The
people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.

8 Neither let us fornicate, as certain of them did fornicate, and there fell
in one day three and twenty thousand.

9 Neither let us tempt Christ; as some of them tempted, and perished by the
serpents.

10 Neither do you murmr; as certain of them murmured, and perished by the
destroyer.

11 And all these things chanced to them in figure: but they are written to our
correction, upon whom the end; of the world are come.

12 Therefore he that thinks himself to stand, let him take heed, lest he
fall.

13 Let not tentation apprehend you, but humane: and God is faithful who will
not suffer you to be tempted above that which you are able; but will make also
with tentation issue, that you may be able to sustain.


The Explication.
6. O How much are Christians obliged to Almighty God, who has laid before
them the punishments of his own elect people, (the children of Israel) not
only for a figure, but an example also unto them; that by the punishments
inflicted on the Hebrews, we Christians might beware, and avoid such sins, as
we see God did not pardon in his own chosen people, but punished them severely!

7. When they erected themselves an idol of a golden calf, and adored it, and
afterward like the Egyptians and Gentiles made great feasts, wherein they
wanted not excesses at their tables, and then rose to their wanton sports and
dancings, as if they would thereby honor their Idol. Which profaneness was
punished by Moses, commanding his Levites to kill at once three and twenty
thousand of them. And this S. Paul inculcates to the Corinthians, and to all
dissolute Christians to day: For as the Corinthians had certain dedications of
thousands of virgins to Venus, who were defloured under pretended honor to
her; so this was a fit example of S. Paul to them, and may be to all our wanton
youth, God help them.

8. Here S. Paul alludes to the abomirable idolatry that was committted to
Bel-phcor, that is, unto Priapus, with the daughters of Moab, abused in honor
of this horrid Idol-god; which was punished as above is noted in the gloss
upon the former verse: where the like punishment was inflicted upon the
idolaters to the calf, as is here mentioned upon the fornicatours; only that
there were mentioned twenty four thousand, Numb. 25. v. 5. here only twenty
three thousand; So the Apostle speaks with the least; not that he contradicts
the other place of Scripture, since the greater number includes the lesser,
though the lesser does not exclude the greater.

9. Here the Apostle calls tempting distrusting in Christ; as it seems some of
the Corinthians did, who doubted of his resurrection: for where in the Old
Testament we read Number. 25.5. the children of Israel are said to murmr against
the Lord; S. Paul here applies this to Christ, and calls it tempting of him in
the Corinthians, as in that figure the Israelites did, who perished by fiery
serpents, Number. 21. v. 6. not that they were fiery, but because the effect of
their sting was as hot as fire, and seemd to burn the people that were stung or
bitten by them

10. Their perishing was partly being swallowed up alive by the earth, partly
being burned with fire from heaven, or smitten with the sword of the Angel,
called in this verse the destroyer, and conceived by the best Interpreters to
be S. Michael, the leader of the people, and the giver of the Law unto them in
the mount Sinai, and in that the figure of our Savior Jesus Christ. And indeed
Gods punishments were frequent, and very severe upon the sin of murmr
against his Divine Majesty.

11. That is, all things here specified, not absolutely all that are written in
the whole ancient law: for however many things were there figurative, yet there
were also many things not figurative, but had their own end in themselves,
without relation to any thing that was to follow. And here the word figure is
not taken strictly, so as to mean allegory or mystery, but rather indeed for
example; since in that sense S. Paul applies it to us in the Corinthians, as
appears by his following words, that they were written for our correction,
reprehension, or admonition. By the ends of the world in this place is
understood the coming of the Messiah, whose time is often called the last hour,
both in the Old and the New Testament; this hour is to be measured from the
birth of our Savior till his coming to judgment, because to millions of souls
it has been already their last hour, and will be to many more, since there is
no more time to work salvation in, then that between his birth and his coming
to judgment.

12. This verse seems added lest any should conceive, the former menaces did
not belong to him in particular; for such is the condition of humane frailty,
that who to day is a Saint, may tomorrow be a sinner; and therefore the Apostle
bids us all stand upon our guard.

13. This Greek phrase of the imperative mood, Let not etc. is to be
understood in the Latin and English, as if it were in the preterperfect tense
of the indicative, and would say has not; that is, the temptations you have
had, were but mere humane, namely to contention, to lust, to liberty, and the
like, such as are common to all mankind, but are easily avoided by the help of
grace bestowed on us, by our faithful God, who, as the following words assure
us, will not desert us in our temptations, nor let us be tempted above our
strength: much less does God (as Calvin says) thrust us on, or tempt us
himself; nor does he (as Luther will have it) impose things impossible on us,
to whom his grace (as to Saint Paul it was) is all sufficient, and from whom he
never takes the said grace, till we reject it, or by our consent to sin expel
it. Contrary, God permits us not to be tempted, but that we may thereby gain
greater force to endure yet further assaults; as who should say, the issue of
our temptation is (if we will) our victory, and inabling us to a new, (if need
be) to a greater combat; for thus much import the last words of the verse, that
we may be able to sustain these, and yet greater onsets, if we will our selves
use the grace which God gives us to resist them with.

The Application.
1. THe sum of this Epistle is to tell us Christians, that what punishments
were inflicted on the little children of Almighty God, the Jews, who had only
the Alphabet, the Elements of religion bestowed upon them, will (if we commit
the like sins) befall us too, that a e the Men, the Combatants, the Champions
of Jesus Christ, honored by him so far as to have the perfection of religion
taught us by himself: not only in the delivery of his holy word unto us; but
in the example of his sacred person, doing before our eyes much more then he
expects from us, because we should have no excuse from doing our endeavors, in
some sort at least to follow his saving footsteps.

2. It will therefore behove us, that are now marching our long journey through
the desert of this world to the kingdom of heaven upon the feet of Christian
charity, to behave our selves as we were passing some narrow and loose bridge
standing over a precipice of deepest waters, full of rocks sure to pash us in
pieces, or to drown us if we fall: for to this reflection the 1^th verse and
close of this Epistle lead us. And by this means we shall be sure to beg both
faith and hope to lead our charity over this dangerous passage, lest while she
thinks she stands, she fall upon the sharpest rock of all before our eyes to
day, Idolatry, by idolizing to her own inventions in seeking of her self, not
looking after Jesus Christ in her devotions; or upon the splitting rock of
Fornication, by pouring out her affections on the alluring creatures of the
world, which she has made (by her baptismal vow) solemnly sacred to Almighty
God alone; or into the deepest pit of Tempting Christ in her prayers, by
praying to God for things she should renounce, and not enjoy, (her own
inordinate desires) and so endeavoring to give God law, instead of begging
favor at his hands, to make her self God, instead of captivating her
rebellious will to his holy pleasure; or lastly, into the desperate swallowing
gulf of Murmur, by repining at God Almighties bounties when she sees any
prosper whom she loves not, especially when this murmuring arrives to the
malice of envying her neighbors spiritual good.

3. O beloved, if this be the frequent practice of Christians (who pretend
charity to be their guide) how ought the reflection of it to strike us into a
religious awe, into a holy fear, into a dread indeed lest while we make a show
to men of saintity, we practice iniquity! And therefore holy Church to day has
made a prayer so excellently suiting to this purpose, that it alone, said with
a heart which beats according to the lip that says it, will suffice to cure us
of those evils, and to secure our charity she shall hold her footing over the
narrow bridge of danger; If while she prays she perfectly renounce her own
desires, and beg of God Almighty only that which is agreeable unto his holy will
and pleasure.

The Gospel. Luke. 19. v. 41. etc.
41 And as he drew near, seeing the city, he wept upon it, saying,

42 Because if thou had known, and that in this thy day, the things that
pertain to thy peace; but now they are hid from thine eyes.

43 For the days shall come upon thee and thy enemies shall compass thee with
a trench, and enclose thee about, and straiten thee on every side;

44 And beat thee flat to the ground and thy children that are in thee: And
they shall not leave in thee a stone upon a stone; because thou have not known
the time of thy visitation.

45 And entering into the Temple, he began to cast out the sellers therein and
the buyers.

46 Saying to them, It is written, That my house is the house of Prayer; but
you have made it a den of thieves.

47 And he was teaching daily in the Temple.


The Explication.
41. HEre our Savior showed the tender bowels of his humane nature, when
drawing near Jerusalem, (the head city of his own chosen people, whither he was
sent by his heavenly Father to redeem them, and all the world besides) and
seeing (by his al-seeing eye) that maugre the exclamations of the children and
people, who showed his way into the City, yet he should by the chief commanders
there be crucified in requital of his love; he fell a weeping, mixing the wine
of his triumph with the water of his tears, to show us how to temper our
pleasures here. Three causes there were of our Saviors tears upon this city;
The first, the blindness, obduracy, and ingratitude of his chosen people, that
would not receive their Messiah and Savior: The second, the revenge of God
upon them by Titus, who was to be their destruction by this ingratitude: The
third, the loss, as it were, of all his own labors upon his best beloved
children, most of the sons of that city.

42. That is, if thou (o my beloved city) did know, as I do, and that in this
thy day, (when I come to give thee a kiss of peace from heaven, being sent
unto thee by my eternal Father) when I enter thy gates to redeem and save
thee, which is indeed a thing appertaining to thy eternal peace: And here, to
show the excess of his grief, he stops, and says not what should follow, to
wit, thou would weep thy self, as I do now for thee, thou would weep to
see what pains I have taken in my three years preaching of penance to thee,
what more I am to take for thee, whilst I die to save thee, who wilt not be
saved: Yes, all this sense runs through our Saviors soul, and is genuinely
taken out of this abrupt speech; which because I see, and thou do not, (wilt
not indeed) therefore I weeep for thee, O wretched city.

43. This was to a title verified, when Titus and the Romans laying seidge to
Jerusalem after our Saviors death, in three days space (as Josephus writes)
built not only Trenches, but walls about them, so as none could stir out at
any rate for relief; whence mothers were fain to eat their own children. So
Josephus.

44. So sensibly our Savior speaks of this cities destruction, that here he
seems to exaggerate; for it is not credible the Romans were either so curious,
or so idle as not to leave a stone upon a stone, since there is now in that new
city the old mount Calvary, where many stones lay one upon the other. So the
meaning of this place is, that the destruction of this city should be so great,
as if there had not been a stone left upon a stone within it, whilst those
that were left, should be of no use nor profit. By the time of the visitation
understand this very time, when our Savior came a loving Messiah to save this
city, and she would not receive him, but plotted his death in requital.

45. See whither our Savior goes, as soon as he is entered the city. Into the
Temple first, to rectify that which was out of order there: So he first enters
into our Temples, (into our souls) when he adopts us to be his children. It was
not amiss to begin visibly to reform the visible abuses in the Temple,
especially since he see the hearts and souls of the high Priests would not be
reformed by him.

46. This was so palpable an abuse of the written word, that none could
question it; and besides it was necessary to abolish open Sacrilege, where
there was to be established open Sanctity.

47. To show, that thus Priests were to employ their times and their talents,
and not in secular companies or employments, at least not in merely secular,
but such as were mixed with Church duties.

The Application.
1. HOw excellently well does holy Church follow her design in this Gospel,
which we perceive she had in the Epistle above! For what else is meant by Jesus
weeping over Jerusalem, and foretelling her destruction, but because she did to
him while he marched before her eyes, as we have heard her children did to God
while he mercifully led them through the red Sea, (and many other dangers) out
of Egypt into the land of promise. What was their buying and selling in the
Temple other then Idolatry to Mammon, other then robbing God of that honor
which they paid (even in his own house) unto his greatest enemy the devil? For
which you see our Savior whipped them out of the Temple, as was said in the
Illustration above, and not unnecessarily repeated here.

2. O Catholic Christians! how do we act this Jewish part! how do we do our
best to make our Jesus weep in Heaven, (if it were possible) to see us
Catholics degenerate into the sordid actions of the Jews! What is it else to
hear us murmr against our Lord, for commanding us to he meek and humble, who
have nothing in us but passion and pride; who are with the Jews ashamed of
holy poverty, while we clad our selves in nothing but gauderies, more vainly
far then those whose Religion binds them not so strictly from such braveries
as ours? While instead of renouncing the vanity of the world, we sell even God
himself for hope of only popular applause, by frequenting the Church for vain
respects, to see, and to be seen, under pretense of praying there, or of
hearing the word of God; which is to make Gods holy House, a den of thieves,
to rob him of his honor in that very place appointed only for honoring, and
adoring of his holy Name.

3. O how rarely well does holy Church rebuke the Priests and Laymen too in
the Prayer she makes to day, as an abstract of all the doctrine on those holy
Texts, when what so ever we do at other times, she bids us, while we pray at
least, refrain (as is our duty) to commit Idolatry, to Fornicate, to Tempt our
Lord, to murmr, to swell with Pride, to dissemble, and to Simonize in holy
Church!

For this were but to shut those sacred ears we praying do pretend to open:
This were to ask unpleasing things to God, not such as we are bid petition in
the Prayer above, pleasing to his heavenly Majesty. On the tenth Sunday after
Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Matthew. 18. v. 14. THis man went down to his house justified more
then he: for that every one who shall exalt himself, shall be humbled, and he
who humbles himself, shall be exalted.

Verse. Let my prayer, O Lord, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
O God, who do manifest thy omnipotency most of all by pardoning and taking
pity, multiply on us thy mercy, that we running unto thy promises, thou may
make us partakers of thy heavenly treasures.

The Illustration.
STrange that holy Church should teach us in this Prayer, the omnipotency of
God is most manifested by his pardoning and pitying of us. True, his goodness
and his love is thereby most of all made manifest: but his power, or his
omnipotency seems manifested more in his creating all things out of nothing; in
his governing the world created, so as to make contrary natures combine all in
one to the fulfilling of his holy will and pleasure; and in his punishing
offenders, who if they could resist his power, would never endure eternal
damnation, as all the devils, and accursed souls in hell are forced to do. But
if we look more narrowly into the business, we shall find Gods power most
manifested in his pardoning and pit^ying offenders: For as by their sins they
relapse into a far worser nothing then that they were created out of first of
all; so to be recreated, as often as they sin, is to keep in exercise Gods
omnipotency every minute in a manner, since they hardly pass a minute without
a sin; and if this be mortal, they as often disannull themselves, as they
sin mortally: and since in this case they cannot be re-made again, but by the
omnipotency of him, who can make all things out of nothing this omnipotency
being manifested by the pardon and pity God Almighty does afford a sinner thus
relapsing; it follows evidently, that the said omnipotency is made most
manifest by such pardon and pity as God affords to sinful souls. Which pity
being an Act of mercy, we had need petition that mercy may be multiplied upon
us, more often then w^ do multiply our sins, because it is by the
multiplication of that mercy we obtain first grace to repent, and then capacity
to be pardoned and pitied too: as if pardon alone were not enough, without God
also took pity on us, and did as well by his pity ^xcuse as by his pardon
forgive our sins: For certainly, should not God pity our frailty, he could
never so often pardon our iniquity, nor multiply (as he does) his mercy upon
us, to prevent our sinning, as if yet our ill natures could be overcome by his
goodness, and made to offend so great, so good a God no more: whereunto there
is nothing so much conducing, as the multip ied mercy that we beg to day: to
the end we may at last leave to grasp after the shadows of comfort we aim at,
by following our own dictamens, and may learn to run after the substance of God
Almighties promises, and thereby may deserve to be made partakers of his
heavenly treasures; which are promised to all that will for love of them
renounce the empty shadows of riches, which this world affords. But it
remains, this prayer must suite as well to the other se^vice of the day, as
this gloss is suitable to the Prayer: In brief therefore see the Epistle all
upon graces gratis given, while the prayer begs that pardon and pity, which we
could never hope for, did not God give them gratis, and multiply his mercies
upon us by the gratuite gift thereof. See again the Gospel making the pardon
and pity extended to the Publicane more ultroneous and free by Gods having
multiplied his mercy on him, least he should with the proud Pharisee boast his
virtues, who was full of nothing else but vice: And consequently, see an
excellent report between the Prayer and both the other parts of holy Churches
service, teaching us by these examples to detest the shadows of worldly pelf,
and to run unto the promises of Almighty God, thereby to be made partakers of
his heavenly treasures.

The Epistle. 1 Cor. 12.2, etc.
2 You know that when you were heathen, you went to dumb Idols, according as
you were led.

3 Therefore I do you to understand, that no man speaking in the Spirit of God,
says Anathema to Jesus. And no man can say Our Lord Jesus, but in the holy
Ghost.

4 And there are divisions of graces, but one Spirit.

5 And there are divisions of ministrations, but one Lord.

6 And there are divisions of operations, but one God, who works all in all.

7 And the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one to profit.

8 To one certes by the Spirit is given the word of wisdom, and to another the
word of knowledge according to the same Spirit.

9 To another Faith, in the same Spirit: to another the grace of doing cures in
one Spirit.

10 To another the working of miracles: to another prophecy: to another
discerning of spirits: to another kinds of Tongues: to another Interpretation
of languages.

11 And all these works one and the same Spirit, dividing to every one
according as he will.


The Explication.
2. THat is to say, like so many slaves to sense, led on by the evil custom of
your Idolatrous Ancestors, and of the devil, or rather indeed misled by them,
you went on in a kind of fond zeal to serve dumb Idols, that could neither
hear, nor see, much less give you any requital of the service you did them:
but now that you are Christians, serving a true, a living, a liberal God, give
that great God thanks for this conversion, O Corinthians.

3. This word therefore is used as a link to tie this and the following verses
in sense together; as who should say, therefore I put you in mind of your
conversion from Gentilisme to Christianity, that your zeal in the service of
the true God may as much transcend what you used to false gods, as life
transcends death, as all things transcend nothing, as the shadow the substance,
for so much a perfect Christian transcends a Gentile. And therefore it is
impossible that a Christian (speaking according to the true spirit of such)
should say Anathema to Jesus, (should curse Jesus) as the Gentiles perhap^ did
curse their Idols, when they had not what they expected from them: but
contrariwise are to bless, praise, and magnify Jesus Christ, as the author
of all grace in this life, and of glory in the next. But the Apostle inculcates
this, because even the Jews did curse Jesus, (as also did the Gentiles,
amongst whom the Corinthians lived) and their Judges (to try who were
Christians) made them do this; so least they should follow this ill example,
the Apostle uses this exhortation to the contrary, holding it sufficient
obligation not to curse Jesus, that one was a Christian. See how handsomely the
Apostle makes these two opposite, to curse Jesus, and to call upon the name of
Jesus; as who should say, since the holy Ghost gives you the grace to call upon
Jesus, you cannot speak in the Spirit of the holy Ghost, if you curse Jesus.
Where note, that by calling upon Jesus is not meant the mere prolation of the
name or word Jesus, but the religious Invocation of that holy name, in order to
a supernatural end; and this none can do, but as assisted by the holy Ghost;
much less can you from any other fountain then this, vaunt your selves, O
Corinthians, of any other gifts or graces, then this (I say) of the holy Ghost.

4. One Spirit (One only holy Ghost,) giving diversely his several graces to
several persons, as he pleases.

5. One Lord, (Christ Jesus God and man,) to whom all orders in the Church pay
the tribute of their respective services, as if from Christ they had their
several offices, and orders appointed them.

6. Note, the Apostle here refers grace to the holy Ghost, as the fountain
thereof; ministration, service or duty to Christ, as Lord of heaven and earth;
and operation or working to God the Father, as the origin and fountain of all
things, and of their operations. And we may not unfitly say the same thing is
meant by grace, ministration, and operation with several respects unto the
several persons in the sacred Trinity, who (as one God) is the undivided
fountain of all the holy divisions abovesaid: and so all things that are done
out of God, (or as Divines say ad extra) are equally attributed to the whole
Trinity; how ever we do piously attribute them also, as it were, severally to
the several persons thereof. By God's working all in all is here understood his
mutual concourse to all natural causes and effects; and his sole working
whatsoever is supernatural in us, by means of graces given gratis: and of such
only the Apostle here speaks; not of graces rendering grateful, nor preventing
our operation, but of such as God gives merely gratis.

7. By manifestation of the Spirit is here understood the gift of the holy
Ghost, whereby the said holy Ghost is made manifest, who is the Author of all
supernatural gifts. The profit whereunto these gifts are given, is rather to
the Church, then to him that receives them; for gratuite graces ever avail the
Church, but not so him who receives them; as miracles may be wrought by a
sinner, who does not profit by them perhaps at all, yet the Church does.

8. By the word of wisdom, is understood the power to explicate deep mysteries
of Faith, as of the B. Trinity, Incarnation, praedestination, or the like: By
the word of knowledge or science, is understood the power to direct men's
actions or manners, that they be rational at least. Thus S. Augustine lib. 12.
Trinit. cap. 14. and 15. distinguishes between wisdom, and science or
knowledge.

9. By Faith here is not understood that act of Theological virtue which is
common to all Christians, but an act of particular confidence in God, whereby
it is believed he will (by virtue of that our confidence) work a miracle, being
asked so to do, by such a Faith as is able to remove mountains. Others
understand by Faith here, a deep understanding inabling to contemplate and
explicate the mysteries of Faith.

10. By miracles here are understood those which are extraordinary, and are
exercised not only upon the body but even on the souls of men; such as was
that of S. Peter upon Ananias and Saphyra, commanding them to dye. By
discretion of spirits is meant, when God gives one man the grace to see into
the very thoughts and intentions of others, to know when an action is done by a
good or evil spirit, by God or the devil; a gift to be begged by ghostly
Fathers, and conducing to their conduct of souls: These gifts S. Hilarion was
noted to have. By interpretation of languages is understood, a special gift
frequent in the primitive Church, whereby men illuminated for that end, did
give the true sense of Scripture; and of those who being ignorant, yet had the
gift of Tongues, and to spoke more then themselves well understood, but were by
Interpret^rs expounded.

11. Namely, as that Spirit (as the holy Ghost) pleases.

The Application.
1. St. Paul in this Epistle first puts the Corinthians (and ^n them all other
Christians) in mind of the horrid Nothing that they were before their
conversion from Gentilisme to Christianity. And his aim in this is, that as
nothing was more abominable to the Gentiles then the name of Jesus Christ, so
nothing ought to be more reverential to Christians, then that most sacred and
most saving name: insomuch as S. Paul concludes, it is an Apostasy from God, a
relapse to Gentilisme, not only to use irreverence to the name of Jesus, but
to conceive we have any other life or being then what is purchac'd in that
sweetest name.

2. Notwithstanding true it is, we have life often given us by the holy Ghost,
the special giver indeed of holy grace which is the ^ife and being of a
Christian; and hence it is S. Paul had no sooner inamoured the Corinthians on
the Name of Jesus, then he falls instantly upon the gifts of the holy Ghost,
sent from his heavenly Father, and from his sacred Son our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, to multiply on us the mercies of Almighty God; as if to have been
once redeemed by Christ had not satisfied his infinite goodness, without he
had also made this Redemption copious by sending his holy Spirit to re-redeem
us by his graces from the relapses into sin, that render our first redemption
fruitless, unless it had been more copious yet by the multiplied mercies of
the holy Ghost, applying the Passion of our Savior to us by some new gift of
grace bestowed upon us, as often as we take religious breath into our bodies by
calling on the Name of Jesus with an aweful reverence thereunto, as befits all
Christians to do: and for this purpose it is S. Paul falls into the enumeration
of the gratuite gifts of God, the graces that are merely gratis given, not such
as are usual, and absolutely necessary for our sayntification, or
justification, but such as rather serve to show the multiplication of Gods holy
Power and Mercies over us.

3. Blessed God! how art thou perpetually out-doing thine own goodness, by thy
continual effusion of thy self upon our iniquity! how art thou giving daily
more and more manifestation (and consequently much more admiration) to the
blessed Angels and Saints in heaven, by multiplying thy mercies on us sinners
here in earth, whom all those happy spirits may give a thousand thousand times
for lost, when they see how we run after nothing but the sordid gain and
pleasure of the world, the sweets that poison, the contents that damn our
souls! and yet by the multiplication of thy mercies we are sweetly forced
(maugre the impulse of devil, flesh, and blood) to let go all our hold on the
possessed shadows of this world, and to run after the promised substances of
the next. But how my God are we forced to this? by the manifestation of thy
Power, in the multiplication of thy mercies; according as was said before in
the Illustration.

Say now, beloved, the Prayer above, and see if it be not excellently well
adapted to this holy Text, and to this application of the same unto our best
improvement.

The Gospel. Luke 18. v. 9.
9 And he said also to certain that trusted in themselves as just, and despised
others, this parable:

10 Two men went up into the Temple to pray: the one a Pharisee, and the other
a Publicane.

11 The Pharisee standing, prayed thus with himself: God, I give thee thanks,
that I am not as the rest of men, extortioners, unjust, advouterers, as also
this Publicane.

12 I fast twice in a week: I give Tithes of all that I possess.

13 And the Publicane standing afar off, would not so much as lift up his eyes
toward heaven; but he knocked his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a
sinner.

14 I say to you, this man went down to his house justified more then he:
because every one that exalts himself, shall be humbled; and he that humbles
himself, shall be exalted.


The Explication.
9. 10. By a Pharisee is understood a proud; by a Publicane, an humble man in
this place.

11. By the word standing the pride of the Pharisee is insinuated. With
himself; it is true, for he prayed neither with, nor to God; for his prayer is
rather a vaunting of his own, then a seeking of Gods glory: And his insolence
is great, whilst he says, he is not as other men, as who should say, all
besides himself are sinners: had he said, as some other men, there had been
less arrogance, yet too much; and out of this arrogance he passes a rash
Judgment upon the Publicane, whom he points out for a notorious sinner, and
insinuates himself to be just.

12. By twice a Sabbath is understood twice a week, as naming the principal day
for the whole week. By Tithes of all he possesses he means not only
ordinary, but ultroneous Tithes of things he needed not to pay Ty^hes for. This
relates to what went before, as vaunting himself to be the only chaste, the
only just man living: chaste, as fasting, which is the mother of chastity;
just, as giving Tithes of all he had.

13. The Publicane (a true Type of humility) standing his reverential distance
from the Altar, confessing him elf unworthy to come nearer to the place where
the Pharisee proudly stood; not daring to lift up his eyes to heaven, where he
had offended the whole Court, the Saints, and Angels, whose inspirations he had
contemned, whose prayers defrauded, God, whose commands he had broken: he
knocks his breast, (his heart) in token of sorrow and repentance for his
sins. By saying, he is a sinner, he confesses his habit of sin: by saying,
have mercy on me, he does not blame either fortune, the world, or the devil,
but himself merely, and lays all the load on his own shoulders, as true
penitents ought to do.

14. More then he, is as much as to say, not absolutely, but in respect of the
Pharisee he was justified; because the one humbled himself, the other exalted
himself. Whence Optatus Milevitanus says well, lib. 2. against the Donatists;
Better (in some sort) are the sins of an humble spirit, then the (pretended
or boasted) Innocence of an arrogant person.

The Application.
1. THis whole Gospel is summed up in these few words of the Publican, God be
merciful to me a sinner. For we see there is nothing else aimed at in the whole
Text but a condemnation of the Pharisees pride, and a commendation of the
Publicans humility; or rather of his humble charity: That is such a love as
renounceth all proper merit, and has recourse to nothing but the mercy of
Almighty God; such a love as likes, but dares not look to heaven; such a love
as hates all sin, but has no other hope of sayntity then from the mercy of God
Almighty; such a love as believes God has power to save a soul, but that he
cannot manifest this Power without his mercy first appear, because he cannot
save a sinner, unless he mercifully give him first leave to repent his sins.

2. Thus we see, beloved, how charity goes shod with humility, when in her
journey she is handed on by Faith and Hope. But that which to me is most
admirable in this days service, is to see the little end, for which Almighty
God is manifesting his power most of all by his mercy, and how he is besought
to multiply that mercy for the ma^ifestation of his power both to men and
Angels, upon so small an account as making us pursue our own felicity only,
that is to say, the Promises he has made unto us of much better gifts in the
days of glory, then he has yet bestowed upon us in these our days of grace.

3. Yes, yes beloved, our good God has much to do with wicked sinners. We may
say (with much more reason) of man's salvation, as the Romans did of erecting
their Empire, Tantae molis erat -- O what a huge attempt it was to set up the
Roman Nation, and to make them Monarchs of this world! So if we look upon the
final end of God Almighties exercised power, and multiplied mercies over us, it
is merely to save his Christian people, merely to make them Monarchs of the
next world, eternal Emperors, everlasting Triumphers over death, sin, devil
and damnation, after they had been slaves to them four thousand years together.
Nay, so fond Almighty God is of his darling man, that he is even content to
bestow his utmost Power, his extended omnipotency, his multiplied mercies on
him to beget but a desire in him only of his own felicity, which consists in
the promises of the next world, not in the possessions of this.

Say then the Prayer above, and see how it petitions only this desire here, to
make us capable of all the joys in heaven, and of all the Treasures there. On
the eleventh Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Mark 7. v. 37. HE has done all things well, he has caused the
deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak.

Verse. Let my prayer* etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
ALmighty, everlasting God, who out of the abundance of thy pity, do exceed
as well the merits of thy suppliants, as their desires, pour out thy mercy upon
us, that thou may forgive what our conscience is afraid of, and add even
what our prayer dares not presume to ask.

The Illustration.
HOw apposite is this admirable Prayer unto the Epistle and Gospel of this day;
which are nothing else but mere relations to the abundance of that pity,
whereby God does exceed as well the merits, as the desires of his suppliants;
and whereby he did pour out his mercy upon his people, forgiving them what
their own conscience was afraid of, and adding what their prayer durst not
presume to ask! Say beloved, was it not an abundance of pity that Christ gave
us S. Paul, and other Apostles to preach unto us the story of his life,
passion, death, and resurrection? were not these works of his pity exceeding as
well the merits, as the desires of his suppliants, when no mortal durst have
desired so much misery to Christ, because no man was able to deserve his God
should suffer so much for him? were not then the mercies of Heaven poured out
upon us, when our redemption was purchased at so dear a rate to Jesus Christ?
and was not St. Paul justly afraid something might lurk in his conscience
unforgiven, when he ends this days Epistle saying, his having persecuted the
Church of God made him unworthy to be called an Apostle, and that since he was
what he was by the grace of God, he durst not presume to ask so great a favor?
O, how literally is this whole Epistle exhausted in this excellent Prayer! And
what are the cures done upon the deaf, and dumb related in the Gospel, but an
abundance of like pity in Jesus Christ? but like excess of his mercy poured
out upon these diseased people? what the amazement in the beholders of these
miracles closing up the said Gospel, but an acknowledgment that the guilt of
their consciences made them afraid to be in the presence of so good a God, and
that the grant of the cure was a thing added freely by Christ, as done in more
ample manner then they durst presume to ask though with a faint desire, and a
fainter faith they had presented those diseased people to our Savior to be
cured? Say now, beloved, was I rash in falling upon this bold attempt, to show
a sympathy between the Prayers of holy Church, and the preaching part of her
Services? Rather I am to ask God pardon that I did often doubt it was not true,
because I was many times too lazy to beat it out by way of meditation: but now
that I see the thing is certainly true, I shall not be troubled if I fail at
any time in so clear a demonstration of it as deeper souls may make, encouraged
by these beginnings of my shallow understanding. Mean while I shall beseech our
whole sodality to say these Prayers with all devotion possible, as being such
indeed that rightly understood do ravish any tender soul, and will make them
see the fondness of a single-soled devotion, in comparison of this which is
the Universal Churches Prayer. Let me conclude with this one question only;
tell me, beloved, what we may not da^e to ask of God Almighty, who in this
days prayer are bid demand more then we dare presume to ask. And why? because
no guilt of conscience is so great, but he that is the searcher of our hearts
can see the depth thereof, and seeing, mercifully pardon it through the
abundance of his pity toward us: nay then he commonly gives a more ample
pardon when we acknowledge his mercy exceeds as much our desires, as it does
our merits; when we rely upon him for prevenient grace to ask him pardon for
our sins, and that done, with a soul contrite, then build upon his goodness
for the rest; when we leave it to him what proportion of mercy he will show us,
since he being God cannot give so little, but it is much more then we his
creatures can deserve, and since his goodness is such as he cannot choose but
give more then he bids us ask, since we must always ask as wanting creatures,
he always gives as an abounding Creator, giving all things to nothing rather
then want a subject to bestow his bounties on; and we are less then nothing
when he gives repentance to our sinful souls. O! this, beloved, is the pouring
out of his mercy, this is the out-doing goodness of Almighty God, which in the
prayer above we so much magnify, and in so doing glorify his blessed name;
whence we may one day hope to see our bliss, our glory flowing also, since
therefore God is glorified here in time, that he may render us in heaven
glorious for all eternity.

The Epistle. 1. Cor. 15.1. etc.
1 Brethren, I give you to understand the Gospel which I have preached to you,
which also you received, in which also you stand.

2 By the which also you are saved after what manner I preached unto you, if
you keep it, unless you have believed in vain.

3 For I delivered unto you first of all, (which I also received) that Christ
died for our sins, according to the Scriptures.

4 And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to
the Scriptures.

5 And that he was seen of Cephas, and after that of the eleven.

6 Then was he seen of more then five hundred brethren together, of which many
remain until this present, and some are asleep.

7 Moreover he was seen of James, then of all the Apostles.

8 And last of all, of an abortive he was seen also of me.

9 For I am the least of the Apostles, who am not worthy to be called an
Apostle because I persecuted the Church of God.

10 But by the grace of God I am that which I am, and his grace in me has not
been void, but I have labored more abundantly then all they; yet not I, but
the grace of God with me.


The Explication.
1. THat is, I call again here to your mind: (So runs the Greek Text, where the
Vulgar says, we are given to understand.)

2. Meaning, if you work according to your belief: so here faith without works
was preached by Saint Paul to be vain; as who should say, no faith were saving
but that which by charity is operative.

3. Hence it is clear, the Apostle did first deliver by word of mouth the
doctrine which he after writ: so by tradition we come first (and chiefly) to
Christianity; by preaching, not by writing, for faith is by hearing: Romans
10.17. And whereas here we read of delivery, the Greeks write tradition, and
that according to the Scriptures.

4. That is, as was literally foretold by the figure of Jonas three days in
the Whales belly; allegorically of Isaac delivered safe to his mother three
days after he had been preserved from death, though offered up thereunto by
Abraham.

5. By Cephas understand Peter, who was the first man Christ appeared to,
though he had before appeared to Mary Magdalene, as we read Mark the last, v.
9. Then to the eleven Apostles: That was in the Octave of Easter, when Saint
Thomas was also present; for at first he appeared only to the other ten;
though the Greeks read to twelve, meaning to the whole College of Apostles;
which may stand good though one, or two were absent, as an act is said to be
the whole Councills act, when it is past by the greater number.

6. He was seen to those five hundred as in the air, or from some high place
that all might see him at once, to show them rather then to tell them he was
risen; for it is not said in this Text that he spoke to any of these five
hundred persons. And it is most probable this apparition was in the mountain of
Galilee, which was by our Savior foretold, so that this company probably went
thither purposely, and as foretold what would happen. This apparition was
before the Ascension, for this mountain was in Galilee, not in Judaea as was
the mount Olivet whence our Savior did ascend.

7. This was an apparition of special favor to Saint James of Alphaeus,
called the brother of Christ, and succeeding him in his sea at Jerusalem. So
our Savior was not content once only (and that in common) to appear unto
Saint James with the rest of the Apostles, (and peradventure with the five
hundred in the verse above) but he was pleased specially to grace his brother,
(so called because he was like our Savior) by a private appearing to him after
these public apparitions to him, and others.

8. Saint Paul calls himself abortive, because he was born to the Apostolate
after the time of Christ his choosing his Apostles, by a special calling even
from heaven, after Christ had ascended to his heavenly Father: So S. Ambrose,
and S. Chrysostom expound it. Yet there want not other pious expositions of
this word by other Fathers; as if by this S. Paul would render himself less
considerable; So the next verse clearly says, and needs no further exposition.

9, 10. By the grace of God I am an Apostle, and the Doctor of the Gentiles;
and this grace has not been void, idle or lazy in me, but operative according
to the diligence of a soul inflamed with the love of God, and making his free
will a servant to grace, by acting freely what by holy inspirations he was
called unto.

The Epistle ends at void, but the verse goes on as above.

He says more abundantly then all they; this may seem an ill arrogance after
so much humiliation of himself; but it is not so; for by more abundantly he
means only by overcoming more vice; (not that he professed more virtue) namely
the vice of a persecuter which was in none but himself; though more may be
attributed to his doing as much in a less time as the rest did in longer
space, being he was last called. With me, that is, labors with me, and not
as the Heretics translate, the grace which is with me, or, in me, I not
laboring my self, but relying on the past labors of Christ: thus vainly they;
but the holy Church understands the Apostle to mean his joint labor with the
grace of God.

The Application.
1. St. Paul in this Epistle recapitulates the arguments by which he brought
the Corinthians to believe the hardest point of Faith that then was agitated;
the resurrection of our Savior; for it was upon preaching that doctrine this
Apostle was chiefly persecuted, and for defense whereof he suffered martyrdom.

2. But as we see this Epistle in the beginning requires that charity accompany
the faith of this great mystery, so in the close thereof humility attends on
charity, while S. Paul first calls himself an abortive, and the least of the
Apostles, more, one not worthy of that celebrated Name, nor daring to ascribe
unto himself the fruits of any his greatest labors, but attributing all to the
grace of God effectually operating in him all those things, whereunto he
thought himself did very poorly cooperate. Thus must faith and humility
accompany our charity in her now long march to Advent, in all her way to
Judgment it self.

3. What can be the result of this mystery, other then that which naturally
follows the unexpected proof of the least expected, and most unbelieved thing
in all the world, the Resurrection of our Savior? A joy no doubt ineffable in
those that were his friends, and had no hand in any of his sufferings: and a
confusion on the other side in all that had contributed unto his death; a
sorrow and a fear, if not a deep despair indeed that their sin of Deicide was
sure enough unpardonable. So should it be with us, beloved, who although we
cannot kill our Christ again, yet do attempt to crucify him, by the very least
of many mortal sins that we commit against his heavenly Majesty;
notwithstanding our own conscience tells us, we do therein worse then ever did
the Jews, for they pretended zeal in all they did, whereas we know we sin
for want of zeal, for want of love to him, who died for love of us. What
remedy, but that which holy Church to day has found? when we hear the
Preachers tell us of the frights and fears, the sadness, and confusion of the
Jews in such a case, that then We pray not only, as we did on Sunday last, to
have Gods mercy multiplied, but even powered out upon us, as his precious blood
was powered upon the Jews; that by such a shower of mercy the sins our
conscience fears may be pardoned, and the favors we dare not ask may be
granted, for the reasons given in the preamble of the Prayer, and in the end of
the Illustration above.

The Gospel. Mark, c. 7. v. 31.
31 And again going out of the coasts of Tire, he came by Sidon to the sea of
Galilee, through the midst of the coast of Decapolis.

32 And they bring to him one deaf, and dumb, and they besought him that he
would impose his hands upon him.

33 And taking him from the multitude apart, he put his fingers into his ears,
and spitting touched his tongue.

34 And looking up unto heaven he groaned, and said to him Epheta, which is be
opened.

35 And immediately his ears were opened* and the string of his tongue was
loosened, and he spoke right.

36 And he commanded them not to tell any body: but how much he commanded them
so much the more a great deal did they publish it.

37 And so much the more did they wonder, saying, He has done all things well;
he has made both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak.


The Explication.
31. THis literal narration of Christ going from coast to coast, and by the
Sea side, alludeth to the change which grace makes in those who follow the
calling of Almighty God, that they must leave their former customs, and go by
new coasts, even rough and dangerous seas of persecution, up mountains of
dangers, and difficulties to enjoy the quiet of a good conscience.

32. By deaf understand mystically those who will not obey the commands of God,
and holy Church: by dumb, those who will not praise Almighty God in their
actions, nor in their thoughts, but like mutes spend their time in silencing
Gods praises. They ask him to lay his hands on them, because they had
experience he did use to cure the diseased by that means.

33. He took him apart, because this corporal cure alludes to the conversion
of the soul; and the best means of conversion to God is an aversion from the
world, a retyring from evil company. By his fingers put into the deaf man's
ears, understand the holy Ghost opening the infidels understanding, and making
him believe the word of God when he hears it. Besides, the holy Ghost is often
intimated by the finger of God, as Ex. 8.19. and alibi. By spitting here is
meant Christ his wetting his own finger with his own spittle, so notes the
Greek Text, not that he did spit into the dumb man's mouth. And Christ his
spittle is not an unfit cure of dumbness, since by the moisture of the tongue
speech is much perfected, and aridity is an impediment to speech. Thus even God
works miracles by the aptest instruments in nature for them.

34. By his looking to heaven, we are minded that from thence comes all the
power we have to hear the word of God, and to speak his praise. By his
groaning he shows how God seems to lament the miseries of those souls which
are infected with the contagion of sin. By his saying Epheta (be thou open) to
the deaf ear, he shows himself to be God, as curing by command.

35. No marvel God commanding the cure was done, but by his speaking right we
are told the cure was perfectly done, and not palliated. And indeed then it is
most evident Gods operation is perfect in us, when it brings us from wrong to
right, from sick to sound; but mystically, when from sinners we are brought to
be right perfected Saints: and surely needs must he speak right whom God had
cured of his dumbness. Though some will have it hence, that this man was not
quite dumb, but had only a stammering in his speech, or a weakness in that
organ, not suffering him to speak plain, but to babble as children do that
first learn to speak. Yet by right speaking may here be well understood, the
cured man's speaking perfectly the praises of God, and rightly glorifying his
Divine Majesty thereby.

36. The word command here is not to be taken strictly, or arguing a precept,
but rather a request: so there was no sin in breaking it, but rather, as S.
Augustine insinuates, a virtue, and that obedience too; for he admires the art
of Christ's command to speak here, under the precept of silence: these are S.
Augustines words lib. de consens. Evang: Our Lord by prohibiting would teach
and inform us, with how great fervor they upon whom he imposes his commands
ought to preach him, when as those that were forbidden could not hold their
peace. No marvel then if the more they are thus forbid, the more they preach
his praises. His commanding them to tell no body, was rather for instruction,
then to have any real force of a command upon the parties healed; because the
intent of this commanding silence was, that when by Gods peculiar grace we are
enabled to do any good, or laudable action, we should rather suppress, then
spread it abroad, lest thereby we be vaingloriously moved to arrogate unto our
selves the praise of the action, which is due to Almighty God as the principal
agent, while we are only instrumental thereunto.

37. They had indeed reason to wonder at his modesty who forbad it, and at
their gratitude who could not forbear to speak his praises that had done all
things so well which he undertook, as himself could not afterward hinder them
in a manner from well doing to publish his wondrous works. It is a sign Christ
did not effectively command them to silence, since the more he bade them hold
their peace, the more they published his praises: For indeed had it been his
pleasure they should have been silent, they would as little have spoken against
his will, (even after the tongue was by him untyed,) as they could speak before
he had untyed the same: but to show us even Gods temporal blessings have
spiritual influences upon us; therefore after their corporal cures these men
became advanced in spirit, in faith, in hope, in love of Almighty God, as
appeared by their frank uttering of his praises unto all the world, and showing
in their doing well toward God, that God had done all things well in them, as
this text expresses, when he had cured their infidelity of souls together
with the diseases of their bodies.

The Application.
1. SInce the Expositours upon this holy Text conclude the literal story of it
mystically does report to us, and that the natural deafness in this man
signifies the unnatural deafness in us Christians to the Word of God, to the
whispers of the holy Ghost into our understandings, to the knocks he gives (of
holy inspirations) at our hearts whilst we deny to let him in; we may very
well fear it is worse with us Christians then it was with this deaf and dumb
Infidel or Jew: for he no sooner received his natural speech and hearing then
he (and all that did behold the miracle) broke out into the praising God, into
the commending of our Savior, saying, He has done all things well, he has
made the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak.

2. O beloved, how often is it (for want if not of Faith, at least of active
charity) quite otherwise with too too many Christians, who instead of praising
and glorifying God become like stocks and stones; of whom the Royal Prophet
says, They have mouths and speak not, they have cares and hear not! Such
indeed are those who in confession will pretend sincerity, and commit a
sacrilege, by revealing many sins, and yet concealing one or other which
renders all the rest unpardoned as well as that concealed, how ere they seem to
go away with absolution. Such again they are who hearing the Name of God
reviled by some blaspheming miscreant, will either seem not to have heard the
blasphemy, or else not dare to reprehend it, as they should, for every
Christian is a champion of our blessed Lord, and ought to bid defiance unto all
that dare abuse his holy name.

3. Since therefore it is by the abundance of pity on us that God has called
us to be not only Christians but Catholics, (which was an act of highest
Grace) we have reason (so long as we are in this his high esteem) to beseech
him to pour out his farther mercy on us; and to forgive us this our wilful
deafness, this our stubborn dumbness which our conscience has cause indeed
to be afraid of, and that he will add besides more favor to us then we dare
presume to ask, considering how often and how grievously we have offended his
heavenly Majesty. Yes beloved, sure enough it was for some at least thus deaf,
thus dumb amongst us, that holy Church (to teach us the practice of charity)
makes all her children Pray to day as above, in consequence to what the
Preachers are to say upon this holy Text, by way of application to us all.

On the twelfth Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Luke 10.30. A Certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho,
and fell among thieves who also spoiled him, and giving him wounds went away
leaving him half dead.

Verse. Let my prayer, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
OMnipotent, and most merciful God, from whose bounty it proceeds that of thy
faithful people thou art worthily, and laudably served, grant unto us we
beseech thee that we may run unto thy promises without offense.

The Illustration.
WHo does not feel this Prayer to ravish with delight, when we therein are
minded that it is a far greater preferment to serve Almighty God, then it can
be to have the title of the best, and greatest Masters in the world? If for no
other respect, at least for this alone, that whomsoever God does entertain into
his service, himself indeed becomes a servant unto him, and pays him so
bountiful wages as if he were rather ambitious to purchase, then to accept of
his service; and further, seems even to contract with him to do the work
himself, in case the servant be not able to perform it, although besides the
bounty of this present stipend that he gives, he also adds vast promises of
further, indeed of eternal, and infinite reward. Nor do I say this gratis here,
for every title of it is avouched in the prayer above, when we acknowledge it
proceeds from the bounty of our most merciful God that he is worthily, and
laudably served of his faithful people; and when in lieu thereof we beg, that
we may run unto his further promises (besides his bounteous wages here) without
offense, by so worthily, so laudably serving of him in this world, as not to
loose the future promises of an infinite reward in heaven. And what is that? to
be no more his servants, but his heirs. O gallant servitude indeed! O Princely
Master! Stay here a while beloved, do not overslip this advantageous pause I
shall beseech you make ere you go on: Be it on this; That it proceeds from
the bounty of our heavenly Master we earthly creatures do worthily, and
laudably serve him, and are faithful to his service. What bounty else is this
but his abundant grace, first to enable us to endeavor, next (if we fail of
performance) to make the service worthy though, and laudable to boot; by his
acceptance of our endeavors, as if we had been able to perform our duty, when
it is himself that does the work, and yet affords the praise thereof to us,
because we did but set our hands to the burden that he lifted up? And hence it
is our willingness is looked upon by him as if it were a perfect will, our
desires as if they were performances; because what we wish he wills, what we
but desire to do he perfects, and so esteems us his faithful people, because
he is as well our faithful servant, as our noble Master; (himself avoucheth
this, I came not to be served, but to serve;) and so looks upon his own worth,
his own praise as though they were radicated in us unworthy creatures; and thus
is pleased in us even while we are displeased with our selves, to see how
little we do in earnest of that all which he accepts at our hands, as if it
all had been by us well done. O convincing goodness! But we must further find
this prayer adapted to the other service of the day. And in one only verse of
the Epistle we shall see it done. Not that we are sufficient to think any thing
of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God, if not to think, much less to
do. What so patt as this unto the Prayer? And yet S. Paul rests not here; he
shows Gods bounty stops not until he brings his servants to the top of all
preferment, as he did when he honored simple men with the title of Apostolate,
when he made them Ministers of salvation unto all the world. When could this be
more aptly made the subject of the Epistle, then now that the Prayer so
magnifies the bounty of Almighty God unto his servants? Or when could the
Gospel better begin with the happiness it was to those that see our Savior
Jesus Christ with their own eyes, whom Princes had in vain desired to see, and
could not have the honor of that view; which yet he was so lavish of unto his
chosen servants, to his Apostles, Disciples, and several devotes of both sexes?
And when could the double-dealing Doctor be better reprehended for his boasted
zeal of knowing how to gain eternal life, then in this Gospel we do read he
was, by being told, God was no way better served then when men did mutually
love each other, and show this love to be sincere by helping one another in
their need? For then we serve God faithfully, worthily, and laudably, when we
love our neighbor as our selves; then we run without offense unto the promises
of Almighty God, when we do that which Jesus told the Doctor of the Law he
should by doing secure himself of everlasting life; that is, by loving one
another. O sweet! O easy way to heaven! O Prayer exactly well adapted to the
other service of the day!

The Epistle. 2 Cor. c. 3.
4 And such confidence we have by Christ to God.

5 Not that we are sufficient to think any thing of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God.

6 Who also made us meet Ministers of the New Testament, not in the letter, but
in the Spirit; for the letter kills, but the Spirit quickens.

7 And if the ministration of death with letters figured in stones was in
glory, so that the children of Israel could not behold the face of Moses for
the glory of his countenance that is made;

8 How shall not the ministration of the Spirit be more in glory?

9 For if the ministration of damnation be in glory, much more the ministry of
justice abounds in glory.


The Explication.
4. BY confidence here is understood an assured trust, such as Saints have when
they undertake by Gods assistance to work miracles: And this confidence S. Paul
had, that by his preaching he had written the word of God in the hearts of the
Corinthians, and that they were now in a manner a living Epistle, or letters of
Gods truth, that is, of Christ his doctrine or Evangelicall instructions.

5. By any thing here is meant any thing appertaining or ordained to faith,
grace, merit, or salvation; as who should say, S. Paul did not arrogate to
himself that he was able to be a minister to his own, or any others salvation
of himself, but attributes all this to the special assistance of Almighty God.
So Catholics teach out of this place against heretics, that our own free will
is not able to will our own salvation as an act purely our own; but it must
proceed from God that we will any thing in order to a supernatural end, and
such is our salvation. Yet hence it follows not, that desire of our salvation
is not an act of our free will, but that free will alone is not able or
sufficient thereunto without Gods grace, and special assistance: so we allow
two causes necessary to concur unto humane salvation; grace, as the
supernatural, and our cooperation (thereby) with an act of freewill, as the
natural; this last being elevated, as it were, by the first to do more with it
concurring, then it could have done alone.

6. By a meet minister here understand a sufficient one: and S. Paul confesses
he is not such of himself, but is made so by virtue of grace, as in the verse
above. Not in the letter but in the spirit, is as much as to say, not by the
written Law, but by the inward spirit, and grace of God; not so as Moses was,
who cited the letter only of the Law for his promotion, the tables of the
Commandments, etc. No, the commission of the Apostles was by way of mission,
their part was to preach according to the spirit infused to them by Christ, and
to deliver by word of mouth his doctrine not by writing; so their tradition was
the first rule of Christian Religion to the world after Christ, and that they
writ the Gospel was an after inspiration of the holy Ghost, not any special
command left them so to do by Christ. Hence they writ it not for a rule, or
necessary square to measure out our ways; but as a spiritual help much
conducing to piety, if rightly understood, and squaring with their sense who by
tradition had delivered much more then they writ. And hence it follows, that
the letter may kill if misunderstood, but the spirit, or sense of the Apostle
is that which quickens or gives spiritual life to our souls, as being a
true expression of the spirit, or sense of Jesus Christ. By the letter killing
is truly meant the letter of the old Law, which was written to terrify rather
then to save, and was but a type of a new Law that should save rather by the
spirit, or sense thereof then by the letter: and the spirit is said to quicken,
because it gives life to the soul, as being the spirit of grace, and charity,
the Holy Ghost indeed, teaching us all truth of the letter of the Law; whence
we say, Come holy Ghost, visit the minds of thy people, fill with supernall
grace the breasts that thou have created.

7. This verse clears all we said in the precedent, and averres that the law of
Moses was rather a law of death then life, a law of figure not of substance;
for that law did rather threaten death and damnation, then truly contribute to
life, or salvation. That it was in glory is understood by the ceremony it was
delivered with, of thunder, lightning, tempests, earthquakes, and the shining
of Moses face coming down from the mountain of Sinai. By being figured with
letters is understood, literally written in the tables of stone.

8, 9. By the ministration of spirit is meant, in these two verses, the
promulgation of the new law, the law of grace, of Christ, which leads us indeed
by the spirit of it into a spiritual life of glory, and salvation. This
ministration is said to be glorious by the promulgation of it by Christ the
son of God, next by the coming of the Holy Ghost like a whirlwind in fiery
tongues, confirming the Apostles in grace, teaching them all truth, giving them
the gift of prophecy, of several tongues; as also the two last were given
visibly to Christians in baptism in the primitive Church, as 1 Cor. 14.26. we
may see; and even now graces, gifts, and virtues are in baptism given
invisibly to all Christians.

The Application.
1. THe Apostle, in this Epistle, teaches three principal things: the first,
how frail men are of themselves, and that they can do nothing at all by their
own power which is able to merit grace here, much less glory in the next
world. The second, how by degrees of the two Laws God brought these unapt men
laudibly to serve his Divine Majesty. The third, how these two laws differ both
in their manner of delivery, and in their final ends which they were to bring
frail man unto.

2. Stay then beloved, this abstract of the Text premised, and set before the
eyes of our marching charity through the desert of this world; what is her
office now, but that first she do walk warily, not only in regard of her own
frailty, but of the multitude of ambuscadoes laid in her way by the common
enemy: next, that she give God thanks he has betterr'd her condition now, from
what it was in our forefathers days: and lastly, that she do remember, it is
not only present grace she is to beg, but future glory; as if God had not made
this world beautiful, nor rich enough for his beloved, but valued her alone
above all the treasure of the earth, and beauty of the universe, to the end she
might prize his promises unto her (yet to come) above all that he had here
bestowed upon her already, and consequently cast her eyes off all the vanity of
present objects, and fix both them, and all her hopes upon the better
expectation she is in.

3. Thus far assuredly we hit the Churches aim in giving us the present Text
to square our actions by. It remains that we conclude, These greater promises
require a present vigilance to keep this law of grace, that is but as (...)
little key to open heavens widest gates put in our hands; which key, if it be
broken, will not let us in; nor can we break it if we keep it close with in our
hearts, or hang it as a jewel in our ears, and hearken unto nothing else but
what this law commands; or if we fix it still before our eyes, as the lantern
that must light us through the darksome ways we are to pass, lest losing
sight thereof, we do not only lose our way, but lose our selves indeed, by
falling into such offenses as the law forbids, not slightly neither, but under
pain of forfeiture of all we can expect to make us ever happy.

Which mischief that we may prevent, we fitly pray as above. The Gospel. Luke
10. v. 23. etc. 23 And turning to his disciples he said, blessed are the eyes
that see the things which you see.

24 For I say unto you that many Prophets, and Kings desired to see things that
you see, and saw them not; and to hear the things that you hear, and heard them
not.

25 And behold a certain Lawyer stood up tempting him, and saying, Master, what
shall I do to possess eternal life?

26 But he said to him, in the Law what is written? how read thou?

27 He answering said; Thou shall love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart,
and with thy whole soul* and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and
thy neighbor as thy self.

28 And he said to him, thou have answered right, Do this and thou shall live.

29 But he, desirous to justify himself, said to Jesus, and who is my
neighbor?

30 And Jesus taking it said; A certain man went down from Jerusalem into
Jericho, and fell among thieves, who also spoiled him, and giving him many
wounds, went away leaving him half dead.

31 And it chanced that a certain Priest went down the same way, and seeing him
passed by.

32 In like manner also a Levite when he was near the place, and saw him,
passed by.

33 But a certain Samaritan going his journey came near unto him, and seeing
him was moved with mercy.

34 And going unto him bound his wounds, pouring in oil, and w^ne, and setting
him upon his own beast, brought him into an Inn, and took care of him.

35 And the next day he took forth two pence, and gave to the host, and said;
have care of him, and whatsoever thou shall supererogate I at my return will
repay thee.

36 Which of those three in thy opinion was neighbor to him that fell among
thieves?

37 But he said he that had mercy upon him: and Jesus said to him, go, and do
thou in like manner.


The Explication.
23. 24. That is the works, and person of the living God, of the Messiah, so
long being foretold, so longed for to be seen, so hoped in: and this is the
sense of these two first verses.

25. This Lawyer is therefore said to tempt him, because he did not ask with a
sincere desire to know what to do for gaining heaven; but rather to entrap him,
if he had said any thing contrary to the Law of Moses, by venting or abetting
a new doctrine of his own.

26. See how in this verse Christ frustrates the Lawyers plot, referring him to
the written Law, contrary to the Doctors expectation.

27. In this verse is grounded the Catholic doctrine that the Law is
observeable, against Heretics who say it is impossible to be kept. Not that
the love here commanded is either to be extensive, or intensive, but only
comparative, final, and appretiative, that is, nothing ought by us to be loved
better then God, more finally then God, nor more dearly, or appretiatively. By
the heart, soul, and mind is here explicated the whole Will of man applied to
the love of God. By strength is explicated here his endeavors, and forces used
to show this love in all his actions. By loving our neighbor as our selves, is
not understood as well as our selves, for a man may lawfully love himself
better then his neighbor, but yet so as withal he is bound to love his
neighbor too; and self-love is not so much commanded, as presumed, because it
is natural, but the love of our neighbor is an absolute command, because our
neighbor is as dear to God as we, and was created by him as we are, redeemed
by him as we are, and so must be beloved by us because he is as well beloved of
God as we, if not better, and if he be a better Christian sure enough he is
better beloved.

28. Here our Savior caught the Doctor, who thought to have entrapped him, by
telling him the keeping of this Law is the way to live everlastingly; but the
Doctor expected Christ would have contradicted the Law, and not have
confirmed, or bound him to keep it; which therefore he did bind him to, because
it was a Law of love, not of ceremony, as those other laws were which Christ
abrogated.

29. By justifying himself is here understood a huge pride in this Doctor, as
who should say, he was so just a keeper of the Law, and so just thereby, that
he did not think he had his fellow in justice, or any neighbor like to
himself; and so he demanded of Christ to know who was his neighbor, who so
just as he, who to be compared with him.

30. By these words Jesus taking it, is intimated Jesus understood the latent
pride of the man; and so in the following parable undertook to confound him,
and make him answer himself, by finding that no man in misery is to be rejected
by those who are in prosperity; but that the way to make a man in prosperity as
good as another in misery, is to commiserate his case, and to relieve his wants
who is in need, not to neglect, or scorn him, as it seems the Lawyer did all
others besides himself, whilst he thought no man so just as he was. True, by
the word tempting, (as above) it is evident this was first the sense of the
Lawyer, till afterward (as some say) he found by his conversation with our
Savior, that his own heart was changed from malicious to religious. If so, the
sense is sound that says really the Lawyer desired to become just; and did not
then (as formerly) think he was so, but with a real desire of becoming so ask
Christ who was his neighbor, that he might love him as he did himself. And
this stands with reason, because the Jews held none for their neighbors but
virtuous people of their own Nation, so they thought it a virtue to hate a
sinful Jew, or a Gentile; but our Savior reduced them from this error by the
following parable, wherein he made the Jewish Lawyer see the Samaritan was the
Jews neighbor, if he did love him, and relieve him in his wants, and that
Christian perfection extended even to the love of enemies. Where note, that our
Savior takes hold of the dangerous passage that was between Jerusalem and
Jericho, because none could pass almost without danger of being robbed, stripped,
wounded, and many times slain. By this man half-slain is understood the state
of man corrupted by the fall of Adam, whose understanding, and free will
remain, but so as a man half dead is said to live in respect of another in full
health, and vigor of body.

31. 32. This is understood a chance to man, but a true providence in respect
of God, who therefore ordained those passengers should go by, that some of them
might relieve the wounded man. But by this act of the Priest, and Levite, we
are instructed how little inward virtue was in the Ministers of the Church
under the old Law, all their sanctity consisting in outward ceremony, and
having no acquaintance with internal sincerity, or charity, so as disdaining
they went off from him whom they found in misery, in the way they were to pass.

33. By the Samaritan is here figured Christ the perfect Priest of the perfect
new Law, and light of the Gospel. He therefore goes not off, blancheth not from
the man in misery, but comes near him, and has pity on him.

34. By the oil, and wine, understand the Sacraments of the new Law made as
salves to cure the sore of sin: which yet literally may be taken for the
Samaritans provision in his journey. By his own beast may here be understood
the humanity of Christ, taking upon his back all our sins to ease us of the
burden.

35. By the two pence given the host may be understood the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, consisting of two natures in Christ, Divine, and humane. The host
may signify the Deacon, or the Priest of the new Law, or the Priest assisting
the Bishop in administration of the holy Eucharist. By what he should
supererogate is here understood what he should spend in cure of this man above
the two pence held sufficient, he would repay: and here is grounded the
Catholic doctrine of works of supererogation, which Heretics allow not of.
And by this Parable is insinuated, that what the old Law had not power to do
for recovery of the wounds in corrupted nature, the new Law, by way of the
Priests, and Sacraments thereof is sufficient for, and so can save even all the
corrupted seed of Adam by the virtue they have from the passion of our Savior
Jesus Christ.

36. Christ does not intend to ask which of these was neighbor to the wounded
man; for all men are truly neighbors each to other; but only which behaved
himself like a neighbor.

37. Here you see Christ by a question makes the Doctor be his own instructor;
commends his answer, and tells him, if he will be saved he must not only know,
but do the law of charity; and this whilst he bids him do to all men as the
Samaritan did to the Jew; to enemy as well as friend, to bad as well as good
Christians, if the bad one be in misery. Thus Christ has made curiosity the
cause of sincerity, and dissimulation the cause of truth in this entrapping
Lawyer; and no marvail, since he alone is able to cull good out of bad.

The Application.
1. THis days Epistle taught us a due regard to the Law of God, least breaking
it we loose the hopes of heaven, and all the expectation of the happy promises
God made to those who keep his holy Law. This Gospel tells us now how to keep
that Law: By loving our neighbor as we love our selves: by loving him for that
dear Jesus sake to whom he is probably much more dear then we, as happily
offending God less, however most displeasing us, who are still less pleased
with others, when we our selves do most displease the heavenly Majesty. So it is
not indeed what others do to us that ought to trouble us, but our omitting that
we ought to do to please Almighty God, and purchase heaven by keeping of his
holy Laws: which then our Savior says are kept, when we are loving and
charitable to our neighbors, for the love we bear to God: so the Gospel ends;
Do this and live: Live eternally, live in the happy fruition of all the vaste
promises God made to those that love him thus.

2. But we have yet a better pattern of our duty then what Jesus bid the
Doctor of the Law take to secure him of this happiness, the charitable
Samaritan. We have our dearest Lord, our Blessed Savior Jesus here, not only
the giver, but the keeper of this his Law; least we should argue our
impossibility to keep the same; when we see at how dear a rate he kept it, how
he so loved us, as he laid his life down for a testimony of his love, and gave
us grace to do the like, as the only means of doing it. Nor had the end (our
glory) been otherwise atchieveable, then by the means unto it, (his holy
grace:) so he that would our happy end, must will us the means to compass it;
this follows naturally, and is therefore in the rule of grace undeniable,
nature being ever perfected by grace. Hear how he says himself, Blessed are
the eyes that see the things you see, etc. and to the rest of those things
(which the Explication enumerates) we may avowably here add this for one,
their seeing Jesus give his life for an example to us, of valuing his love at
as dear a rate as he did our loves when he died to gain them.

3. Yes, yes beloved, this is the full scope of the Gospel, and ought to be the
aim of our actions while we read it; so we may hope that he whose bounty gives
us Faith to believe him, charity to love him, and hope to enjoy him, will
mercifully give us grace so to fulfill the condition of his Laws (whereunto
his promises are annexed) that we need not fear to obtain What to day we beg in
the Prayer above, the running without offense in to the possession of those
promises, which they that do offend cannot obtain, and those that love, can
never loose by offending, whilst they love. So that only love is the easy
rule we are to be happy by for ever: as was hinted before in the Illustration.

On the thirteenth Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Luke 7.15. But one of them, when he saw that he was made clean,
returned again with a loud voice, magnifying God.

Verse. Let my prayer, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
ALmighty, and everlasting God, give unto us the increase of faith, hope, and
charity; and that we may deserve to obtain what thou do promise, make us
love what thou do command.

The Illustration.
Here Is a Prayer that in one word of it richly contains all the doctrine of
this day, and indeed all the main point of the differential doctrine between
the Roman Catholic Church, and her antagonists, especially the Heretics of
this time; who deny good works to be necessary to man's salvation, and will have
no more then faith alone required on our parts, pretending, the work of our
salvation is already finished by the passion of our Lord, if we do but believe
as much. It is otherwise with us: for here we pray not only for other acts of
virtue, namely, hope, and charity; but even for our own increase of faith, as
well as for increase in other good works, which as they are all rooted in these
three Theological virtues, so are they contained in them as the tree is
contained in the root thereof, or rather in the seed that runs to root the
better to support the tree. That then we may pray as well to the bettering of
our understandings, as to the perfecting our wills in the service of Almighty
God, know, beloved, holy Church to day instructs us in this Prayer to beg
increase of all good works, eminentially included in the three Theological
virtues above mentioned; and does further declare, that by this increase it is,
we may deserve to obtain as much as God Almighty has pleased to promise us,
(which is no less then his heavenly glory) especially if we can by our
increase in virtue arrive as well to love, as to do what God commands; that is
to say in other terms, if we so love God, as for his sake we can also love the
things commanded though never so contrary to our liking; for then we Saint our
selves indeed when thus we love. And why? because where sin is not in man,
sanctity will be undoubtedly; as it was in S. Marie Magdalene, who then was
even canonized by our Lord himself when he declared, Many sins were forgiven
her because she loved much, Luke 7.47. And by many we understand all, for God
never does his works to halses but leaves them ever perfectly complete. And
having thus evinced the verity of this gloss out of the letter of the Prayer,
let us further see how the Canon of the Churches service is harmonious, by the
music of her Prayer to day, which is therefore best because it is throughout
three parts in one. Nay, if I said the whole Epistle, Gospel, and the Prayer to
boot were all contained in the word increase, perhaps I should not err; for if
we but apply that word unto the things wherein we beg increase, the work is
done, the cabinet of rich connection by that key is open to the view of the
world. But lest some dimmer sighted souls do not perceive as much, it will not
be amiss to show the whole Epistle of the day does run upon the groundwork of
the Prayer, while from the first unto the last, it beats upon the faith of
Abraham, joined with the hope of a reward for his obedience, performed with an
act of charity, wherewith he showed he did deserve the promise of Almighty God
because he loved his commandment better then he did his only son Isaac,
whom he was ready to sacricrifice, to show how truly he did love the said
command. Compare this now unto the Prayer, and see what can be more desired to
make the harmony complete. Yet further look upon the Fathers expositions of the
last verse in this Epistle as you see below, and then say if the gloss I made
above be other then Expositours allow. As for the Gospel, it is alike concording
with the Prayer, if we believe the Fathers of the Church expound the saving
faith aright, wherewith it ends, when they declare, this faith was saving to
the cured Samaritan, because it was accompanied with his good works, namely,
with his hope of cure; when in that hope he paid obedience unto Christ saying,
go show your selves unto the Priest, for the Text says after, and it came to
pass as they went they were made clean; and lastly, by his gratitude,
returning to give thanks for the cure: which acts of other virtues, obedience,
and gratitude made manifest his charity, since they were good works growing
out of that root; and since by this action of gratitude we see the Samaritan
showed an increase of Faith, Hope, and Charity in him, upon his spiritual
conversion wrought together with his corporal cure, the Church with all the
reason in the world prays to day for increase of the like virtues, and thus
adapts the Prayer unto the preaching parts of this days service so exactly
well, as we may freely say the spirit of the Epistle, and Gospel is as it were
eminentially contained in the Prayer above.

The Epistle. Galat. 3. v. 16. etc.
16 Brethren, to Abraham were the said promises, and to his seed: he says not
and to seeds, as in many, but as in one, and to thy seed which is Christ.

17 And this I say, the Testament being confirmed of God, the Law which was
made after four hundred and thirty years, makes not void to frustrate the
promise.

18 For if the inheritance be of the Law, now not of promise, but God gave it
to Abraham by promise.

19 Why was the Law then? It was put for transgressors until the seed came to
whom he had promised; ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator.

20 And a Mediator is not of one, but God is one.

21 Was the Law then against the promises of God? God forbid. For if there had
been a Law given that could justify, undoubtedly justice should be of the Law.

22 But the Scripture has concluded all things under sin, that the promise
by the faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.


The Explication.
16. IN recompense of his faith were these promises made to Abraham, which are
read Genesis 22. etc. Nay even of Isaac himself, whom his Father Abraham
obediently sacrificed, would Christ descend, that so in Abraham's seed the
promises might be made good. Yet this seed is not to be understood Isaac, but
Christ of Abraham by Isaac lineally descending. Note, these promises were not
made so to Abraham as to fall upon his person, but upon the person of his seed,
Christ Jesus; for in him indeed were all the promises truly performed which
were made to Abraham, since by believing in Christ we are all saved, not by any
merits of Abraham. So Abraham's seed or posterity is not here taken
collectively, as importing many, but as importing one only branch of the said
posterity, namely, Jesus Christ.

17. Since it was said before v. 15. man's will, and testament is not to be
broken, much less that Testament which is confirmed by God himself, which were
these promises to Abraham; no, they are not violable by any Law, less by a Law
subsequent thereunto, as by the Law of Moses which was 430 years after these
promises to Abraham.

18. Hence it is evident, Abraham's seed did not inherit these benedictions by
virtue of the Law, which was delivered to Moses on the mount Sinai 430 years
after God had made the promise of these benedictions, as if that Law were
giving life, or saving souls; but by virtue of the promise made before the Law
of Moses was written. So that our salvation flows out of the faith we have in
Christ to whom the promises were made that by his person, being the seed of
Abraham, all men should be made happy. For this promise involves the faith of
Christ as the means to save us, so does not the Law of Moses, rehearsing only
the said promise.

19. This question is of difficulty, the premises in the precedent verses
considered: yet it is evident the Law here mentioned was not saving, but rather
to terrify the transgressors, and to declare their transgressions, then to
save them; for neither was there time yet or place for a saving Law, since the
Savior of the world was not come; so this was at most but a middle Law between
that of nature before it, and this of grace following of it, which we now
enjoy, and so it was adapted as to a middle use, to civilize rather then to
save men, who even in the time of this law were not savd by virtue of it, but
by virtue of Faith, and Hope in Christ who was to come after this law, and who
was prefigured by it. So S. Paul speaks plainly when he says in this verse,
this law was made but for transgressors until the seed of promise, that is,
until Christ should come. In the following words, ordained by Angels, is
insinuated the Catholic Doctrine, telling us this Law was written* and
delivered by Angels, or Gods Ambassadors, not by God immediately; and so like
Ambassadors they use his name, and speak in his person whom they personate,
that is in Gods Name; whence it is, that part of this Law which was confirmed
by Jesus Christ, comes elevated or dignified unto us by the dignity of the
deliverer, the Son of God himself, not only an Angel. By the hand of a
Mediator is understood the person of him that did then mediate between God,
and the People of Israel, namely Moses, into whose hand the Law was given. For
since a Mediator must be a party placed between two, and partaking of both
sides, here Mediator must not be understood of Christ, who was not then in
being as man, but only his Deity had being, his Humanity had it not. Nor is
Christ called our mediator as God only, but as God, and man: for as God he
partakes of the dignity, and authority of his Mediatourship; as Man he
exercises the works, and merits of a Mediator. Besides, the Angel is said
here, to use the hand of the Mediator to deliver the Law by, but that was
Moses hand, so in this place he must be understood to be the Mediator.

20. This verse again confirms what was said in the former, that Moses is
spoken of for Mediator, as distinguished from God, whilst the Apostle says,
a Mediator is not of one; so Moses was not of one side only, but of Gods,
and the Jews, or rather Gods chosen people the children of Israel. So Mediator
is not taken here for Christ as mediating between God, and Christians, or all
Nations, but as Moses mediating between God, and the Jews only, a particular
nation; for this mediation was not to salvation, since that was Christ's, and
could be none others, because he could both plead as man, and forgive as God.
This is yet cleared more by the following words, saying, God is one, and so
could not be the Mediator here mentioned which was Moses, for God had not
then put on humane nature to render him of a double consideration, or concern,
but only was one creating, not mediating God which must be man too. So that
the true sense of this place is, God, who is one, then made Moses Mediator
between him, and the Jews, and since made Christ Mediator between him, and all
the Nations of the world. Wherefore that law of Moses was rather an usher to
Christ his law, then a fulfiller of the promises made to Abraham, for they were
only fulfilled by Christ, and his holy Gospel, being the means as well to
save, as to govern men; whereas Moses his law could only govern them, but
their salvation had root in the following law of Christ, who had power as God
to abrogate what he pleased of Moses law, and to confirm what he pleased
thereof, and to make what new law best liked himself, as he did when he made
our saving law of the Gospel. To conclude, these words, God is one, import the
Savior of the Jews was not Moses, but even that one God who also saves all
other Nations; and therefore he is emphatically called here one God, that is to
say one Savior.

21. This verse only reduplicates the former senses, and says that neither
the law of Moses was against the promises of God made to Abraham, nor yet was
it that law which did, or could justify the people, but that it was as it were
a stay or prop (a pedagogue indeed as follows v. 24. of this chapter) unto them
to keep them in aw, and order until Christ came, in whom the promises made to
Abraham were to be performed, and he coming the pedagogue of Moses law was to
cease at his pleasure.

22. By the Scripture concluding all things under sin, is here understood
Moses his written law, which then was, and still is called the Scripture even
to this day: yet by this concluding is not understood the Scripture orders
sin to be, but only, that ( this Scripture notwithstanding) all men then
living lay under the yoke of sin, and were not by virtue of that Scripture
freed from this yoke, but by Jesus Christ, in whose person (and not in Moses
law) did consist our justification, promised to Abraham's seed, that was to
Christ Jesus. Note here, the promises said to be given to those that believe,
do not exempt from good works, nor make faith alone (even in Jesus Christ)
without works to be saving; but such a faith only saves which works by charity.

The Application.
1. THe scope of this Epistle is, to tell us with how ample a reward Almighty
God did recompense the obedience of Abraham, in being ready to sacrifice his
only son Isaac according as he was commanded by the Author of life: Namely,
with such a blessing upon his seed, as should bring a benediction upon the
whole seed of Adam, all mankind: So that since the first root of all man's
misery was Adams disobedience in a trivial thing, an apple, therefore God was
pleased to take an occasion of making Abraham's obedience in a weighty thing the
apple of his eye, his only Joy, the rise of all man's happiness; not that
Abraham's obedience, did satisfy God for Adams disobedience, but that the son
of God who was to satisfy the Divine Justice for this sin, did please to
take that first man's flesh upon him, who first by his obedience taught man the
way to keep the law of God, by doing his commands.

2. And certainly it was with deep design Almighty God delayed his promise
unto Abraham four hundred and thirty years before he was pleased to make a
beginning of performance, in giving by Moses a Law to lawless man; and by
that Law to try the children of Abraham the Jews, before he gave a better Law
to them, and all the world besides, by Jesus Christ. The design we may both
piously and profitably presume was as well to prove the faith and hope of
Abraham, as his obedience and his love were proved in the sacrificing little
Isaac. For probably there passed not one minute of time over Abraham's head, nor
over the heads of his posterity, wherein they did not give themselves an
infinite content in thinking on the goodness, and on the veracity of God, that
surely he would not fail to verify his promises which he had graciously made
unto them: the frequent memory we find in holy Writ, and the gladsomenesse
wherewith the mention is made of these promises testify as much; and
consequently prove Abraham's whole life time was in a manner one continued act
of faith, and hope, in the Messiah to come.

3. O beloved! how can we read this Text, and not be animated to an imitation
of like acts of virtue, of like obedience to so sweet a Law as we enjoy, when
all the end thereof is felicity without an end! Or if we cannot think our
selves so much concerned as Abraham, who had as we the comfort of having
concurred to the salvation of all mankind, as of himself; at least let us not
come short of Abraham's posterity, of the Jews; see how they boast here, how
they vaunt themselves thence the sole people of Almighty God, because they were
descended but from Abraham: When did the cease to glory in the promises made of
Jesus but to come; and that (as they thought) to make them only rich, only
honorable here on earth, only temporally happy? whereas we Christians know he
is actually come, has left us rich here in grace, and made us sure of heavenly
honor, of eternal felicity, and of greater riches yet in glory, if we be not
defective to our selves. O how should our whole lives be one act of faith, one
act of hope, one act of charity, one continual endeavor to prove all this, by
a perpetual obedience to the Law of Christ, from whom we are extracted in a
righter line then the Jews yet were descended from Abraham, since their
natural conception was in sin our supernatural adoption is in grace!

What need we more? say but the Churches prayer upon this holy Text, and see by
that what Christians should be at, according to the will of holy Church, and
that is the will of God no doubt. Say then that prayer, beloved, and do as you
pray, so shall you be the Christians Christ desires. The Gospel. Luke 17. v. 11.
11 And it came to pass as he went unto Jerusalem he passed through the midst
of Samaria, and Galilee.

12 And when he entered into a certain town there met him ten men that were
lepers who stood afar off.

13 And they lifted up their voice, saying; Jesus, master, have mercy upon us.

14 Whom as he saw, he said go, show your selves to the Priests, and it came to
pass as they went they were made clean.

15 And one of them as he saw that he was made clean, went back with a loud
voice magnifying God.

16 And he fell on his face before his feet giving thanks; and this was a
Samaritan.

17 And Jesus answering said, were not ten made clean? and where are the nine?

18 There was not found that returned, and gave glory to God but this stranger.

19 And he said to him, arise, go thy ways, because thy faith has made thee
safe.


The Explication.
11. HE was then going from Cesarea to Jerusalem, to the feast of the
Tabernacles, and was willing to pass by Samaria, and Galilee: (the right way
indeed he was to go, yet) he went that way with special zeal to requite the
discourtesie he received in being cast out of a village in that country, and
ill used after a cure he did upon one of that country men, a Samaritan;
showing us by this, an example to requite evil turns with good offices.

12. When he entered: (as he was entering) for lepers use to sit without the
gates of towns, and castles still, as infected people not admitted to mix with
the sound; and it was a noted penalty inflicted on the people that the legal
infirmity should be catching, and infecting by the touch of a leper: besides
leprosy is a type of sin, especially of concupiscence, heresy, and other
notorious vices. They stood afar off, (as the custom was) that passengers
might go by without danger of their contagious breaths: And the reason why
among nine Jewish lepers one Samaritan stood admitted, was because the common
contagion of the disease made those two Nations (otherwise refusing each others
companies) to cohabit together.

13. They must speak aloud to be heard at a distance. By the word voice
understand their common, and unanimous consent to beg cure of Christ: And note,
they call him here rather Master, then Doctor, to argue they sought not so
much his doctrine, as his power, for in that they confided what ere they
thought of the other; they took him to be as powerful almost as God, and so
besought him to command away their leprosy by his power, and by his command to
show his mercy to them.

14. Whom as he saw, This shows Gods promptitude to do us good as soon as he
but sees our necessities: he bid them go show themselves to the Priests,
because no cured leper could be restored to the society of other men unless he
had the testimony of the Priests to declare that he was cured; so though Christ
sent them to the Priests for this cause to observe the Law as Levit. 24. was
prescribed, yet withal he did it to let the Priests see the miracle was done
by him, because they were cured before they came at the Priests, even indeed as
soon as they obeyed his voice, saying, go show your selves, etc. Now mystically
they were bid go to the Priests, to declare that in the new law there is no
cure from the leprosy of sin, but by confessing it to the Priests; and
though contrition be never so great, able to save without confession, yet by
this place we ground that there must be at least a desire, or an endeavor to
confess if it be possible.

15. That of ten there went but one back to give Christ thanks, argues the
generality of men to be ungrateful unto God, though he be never so beneficial
to them.

16. That this one came in so humble a manner, as to fall at Christ his feet,
being a Samaritan, and so abhorring all Jews, made the miracle the greater;
when thereby it appeared how much the grace of God shined in this man, who by
Nation a Samaritan, hating Jesus that was a Jew, yet by obligation became his
captive, and laid himself at his feet. Again, it argues the conversion of
Gentiles is more perfect then that of Jews, since nine Jewish lepers showed no
gratitude to Christ their own countryman, whilst a mere stranger, a Samaritan
expressed a most grateful heart for the favor of his corporal cure, and of
his mystical conversion.

17. This verse argues Christ was sensible of the Jewish ingratitude, which act
of theirs made the gratitude of the Samaritan more pleasing to him, and more
remarkable to the world; but these that came not back declared they were
transported with self-interest, at the joy they had to be restored to the
commerce of men, and so neglected their religious repair to God.

18. It had indeed been a glory to God to give thanks to Christ who was God,
and man: and as it was Gods miracle wrought by Christ, so the glory was due to
God, and not arrogated by Christ to himself; whose wonder was not that they
forbore to give him thanks, but that they neglected to glorify God by
returning to him, as the forreiner, the Samaritan did.

19. Jesus did not say unto him, arise, and go hence out of the company of the
Jews being a Samaritan; but go and be, for thy gratitude to me, grateful unto
my people, converse with them as a native; ( forreiner though thou art) to show
that union of faith makes amity amongst all Nations, for by admitting him into
the company of the Jews he declared his faith, and theirs were one. And when he
told him his faith had saved him, that is, had not only cured his corporal
leprosy, but his spiritual infidelity, he meant that his faith had cooperated
toward his cure, and salvation, namely by his going (as he was bid) to the
Priests, in hope of cure by that obedience. So though the miracle were indeed
wrought by God, yet it was (as we may say) merited by an obedient faith; and
so Christ lessening his own power, to teach us humility, exalts the
Samaritans virtue, to wit, his faith, whilst he proclaims it saving to him as
being accompanied with good works, to wit the acts of obedience, and
gratitude. See still faith and works go hand in hand to render each other
saving to our souls.

The Application.
1. THe Illustration and Explication above may ease us in part of amplifying on
the Application here, further then to let us know the gratitude that should
accompany our Christian faith, our hope, our charity, when we see how
specially it is by Christ observed in this Samaritan; how in that observation
recommended unto all that read the story of it, and in reading see the root of
all Religion to be faith, since unto that our Savior attributes the cure of
this Samaritan, and of the other nine ungrateful Jews, for they were cured
by Faith as well as he, though for want of charity they were not so grateful
as he was, to come and render thanks for being cured.

2. Hence we see, no single virtue is enough to Saint a soul, nor less indeed
then the three roots of all the other virtues whatsoever, Faith, Hope, and
Charity. For how soever these extensively taken are what virtue else so ere we
can imagine, yet they alone intensively produced are sufficient (absolutely
speaking) to save a soul: that is to say, if on our death bed, when we come to
die, we should be troubled what to do, in that no further doing period of our
time, it were sufficient then to exercise an act of Faith, an act of Hope, an
act of Love to God. Nevertheless we, whilst we live, (and can do more) are
also bound to an extensive Faith, and Hope, and Charity; that is, to do those
other acts of virtue whereunto these three extend themselves; and that we may
do this the better, we are intensively to use these three, which then is done,
when we produce them often, and give them an increase intensive, making them
stronger every one by being frequently produced.

3. As for the times when these acts ought to flow from Christian souls, (which
are essential unto christian duty) as there is no time when they are
unseasonable, so there are many times when they are of obligation, especially
when holy Church obliges us to saintifie our time by doing homage to Almighty
God. So by this account all Sundays, and Holy days require an exercise of
these three virtues Theological: and consequently all the time of private
prayer is to be spent in actual exercise of these, because that prayer is an
address to God; as all the time of persecution, that being suffered for Gods
sake; all the time of troubles, for those are caused by sin against Almighty
God, and must have end by saintitie; so by this account all our life time must
be a practice of these virtues, an increase of them indeed, as the only means
to make us saints, to make us capable of God Almighties promises by loving
these his easy, his sweet, his saving commandments, which are the continual
exercise of these Theological virtues whereby we are made capable of his
heavenly promises. And least it should be with us as with these nine
ungrateful Lepers cured from their Leprosy, which is a type of all sin
whatsoever, but especially of the foulest of all others, Infidelity, Therefore
holy Church to day to prevent all sin in her Christian children, and above all
the sin of ungrateful infidelity) commends unto us the Prayer above, that by
often saying this Prayer we may exercise the noblest and most essential
virtues that belong to Christianity, and by their increase, make our selves
worthy of our Saviors promises to all good Christians.

On the fourteenth Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Matthew. 6. v. 33. SEek first the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all things shall be given you besides.

Verse. Let my prayer, O Lord, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
KEep we beseech thee, O Lord, thy Church with perpetual propitiation; and
since without thee humane mortality fails, let it always by thy helps be
withdrawn from such things as are hurtful, and directed to those that are
saving.

The Illustration.
HOw excellently well is the much of the Epistle, and Gospel contained in the
little of this Prayer! wherein we confess it is by the perpetual propitiation
of our Saviors passion, (without which our humane mortality would be always
failing) as the only help conducing to support us, that we can be withdrawn
from the works of the flesh, and directed to walk in the Spirit; that is to
say, taken off from those things which are hurtful, and directed to those that
are saving. And what else is the whole Epistle but an exhortation to leave off
the works of the flesh, and to pursue the fruits of the Spirit? Again, what are
the two masters which the Gospel says we cannot serve at once, but the flesh,
and the spirit? what the drift of all the Gospel, but to dehort from one, and
exhort unto the other? So here Epistle, Prayer, and Gospel speak all one thing,
how several soever the language be of each: and no marvel, because the spirit
of Almighty God is able to animate all the creatures of the world; Act. 17.28.
For it is he in whom we live, are moved, and have being. Now having thus made
good our main affair of this work, (the mutual connection of parts in holy
Churches service) it rests only to elucidate a word or two in the Prayer
above, to render the same (in it self) perfectly understood. The first is, the
perpetual propitiation wherewith we beg the Church may be kept; for though
above we called that propitiation an effect of our Saviors passion, yet here we
must further give a reason why we did so call it, and also why we in the Prayer
affirm the same to be a perpetual effect thereof. Know therefore, it is the
effect of his passion, because it is not only a satisfaction for sin, but
also a pacification of Gods wrath against mankind, who by sin had provoked
Almighty God to a high indignation against the whole race of men: And
therefore we call this propitiation perpetual, because it is infinite in
duration, as well as in power of appeasing; for though it be now above 1651.
years since our Savior did actually suffer, yet the virtue of his suffering is
still vigorous, and shall be to the worlds end, because it was the suffering of
God as well as of man, and therefore must needs have an eternal operation,
that is, be able for all eternity to appease the wrath divine: and in this
sense we say the preservation of the world in being, is the continuation of the
act whereby it was created, so the preservation of men's souls from the wrath of
the heavenly Father, is the continuation of the passion of his sacred Son.
The next phrase of this Prayer which we are to clear is that, wherein we say
without our perpetually propitious Lord Humane mortality would fail; as if
there were any other mortality then humane that were capable of the benefit of
our Saviors passion, of his perpetual propitiation. Truly no, there is not;
for since it was only Humane nature that he assumed, (and by assuming it was
pleased to redeem the same) we say rightly well no other mortality was capable
of the benefit of this redemption; not but that other natures are mortal, as
all terrestrial creatures are in the very rigor of death, or mortality,
because they all die by way of corruption; and if we say the celestial spirits
are mortal too because they may be held to die when they fell from heaven to
hell, from the state of grace, to the state of damnation, we shall not speak
improperly: and truly the phrase of this Prayer seems to allude to that
mortality of the blessed spirits, when therein we are taught to affirm, that
our Saviors passion was a propitiation peculiarly provided for the subsistence
only of humane mortality, since it was a remedy provided only to recover (so
often as they chance to fall) mortal men, and not any other mortal creature
besides, either terrestrial, or celestial: And thus the style of humane
mortality is most apposite, because man only had the happiness of mercy to
be showed him for his sins, which was a favor never done to any Angel
whatsoever; and this mercy is just the same which this present Prayer
avoucheth, begging that our humane mortality (which needs must fail without
it) may have the benefit of our blessed Saviors perpetual propitiation by the
application thereunto of his bitter death, and passion, which will afford it
helps to avoid what is hurtful, and to follow what is saving.

The Epistle. Galat. 5. v. 16. etc.
16 Brethren, I say walk in the spirit, and the lusts of the flesh you shall
not accomplish.

17 For the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh,
for they are adversaries one to another, that not what things soever you will,
these you do.

18 But if you be led by the spirit, you are not under the Law.

19 And the works of the flesh be manifest, which are fornication,
uncleanness, impudicitie, lechery,

20 Serving of Idols, witchcrafts, enmities, contentions, emulations, anger,
brawles, dissentions, sects,

21 Envies, murders, ebrieties, commessations, and such like: as I have
foretold, that they who do such things shall not obtain the Kingdom of Heaven.

22 But the fruit of the spirit is Charity, Joy, Peace, Patience, Benignity,
Goodness, Longanimitie,

23 Mildness, Faith, Modesty, Continence, Chastity, against such there is no
Law.

24 And they that be Christ's have crucified their flesh with the vices, and
concupiscences.


The Explication.
16. THe sum of all he aims at in this Epistle is, to advise the Galatians
to walk in the spirit, after the dictamen of grace, and not of nature, after
the instinct of the holy Ghost, and not of their own corrupted judgments; and
by this mean^ he tells them they shall avoid the accomplishment of fleshly
desires, how ever they may be tempted therewith.

17. Hence the Manicheans, and some Philosophers held there were two souls in
man, one spiritual, the other carnal, this of God, that of the devil. But the
Catholic doctrine is otherwise, that by one only rational soul in man are
performed the operations of vegetative, sensitive, and reasonable souls. Hence
we see the reason why some good men sin, because they do not what they would,
what their spirit desires, but what their flesh prevails for by a greater
desire: And indeed man is made up of these two contraries, to show his life is
a perpetual warfare upon earth between the flesh and the spirit.

18 This verse has diverse senses; but the genuine is, if we be so led by the
spirit of God, as we do what the same spirit dictates, then we are not under
the Law, (subject unto it, or guilty of the breach thereof.) Not that the Law
cease to oblige us, but that we forbear to offend the Law, and so are as it
were rather above, then under it, whilst we walk under the Law of the spirit,
and in so doing, rather trample it under us, then break the Law; which is only
made against transgressors, not against the Just, for against those there is
no law, (says the Apostle by and by) against those who walk according to the
dictamen of the Spirit.

19. By the flesh we are here to understand the concupiscence thereof which
leads to the vices afterward enumerated: namely, fornication, which is
properly simple carnal knowledge between man and woman without other
circumstances of adultery, rape, incest, or the like. Uncleanness is properly
that mollities, or softness (rather easiness indeed) to carnal delight, which
causes single pollution without commixture of two bodies. Impudicity is
properly immodest kisses, or touches between two persons. Le^hery is properly
any unlawful carnal delight which is extraordinary, and so mortal. This may be
called also Lasciviousness, which for the excess transcends and passerh over
all the special kinds of lust that are above named, or can be indeed imagined;
and this excess may be committed even between man, and wife by undue knowledge
of one another, or by intemperance even in the due ways of their mutual
knowledge.

20. By this verse enumerating acts of the soul amongst the works of the flesh
we are taught, that concupiscence resides as well in the soul, as in the body
of man, and was left as a perpetual punishment of Adams sin in b^th parts of
humane nature, thereby to show the whole mass of pure man was corrupted; not
only every individual of mankind, but every essential part of man, as well his
form, as his matter, his soul as his body: (from which Christ was free, being
God as well as Man) and this punishment may not be unproperly called
concupiscence, which is indeed the fuel to the fire of all sort of sins
burning perpetually in mankind, and being by concupiscence perpetually fed; so
that concupiscence leads not only to corporal, but even to spiritual vices,
and therefore as well these as others are called works of the flesh, and are
here numbered by the Apostle among them; namely, Idolatry, which is serving
false Gods; Witchcraft, which is working by help of the devil; Enmity, which is
a permanent, and professed breach of friendship; Contention, which is perverse
opposing one another in words, or opinions out of a spirit of contradiction;
Emulation, which is a repining at others well doing; Anger, which is a height
of passion seeking revenge, and this is mortal, or venial, according as it is
greater or lesser; Brawles, which is breach of brotherly charity by giving
provoking language; Dissension, which leads to strife, or war; Sects, which
are all Heretical opinions, or choice of religions by the conduct of private
sense, or spirit, contrary to the known and common doctrine of holy Church.

21. The three first vices mentioned here speak themselves plain enough in
their names. Commessations are all riots, or gluttonous excesses in eating or
drinking, feasts or banquets; hereunto are reduced all excesses of wantonness
at such feasts, as idle songs, and light women's company, or unchaste talk. The
close of this verse prohibiting from heaven these who do those works of the
flesh above enumerated, is to be understood only when mortal habit is
contracted in all or any of these works, or when any dies in a mortal act of
any of these vices.

22. See how contrary the works of the Spirit are to those of the flesh; and
note that the Apostle speaks not here in the same style as formerly, for he
calls corporal deeds works of the flesh, but spiritual acts he calls the fruits
of the Spirit; and why? because they are more indeed the fruits of the holy
Ghost, then of man, and therefore are called fruits rather then works; though
they are the works, or acts of our soul, yet in regard they are done by the
virtue of grace, not of nature, hence they are imputed to be rather fruits of
the holy Ghost, then acts of our soul, whilst that holy Spirit operates more
toward them, then our own souls do, which since Adams fall are still more
propense to evil, then to good works. Note, here are principally understood the
acts, not the habits of those virtues; for an act is properly a fruit of the
agent, and the chief agent in these being the holy Ghost, they (though produced
by us) are called the fruits of the Spirit, that is of the Holy Ghost in us.
And the first of these is called Charity, as the prime, and principal fruit of
the Holy Ghost in us, because it is indeed the highest of all other virtues,
insomuch that it partakes in a manner of the Deity it self, since God is called
Charity, 1 John 4 8. and therefore this is indeed the main, and special fruit
of the Spirit, and all other virtues are not improperly called the fruits of
this, because it is this gives life to the soul, and to all her virtues
whatsoever: And by this are produced in us these following; namely. Joy, the
fruit indeed of a serene conscience guilty of no adulterate affection to
creatures, but ravished wholly with the pure love of God: Peace, the
tranquillity of mind upon the serenity of a conscience not troubled with any
horror of sin, or the least affection thereunto; which peace of conscience the
Apostle magnifies so, that he says it surpasses all sense, and cannot be
sufficiently expressed, Philip. 4.7. so great a fruit this is of charity: and
these are the chief internal fruits. Now the external are, Patience, whereby we
bear with the provocations of others that attempt to disturb the tranquillity
of our minds, by which we neither loose our own, nor disquiet others. Benignity
goes further, whilst it not only bears patiently all external attempts
against our internal quiet, but even endeavors to sweeten their asperity who
are harsh unto us, to oblige others who would disoblige us, as well as to
requite the courtesies we receive from them; this consists chiefly in a
sweetness of language, in an evennesse of actions toward all men, and is such
as very good men may want unless they have the special gift thereof; and this
is the main virtue by which we gain from others the reputation of being Saints.
Goodness rests not satisfied in doing well for all men, and in all we do, but
in declining offense to any, either God, or men: this consists chiefly in
aiming to profit our selves, or others, and is therefore esteemed the fountain
of utility. Longanimity has a great share of patience, as if it were a
continuation thereof; yet has this special difference from it, that this
reports rather to time then persons, and uses the exercise of patience
properly upon all diversity, or difference of time past, present, and future;
for that every minute of our lives ought by this virtue to be a patient
expecting the good hour of Gods holy will to be done in us, whilst we live, by
our sanctification, when we dye, by our salvation.

23. Mildness is here understood to be diametrically opposite to anger, or
revenge of injuries, and differs by that notion from patience, as also by
rendering a man tractable, and flexible to all that is desired, and good to be
done. Faith is of two considerations, first, as it is opposite to heresy, and
so assenteth to whatsoever is proposed by God, or holy Church to be believed,
though never so much above nature; and this faith is not so properly called a
fruit of charity, or of the holy Ghost, as it is indeed the root or first
principle of religion: Secondly, as it imports fidelity, or veracity in point
of promise, and as it is opposite to fraud, or lying; and thus it is properly a
fruit of the holy Ghost, or of charity, or as it is said here by the Apostle,
of the Spirit; and of this Faith S. Paul says, Charity believes all things, 1
Cor. 13. so it consists in a kind of genuine simplicity, by considing in the
veracity of all men, and believing rather then distrusting what they say.
Modesty imports an equal temper in all words, and actions, and renders a man
well composed, (for the exterior of him) grateful, and acceptable to all men,
being an effect of his inward rectitude, or composition. Continency is as it
were a militant chastity, and consists in the act of resistance to
temptation; so it is rather an imitation, or inchoation of chastity, then
chastity it self, which may be perfect when, and where there is no opposition
or temptations; as a man is said to live chaste so long as he sins not
carnally, but continent whilst he actua^ly resists temptation to carnality:
though this virtue is a kind of transcendent perfection over all men's actions,
and thus it is as well a temperance from excess of meats, as from all other
vices: Hence married people may be said to be continent, though not chaste,
when they forbear all carnal pleasure but that which is the moderate use of the
marriage bed: Chastity consists in an absolute forbearing all carnal pleasure
whatsoever, as well that of marriage as not of marriage, and is highly
commendable as laboring to bring the body to the simplicity or purity of a
spirit, by declining all corporeal commixtion, or impurity. And against these
fruits, or the producers of them, there is no law; that is, they are not
forbidden any way, nor punishable by any law at all, but may freely be
practiced. Which doctrine of the Catholic Church is against that of Sectaries
forbidding vows of chastity, as if they were vows against the law of nature.

24. This last verse ends the forementioned war between the flesh, and the
spirit; telling us, that those who are truly Christ's have by the grace of the
Spirit, by the help of the holy Ghost, not only overcome the flesh, but
crucified it too, allayed even all the desires, and concupiscences thereof by
works of penance, and mortification; which is called a spiritual crucifixion,
because it imitates the death of our Savior, who dyed that we might live in
spirit, and never dye to him. There are five noted ways of this crucifying our
concupiscences, by fear of hell, by conformity of our will to Gods holy will,
by guarding of our senses, by prayer, and by fasting, watching, and alms
deeds, or any other mortifications either of mind, or body.

The Application.
1. IT is no marvel if after so deep a root as our Faith took last Sunday, we
see to day the same Faith rise with a mighty stemm, a stock of Hope, topt with
a gallant Head of charity, and become a dainty Tree, laden with several fruits
of all sorts of virtues whatsoever; for the many numbered here in this Epistle
are an epitome of all the rest: and indeed however Charity be the best and
highest of all virtues, yet she must have the staff of Hope to rest upon, and
the root of Faith to suck the triple breast of the single Deity, the milky
mystery of the B. Trinity, or else she is not ripe enough to gather, and be
served in as fruit sit for the heavenly Table.

2. But that we may know when she is ripe indeed, see here how she is set
against her opposite the flesh, which is a love to sense, but not to souls, to
creatures, but not to the Creator: so the Apostle plays at once the
husbandman, the painter, and the Philosopher, whilst he to day gives charity
to us full ^ipe, and with her best life color made by the shadow of the flesh
that sets her off, as foyles do beauties, and as two contraries set forth one
another: see them both in their several effects in the Explication of the Text
above.

3. But because fruits do wither where the grounds are dry, and have not sapp
to feed the Roots, therefore S. Paul does close up his Epistle to day with the
Aqueduct of life giving waters to all Christian virtues, our Savior, and his
sacred Passion; for when he says, Those that are of Christ have crucified
their flesh with the vices and concupiscence, he must needs conclude, that
Christ first overcame this flesh by his Spirit, and that it is by the
application of his Passion we are enabled also to do the like, and that without
the application of this passion to us perpetually our humane mortality would
fail in all her works of charity.

Whence it is holy Church, to ripen her charity and to preserve it for
eternity, begs in the Prayer above, that it may by the perpetual propitiation
of Christ, (that is to say, by the continual application of his Passion to us
in the sacrifices and Sacraments of holy Church) be withdrawn from hurtful
things, and directed to those which are saving. The Gospel. Matt. 6. v. 24.
24 No man can serve two Masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the
other; or he will sustain the one, and contemn the other. You cannot serve God,
and Mammon.

25 Therefore I say unto you, be not careful for your life, what you shall eat,
neither for your body, what raiment you shall put on: is not the life more then
the meat, and the body more then the raiment?

26 Behold the fowls in the air, that they sow not, neither reap they, nor
gather into barns, and your heavenly Father feeds them; are not you much more
of price then they?

27 And which of you by his caring can add to his stature one cubit?

28 And for raiment why are you careful? consider the Lillies of the field how
they grow, they labor not, neither do they spin;

29 But I say unto you that neither Solomon in all his glory was arrayed as one
of these.

30 And if the grass of the field which to day is and to morrow is cast into
the oven* God does so clothe; how much more you? O ye of very small faith!

31 Be not careful therefore, saying, what shall we eat? or what shall we
drink? or wherewith shall we be covered?

32 For all these things the heathen does seek after: for your Father knows
that you need all these things.

33 Seek therefore first the Kingdom of Heaven, and all these things shall be
given you besides.


The Explication.
24. BY serving is here understood loving, and obeying out of love, not serving
for hire, since so we may serve many masters. By can is meant can easily: So
the text intimates only a huge difficulty, not an absolute impossibility. That
this is the sense the following words prove of hate, and love. Now the next
words of sustaining at least argue a possibility, (though with difficulty) for
to sustain or bear argues a power thereof. The last words of this verse, you
cannot serve God, and Mammon, are taken strictly for loving, and obeying; so
thus the Apostle says, God and riches are incompatible masters.

25. By careful is here understood anxious, or solicitous: for your life is
understood your soul, because by that we live: and we are not to be anxious for
our souls sake what we eat, because it does not eat to keep it self alive, but
only the body. The like anxiety is forbidden even for the body too, how it
shall be attired. The following words are Christ his argument from the less to
the greater; as who should say, I who have created your souls out of nothing
will not fail to give you meat to conserve them and the body in union, and
health; which is to show us, we shall not want his less favor that have had
his greater; so if he give our bodies life, and health, it is not likely he
will deny us clothing for our bodies, unless we fall to be anxiously
solicitous how to clothe our selves, which anxiety is here forbidden, and we
are counseled to rely upon Gods providence herein.

26. The same natural argument flows in all the six following verses: But it
is here worthy observation that Christ rather instances in birds then beasts,
to show us, that as they live in the air, off from the earth for most part, so
man should have his thoughts in heaven and not in earth, and should expect his
food rather from heavenly providence then from earthly solicitude.

27. And as such solicitude were vain, so is it to care what we eat, or how
long we protract our lives by curiosity of diet. And this example of a cubit is
not improperly brought in, to show us, that as the due proportion of a man is
to be as square or broad, (when his arms are stretched out) as he is long from
head to foot; so a soul well proportioned must be solid in virtue, and constant
in the pursuit thereof.

28, 29. As the former verses argued to cast off care of meats, so these two
next argue in like manner against anxiety in clothing; exemplyfying in the
delicate attire of Lillies, and of Solomon who by art (the ape of nature) had
made his attire to be decked with Lillies of most curious needlework, to show
the robes of grace, or nuptial garments of our souls should be as fragrant,
and as pure in Gods sight as Lillies are in ours; and if they be but so it
imports not how our bodies are attired.

30. By adding the low similitude of the grasses beauty after that high, and
rich one of the Lilly, and Solomon's garments, Christ augments the reason we
have to confide in Gods providence toward the meanest of persons, since he is
not wanting to adorn the grass as he does. By grass is here understood all
plants, at least such as make fuel for ovens, for else in vain had he spoken
of putting grass into the oven, if it had not been that after these fine green
plants of the field were cut down, and lost the splendor of their growing
state, and served now for nothing but fuel to fire, he had not intended to
show us that if God were so careful for so small a thing as grass, and little
green plants growing, to adorn them, as he does; he would be much more careful
to cloth us with attire sufficient for this life, whom he intends to invest in
robes of glory for all eternity. By the close of this verse rebuking our very
small faith, is not understood our want of belief in God, but our want of
trust, or confidence rather, that he whom we believe to be so infinitely great,
and good, can, and will have care of our least necessities.

31. He well subsumes to close his argument, that after all these examples of
his solicitude for the meanest creatures, he will not be careless of us if we
confide in him as we ought to do, for our due supplies both in meat and
clothing.

32. This is an excellent argument against the anxiety above, that it is common
to heathens; and therefore no way proper to Christians, who since they know God
sees their wants, they ought to refer the supply thereof to his omniscience
as God, to his love as father, to his power as King of heaven and earth; so if
he see, and supply not, he is pleased we shall suffer want, and therefore in
vain we seek to have that else where which God pleases to abridge us of:
rather in this case we must be content as the grass to lose our luster, then
covet to enjoy it when it is designed for feuell to the fire; so we must live
rather content to die poor, then seek to live rich after God will have us die
beggars. Note, it is only excess of care, or anxious solicitude that we are
forbidden, not ordinary diligence in our occasions.

33. By first is here understood chiefly, or principally; so that we are
allowed a secondary care of our temporals, though our main employ and study
must be to get heaven, for that is the Kingdom of God. By Gods justice is here
understood those virtues, and good deeds that render us just in the sight of
God, and so capable of that heaven we are in the first place to seek, since it
was the end for which we were first created. By those things which shall be
given us besides are understood things of less moment, and consequently which
ought to take up less of our care, such as are meat, clothes, and other
temporalls.

The Application.
1. GOd and Mammon are not so here declared to be the two masters meant who
cannot be both served at once, but that we may also take the spirit and the
flesh for these two masters: and this the rather, because so the Gospel is more
literally suting the Epistle; and besides, S. Matthew in the following verses
of this present Text does aim directly at the service we pretend unto the
flesh, when we neglect our souls to provide for our bodies.

2. And see how, to prevent this poor pretext, our charity is led to day by
Providence to show us, that we cannot any way pretend to corporal duty for
excusing us from our spiritual obligations; since God Almighties Providence is
here brought in to furnish us with all things necessary for the body, and so to
ease us of that care, and to send us about our main and only business our
secking in the first place the kingdom of heaven, and the justice thereof by
the works of charity, (such as in the Epistle above are enumerated) and
assuring us all things wanting else shall be provided us by his Providence, who
never relinquisheth the just man, nor permits his seed to seek their bread; so
if neither for our selves nor for our posterity we need to interrupt our
spiritual duties, or to renounce our service to our souls, for any tie we have
to serve our bodies, we have no pretense then left at all for our so doing.

3. Yet least we be withdrawn from the saving works of charity, by the hurtful
ones of the flesh which humane frailty would easily incline us to, therefore we
are taught upon the reading of this holy Text, To pray as above, always for
the help of Christ his perpetual propitiation (by the cordial of his passion)
to relieve our fainting charity withal, in her march to heaven.

On the fifteenth Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Luke 7. v. 16. A Great Prophet is risen amongst us, and because
God has visited his people, etc.

Verse. Let my Prayer, O Lord, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
LEt thy continued mercy, O Lord, both cleanse, and defend thy Church; and
because without thee it cannot stand securely, be it always governed by thy
bounty.

The Illustration.
WE heard in the exposition of the last Sundays prayer, that the perpetual
propitiation (there begged) was the continuation of our Saviors passion to be
our continual help in all occasions; and now that to day we beg to have the
mercy of our Lord continued to his Church, we seem but to repeat the same
prayer again in a varied phrase. But if we cast our eyes upon the Epistle, and
Gospel here below, and observe how the Expositours upon them apply the same, as
declaring all the office of Priestly function, and telling us what should be
the duty of the people thereupon, we shall soon perceive as well a difference
in the substance, as in the phrase, or language of these two prayers: That
alluding to the immediate influence of the passion into us, by the personal
help which our Savior affords in the grace he gives us to repent us of our
sins; which relating to himself is fitly called his perpetual propitiation,
but reporting to the mediate helps we have from our Savior by the mediation of
his Ministers, the Doctors, Teachers, Preachers, and Priests of holy Church,
it is rather styled his continued mercy toward us; because it was his mercy
that moved him to supply his own personal presence amongst us by the mediation
of the Priests, whom in his place he left (by means of catechizing, preaching,
and administration of the Sacraments) to continue his mercy toward us, and by
the continuation thereof to cleanse, and defend his holy Church; cleansed
indeed by participation of the Sacraments, defended by the communication of the
Priests their functions, sacrifices, and prayers in her behalf; and yet our
holy mother closes up this Sundays prayer with an immediate address again
unto the fountain it self, when she concludes affirming, it is as well his
bounty, as his mercy that she subsisteth by, when she professes she cannot
stand securely unless she be always governed by his bounty, that is to say,
by his holy grace derived unto us through the hands of his Ministers the
Priests of holy Church: so that this prayer instructs us whence our helps do
flow, and by what hands they are conveyed to us. And requisite it is that we do
pray in this sort to day, when the Epistle runs all upon the Priests office to
the people, and their putting in practice the Christian doctrine taught them by
the Priest; all which is neatly couched under the spirituality, wherewith the
Epistle tells us both are rendered complete, as signifying, neither the Master,
nor the Scholar must sow fleshly seeds, since both must live by spiritual
fruits. And for the Gospel we hear the Fathers of the Church avouch it to be a
parable alluding to the death of sin, and life of grace, which is coincident
with what the Epistle taught us of sowing spiritual seeds, that might bring
forth fruits of grace, of Christ, not fleshly, which produce nothing at all but
corruption and death. Since then we have this prayer adjusted to the sense of
the Expositours upon the other parts of this days service, we make good our
design, as hitherto we did in some one of the latitudes, in the preface of
this work, allowable unto this mystical Theology.

The Epistle. Galat. 5. and 6. Chap.
Chap. 5. v. 26. If we live in the spirit, in the spirit also let us walk; let
us not be made desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one
another.

Chap. 6. v. 1. Brethren, if a man be preoccupied in any fault, you that are
spiritual instruct such a one in the spirit of lenity, considering thine own
self, lest thou also be tempted.

2 Bear ye one another burdens, and so you shall fulfill the Law of Christ.

3 For if any man esteem himself to be something where as he is nothing, he
seduceth himself.

4 But let every one prove his own work, and so in himself only shall he have
the glory, not in another.

5 And every one shall bear his own burden.

6 And let him that is catechized in the word communicate to him that
catechizeth him, in all goods.

7 Be not deceived, God is not mocked; for what things a man shall sow those
also shall he reap.

8 For any that sows in his flesh, of the flesh also shall reap corruption;
but he that sows in the spirit, of the spirit shall reap life everlasting.

9 And doing good let us not fail, for in due time we shall reap not failing.

10 Therefore whilst we have time let us work good to all, but especially to
the domesticalls of faith.


The Explication.
26. IF we have internal life of grace, and justice, let us walk justly
according to the conduct of that grace, and by no means look back to the ways
of Judaisme, being (as we are) Christians; but let us so far decline from
being vainglorious, (as the Jews were) that we even forbear the desire as well
as the act thereof; much less let us vaunt our selves to be better then
others, provoking them thereby to anger, or envying, if in any gift they excel
us.

1. Note, S. Paul means here such faults as are casually (and by frailty)
committed, not those that are habitual, or accustomary; besides, he glanceth
here specially at frail relapses to Judaisme; and such he commands the
Galatians to instruct, that is, to reprehend gently, and with lenity, not
rigidly, or severely as obstinate offenders ought to be reprehended; so
besides, he makes not every one a reprehender of his brethren, but those only
that are spiritual, meaning Priests, or Churchmen; and such reprehension he
will have to be in spirit also, not in any vain way. Note, he falls from the
plural to the singular number, left he had else seemed to accuse a whole
community of frailty, and of danger to be tempted; which is indeed incident to
single persons, and not handsomely imputed to many.

2. Here he comes to the plural number again, exhorting us to bear each others
burdens, whether they be of natural disposition, (not agreeing with our own)
or whether they be diseases, or afflictions laid upon our neighbor, or lastly,
and chiefly, even their sins we must bear, indeed pardon, conceal, excuse,
and (if we will perfectly obey this counsel) even do penance for them by our
prayers, fastings, or alms; and in so doing we shall fulfill the Law of Christ,
his command of loving one another; This is my precept, that you love one
another as I have loved you: Joh. 15.12. but he so loved us as he bore all our
sins upon his back, and therefore we must be content to help bear those of
our neighbors, to imitate the example of our Master.

3. By something is here understood, good, virtuous, or spiritual; as who
should say, if any man does not follow the precept above of bearing his
brothers burden, let him never think he is, or can be any thing in the sight
of God. Observe, the text is so far from esteeming him for some body who is not
sweet, and gentle to his brother, as he is not accounted so much as any thing
in the sight of God, but is truly as nothing in his eye, and absolutely
seduceth, or cheateth himself if he conceives otherwise.

4. In this verse we are exhorted to value our selves only as we can deserve
to be esteemed by Almighty God, where we all know we merit little, or nothing,
and not as we may seem to be compared to others. For what availes it a man to
see another commit greater sins then himself, if he commit sin enough to
damn him, or at least to render him ungrateful to Almighty God? And yet
nothing more common then for us to flatter our selves that all is well at home,
if we see any greater evil in others then in our selves. To seek our glory out
of others ignominy is folly: We shall never arrive to eternal glory in the next
world, if we do not contrive to be such here within our selves as may deserve
the reward of eternal glory, rather for our own good works, then because others
have greater bad ones to answer for then we.

5. Note, in the second verse above, the Apostle meant the burdens of the
living brethren; in this, he reports to those of the dead: and in that sense we
should each one carry his own burden before the Tribunal of Christ at the
later day, as if our sins were then laid in a knapsack, on our own backs, and
each man there to answer only for his own, unless he had made himself also
guilty of others sins too, and in such case they become his also. The Reformers
mis-understand this place when they allege it against purgatory, and will
therefore have it needless to ease our brethren in purgatory of their burdens
by our prayers. Alas! they are chiefly then objects of our compassions, and may
yet find ease by the communion with the Church in prayer, by partaking of the
suffrages which the Saints afford them; but at the later day it will not be so,
then is a time for justice, not for mercy.

6. Observe here the practice of catechizing, or teaching Christian doctrine to
be as ancient as from the primitive Church in the Apostles days. Note, that
then also, they who had the happiness to receive the benefit of being
catechized, were exhorted to repend the spiritual courtesy, by temporal
rewards of relief to the Apostles. Note lastly, that catechizing was by word of
mouth, not by writing performed; for it was indeed prohibited in those times to
commit to writing the mysteries of faith, lest the Infidels should profane them
as they came to their view: and yet now what huge force the Reformers put in
the Scripture, as if it alone availed, and tradition were nothing worth,
whereas both together make up one perfect Record of Christian doctrine.

7. This verse may either be referred to that immediate before, or to the fourth
above; as who should say, deceive not your selves by pretending excuses from
relieving their temporal wants, who afford you the spiritual helps of Christian
doctrine; so S. Augustine, Theophylactus, and S. Hierome expound this place: or
as more generally others expound it, delude not your selves, for you cannot
cosen God by shaking off your burdens upon other men's shoulders, you shall
bear your own, for God knows which are yours, and you cannot cosen him; and
thus it reports to the fifth verse as above, let each one bear his own burden.
So the metaphor imports that this life is a husbandry, a time of sowing; the
next is that of reaping, according as we have sowed here, if good works then
good reward, if bad then punishment.

8. This verse S. Hierome, and the rest above interpret as they did that of the
catechized; as who should say, if you sow the seed of alms to those that
instruct you, you shall reap the reward, the Spirit, that is heaven; if you sow
penury, and relieve them not, you shall receive, or reap corruption. But the
common sense is that the fruit of carnality is disease, corruption, death,
damnation; that of spirit, virtue, life everlasting, glory, and salvation.

9. The Apostle here exhorts to a perseverance in doing good, the Priest
constantly continuing to teach, the Lay to learn, to relieve his teacher, and
to work according as he is taught; as if incessant reward were not otherwise to
be hoped, but for incessant labor. So as we may understand this in two sorts,
we shall reap in due time (in the next world) if we do not cease our labors in
this; or we shall even in this world reap incessant reward in due time, for our
labors here, if we labor constantly, and slack not our zeales, since it is
the end that crowns the work either with grace in due time here, or glory in
due time in the next world.

10. That is, whilst we have time to sow the seeds of good works, let us do
good to all people, Christians, or Heathens; not only to those we catechize,
though principally to Christians, as being domesticals, and of one house with
us, fellow servants in the Church of Christ, the true house of God.

The Application.
1. THe last Sundays service and this do seem to be almost the same, only
that was a more general Application to all mankind, this to the chosen sort of
men, who make up the mystical body of Christ his holy Church. Wherefore S. Paul
in this Epistle makes his address particularly to the Priests, and Pastors of
our souls, from the first verse to the end of the fifth; at the sixth he
begins to tell the sheep their duty to the shepherd, and so continues to the
end of the eighth verse; in the two last verses he concludes with an
exhortation to them of perseverance in their Christian duties, bidding them do
good to all men whatsoever, but especially to one another, to the domesticals
of Faith, to those who have not only Christ their Father, but do profess his
holy Spouse (the Church) to be their Mother.

2. We see by the Illustration above that the Priests office to us is double;
the one to cleanse us, by administering the holy Sacraments unto us; the other
to defend us, by preaching, praying, and offering up their daily sacrifices for
us. Hence we must conclude, our duty consists in preparing our selves worthily
for receiving those Sacraments from the hands of the Priests, lest we incurr
the censures of unworthy receivers, no less then our own damnation if it be
the Sacrament of the holy Altar that we do receive; and if any other of them,
there hangs a curse at least upon all who perform the work of God negligently;
as all unworthy receivers of any Sacraments do, or the negligent hearers of any
Sermons, or of Mass, which is the sacrifice as well of the people, as of the
Priest: and these are peculiarly indeed the works of God, as being instituted
by his sacred Son; nay more, they are the works of his continued mercy toward
us, and so surpass all other his works whatsoever, because we are told his
mercy is above all his works.

3. Hence the Priest is put in mind (further then in the Explication above)
with what a holy intention, attention, reverence, and zeal of souls he ought
to administer any Sacrament; and also how with the like regards he ought to
preach, or offer up his sacrifices, thereby to comply with the trust of
Sayntity which both God and man have put into his hands, lest he incurr the
odious brand of becoming like the people, so the Priest: for how ever both are
sinners to God, yet the Priests are set apart as Saints to the eyes of men, and
they peculiarly were those he bade be holy as himself was holy who made them
dispensers of the mysteries of God unto the people. Lastly, hence the Laymen
are minded with what humility, reverence, fear, and trembling; yet with what
confidence, comfort, obedience, with what Faith, what hope, what love, with
what adoration, with what zeal to God Almighties honor and glory they ought to
receive the holy Sacraments, to hear the Word of God, to assist at the
sacrifice of Mass, which is not only a commemoration, but even a renovation,
a repetition (in a mysterious way) of our Saviors death and passion; so they
are to look upon the Priest going to the Altar with the same devotion as if
they did behold our Savior going to be crucified.

Now that both may do this our holy Mother prays to day, as above, for that
special gift of God, that bounty whereby it is performable, that ardent charity
which sets on fire the world of flesh, and makes it fly out into flames of
holy love unto his heavenly Majesty; for by this love it is that the Church
militant is governed, and by the same love God is glorified for all eternity in
his Church Triumphant. The Gospel. Luke 7.11.
11 And it came to pass afterward he went into a City that is called Naim,
and there went with him his disciples, and a very great multitude.

12 And when he came nigh to the gate of the City behold a dead man was carried
forth, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow, and a great multitude
of the City with her.

13 Whom when our Lord had seen, being moved with mercy upon her, he said to
her, Weep not.

14 And he came near, and touched the Coffin, and they that carried it stood
still, and he said, young man, I say to thee, arise.

15 And he that was dead sat up, and began to speak, and he gave him to his
mother.

16 And fear took them all, and they magnified God, saying, that a great
Prophet is risen among us, and that God has visited his people.


The Explication.
11. THis was a fair City in Galilee within two miles of mount Thabor; and so
had the name of Fair, for Naim imports as much. This made the sadder funeral,
and the more gladsome miracle being in so vast, so famous a City, into which so
great a multitude, such a train of people followed our Savior.

12. This seeming chance to man of two such multitudes meeting (those within,
and those without the City) at the funeral, was designed by God, to render
more authentical the miracle, God thereby more glorified, and Christ the more
beloved: though it is to be noted, that the Jews, and Romans too had their
burials always out of the Cities, unless (rarely) for Kings, who were buried
in the City of Sion, David building a place for that purpose. Note, this only
son was also her only child; hence the mothers sorrow was greater to lose in
him all the whole hopes of her house, being a widow of note, and so past hopes
of more of that family.

13. By saying to her weep not, he showed his compassion of her sorrow was
such, that he meant to take away the cause of her tears by restoring her son to
life again; and so doubtless she believed when he bade her weep no more.

14. See how soon the promised comforts of God arrive: immediately as he said
to her weep not, he stopped the hearse, and bade the dead corpse arise. Elias,
Eliseus, and others did pray to raise the dead; Christ, to show he was God,
raised this young man by command, and not by prayer. Yet observe, he touched
the hearse; no marvel upon the touch of Christ, who was life everlasting, (as
being God) that temporal life should be restored to the dead body that he
touched; this he did as naturally as a red hot iron burns straw. So did his
flesh (united to the Word) give life to a carcass by virtue of that
hypostaticall union.

15. His sitting up, and beginning to speak were indeed true signs of his
reviving; yet Christ was pleased to take him by the hand, and thereby lift him
from the hearse, and lead him to his mother, to show that he was so humble as
he would not only oblige, but even serve his servants: Nor is it any wonder
that Christ the King of Heaven and Earth should perform the office of a
Courtier by his civility to the noble person of this sad widow, whom he had
graced and comforted by that act of his power.

16. Note, this miracle was a kind of Parable, importing the spiritual death
of souls by sin, and the reviving of the soul again by grace; though here the
widows tears were the motive for Christ to reward her, by the restoring her
son to life, and withal many souls doubtless from the death of infidelity to
the life of Christianity upon the sight of so celebrated a miracle. That they
were all struck with fear, what wonder? for their guilty conscience might make
them doubt, he who could raise the dead could kill the living as easily if he
list; but seeing he did not so, (or rather lest he should do so) they blessed
God, and said ( for magnifying here imports glorifying of him) he had pleased
to visit his people by sending them a great Prophet, for as yet they understood
Christ to be no more, and that he was such this very act made them believe, and
some doubtless concluded he was the long expected Messiah, whom they called by
the name of the great Prophet for distinction sake. Note, the gloss observes
three resuscitations from death to be made by Christ; the first, that of the
daughter of the Archi-synagogue, and that by private prayer in her fathers
house none being by: the second, this of the only son of the widow, whom he
raised in public by a word of command, and by a touch of his hand: the third
was that of Lazarus, whom with a perplexity of prayer and tears he raised, and
with loud crying out, Lazarus come forth, as if he were undone if he had him
not alive again. The first of these signifies souls dead by mortal sin of
thought, and those therefore were more easily raised, by private prayer; the
second signifies those dead by mortal sin of words, those are yet with more
difficulty raised, by command; the third yet more hardly, by importune prayer,
tears, and cries to heaven, as signifying those souls which are dead by mortal
sin of deed, and that reiterated, or habitual unto them.

The Application.
1. ALl Expositours agree, this miracle of raising the dead by a touch of our
Saviors holy hand, is a mere figure of his raising souls from the death of
mortal sin to the life of grace by the finger of the holy Ghost, by the gift
of his holy grace, his holy Law, which cannot touch a soul, but it must needs
enliven it. See the explication of the last verse in the Gospel for more to
this purpose.

2. And who can now forbid us piously to think this only son of the
distressed widow represents the soul of some one faithful believer, dead yet
for want of charity, and revived by the tears and prayers of his tender mother
the holy Catholic Church; at whose intercession (and in contemplation of her
tears) our Savior Jesus Christ sends down the holy Ghost, to touch the Coffin
of this sinners heart with the finger of his grace, with the gift, the flame of
Love, and so reviving him first internally, then gives him by the hands of the
Priest (who is Christ's Vicar in point of absolution) into the lap of his
mother, externally to live again, that is to say, admitted to the Sacraments,
and declared to be a living member, as before his death of mortal sin,
during which time he was not capable of any Sacrament at all, as to the effect,
the grace thereof?

3. To conclude, as reason teaches every man to beware of his own danger by
seeing another perish in going such a way before him; thus holy Church, knowing
her Priests, and people are many ways liable to the snares of the common
enemy, and perceiving it is often by the prayers of those that stand, they are
raised again who fall, and that this raising is a continual mercy of Almighty
God gratis given, (even when most earnestly implored) and that the continuation
of this gratuite gift is the only means by which even all the children of the
Church do not fall, all at once into the death of deadly sin, but are many of
them (while others fall) enabled to stand securely on their living legs of
charity, and are governed thereby, in every step they make to glory;
Therefore, I say, we are to day bid pray as above, that this charity, this
bounty of our Lord may govern us in all our ways, and that we may have the
cleansing and the defending mercy of God continued over us, lest that failing
us, we here fall out of grace, and thereby fail of glory in the world to come.

On the sixteenth Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Luke 14.10. WHen thou shall be called to a marriage sit in the
lowest place, that he who did invite thee may say unto thee, friend, ascend up
higher, and so it shall be a glory unto thee before them that sit there.

Verse. Let my prayer, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
LEt thy grace we beseech thee, O Lord, always go before, and follow us, and
make us continually intent unto good works.

The Illustration.
WHat may seem as common in this Prayer to all persons, times, and places, must
not hinder it to be a very particular and apposite petition to this present
time wherein it is by holy Church put up unto Almighty God;

(...)

(...)

(...)

purity cannot approach. Tell me, beloved, now what single-souled devotion can
compare with this, that being common, is peculiar unto each particular in such
a sort, as it there were no more but one man left in all the world, even into
his particular necessity would run the whole contents of all these common
prayers; which are not therefore less adapted unto every one, because they are
the prayers of all the world besides, but rather we are sure our selves had
need to say them, when every man alive does find himself concerned therein.
Just thus it is with holy Churches preaching; admit a million of people be
assembled to one sole Preacher in the pulpit, is his Sermon ever the worse
because it dynts the soul of every hearer there? and moves him so, as if the
Preacher knew the heart of every auditour he had? (whom yet he never saw in all
his life, nor knows him now he sees him) would any man condemn this Preacher?
No, admire him rather, and in him adore Almighty God, who with one speech could
touch the quick of every soul alive. And so it is with holy Churches prayers;
the commoner they are, the more peculiarly they touch each pious persons soul;
if rightly understood, they seem to reach as far as all the preachers of the
Church can scrue into a soul, and farther too; for who so says them with a
zeal suitable to the Spirit whence they flow, he like a river runs into the sea
whence all the waters have their spring, and is not lost although he be^ not
found, but rather swells to be a sea of spirit, while he falls out of his
private devotions into the Ocean of the Churches prayer, and says to himself,
Matt. 23.23. These things ought to be done, and those things ought not to be
omitted. O Christians! what a sovereign cure have we to day against the worst
contagion in the Church, the spirit of division, of faction? Say but this
prayer devoutly, read but the lessons of the other services of holy Church to
day agreeable to this prayer, and I shall hope to hear no more of faction in
the Church, of division in the house of the Holy Ghost, of dissension among
Roman Catholics, much less amongst the Priests of holy Church, for in them it
were a contagion worse then diabolical; who as they are all Ministers of one
only God, so should they all agree in one, to guide the souls they are to
govern in the spirit of peace, and unity, of love, and charity, which they
shall never teach better then when they give example of it to their flocks.

The Epistle. Ephesians. 4.1.
1 I therefore, prisoner in our Lord, beseech you that you walk worthy of the
vocation in which you are called;

2 With all humility, and mildness, with patience supporting one another in
charity*

3 Careful to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

4 One body, and one spirit, as you are called in one hope of your vocation:

5 One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism:

6 One God, and Father of all, which is over all, and by all, and in us all;

7 Who is blessed world without end, Amen.


The Explication.
1. THe cause why he beseeches them is, in regard they had the happiness to
be made of Gentiles, Christians, and so equal with the Jews that were the
chosen people of God. He calls himself prisoner in our Lord, because he was in
prison for our Lord, for teaching the faith of Christ Walking here is
understood living. Note, the word Vocation is of special regard, and so
imports a special obligation they had to comply with their said vocation,
which was indeed their conversion from Gentilisme to Christianity.

2. This verse specifies the eminent marks of Christians from Gentiles; the one
proud, harsh, furious, quarrelsome; the other therefore, humble, mild,
patient, loving; that so it might appear a religious change, to come from one
contrary to another. Supporting each other imports bearing with each others
infirmities: In Charity, is to say by, or with Charity repending good for
evil.

3. By unity of spirit is here meant unanimitie, that is, though in bodies
divided yet in mind they should be one, and make it their study so to be, thus
to comply with the care thereof commended, if not commanded also. This verse is
hugely against all schismatic division in the Church, receding from the
common Doctrine to follow the fancies of private spirits. By the word bond is
understood removing private sense in point of religion, for a bond imports a
tie between parties, and so abandons singularity, when it must bind many
together in the peace of unanimitie.

4. This verse is exhortatorie, stirring up to be all as one body, and one
soul; that as you are called to one hope of Heaven by this your vocation to
Christianity, so you go all thither as one man, since the Church is properly
called one civil man, while all the Members of it are regulated by one Law of
Christ, by one holy Spirit. And indeed Saint Paul uses a huge Art telling us
we have all one hope, namely Heaven, thereby to make us tend all one way to the
attaining thereof.

5. One Lord, Christ Jesus; one Faith, that which the Apostles preached; one
Baptism, that which is given in due matter and form, applied with due
intention, water accompanying these words, I baptize thee in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, according as holy Church
intends when this Sacrament is administered.

6. In this verse the Apostle sums up all he said before: As we have but one
God who is our common Father, so we must have but one spirit, lest we
degenerate from being his children, who will own none but those that are one in
him, and one to one another; all others are bastards, and cannot be brothers
because not begotten of him that knows no division, but consists of unity,
and simplicity. No, God is above all men by his Majesty, and Deity; he is
through all things by his power, and efficacy in them, penetrating, and
passing through them all as freely as we do through the Air; in all things by
his essence, and being in us Christians by his grace which makes us be his
children, and by his glory which makes us be his heirs. Others understand by
this triple division the Apostle means that God the Father is above us all by
creation; God the Son by redemption runs through us with the Sea of his
passion; God the Holy Ghost is in us all by his sanctifying grace.

The Application.
1. SAint Paul, being by his imprisonment separated from his Converts the
Ephesians, and desirous in little to send them much counsel how they might walk
worthy of the vocation in which they were called, sums up here those virtues
that are most necessary for new converted souls. Humility, as the foundation
whereupon they must build their monuments of a blessed Eternity, in imitation
of Almighty God, who raised all the fabric of humane salvation upon the
Basis of his own abasement. Mildness, in testimony they were no more children
of wrath and indignation, but of their mild Redeemer, and Savior Jesus
Christ. A charitable Patience (that is to say, for love of God) supporting
(bearing with) one another, as the only means to keep themselves in favor
with Almighty God, whom they hourly much more exasperate then any man can do
them. And Unanimitie, as the badge of perfect Christianity, testifying they
are only true lovers of one another, who are right believers in Jesus Christ.

2. O beloved, it is wonderful to think how deep a root S. Paul lays here of
Christianity: for whereas he speaks in all the following verses of unity of
body, of spirit, of hope, of our Lord, of faith, of Baptism, of God etc. he
means, our unanimitie must not consist of our being all of one mind with one
another, (for so are many that are not true believers) but that we ought to be
all of one mind with God, who by his sacred Son, and by the holy Ghost has
taught us what that one mind is of his divine Majesty which we should be of;
such a mind, as makes us one thing with him, how ever several things in our
selves; that is to say, one mystical body of Christ, animated by one spirit,
believing one and the same faith which his sacred Son delivered unto us; not
making our own faith, suitable to our own fancy, and calling that one spirit,
because many are of that fancy too: no, no beloved, Christian unanimitie is
rooted in the sacred Trinity, where though there be a multiplicitie of
Persons, yet is there a simplicity of Nature, an unity of essence, an
identitie of Deity; not only because the Three distinct Persons are al of one
mind, but because they are one and the same Thing, (or Being rather, since in
God there is no composition between the Thing, and the Being thereof, as is in
creatures, and so he is more properly called a simple Being, then a simple
Thing.) And therefore all our simplicity, unity, or indivisibilitie must have
root in him, and not in us: so that the unity of our spirit, which makes us
one mystical body of Christ, must be derived from the same divine spirit that
made God and man one person only, though consisting of two natures.

3. To conclude, as the essence of the Deity consists in the unity of the
blessed Trinity, so does the essence of true Christianity consist in the
unanimitie of Christians; yet with this difference, that in this life their
unity is rather a community then an identitie, and their union properly is a
communion, first, with Christ their head, next, with his holy spouse the
Church, and lastly, with the Saints, (as in our Creed we profess) for by the
participation of all their saintities it is that sinners are drawn out of the
mire of their iniquities. And as we read 1. Jo. 4. v. 10. Charity is not in
this, as though you have loved God, but because he has loved you: so we may
say of faith, it is not as we square or choose it, but as Christ has squared
it, since we are not his, for our chosing him, but because he has chosen us:
Jo. 15. v. 16. Now because upon this Epistle Preachers are to insist on the
communion or union, the unanimitie or unity of true Christianity, as the
proper difference thereof, making them Saints only and saved souls, who are
true believers, and true lovers as above; Therefore holy Church to day prays
to be preserved from that which is the poison, bane, and contagion of
Christians, namely division, faction, schism, heresy, infidelity, etc.
stil^^g these very properly a diabolical contagion, because the Devil is the
author of them all.

The Gospel. Matt. 22.34.
34 But the Pharisees hearing that he had put the Sadduces to silence, came
together:

35 And one of them a Doctor of Law asked of him tempting,

36 Master, which is the great Commandment of the Law?

37 Jesus said unto him, thou shall love the Lord thy God from thy whole heart,
and with thy whole soul, and with thy whole mind.

38 This is the greatest Commandment.

39 And the second is like to this; Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

40 On these two Commandments depend the whole Law, and Prophets.

41 And the Pharisees being assembled Jesus asked them,

42 Saying what is your opinion of Christ? whose son is he? They say David's.

43 He says to them, how then does David in spirit call him Lord, saying,

44 The Lord said to my Lord, sit on my right hand, until I put thine enemies
thy fooot-stool to thy foot?

45 If David therefore call him Lord, how is he his son?

46 And no man could answer him a word, neither durst any man from that day ask
him any more.


The Explication.
34. THe Pharisees came with intention to undervalue him, and find him (as they
thought) ignorant in the Scriptures, so to eclipse the glory he had in
silencing the Sadduces, ignorant men in the esteem of the Pharisees.

35. It seems this Doctor came not with any real intention to entrap our
Savior, (as the other did, whereof mention is made by S. Mark c. 12.) but
rather blinded the other Pharisees by seeming to ask a question to their
entrapping sense, while in truth he did ask it to satisfy his own doubt in
point of practical virtue, as the Sadduces had been satisfied by him in the
speculative verity of the resurrection; for here this Doctor did approve our
Saviors answer, and said to him, thou have answered well indeed.

36. The reason they asked this question was, in regard they much doubted
whether the greatest commandment were not that of sacrifice Levit. c. 1.
because God seems chiefly honored thereby. And here the Pharisees absurdly bid
children refuse to help their parents, under pretense of offering to God what
should relieve their needy parents, as if that cloak of Religion were better
then this duty to nature.

37. But Jesus made them see there is no sacrifice so precious in the sight of
God as that of our hearts affections; and so he puts in the first place of
commands that precept of charity which bids us love God above all things, with
all our heart etc. And the reason hereof is, because there is no precept so
extensive as this of love; whence you see it is expressed by giving all our
affections wholly to God. This made S. Bernard bold to say, we must love him
beyond all measure, when he says, the mean of love to God is to love him
without mean or measure.

38. Well is this therefore called the first, and great commandment, because it
is so per excellentiam, by excellency, as extending to a kind of infinity, when
it puts no mean to our love of God, no end at all, but requires it be for ever
that we love him. Hence it is that charity is the Queen of the soul, and life
of all virtues, and is indeed above Religion, above sacrifice, because by
charity (which is the love of the soul to God) sacrifices are commanded to be
made as testimonies of her loyalty to God who does command them.

39. This love of our neighbor is called the second commandment, in order to
perfection, not in rank of law; for there were many laws made before this was
declared. By loving our neighbor as our self is understood that we must
really, truly, and cordially love him, though not so much as our selves. So by
the particle as, is here understood similitude, not identity, or equality of
love.

40. Yes, so they depend on these two as all the boughs, and branches of a tree
depend on the root thereof; for the root of all the Law is love of God, and of
Gods creatures for Gods sake, not otherwise. (hence even self-love is not
lawful but as directed to Gods honor, and glory.) The three Laws of the first
table are expressed by love of God, the seven of the second table by love of
our neighbor.

41. This aggregation, or assembly of them S. Ma^k observes was in the Temple;
be it where it will, this seems to assert the Doctor who was his first
aggressour was either gone, or at least satisfied, and so silenced, for now
they all assault him, as if they were not satisfied with him though the Doctor
were; and hence Jesus seems to ground his question in the following verse;

42. Whereby, in requital of their tempting him by a subtle question in the
Law, which was the chief commandment? he now undertakes to impart unto them a
far more subtle verity, and more necessary instruction, (that so he might
with good repay evil) namely, the truth of his being not only Man, but God,
not only the son of David, as they allowed him to be, but even the Son of
God, the Messiah who was expected to be the Redeemer, and Savior of the whole
world: and this he inferres upon them so, as by force of argument out of David's
mouth, out of the Scripture, he makes them see clearly it must be so; though
they were too proud to confess it. No marvel they could not answer right to
the question; for when S. Peter (Matthew. 16.) did answer the same question
right, our Savior told him flesh, and blood had not revealed it, but the
heavenly Father, who had not so illuminated these Pharisees as he did Peter.

43. Observe, while Christ makes in this verse a further inquiry, it does not
infer he denies himself to be what they said truly that he was, the son of
David; (for so the Scripture told them clearly the Messiah should be) but he
was willing to draw them on to a further knowledge that the Messiah was also
the Son of God, and not only the son of David, and this out of David's own
mouth, who in spirit (by inspiration from heaven) called him Lord, a style
which fathers do not use to give unto their sons: and that this was true he
cites David's words in the next verse, saying,

44. The Lord said to my Lord, (God said to the Messiah, to Jesus Christ) by
the instinct of the Holy Ghost, who did indeed dictate unto David all the whole
book of Psalms which runs much upon the prophetical prediction of our Lord,
and Savior Jesus Christ his coming, and being the true Messiah that was
expected with so much fervor by the languishing world. So by this quotation of
the Scripture where David calls Christ his Lord, they are brought to see
evidently he must needs be more then his son, else they had replied again,
which they neither did nor durst, nor indeed could do, as the last verse of
this present Gospel shows. By sitting at Gods right hand is clearly declared he
is not only David's Lord, but also the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, true
God as well as man, placed above all the quiers of Angels in heaven, and
empowered at the day of judgment to come in Majesty, trampling over all his
enemies, the world, the devil, and the flesh, when he shall judge all flesh,
and all spirit too, man and Angels, and make his enemies truly his footstool
when he tramples first upon them, and lastly kicks them down to the pit of
hell, where the foot of his eternal power holds them everlastingly under him,
in pains, and torments.

45. It was time for Christ to close up the irrefragable force of his argument,
by showing the Pharisees, in this verse, he being the Messiah mentioned by the
Royal Prophet was not only David's, but Gods son also; and whilst he
inferres the greater out of David's mouth, he does not deny the lesser, though
here he seems to ask how David could call his Lord his son, when they
themselves did see he must also be David's, and the whole worlds God, Redeemer,
Judge, and Savior too.

46. And their silence asserted in this verse to his inference, argues their
consent it was, and must be true; hence they were left at least to wonder at,
if not to believe, confess, and love this undeniable truth: for of these S.
Augustine, in his exposition upon the 109. Psalm cited by Christ, says
excellently well, These proud Pharisees chose rather to burst with the pride of
their swollen (and sullen) silence, then to be taught by their humble
acknowledgement, and confession. S. Chrysostom upon the same place says, They
were struck dumb by the dart of this dead wound they had received from Christ,
convincing (though not converting) them. So it often fares with Heretics.

The Application.
1. IT is not without design that, when the Epistle runs wholly upon unity
of spirit in the Church of Christ, the Gospel is so full of example of
disunion, and division amongst the Doctors, and Sages in the synagogue of the
Jews, for such were the Sadduces, the Scribes, and Pharisees: And we may
piously believe the design of holy Church in this, was to bid us beware of
such spirits in our Doctors and Teachers; for there is no greater plague, no
contagion more malignant then duplicity, falsity, and division in those who
should cement us together by the concordancy of their doctrine, and by the
exemplarity of their lives.

2. So when we hear the Sadduces, Scribes, and Pharisees pretending zeal to
Christ, and desirous to know which is the first and greatest commandment, that
of Love, or that of Sacrifice: we may imagine our charity, though she were
cleared out of the mist in her way last Sunday; has now a more malignant
darkness in her eyes, an Eclipse, a shade that hinders her of the suns
influence upon her, that is to say, of the light of grace; as if God were
pleased a while to leave us to our selves, to show us that when he does so we
are darkened with the Eclipse of our judgments, of our understandings, as the
Sadduces, Scribes, and Pharisees were when the force of sense was so strong in
them, they would not believe in the Deity of Christ; because the mysteries of
his doctrine were some of them above reason, though never against it.

3. But a far greater Eclipse it is of grace amongst us when our Pastors,
our Teachers, and Preachers (seeking themselves, and not Jesus Christ) do erect
Altar against Altar, do bandy and contrast with one another out of
self-seeking; and so mislead their flocks, and make them feed upon the sower
and contagious fruits that grow in the eclipse of grace, or that wither rather
then grow, that infect rather then nourish, that poison rather then preserve us
alive, that damn indeed and do not save us, that putrify, instead of
purifying our intentions of honoring (as we ought to do) one only God, when
even under that pretense, by the contagion of factious doctrine, we Idolize to
as many devils as mislead us in the ways of faction and division.

For prevention whereof holy Church fitly prays, as above, that our intentions
may be purified by the unity thereof, by intending Gods honor only in those
services that are pretended done for Gods sake, and not our own interest. On
the eighteenth Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Matthew. 9. v. 7. THe sick, then of the palsy took up his bed in
which he lay, magnifying God; and all the people which beheld it gave praise to
God.

Verse. Let my prayer, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
LEt, O Lord, the operation of thy mercy direct our hearts, because without
thee we cannot please thee.

The Illustration.
IF any man doubt what is meant by the operation of our Lords mercy mentioned
in this prayer, S. Paul in the first verse of this days Epistle will tell him
it is the actual grace of God, which the Apostle always gives thanks for, as
being the cause of the Corinthians conversion, of their being enriched in all
things appertaining to Christian religion, so as to want nothing but the
revelation of Christ in glory, whom already they beheld in grace, as also of
their perseverance without crime till the day of doom in that belief, unto
which by this grace they had been called. This is the sum of the Epistle, and
undoubtedly this is the sense of the prayer begging, that as by the operation
of Christ his mercy the Corinthians became Christians, so we that are by the
same means of the same profession, may by the same help have our hearts
directed, (by the operation of our Saviors mercy toward us) by the increase
of his grace within us: And indeed that increase is also properly the operation
of his mercy too, for the first gift thereof was rather the exhibition then the
operation of his holy grace, and yet to us it seems like an operation of it too
within his own bowels, and so, as we said above, the exhibition of it in our
eyes is as the effect of his mercy upon himself, but the increase thereof is
the operation of it upon us, to whom it is exhibited; so by the exhibition of
this grace we become children of God, and by the increase thereof we grow to be
his champions, to live his Saints, and die his Martyrs, rather then renounce
the Faith of Christ. Thus we see the first clause of this Prayer has exhausted
the whole Epistle of the day: Now that the Gospel should be by the close
thereof exhausted too, would seem strange, if already stranger mysteries had
not appeared in the mysterious prayers of holy Church. And certain it was for
the depth of their spirit that S. Gregory the great collects them all together
into a book entitled of Sacraments, that is to say, of Mysteries, as in the
preface of this book was hinted; not that the style of Churches prayers is
other then plain, and easy, but that the depth of their meaning is prodigious.
We have examples in the simple style of Thomas a Kempis, (author of the
following of Christ,) the plainest, and the deepest book that ever was written
next to holy Writ; the fullest of common places, and yet the most home to every
man's particular that reads it. So it is with the Churches prayers, they are in
words simple, and facil, but in sense such as the deepest understanding may not
be able to sound the bottom of them. For instance, see how the whole story of
the Gospel is wound off by the only close of this days prayer: (if yet the
former clause thereof were not appropriable thereunto) For what imports the
pressing into Jesus presence of the paralytick, and those who from the houses
top did drop him down into the room where Jesus was, when they found not
entrance any other way, but an infinite faith they had of being cured by the
least touch of his sacred person? (and this to satisfy our selves with the
letter of the story, not recurring as we might to the mystery thereof:) What, I
say, means this passage else then a remonstrance of this paralyticks faith in
Jesus Christ? And who does not see the close of this prayer excellently well
allude to faith? since we read that without faith it is impossible to please
God, Heb. 11.6. Do not we Christians then implicitly beg, if not the gift,
(which we have already) at least the increase of faith when we end this prayer
with confessing, We cannot without God please his Divine Majesty? that is to
say, as without the gift of faith we can be no Christians at all; so without
the increase thereof ( through the operation of Christ his mercy in us,) we
cannot become good Christians, such as by works of charity still increase our
faith in Jesus Christ, and by that increase deserve with the paralytick as well
the remission of our sins, as the cure of corporal diseases, since without such
remission we cannot please Almighty God, and without him no such remission can
be had, that is, without his mercy operate first upon him to pardon us, and
then upon us (when pardoned) to offend no more. (not that this operation of
Gods mercy upon himself is any new act; but ever is, ever was, and will be one
and the same act in him, seeming new to us by the new effects it produces in
us.) So every way is it an undoubted truth, that without him we can no ways
please him: And thus do we still adjust the prayers of holy Church unto the
other service of the day.

The Epistle. 1 Cor. 1. v. 4.
4 I give thanks to my God always for you, for the grace of God that is given
you in Christ Jesus;

5 That in all things you may be rich in him in all utterance, and in all
knowledge:

6 As the testimony of Christ is confirmed in you.

7 So that nothing is wanting to you in any grace, expecting the revelation of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

8 Who also will confirm you unto the end without crime, in the day of the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.


The Explication.
4. IN these words, S. Paul gives thanks to God incessant for the grace of
Christ which was given to the Corinthians, who thereby were made Christians. An
excellent lesson, and ought to be frequently practiced by us, to acknowledge
that our perseverance is a continuation of our vocation to Christianity.

5. In all things appertaining to your religion. Rich in him, (rich by him)
that does enrich you every hour by preserving you in the same vocation he has
called you unto. In all utterance, (in all your words) whereby is preached this
faith. In all knowledge, (in all true spiritual understanding the doctrine of
Christ) as who should say, I thank God that has by mine, and by Apollo's
preaching afforded you all understanding, and true sense of the doctrine of
Christ, the Gospel we have delivered unto you.

6. The particle as, here imports as much as if he had said, by these two
means, namely of our preaching, and your (thereby) tightly understanding the
true sense of Christ's doctrine you are confirmed in Christ, (in your belief of
his veracity) and so he becomes confirmed in you by these infallible
testimonies you have of him, our preaching, and your right believing.

7. See here how absolutely right masters the Apostles were, how absolutely
true scholars, or disciples the Corinthians were of Christ, to whom nothing is
wanting in any grace that can be requisite to their confirmation who are true
children of Christ, who have such masters, and who are such believers as the
Corinthians were. So that what remained was only to see all they had heard,
and believed of Christ to be verified, by his revealing the certainty thereof
at his second coming in the day of Judgment, when this perfect, and fertile
grace shall bring forth in them the fruits of glory in the Kingdom of heaven.

8. This verse alludes to the present grace of Christ which the Apostle says
should confirm them now in their belief, (meaning the Church, not every
particular member thereof) and render them both here till then, and at the day
of Judgment inculpable for their having thus believed, being thus called by
God, and thus instructed by the Apostles.

The Application.
1. WE heard last Sunday how this Apostle summed up to his Ephesian Converts
those particular virtues that were proper for new converted souls; now to day
he speaks to the Corinthians much in the same style, they being newly (by his
means) then made good Christians: only here the Apostle insists much upon the
effects of that grace in them which wrought their conversion, and those effects
how excellent they are the Explication of the Text above has told us.

2. It remains therefore that all Catholic Christians, while they read this
Text which minds them of their like conversion amidst a thousand millions of
men who want that happiness, set their charity on work immediately, to produce
the like effects in their souls, by the operation of the grace they have
received, to be, and to persevere in that saving Faith, which works it self by
charity out of grace into glory at that latter day, when every one shall
receive according to their works.

3. As therefore the gift of Faith wrought upon our understandings, and
directed them to an assent to mysteries above the reach of reason; so charity
is to direct our wills to attempt things above nature, such as are all good
works done for a supernatural end: Now because all such works are the effects
of grace, and not of nature, and because grace is given to us by the operation
of God his mercy toward us, who mercifully operates that in us, which we our
selves may cooperate unto, but cannot operate without his helping hand, without
the operation of his mercy upon us (even toward our cooperation) which is
indeed his holy grace working in us;

Therefore holy Church to day fitly prays as above.

The Gospel. Mat. 9. v. 1. etc.
1 And entering into a boat, he passed over the water, and came into his own
city.

2 And behold they brought unto him one sick of the palsy lying in bed; and
Jesus seeing their faith said to the sick of the palsy, have a good heart son,
thy sins are forgiven thee.

3 And behold certain of the Scribes said within themselves he blasphemeth.

4 And Jesus seeing their thoughts said, wherefore think you evil in your
hearts?

5 Whether is easier to say, thy sins are forgiven thee, or to say, arise, and
walk?

6 But that you may know that the Son of Man has power in earth to forgive
sins: (then said he to the sick of the palsy) Arise, take up thy bed, and go
into thy house.

7 And he arose, and went into his house.

8 And the multitudes seeing it, were afraid, and glorified God that gave such
power to men.


The Explication.
1. MUch dispute there is about this City which it was, since the Text calls
it his own; but the most probable sense is that it was Capharnaam, which he was
most pleased to grace with his miracles, and preaching; for Bethleem he had
honored with his birth, Nazareth with his youthly education, Egypt with his
slight thither, Jerusalem with his passion, and so it rests Capharnaam must be
that city which he now calls his own by his habitation, preaching, and cuting
all diseases frequently therein.

2. They bring him a paralytick in his bed; the reason was that men sick of
this disease lose the use of their joints, can neither go, stand, nor sit. Here
we may learn not only to labor our own, but our neighbors welfare; for this
paralytick was brought doubtless by those who, having seen the works of
Christ, and his wonders, were zealous to bring this sick man on their shoulders
to the fountain of health. S. Mark says c. 2. v. 3. there were four did
bring this man to Christ. And by the following words in this verse is evinced
what we have already said of these men's zeals, for they carried the man up to
the top of a house, not being able to bring him bed and all through the crowd.
So Christ seeing the faith of these men who brought him with this zeal, said to
the paralytick in recompense of his, and their faiths who brought him, (for the
Text runs in the plural number) Son be of good heart, thy sins are
forgiven thee. By these words we see the faith of miracles is, and must be
mixed with a confident hope of obtaining the favor asked, which we believe is
in his power to grant that we do ask it of; and this confident hope is that
which chears up the heart, which Christ bade this paralytick continue. Great is
seen to be the benignity, grace, and favor shown by Christ to this poor
diseased creature, when he calls him child, and to make him capable of that
denomination, forgives him his sins, to show he was not only a corporal but
a spiritual Physician, and had power over souls as well as over bodies: Nor is
it marvel he first heals the soul of sin by remitting it, before he cures
the body of this paralytick, since commonly sin in the soul is the cause of
diseases in the body, so that this was even a due order to cure the disease by
taking away the cause thereof: besides, since all Gods works are perfect, it
is consonant to Christ his dignity, and bounty being God to do the work
completely, to cure the man both body, and soul; and this indeed is commonly
found to be the practice of Christ in most of his cures, since his aim in all
his miracles was the conversion of souls: besides, he came purposely into the
world to take away the sins thereof: But a main reason why here he did remit
sin was to show himself to be God; by exercising that power which then none
ever had done before, (nor since, but by commission from our Lord.)

3. And here we see in this verse the Jews were scandalized at him, for
presuming to claim a power they thought was so much above him, as they held it
blasphemy in our Savior to exercise the same; whence Saint Mark recounting
this story adds c. 2. v. 7. that they said, who can remit sin but God alone?
yet these their thoughts Saint Matthew here does not say they expressed, but
that Christ knew them as well as if they had done so, as is clear by the
following verse.

4. Note, by Christ's seeing their thoughts we are here to understand he sees
them by his own power, not as Prophets who by revelation see, and know hidden
mysteries, but as illuminated by his own (not any extrinsecall) spirit, as he
was God the knower, and searcher of hearts. So by this they did not only see
he was a Prophet, but also that he was God, since it was only foretold of the
great Prophet the Messiah that he should remit sins, which Christ to prove
himself to be did practice upon this paralytick.

5. It is not only easier to say to a lame man walk, then to remit sin, but
it is rasier to create the whole world then to forgive sin; and this because
sin is a nothing more removed from God then any other nothing can be: So to
draw being out of any other not being, or nothing, requires less power then to
give the being of grace to him that was annihilated in the nothing of sin; as
who should say one were less a child of God by being a sinner, then nothing is
(in respect of being) a creature. For nothing is only negatively, or
privatively opposite to God, but sin is diametrically opposite, as a contrary
inconsistent with him; nay, there are no contraries so opposite as God and
sin are. Lastly, the remission of sin produces an effect supernatural, to
wit, grace, but creation gives only a natural being to a creature. Note here,
Christ does not ask whether is it easier to forgive sin, or to cure the
sick, but to say, thy sins are forgiven, or to say rise and walk; for though
it may seem the first is harder, yet in earnest the last is the hardest,
because the first cannot so easily be disproved as the last; for if one say,
rise and walk, unless it be done it is easily said a man spoke beyond his
power, but it is not so if one say, thy sin is forgiven thee, for none can tell
but it may be true.

6. Note, by the Son of Man in this verse is proved that Christ (as man) had
power to forgive sins, else he had come short in power of his Apostles to
whom as to men he gave faculty to remit sins also, and therefore this
faculty must needs be more proper to himself as man, since no man can give
another what is not in his own power. And this power of superexcellence in
Christ consists in four things: The first, that the merit, and power of his
passion is it which operates in the Sacraments chiefly. The second, that in his
name Sacraments are made holy. The third, that he is the instituter of them.
The fourth, that he by his special prerogative can give the effect of
Sacraments without the Sacraments, remission of sins, or grace. And this
power is proper to Christ alone, for neither Saint Peter, nor any Pope else
ever had, or can have it. That he speaks to the paralytick, not to the
Pharisees argues they were murmuring at him, as if they did not believe him, so
he turns to the sick man, saying, Rise, take up thy bed, and go home: and by
this done, as well as said, it was proved evidently both that he was God, and
man, for the cure was wrought to prove he had power on earth to forgive sins.
That you may know says he, the Son of God can remit sins, I confirm it by
this miracle bidding this sick man rise, take up his bed, and walk; as who
should say, I confirm one truth by another, my being God, by showing you I am
the Messiah, and can heal both souls, and bodies too.

7. 8. By this act of doing as he was bid the sick man gave undoubted proof to
them all, that as well his sins were remitted, as his disease cured; for they
seeing him obey the sudden command who was before not able to stir, fell all
out of admiration into a fear of that power, for which they glorified God, to
wit, chiefly that of forgiving sins; which they had not before seen any proof
of in other Prophets doing it in their own names as Christ now did, though
often they had seen, and heard of corporal cures, and great miracles done by
other Prophets. So this admiration, and the effect thereof, this their fear,
was grounded chiefly in that power they see Christ exercise of remitting sins,
and of proving the same power by another of curing the paralytick also of his
corporal disease; and hence they seeing admired, admiring feared, and fearing
glorified God who had given such power (namely of forgiving sins) unto man;
for that was it Christ undertook to prove, that the son of man had power to
forgive sins, which when first they heard they thought he blasphemed, but now
they rested satisfied it was true, and glorified God because they found it true
by the testimony of this prodigious miracle.

The Application.
1. SEe how suitable this Gospel is to the Epistle. What was the cure done
here, but an operation of mercy in Jesus Christ, giving this sick man first the
gift of faith, next that of charity to work a sorrow in him for his sins, and
lastly the effect of that sorrow, absolution from the guilt of sin, and
restitution of his useless limbs to their natural uses, by the corporal cure
of his palsy, superadded to the spiritual cure of his sinful soul, as was
said partly in the Illustration, partly in the Explication above?

2. So that by this example of Christ his mercy toward the sick man, and to
those that brought him, and to all the rest that were spectatours of the
miracle, we are taught to be still employing our charity in works of mercy both
corporal, and spiritual, not to some one only, but to all, upon all
occasions offered.

3. And we may piously persuade our selves, this doctrine is to day inculcated
the rather, because our charity these two last Sundays past was at a seeming
stand, or loss of her way, by reason of the mists and the eclipse she met with,
in her march: so now she is exhorted to mend her pace, to advance the faster;
yet withal to show her she stands not altogether upon her own legs, nor moves
by her own strength, nor can without God, please God in the least, Therefore
she prays to day that he will mercifully perfect her faith (which is the first
step to his pleasure) by the operation of her charity; and yet lest she ascribe
the least unto her self, she beggs the operation of his mercy in her, may be
the demonstration of her love to him, because without him she cannot please
him, however he seems mercifully not to be pleased without us, cooperating with
him to his ends, which are our own felicities.

On the nineteenth Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Matthew. 22. v. 11. ANd the King went in that he might see those
who were set, and saw there a man not clothed in his wedding garment, and says
to him, friend, how came thou hither not having thy wedding apparel?

Verse. Let my Prayer, O Lord, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
ALmighty, and merciful God, vouchsafe propitiously to exclude all things
which are adverse unto us, that being set at liberty both in mind, and body, we
may with free souls execute those things that appertain unto thee.

The Illustration.
WHo can enough admire the depth of the Holy Ghost that in this prayer, nay
even in one emphaticall word, or two thereof has summed up not only the
Epistle, and Gospel of the day, but the whole story in a manner of our humane
generation? For what else do we find in the Epistle but S. Paul advising the
Ephesians to put on the new man, and cast off the old? what else in the Gospel
but a very good reason given us for doing thus, by the parable of him who was
not only shut out of the wedding room because he had not put on his nuptial
garment, but also was cast into outward darkness etc. And what does this mind
us of less then of old Adams story, cast out of paradise because God found him
there without his wedding garment, without his original justice? Now that the
prayer above does sweetly sum up this, will not perhaps so easily appear,
until we find some transcendentall word or other which unlocks all the
mysterious meaning of the prayer. What if the word exclude go far in doing
this? when we beseech our almighty, and merciful God that he will vouchsafe
propitiously to exclude al things which are adverse unto us? Certainly when all
adversity is excluded from us, God has given us a fair testimony that we are
included in his favor, and have no bar between us, and our eternal
happiness. O! had Adam been so happy to have said this prayer, and to have had
the grant of his petition, (the serpent excluded out of Paradise, which we see
was a huge adversity let in unto him) our danger had not been as now it is to
be shut out of heaven gates for want of our wedding garments, and cast into
outward darkness, into the pit of hell; unless we may by praying as above
obtain to have all things excluded which are adverse unto us, lest if any one
of all adversities enter in upon us, we prove as weak, as frail as Adam did,
and let that one enemy cast us out of all our felicity temporal, and eternal.
For while we let in but any one, he fetters us immediately, he hampers our
affections, and makes us (silly fools) to dote upon our own undoing. Whence we
pray that all adversity may be excluded; and that by this means being set at
liberty both in mind and body, we may with free souls execute those things
which appertain to Almighty God; for free souls import such as are not
fetterred with the shackles of adversity, and sin. If any ask what those
things are which appertain to God: why, nothing more then we are told in the
Epistle, and Gospel, to put off the old man, and put on the new, such as is
according to God created in justice, and holiness of truth, that thereby we
may be capable of the happy appertaining to so great a master, so good a God;
and consequently such, as has excluded lying, anger, theft, and (together with
all his other sinful children) the devil himself, not giving him any the least
place in the soul. And when we have put off the old man, (therefore called old
because he is sinful as old Adam was) then we may hope to have put on the new;
or to speak more properly to the letter of the prayer, (though this be a good
sense thereof) then God will put us on the new: For it is indeed he that must
create us, he that must renew us in the spirit of the mind, he that must make
us just, and give us the holiness of truth; ours is the negative, his the
positive part of sanctity; we must first (by his holy grace) decline evil, and
then he will make us (by virtue of the same grace) do good; we must not lie,
not be angry, not steal, in a word not sin, as this Epistle tells us, for
these things appertain to the devil, and then we may hope to be the new created
Saints whom the Gospel admits with wedding garments in to the wedding feast.
But in regard we find difficulty in our declining evil, or in our not sinning,
therefore the prayer petitions that God will vouchsafe propitiously to exclude
all adversities out of doors; (and by all adversity we mean all sin) for if
he leave it to us we shall certainly let sin in, and by so doing cause Almighty
God to shut us out of heaven gates, and cast us into outward darkness for want
of our wedding garment, the livery of the new man, who according to God is
created in justice, and holiness of truth; who is not only called but elected
too, selected for eternal happiness, by God having excluded all adversity
from him, and made him freely execute those things which appertain to his
Divine Majesty, to be holy here, and glorious in the life to come.

The Epistle. Ephesians. 4. v. 24. etc.
23 And be renewed in the spirit of your mind.

24 And put on the new man which according to God is created in justice, and
holiness of truth.

25 For the which cause laying away lying, speak ye the truth every one with
his neighbor, because we are members one of another.

26 Be angry and sin not, Let not the sun go down upon your anger.

27 Give not place to the devil.

28 He that stole let him now not steal, but rather let him labor in working
with his hands that which is good, that he may have whence to give unto him
that suffers necessity.


The Explication.
23. HE had in the verse before bid them lay aside according to their old
conversation the old man etc. And now he bids them be renewed in the spirit of
their mind; not to be (as formerly) corrupted according to their own desires of
errors, but to have their souls fixed upon truth, and justice, such as from
bastards of the devil made them true children of God, and from wicked, to be
just: for as thus they were changed from old to new by holy baptism, so now he
exhorts them to renew in themselves the same spirit of their minds which they
then were endued withal, and which by the corruption, of humane conversation
had decayed in part. Note the phrase of the Apostle how deep it is; the spirit
of your mind, as who should say, that mind which led them before baptism to
the desires of error, and which since baptism had relapsed a little that old
way, was rather a corporal, or at least but an animal mind, and deserved not
the honor to be styled spiritual, as not being led by any other motive then
sense; but now they are Christians he tells them their mind must be spiritual,
and follow the motives of grace and virtue: So while he bids them be renewed in
the spirit of their mind, he insinuates as if, though their actions (even now)
have life from the old soul, yet they should be performed by a spiritual, and
not by a corporal impulse.

24. By putting on is here understood continue, and keep on: by the new man is
meant the supernatural, not the natural man, or the internal, not the external;
for as the last we cannot loose, so the first we can hardly keep, and therefore
the Apostle exhorts us to live always putting on that man lest at any time he
fall off from us. By saying, this new man is created to God, the Apostle means
to the image, or likeness of God, namely supernatural: for even as Adam the
first of men was not so properly said to be made like to God in respect of the
natural creature he appeared to be, as in regard of his invisible, and
supernatural being, that is in grace, sanctity, and truth; so in us the new
man imports the supernatural, which according to God was created in us when by
holy Baptism we were regenerated: whence we are truly created spiritual men by
grace, as often as from sinners we become Saints, from unjust just, from
vicious holy, from false true children of Almighty God.

25. And that we may be preserved, (which is, continually created) and by new
acts of grace become more and more Saints, in this verse the Apostle bids us
cast away all falsehood, all deceit, all lying, as members of the old man, and
not fit to be about the new one. For since Christians have that happiness to
be members one of another, as far forth as they make up the mystical body of
Christ their Head, therefore the Apostle tells them* they ought to be as exact
in telling truth to one another, as the members of our natural body are exact
each in the true performance of their duties, the hand removing, not laying
danger in the heads way, nor in the way of any other members of the body, the
feet bearing up, and not letting fall the bulk of the walking body, entrusted
to them whilst the man is walking: and this natural fidelity in our natural
members the Apostle exhibits unto us as an example of our veracity, and truth
to one another, who are spiritual members each to other, and consequently bound
to be as faithful to our neighbor, as sincere to him when he relyes upon us,
as our feet to the whole body whose weight relies on them, and who walks in
confidence they will not let the body fall: whence it follows, that a lie to
our neighbor is as great a breach of trust as if we tripped up his heels
whilst he walks confident of our bidding him rely upon our supporting of him,
when yet by lying we deceive his trust.

26. The Apostle does not here command anger, but supposing it just, he bids us
take heed it become not unjust, or proceed not to sin; as who should say, if
you be justly provoked to anger against any evil in others, take heed it
proceed not to sin in your-selves. Just anger is that which Saints have against
sin, not against sinners, which parents have against children offending, which
Princes have against breaches of the Law, when they punish the offenders for
their faults without sin in themselves, such as holy David meant was fit to
have against Idolaters, and persecutours of the just. And indeed there is a
kind of innate necessity in man to anger, namely, that which makes him use
violence for the removing obstacles in his way to any heroical, noble, and just
achievement. This anger the Apostle bids us so use, as we take heed not to
abuse it by letting it rise to the malice of a sin in us. And when the sun is
forbid to fall upon our anger, he exhorts us to forbear continuing in it; not
that he allows a continued act of anger all day, provided we cease to be angry
at night, but that rather it should pass as fast as the sun does over our
heads, that rather if we were angry toward sunsetting, we should be sure to
be quieted ere it were set, that is immediately. Note, the Apostle here by
anger means not the habit, but the act thereof; nor yet the moderate act of it
neither when he bids the sun should not fall upon our anger, for he means an
excess of anger, a fury, or wrath, lest thereby (as bees do when they sting)
we weaken our own virtues by acting revenge upon our neighbor, and so endanger
to sleep in sin, which is understood by the sun setting on our anger, and
thereby hazard the loss of our own soul, that may in sleep depart without
repentance; which cannot probably happen in the day time, and consequently
diurnal anger is not so dangerous as nocturnal.

27. And that this is the Apostles true meaning in the verse above, these
following words testify; For it is to give place or way to the devil, to leave
our selves at his mercy as it were, at his advantage when we sleep in sin, or
when indeed we do waking continue in any sinful act with deliberation; though
it is also true that nothing lays us so much exposed to the devil as anger,
for it is a vice which takes away reason above all others, insomuch as we
usually say men act not like men but like beasts when they are furious; and
though a sudden fury may excuse sometimes from sin, yet a continued one does
ever aggravate it, and thereby gives more and more place to the devil, which
wrath or fury the Apostle here dehorteth from.

28. He that when he was a Gentile did steal, now that he is a Christian let
him not steal, because perfection is now required at his hands: and to this
perfection he must approach by degrees, first casting off his old vices; nay,
rather then steal for want of means to live himself, let him labor about any
good employment, that he may be able to give unto those who are in want, and by
so doing prevent in them the danger of stealing too. So that Christian
perfection stops not at moving every one to do good in himself, but proceeds to
prevent evil in others, and so to prevent it, as even by our handy labors to
take away the cause that may tempt others to ill, rather then for want of our
labor expose them to the danger of evil doing. By laboring that which is good
is understood using honest labor, and that for honest ends, not for lucre, or
unjust sordid gain, the temptation whereof will cease if we make it the end of
our labor to do works of charity to others, such as is relieving them in their
necessity. And if to this end even Churchmen labor, they will not want the
example of it given them by the Apostles who did practice the same as well as
preach it.

The Application.
1. St. Paul not knowing what better counsel to give his Ephesian Converts when
he found some of them relapsing toward the old man, then to bid them be
renewed in the spirit of their minds, and to put on the new man which according
to God was created in Justice and Holiness; seems in this to have left it as
a rule of Christian perfection, that the Ephesians should endeavor to be
continually the Saints which first they were, when God by holy baptism snatched
them out of the bondage of the devil, and made them freeborn Citizens of the
heavenly Jerusalem clad in the richest robes of Saintitie, the purest
Innocence.

2. And surely holy Church can have no other aim by reading us this lesson to
day, then to mind our charity of walking in that saving path of Innocence, by
renewing her baptismal vow, her holy covenant with Almighty God, of loving him
above all things, and her neighbor as her self, of renouncing the world, the
flesh, and the devil, with all their lying, passion, malice, and injustice
forbidden to all Christians in the holy Text above.

3. Now because this is easier said by Preachers then done by the people, and
because it is impossible for men of themselves to do the least good at all;
(the Royal Prophet saying there is not one that does it) therefore holy Church
finding her children by S. Paul exhorted to no less perfection then the
highest of Saintity, and remembering that as when Adam was in Paradise, God to
ease his way to Saintity had shut out all Adversity both of mind and body from
thence, all disturbance and grief of soul, all rebellion of sense against
reason, all disasters of the body, in a word all mortality it self; so the same
God having pleased to bring us in to a Paradise of grace, our prudent Mother
hopes his divine goodness will also shut out all adversity from thence, that
we may not (by disturbance either in mind or body) be hindered from executing
his commands better in this paradise of grace, then Adam did in the paradise of
Earth; yet withal our holy Mother knowing the difficulty of this work to
procure us this tranquillity uses all her best arts, and for this end Prays
to God that it may be (if not ours, at least) his own handiwork, and if not
feisible by his ordinary Power, that yet it may be done by his Omnipotency, or
by that which yet (to us) is greater, by his mercy; and lest that mercy be
mistaken, she conjures him by the high^st of his mercies, by his bitter death
and passion, by that mercy which does not only satisfy the rigor of his
Justice, but renders him Propitious also to us. Say but the Prayer above, and
see if it be not home to all this purpose.

The Gospel. Matt. 22. v. 1.
1 And Jesus answering spoke again in parables to them, saying,

2 The Kingdom of heaven is likened to a man being a King, which made a
marriage to his son;

3 And he sent his servants to call them that were invited to the marriage, and
they would not come.

4 And again he sent other servants, saying, tell them that were invited,
behold I have prepared my dinner, my beeves, and fatlings are killed, and all
things are ready, come you to the marriage.

5 But they neglected, and went their ways, one to his farm, and another to
his merchandise.

6 And the rest laid hands upon his servants, and spitefully entreating them
murdered them.

7 And when the King did hear of it he was wroth, and sending his hosts
destroyed those murderers, and burnt their City.

8 Then he said to his servants, the marriage indeed is ready, but they that
were invited were not worthy.

9 Go ye therefore into the high ways, and whomsoever you shall find call to
the marriage.

10 And his servants going forth into the ways gathered together all that they
found, bad, and good, and the marriage was filled with guests.

11 And the King went in to see the guests, and saw there a man not attired in
a wedding garment;

12 And he said to him, Friend, how came thou in hither not having a wedding
garment? but he was dumb.

13 Then the King said to the wayters, bind his hands, and feet, and cast him
into the utter darkness; there shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth.

14 For many are called, but few elected.


The Explication.
1. BY this way of parables Christ did often instruct, and illuminate the
Jews, who were very intentive to any parabolical sense, and much pleased
therewith.

2. By the Kingdom of heaven is here understood the Church militant, which is
truly a Kingdom purchased by the blood of Christ: and the time when this
marriage was made was when Christ became man, who being the second person of
the blessed Trinity, was espoused to his holy Church. So the King here
mentioned is God the Father, sending down his Son to be married to his said
Spouse the holy Church.

3. The servants meant in this verse were the Patriarks, and Prophets of the
old Law, who could not prevail with the Jews to come unto the wedding feast
that God had by these his servants invited them unto.

4. The servants in this verse were the Apostles, their disciples, and all
missionary Priests of the new Law of Christ. These were bid tell the people
invited, (and with great reason) the wedding feast was ready, for so the word
dinner here imports. By the beeves, and fatlings are understood the Sacrifices,
Sacraments, Sermons, Martyrdomes, and all other spiritual food prepared for
souls in holy Church.

5. By these are understood men preferring the world before God, and so
refusing to be reconciled, for fear of loosing their estates by the penal laws
of man made against the followers of the Law of Christ. The farm, and
merchandise are here set down in lieu of all other worldly occupations
withdrawing souls from the service of God.

6. These are such as did not only refuse themselves to become good, but
proceeded farther in their malice by opposing others in their way of virtue, in
a word by persecuting the people of God, the true Church of Christ. Such were
those who put to death the Apostles, such they who now execute the Priests that
succeed the Apostles in the ministry of Gods holy Word.

7. This verse tells us that God perceiving the wickedness of those who
persecuted his Saints, as the Jews had done his sacred Son, sent in his wrath
Titus, and Vespasian to destroy the Jews, to sack Jerusalem, and therein to
pull down the Temple of Solomon, the miracle in a manner of the world. So that
the Princes Armies were the hosts in this verse mentioned, who after they had
sacked, did burn the City of Jerusalem.

8 This verse alludes to the turning a way Gods face from the Jews, (his chosen
people) and casting his eye upon the Gentiles, which signifies the
transmigration from the Jewish Synagogue, to the Church of Christ, from the old
Law, to the new. And he says truly, dinner was ready indeed, because Christ
was then crucified; and yet after that, his resurrection, ascension, and coming
of the Holy Ghost, the stiff-necked Jews would nor be made believe in him; so
then the Apostles were sent from the unworthy Jews to the Gentiles.

9. Into the high ways, into all the nooks, and turnings of the whole world,
into all Nations, with Commission to make no such distinction as formerly God
made between Jew, and Gentile, but to preach, and teach the Word of God to all
in general, and to every one in particular, of what Nation soever, to every
creature of the whole world, Mark 16. v. 15.

10. This verse alludes to the performance of this Commission, when holy Church
says in honor of the Apostles, Romans 10.18. The sound of their lips went into
every Nation, and even to the worlds end their words were heard, inviting (as
they were commanded) bad, and good; that is, not denying (as Reformists do) but
that true faith may consist with evil manners, that bad men may be yet true
Christians, or (which is all one) that in the Church of Christ there are
sinners as well as Saints, who are not therefore secluded the Church because
they are of evil life, but are still exhorted to mend. By the marriage being
filled with guests, understand here the Church of Christ was full of true
believers of all Nations whatsoever.

11. This verse points at the day of Judgment, which is the last day of the
nuptial feast of Jesus Christ, when God coming to view his guests brought into
the Church out of all Nations, shall espy one wanting his wedding garment,
wanting his robe of innocence, and sanctity of life wrought by charity in his
soul, and rendering his faith meritorious in the sight of God by the good works
of his charity. By this one is literally, and eminently here meant the
reprobated Jew, who at the day of Judgment shall be more confounded then any
other Nation whatsoever: so here is not had regard to faith as distinguished
from charity, since the only obstinate Jew is understood to have no faith at
all, (how ever he come thither to receive his doom with others that are then to
be judged) but his reprobation shall be signal, and remarkable when he shall be
as it were the only man picked out to be thrust into the pit of hell. Though
by one man mentioned here is also signified, that at the day of Judgment there
shall not one be permitted to enter into the Kingdom of heaven who has not on
him the wedding garment of sanctifying charity; hence, each one ought to have a
great care lest he be the one singled out to eternal perdition, since in that
vaste multitude not one can hope to lie hid from the sight of the Judge.

12. By being dumb is here understood not being able to allege any excuse why
he should not be damned. Yet even in this inexcusable delinquency the text by
the word friend out of the King; mouth expresses, it is purely our own faults
we are not saved, for God on his part is our friend, and so calls us when we
obstinately persist in professing enmity to his Divine Majesty.

13. By the Waiters here we may not unfitly understand the devils, who wait
indeed to snatch away as many souls to hell as they can. By the binding his
hands and feet is understood the cessation of all future action, and place is
then only left for passion, for enduring endless torments. The darkness of
hell is therefore called utter darkness, because there is neither light of
reason, nor of grace, nor place left in the damned to be saved by any means.
Though S. Gregory calls it outward darkness, which is more after the Latin
text, because it is a darkness added to the darkness of the heart, and soul
wherein the damned creature lived, which, as contradistinguished to that of
hell, S. Gregory calls inward darkness, where no light of grace did shine
within the soul.

14. This is a fearful conclusion; for whereas the parable speaks but of one
rejected, this verse intimates very few are saved; that is, though many are
called into the lap of the Church, yet but few are placed in the bosom of
Christ, and there rewarded with eternal glory, namely, those only who by good
works, and godly life added to their faith, have (according to S. Peter's
counsel) made certain their vocation and election too, 2 Pet. 1.10. certain
indeed to God, but not so to their knowledge, who at most can have but a
certain hope thereof so long as they live.

The Application.
1. THe Parable of this Gospel seems nothing else, but a deeper inculcation to
us of the doctrine delivered above in this days Epistle, inviting us to an
innocence of life in this Paradise of grace, by inviting us to a saintity of a
far better life in the Paradise of glory.

2. For what are all these excuses pretended here against our going to heaven,
but that which the Epistle forbids, a mere practice of lying both to God and
man? So the Prophet had reason to say, Iniquity gave her self the lie, by
pretending excuses from her bounden duty which ought to be nothing else but the
serving God, and the saving of her soul thereby. What is the laying hands on
Gods servants and murdering those that invite us to heaven, but the Anger, and
giving place to the devil, (both forbidden in the Epistle?) what our stealing
away the grace of our souls, by the hands of sin, (which was a treasure given
us to work out both our own and our neighbors salvation also by) but a plain
practice of the prohibited Theft in the last verse of the Epistle, with making
the theft a sacrilege to boot, by robbing God of his glory and of his Saints,
whilst we concur to their damnation, whom Jesus sayntified by his bitter death
and passion?

3. What then remains but that as these falsities, passions, malices, thefts
are merely the devices of the devil, the multiplicity of his invented
adversities to disturb the quiet of our minds, and bodies by, that they may not
be free to serve God with a prompt obedience to his commands, his mere bolts
indeed to shut us for ever out of our best Paradise of glory; so the Church by
the practice of veracity, patience, goodness, and honesty, bids us work
counter to the devil?

And for this purpose prays to day, that God will by the bolt of his
efficacious grace shut out the devil with all his adversities from our souls
and bodies, that so by a tranquillity of serving God, in the Paradise of grace
in this life, our charity may enter into a security of enjoying him in the
Paradise of glory in the life to come. On the twentieth Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. John 4.52. But the father knew that it was the same hour in the
which Jesus said, thy son lives: and he believed, and his whole house.

Verse. Let my prayer, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
WE beseech thee, O Lord, (thou being pacified) grant unto thy faithful
pardon, and peace; that they may be both clean from all offenses, and serve
thee with secured souls.

The Illustration.
WHat is remarkable in this Prayer is, the filial language of it to the
heavenly Father; of whom we beg first that he will please to be pacified for
the offenses of his children, next that he will not only pardon the said
offenses, but further grant unto us the highest of all favors, his blessed
peace, the same which surpasses all understanding as we have heard formerly:
and the reason why we are not content with pardon, unless we have also the
peace of conscience to boot, (that which is never struck up between God, and
man without a kiss of love) the close of this prayer tells us; because as by
pardon we are cleansed from all offenses, so by peace we are made able to serve
his Divine Majesty with secured souls. And of what are we secured? of his
undoubted reconciliation to us by the kiss of love which sealed a happy peace
between us. Blessed JESU! how fond the holy Ghost is of us! that inspires aged
men to demean themselves in their devotions like little children sitting in the
laps of their loving parents: For such is the language of this prayer, even as
in a word or two we said to God Almighty, Kiss, and be friends; for without a
kiss of love it is impossible to hope for peace of conscience to serve God,
with souls secured that we are in his favor. But that this gloss may appear
to be as congruous to the other service of the day, as to the prayer above, see
how by S. Paul the holy Ghost speaks to us to day, as to little children,
bidding us walk warily, and be wise, redeeming lost time, and wisely now leave
to run after the rattles of our own inventions, and learn to understand what is
the will of God, to forbear the riotous company of sinners, and to converse
with Saints, those that are not glutted with the wine of worldly pleasures, but
filled with the grace of the holy Spirit, which makes them never speak in other
language then in psalms, hymns, or spiritual canticles, sung in their hearts
to our Lord God, or then in some thankesgiving to him in the name of Jesus
Christ, that has made us subject to one another without any other fear then of
our Lord, and Savior, from whom we are confident to obtain pardon of our sins,
testified with a pledge of peace given us by a kiss of love as often as we
shall like dutiful children demand it. And if we take the Gospel in that
mystical sense wherein the Expositours do explicate the parable thereof, we
shall find this gloss we have made to be hugely suitable thereunto. For the
Expositours will have the soul of man to be the Lord, or little King who
demands of her father Christ (the great King of heaven) cure of a sick son, (a
depraved will) and imployes all the senses as so many servants sent to beg this
cure, when the soul renounces the world, the flesh, and the devil in holy
baptism, and is by that Sacrament as by a touch of the virtue of our Savior
cured of her ague, her inordinate desires, and appetites, and this at the
seventh hour, that is to say, by the sevenfold healing Spirit of the holy
Ghost, we shall then see this prayer is penned in a language speaking (though
in other tearm^) the very sense of this Gospel too. For what does the pardon
begged in the prayer allude unto but original sin? remitted by holy baptism,
and actual sin forgiven by the Sacrament of penance; and to the pledge of peace
sealed with the kiss of love, when by the Sacrament of the holy Eucharist we
see our selves not only set as it were like darlings in the lap of Christ, but
even the blessed Trinity delighted to dwell in our hearts cleansed, as above,
from all offense, and serving God with secured souls that then all is well
between us, and our heavenly Father, when in testimony thereof his Divine
Majesty makes our soul here his temporal throne, that we may hope to have his
bosom our eternal tabernacle in the world to come. And thus we see how
particularly this Prayer is grounded on the other service of the day, what ever
common place of piety it seems to be to those that will not study the special
mystery thereof.

The Epistle. Ephesians. 5. v. 15.
15 See therefore brethren how you walk warily not as unwise but as wise.

16 Redeeming the time because the days are evil.

17 Therefore become not unwise, but understanding what is the will of God.

18 And be not drunk with wine wherein is riotousnesse, but be filled with the
Spirit.

19 Speaking to your selves in Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual canticles,
chaunting, and singing in your hearts to our Lord.

20 Giving thanks for all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to God
the Father.

21 Subject one to another in the fear of Christ.


The Explication.
15. THe Apostle here speaks to the Ephesians out of the abundance of his care,
when he bids them see how they walked, as if the least trip in them (now they
had so clear a day, so bright a sunshine to walk in as is that of the Gospel)
were unsufferable, in regard the word of God was like a lanthorn to their
footing, Psalm. 118.105. showing them where they might fix everystep securely;
and walk (converse) warily, as if they were to render an account not only for
every idle action, but for every idle word, Mat. 12.36. since they had the
honor to be instructed by Jesus Christ, the wisdom of the eternal Father, how
to lead their lives here so religiously wary, as that they need not fear to
live eternally happy in the next world. And not to do this, S. Paul here tells
them is folly, and they that do so are not wise, but fools to wast away that
precious time in idleness, which was given them to work out their salvation in
with fear and trembling, lest by loosing any part of the time allotted them for
this end, they might by sudden death be prevented in that very loss of time
they made, and so with the foolish virgins be shut out of heaven as not ready,
nor fit to enter in when the Bridegroom comes by, with whom (or never) they
must be admitted in.

16. And that the Apostle in the verse above intimated their regard to a good
use of time in their conversations, this verse restifies, bidding them not
only have a care to spend the time present, and to come religiously, but even
to redeem the time past which they had misspent; or else it needed not to be
redeemed, but that he did account it quite lost unto them who had not spent it
well. Now the best way to redeem past time ill spent, is to be sure that every
instant of time be not only well employed, but that in it (over and above)
some good deed be superadded more then rigorously we are bound unto, with
intention to redeem time past thereby; and this may be done by prayers,
mortification, alms, contrition, and tears, laid down upon the account of
misspent time before: so that as we secure every instant of present time by
doing good all the while it flows away from us, we shall likewise redeem our
lost time past, if we produce an act of sorrow for it, and let our repentance
for not having done well heretofore accompany our well doing for the present.
Note, the days are not said to be evil, that there is any malice, or iniquity
intrinsecal to time; (which is no other thing then the suns motion, and this we
may call the measure of al other movings) but that the malice of an evil
action, which takes up time whilst it is in doing, is of so malignant a nature
in the sight of God, that it renders the doer of it (and the time wherein it is
done) ungrateful to his divine Majesty; and consequently, as that man is evil
who does ill, so that time is accounted evil also which is spent in evil doing:
and since there is no man that does good, (of himself) no not one Ps. 13.3.
therefore the Apostle reflecting on what we do of our selves, says absolutely,
the days are evil: (are rendered such by our evil deeds) And that they may be
good he exhorts us in the following verse

17. That we become not unwise, in wasting time by following our own
imaginations, but wise, in studying to understand what is the will of God;
namely, to spend our time in acts of virtue, not in idleness, or sinful
courses.

18. And for instance that this was his true meaning, the Apostle gives us
warning above all others of that idleness, and wicked course of life which
drunkards spend their time in, who seem to drink off their own damnation by
every cup of drink they take in any notable excess; or as if they did begin a
health to the devil, and he (to pledge them) swallowed the drinkers of his
health up into the pit of hell. This seem to be affirmed by the instance of the
effect that follows drunkenness, or rather by the description of it what it is,
when S. Paul says it includes riotousnesse in it self, it exposes men to all
sort of sin; and we know whither the great master of Ryots, Dives went,
immediately to hell, so do all his followers that die guilty of that
soul-swallowing-sin of drunkenness; for few there are who once give way to
this absorbing vice that ever leave it off, because it brings them to
wantonness, quarrels, and what not besides? so consequently great is the
danger of it; and therefore the Apostle names it here, as the greatest, or one
notorious mis-spending of time principally to be avoided by Christians: But if
your thirst be such as you must always be quenching of it, and so endanger
being drunk, lo S. Paul gives you a safe, and lawful cup whereof he allows
you to drink your fill, the cup of spirit; not of material liquours, but such
as the Apostles drank when their hearers thought them drunk, Act. 2.13, 14.
though they were not so, save only that by the plenitude of the holy Ghost, of
the cup of grace, they did seem to be like drunken men.

19. Always talking, both in Church, and house, at home, and abroad of the
Almighty God of heaven, or of heavenly things, as if the wine of grace had set
our tongues a running, so as we could not hold our peaces; and yet to show what
cup it was we were filled with, our talk ought to be spiritual, even singing,
as commonly drunkards do, but differently from them spiritual hymns, and
canticles praising Almighty God for our spiritual inebriation; and this even in
our hearts, as the Apostle advises, which argues our heads are not to be full
of drink, but our hearts full of love, that is our souls full of grace. So
here we see the difference between brutish, and spiritual drunkards; the one is
feeding full, the other fasting; the one prating, the other preaching; the one
howling, the other singing; the one wallowing in the mire of sin, the other
swimming in the sea of grace; and see one more admirable difference, that even
while our tongues are silent, our hearts and souls are singing the praises of
Almighty God when they are drunk in spirit. This the Apostle says in plain
terms while he bids the Ephesians (and in them us Christians) sing in our
hearts; which may be done not only while we hold our peaces, but while we
waking pray mentally, nay, while we sleep, or (which is more) while we are
extatically rapt in a deep contemplation, more benumming our outward senses
then soundest sleep can do: and in such a circumstance was S. Paul himself when
he was rapt to the third heavens, and said of himself, he knew not whether his
soul were in, or out of his body, 2 Cor. 12.2. but well he knew that his heart
was singing praise and glory to his Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, to Almighty
God. And the best evidence of our being thus spiritually drunk is, when we are
always cheerful in our countenances, and speeches, whatsoere befall us in our
persons, sickness or health, peace or persecution, favor or frowns of Princes,
or the like.

20. Giving God the Father always thanks for all in the Name of Jesus Christ,
good or bad that shall betide our persons; that is to say, taking good as
encouragements to deserve better, bad as punishments to terrify us from
continuing to do ill. And while the Apostle bids us live always giving God the
Father thanks in his Sons Name, (who gave him the best) be alludes unto the
double title by which God requires these continual thanks at our hands; first,
as he is God, and Master of all goodness; secondly, as he is our Father,
incessantly imparting part of his inexhaustible goodness unto us.

21. By being here subject to one another is not understood denial of all
superiority, as some would fondly infer, but the speech is indefinite, not
determining how many shall be subject, and how many command, yet absolutely
commanding Subjects to obey their Superiors, Children their Parents in the
fear of our Lord; for fear lest our Lord punish those that break this command,
not by the penance which superiors here impose upon the offenders, but by
eternal, or at least far greater purgatory punishments to be inflicted on them
by our Savior, the Judge of all the Universe, then any this world can afford.
And yet by this fear is not meant a servile one neither, such as servants are
in toward their Masters, but a filial one, such as Children are in toward
their Parents. For then we best fear Christ, when we love him most: so by the
fear of Christ is here understood also the love of him, which makes us subject
our selves to those superiors whom he has placed over us. Note lastly, though
superiors may, and must bear a commanding hand outwardly over their Subjects,
yet they may, and must (to be perfect) be even subject (that is, think
themselves inferior) to their own Subjects in the sight of God; as if God were
better pleased with the Subjects obedience then with the superiors commands,
for this latent subjection is compatible even with open superiority; and in
this sense the Apostles words (requiring all perfection in both parties) may
exhort to an absolute mutual subjection unto one another in the fear of Christ.

The Application.
1. SAint Paul in the three first Verses of this Epistle, exhorts the Ephesians
to a wary and wise walking, because the days are evil. And least they should
not understand what he meant by this, he concludes those are wary and wise
steps which are made according to the will of God. In the fourth Verse he
dehorts from Drunkenness and Riots; but allows Repletion with the spirit. In
the three last Verses he shows evident signs of spiritual repletion; as
singing forth the praises of God, and giving him thanks in the Name of his
sacred Son, who has set us in so sweet a way of government, as that our
subjection to one another is without all fear, but that of offending Jesus
Christ.

2. What can our charity cull out of this? but that she ought to day so warily,
so wisely to walk, as if she were passing some narrow stony Lane, full of
Thorns, so that every step she made must be with hazard of a trip or stumble,
(if not of salling too) or at least of running a thorn into her foot, and
crippling her self: And such she may presume the passage is, when either the
stone of scandal lies in her way, or the briar of vainglory in her own actions
that are good and laudable; for in such occasions she must first by prayer
endeavor to understand the will of God, which never allows of scandalizing
others under the fairest pretext that can be made of doing good. He that says,
Woe be to the world from scandals, knew it was not only the ruin of him that
gave it, but of all that took it. And when we read that to God alone is due all
honor and glory, we are forbid to arrogate either of them to our selves, for
that were to set up a Pew, or seat for the Devil in the Quier of Jesus Christ,
and to sing the Dirge of our own damnation, instead of praising and glorifying
God, for having done that good work in us which he is ready to crown with our
salvation, if we shall religiously ascribe all praise to him, all blame to our
selves. To conclude, then we are rightly subject to man, according to the will
of God, when we dare displease the first, to please the last; saying with the
Apostle, If I should yet seek to please men, I were not the servant of God,
meaning in those things only where man commands against the will of God.

3. But holy Church is not content to point us out our way, to tell us what we
are to do; she further is solicitous to beg of God that he will give us grace
to do as we are taught: and this she begs to day so artificially as if she
hoped to prevent all sin by asking pardon for it ere it were committed, under
pretense that God would never suffer right believers to be other then faithful
lovers too, exact performers of his holy will, so far as in them lay. Yet
because our Beings are forced out of the Nothing that we were before God made
us Be, therefore all our actions (so far as they are ours) tend to the Nothing
that we were: for which cause holy Church gives it for granted all we do must
needs be Nothing, (for so we may well call sin) and therefore without scruple
she begs a pardon for mistreading even in her most wary walking; she begs a
peace before the war be made, to show she makes a war against her will at
least, while she sins of frailty, not of malice; and thence petitions, that
being by the grace of God purged from the guilt of all offense, she may serve
his divine Majesty securely with a contented soul, such as freed from fear of
any thing but sin (and flying that) can like the early Lark rise from the earth
singing the praises of Almighty God.

Say now the Prayer above, and see if it import not full as much as this. The
Gospel. John 4. v. 46. etc.
46 And there was a certain Lord whose Son was sick at Capharnaam.

47 And having heard that Jesus came from Jury into Galilee, he went to him,
and desired him that he would come down, and heal his Son, for he began to die.

48 Jesus therefore said to him, unless you see signs, and wonders, you
believe not.

49 The Lord says to him, Lord come down before that my Son die.

50 Jesus said to him, go, thy Son lives: the man believed the word that Jesus
said to him, and went.

51 And as he was going down, his servants met him, and they brought word,
saying, that his Son lived.

52 He asked therefore of them the hour wherein he was amended; and they said
to him, that yesterday at the seventh hour the Fever left him.

53 The father therefore knew that it was in the same hour wherein Jesus said
to him, thy Son lives; and himself believed, and his whole house.


The Explication.
46. SAint Irenaeus will have the Centurion, of whom Saint Matthew speaks in
his eighth Chapter, to be this Lord whom here Saint John mentions; but it is
more probable to be another, because that Centurion did believe by the motive
of this precedent cure, and seeing Christ ready to go to his servant, stopped
him, and said, he needed not give himself the trouble of that labor, but it
would suffice if he did command the cure by a word of his mouth, Matthew. 8.8.
whereas this Lord presses Christ to go: Again, that Centurion asked the cure
of a Palsy; this Lord, of a Fever: That Christ going, (and almost coming near
him) cured; this he did not go unto, nor stir toward. Hence this must needs be
a different cure from that, and was indeed precedent to it, as we said above.

47. Note this Lord went from Capharnaam to Cana in Galilee fourteen Leagues
off, out of the fame he had heard of Christ his great cures; but not believing
this was done by any other then humane means, he asked him rather as a famous
Doctor, then as otherwise qualified, to come unto his son, and cure him; or if
he did believe he could cure by touching the diseased, yet he did not believe
the touch of his virtue was sufficient, unless he added thereunto the touch of
his person, so he pressed him to go personally to his son.

48. Be the opinion of the Lord what it will concerning Christ his power,
whether as Doctor, or as God that he did his cures, certain it is Christ his
meaning was to bring men by the fame of his works to believe in his Deity, and
therefore he replies to this Lord, as if he must have signs, and wonders done
to work belief into him. Note, that signs, and wonders thus differ: the first
are properly done in, and by nature, gently operating, as curing diseases which
need not any power above nature; the second is commonly miraculous, and is
therefore done by a power exceeding natures force; of this sort is raising the
dead: So by wonders here are understood miracles, and all little enough to make
the Jews believe.

49. It seems by this reply the Lord showed himself to be rather of the Jewish
then of the Samaritan (that is of the Gentiles) race, for you see he believes
in no virtual, but will have an actual touch to cure his son, lest he die for
want of such a touch; and no Nation so hard of belief as the Jewish.

50. O strange clemency in our Savior! he rebukes no more, but by yielding to
humane infirmity confirms this Lord in the belief of his Deity; for the more he
doubted of Christ his power to be able (at a distance) to cure his son, the
more he must admire to see it done at the same distance, and the more he
admires at the thing done, the better he thinks of the power doing it, and the
stronger is his faith in him that gives testimony of such a power. Lo, by this
art our Savior converts this Infidel, by doing at a distance what the other
thought was impossible so to be done: whereupon our Savior says to him, Go,
thy son lives; that is as much as to say, he is cured, and shall live. Now
though this Lord did not sufficiently believe in Christ his distantial
operative virtue, yet he nothing doubted of his presential veracity, but firmly
believed what he said or promised here, would undoubtedly be verified, and made
good there where his son was: Hence the Text says, he believed, and went to
enjoy the hopes of his belief by finding him well; for the words of our Savior
were not only affirmative, or enunciative, but operative too, that is, did
effect the thing they declared to be done, and this effect the Lord did
confidently believe. So by this means Christ wrought two miracles, one in
curing the corporal sickness of the son, the other in curing the spiritual
disease of the father his infidelity: and it may not be wide of the sense to
say the later cure prevailed to obtein the first; for it seems the child proved
well just at the time the father did believe he should find him so when he came
home.

51. 52. These two verses seem to tell us only (for they import little else
besides) this remarkable sign of Gods goodness, to prevent the father in the
satisfaction he expected, by ordaining his servants should meet him, and give
him the certainty thereof, and thereby the reward of his belief soon then he
did expect it, which was not before he had seen his son well at home; but now
he finds it is true ere he gate unto his house, much less unto his son, for it
seems they were come the day before from home (since they told him he was
yesterday recovered) to meet their master with this gladsome tidings of his
sons recovery. Yes indeed, God is so good he rather anticipates, then protracts
his servants rewards when they do well.

53. The reason why the exact hour of the child's recovery was enquired after by
the father, was to satisfy his family, as well as himself, that this was a
miraculous, and not a natural cure; since the child lying at the point of
death, was proved to recover just at the instant wherein our Savior said he
lived, or (which is here all one) that he was well: for it was proper enough to
speak this later by the former words, since the father had told our Savior his
son began to dye, (was actually agonizing, or dying) whereupon Christ told him
he did live, as who should say, there was not in him any danger of death. And
since this danger was prevented by the virtue only of a word out of our
Saviors mouth, spoken at that minute when it was doubted whether he were dead
or alive, (so dangerous a case he was in) those who heard of this prodigious
alteration upon the mere, and sole prolation of a word were immediately
converted, and became as faithful believers in our Saviors Deity as their
Lord, and Master was; so every way is it true that God his works are absolutely
perfect, Deuteronomy. 32. v. 4. since here we see by the force of one only word of
God, the father, son, and all the family became of Jews, good Christians, and
doubtless so continued, and so dyed, having the same their converter who was
their Savior, and who questionless converted them to save them all. To
conclude, if we will understand this story mystically, we may conceive this
Lord to be the soul of man, called little King, as being allied to the King of
heaven; his sick son to be his depraved will; his servants his corporeal
senses; his ague his inordinate appetites, or desires. This soul sick, as
above, is cured by Christ in holy baptism, and made of a petty King, of an
heir to the world, a great King indeed, an heir to the Kingdom of heaven; her
cure is said to be perfected at the seventh hour, because the number seven is a
type of the Sabbath, or day of rest, or of the sevenfold healing Spirit of
God, the Holy Ghost conveyed into our souls by the seven Sacraments, while in
them his holy grace is bestowed on us, or of the number seven divided into
three, and four, betokening the mystery of the sacred Trinity dispersed into,
and reigning over all the four corners of the world, East, West, North, and
South.

The Application.
1. SInce the story of this Gospel is all parabolical, and concludes that in
recompense of this Lords faith his sick son was cured, and his whole family
with himself was converted to the faith of Christ; we, that have already the
happiness to be of this faith, are taught yet by this parable how to perfect
it upon all occasions, by producing frequent and deeper acts thereof then as
yet we have done. For here in this Lord we see three degrees of Faith; the
first, that faint one, when he besought our Savior to come to his house and
cure his son; the second, that stronger one, when after Christ had bid him go
for that his son was well, then he believed the touch of his power was equal to
that of his person; and the third, that strongest of all, which made him go
home, and perfect the faith he brought thither, by his daily works of charity,
which he and all his family religiously fell upon, and continued to their dying
days.

2. Since therefore we are bid in the Epistle walk warily, this Gospel does
fitly secure our footing by the firmness of our faith required to our wary
walking; for indeed charity can no longer stand fast then she is supported by
the root of firmest faith: and we have diverse places in holy Writ that
inculcate this doctrine to us, as when we are told Romans 10. The heart believes
to justification but the mouth to salvation, so that the profession of our
faith is requisite to show the perfection of it: Again, Matthew. 14. v. 31. our
Savior himself rebuked those of little faith as unpleasing to him. So the
Church, to prevent these defects in us, seems to day to exact a testimony of
all our other virtues by the perfection of our faith, as if the root of all
defects in Christianity were the want of solidity in faith.

3. And we may piously persuade our selves, that upon the sole account of our
perfection in this one virtue, the Church builds her confidence to ask (this
once at least) pardon for all her sins whatsoever; the rather because she sees
that many evil livers have gone away renowned hence with the Crown of
Martyrdom, in recompense of their firm and lively faith, which ever involves
an act of charity.

Whereupon our holy Mother prays to day, as above, that her perfect believers
may have pardon of their sin, and with a security of mind may serve God quietly
in works of charity.

On the one and twentieth Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon, Matthew. 18. v. 32. WIcked servant! did not I forgive thee all thy
debt because thou did ask me? ought not thou also to have compassion on
thy fellow servant, as I had compassion on thee?

Verse. Let my prayer, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense* etc.


The Prayer.
PReserve we beseech thee, O Lord, thy family with continual piety, that (thou
protecting) it may be free from all adversity, and in good works rest devoted
to thy holy name.

The Illustration.
IT imports not whether we understand by piety in this prayer Almighty God his
pity toward us, or our devotion toward him, for either way the sense is
good: since if God be always taking pity of us, certainly he will vouchsafe us
such means as may afford us the fruits of his pity, that is, our relief, or
ease; and if we employ our selves in a continual piety toward him, we may rest
assured, in lieu of that continued devotion, to obtain his help in all our
distresses, and to find that, he protecting us, we shall be both free from all
adversity, and rest in good works devoted to his name with that continual piety
which here we do petition. But it will be requisite, for our adjusting this
Prayer to the other service of the day, to know what protection it is which
will be so efficacious as to free us from all adversity, and to devote us still
unto good works done in the name of God; nor can those be truly good works
which are done in any other name: And S. Paul in this Epistle informs us that
this protection is the grace of God, which does strengthen us in our Lord, and
in the might of his power, that being an armor able to defend us against all
the deceits of the devil; in brief, it is that grace which girts our loins
with truth, and clothes us with the breast plate of justice, which brings along
with it the shield of faith, the helmet of hope, the sword of the Spirit, or
the Word of God wherewith we vanquish all the enemies we have, Princes,
Potentates, Rectours, or what other so ere they be that hell it self can issue
out against us. And if we call this grace the continual piety of Almighty God
toward us we shall not speak amiss, for it is that piety indeed which is our
protection from all adversity, and which abundantly serves us to all purposes
in this Epistle specified. As for the Gospel it being parabolical, no mervail
the close of this prayer exhausts it in a mysterious language, namely that of
our being devoted to the name of God in good works: For in very truth the whole
parable is epitomized, or summed up in this, that as we hope God should be good
to us, so we must be good to our neighbors; as we hope God should have pity on
us, and out of that pity furnish us with the protection of his holy grace, so
we must have pity of one another, and do to every body as we desire God should
do to us. Now since all that comes from God to his creatures is his goodness
poured out upon them, and so justly called his good deeds to us, therefore we
most properly close this prayer with an acknowledgment that the grace of God is
that which devotes us to his holy name, and which for honor to his Divine
Majesty makes us do good to our neighbors, employ our selves, and our
abilities in good works done to them. And certainly while we are loving one to
another, we are devoted to Almighty God, in regard it is, and ought to be for
Christ his sake, and for devotion to him, and to his name that we do good to
Christians: and we have sufficient motive in the close of this Gospel for our
doing good works, since we see the penalty of omitting them in him that was
cast into eternal misery for want of doing one act of mercy to his neighbor.
And thus still we see the asserted connection between all the parts of holy
Churches services made good in each particular thereof, by a constant relation
from one unto the other.

The Epistle. Ephesians. 6.10.
10 Henceforth, Brethren, be ye strengthened in our Lord, and in the might of
his power.

11 Put on the armor of God, that you may stand against the deceits of the
devil.

12 For our wrestling is not against flesh, and blood, but against Princes, and
Potentates, against the Rectours of the world of this darkness, against the
spirituals of wickedness in the celestials.

13 Therefore take the armor of God, that you may resist in the evil day, and
stand in all things perfect.

14 Stand therefore having your loins girded in truth, and clothed with the
breast plate of justice.

15 And having your feet shod to the preparation of the Gospel of peace.

16 In all things taking the shield of faith, wherewith you may extinguish all
the fiery darts of the most wicked one.

17 And take unto you the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit,
which the Word of God.


The Explication.
10. HAving now heard what I have said unto you, and believing (as you do) that
what I say is true, take courage, and be not afraid to put it in execution, for
any difficulties arising to deterr you from it, but be strengthened in our
Lord; be as cowardly, as faint-hearted, as diffident of your selves as you
please, (the more of this the better) so you humbly acknowledge all your force,
and power to practice what I have preached unto you must come from God, (from
Jesus Christ our Lord, his sacred Son) so that if what you do be done in him
rather then in your selves, desiring him to work in you by the virtue of his
grace, by the merits of his passion, (for therein truly does consist the might
of his power since thereby he has wrested all mankind out of the hands of the
devil to whom they were slaves before) if thus I say diffiding in your selves,
and considing in him, and in his assistance you take courage, and do as I have
advised you, fear not but you shall (maugre all opposition) atchieve that
perfection which it behooves Christians to aim at.

11. By the armor of God is here understood his holy grace, which is unto us a
complete armor, indeed from head to foot, not only of Pistol, or Musket, but
even of Cannon proof; for so it is understood when it is said to be against all
the deceits of the devil, his least, his greater, and his greatest of all, even
those that like thunderbolts of most horrid temptations play about our ears
much louder then the voices of Canons do, or can; because against these (be we
never so often, never so long battered, or stormed by them) the grace of God is
proof enough, not only to bear off first all the play of the Devils artillery
against us, but afterward to furnish us with powder, and ball sufficient to
batter down all our enemies strongest holds, to force his trenches, and chacing
him from thence to render us absolutely masters of the field, and conquerours
over all our enemies that either the world, the flesh, the devil, or all Hell
it self can issue out against us; for as Saint Bernard says, The devils
temptations are not so powerful over us, as our prayer is over him, his pride
cannot lay us so low as our humility will prostrate him.

12. This Verse is not so affrighting as it is friendly, informing us whom we
are to fight against, not only flesh and blood, for they are yet weaker then
our own reason, how ever for want of using the imperium, or absolute command of
our souls over our own bodies we are miserably betrayed, and made a prey to our
own mutinous fleshly members; but we have yet stronger enemies to encounter
with, and fit it is we should know them, for which cause the Apostle here
rangeth them into battle array, calling them Princes, Potentates, etc. By
Princes are here understood those devils who were of that rank and order of
Angels before they fell, whom Saint Paul calls Principalities: by Potentates
those whom he calls Powers, which rank they yet reserve in Hell, and so command
the inferior Orders of Devils to act their pleasures, even as we see Rebels to
their lawful Prince content to obey the commands of him they choose for their
Master Rebel, which in Hell is Lucifer the Archangel, and under him some of
all the nine Quires of Angels who fell into the first Rebellion with him. And
namely by the Rectours here specifide, the Apostle seems to allude unto these
Apostatical Fiends who were formerly called by him the Dominations, for these
had a kind of dominion special to them in Heaven over the children of God, and
now such of them as are fallen have the same dominion over the children of the
Devil, for these be they who make up the world of this darkness, not only of
sin, but of all the effects thereof, War, Plague, Famine: And these Rectours
are commonly conceived to be the aerial Devils who cause all storms, etc. in
the air, all temptations, and troubles in men's souls; and hence it is Saint
Paul calls them the Spirituals of wickedness in the celestials, that is to say,
the aerial devils towering like Hawks in the air over the prey of our souls. By
the Spirituals of wickedness is meant the wickedness of these spirits who have
no limit of their malice, tormenting not only our bodies but our souls; which
last is expressed by the Apostle, saying, they attach us in the celestials, in
those points which concern our souls, being spirits created, and ordained for
heaven, and to eternal glory there, and are perpetually by these aerial devils
seized on by their sharpest talons of temptation whenever they make the least
attempt of an aspiring, or mount to heaven, unless the impulse of grace be
such as renders them more able to rise upon their spiritual wings, then these
aeriall devils are to keep them down, which is ever when to sufficient (never
failing the true children of God) they obtein the addition of effectual grace,
seldom given gratis without our extraordinary cooperation toward obteining of
it.

13. Now that we see that we have no unarmed enemies to encounter, the Apostle
bids us again take up, and stand to our arms, the grace of God, (which alone
suffices, and is proof enough) that we may resist in the evil day, which
imports in the hour of temptations, that being the greatest of evils, for by
this evil it is that we are plunged into all the rest; though our resisting
temptation will not make the day so good wherein we do resist it, but that
there will come a period of that day which will be evil to us again, namely,
the day of judgment, wherein the devil will pretend some guilt of consent
amidst our best resistances, yet in vain, by Gods grace; for if we secure our
selves from mortal sin in the evil day of temptation, we shall not need to
fear his malice in the day of publication, when he will lay open all our faults
against us in hope thereby to make it the day of our eternal damnation. By the
close of this verse we are not only counseled to resist temptation, but to
keep the field after the battle won; for thus much imports the counsel of
the Apostle bidding us stand in all things perfect, meaning there to fortify,
and plant our selves in virtue where we were by vice attached.

14. By this verse we are told, truth must be the ground of all our war, and
that we must be sure our cause of fight be just besides, and the justice of it
is our breast plate; for those are the two buckles that must gird our loins,
(which is to say, strengthen our cause;) and being so girt we need never fear
the hottest fury of most fierce assaults, but shall be better accoutered for
our spiritual fight then soldiers are to the wars, who have their scarfes, or
belts about them of silk, gold, or silver to adorn them with, in testimony of
their fidelity, resolution, and affection in, and to their cause.

15. By being shod is here intimated the difference between the Evangelicall
and the Old Law: for in the Old Law all servants as well as slaves went
barefooted; and to foretell the captivity of the Egyptians, who were by the
Assyrians led barefoot in show of their slavery, Isaias went three days
barefooted, Isa. 20.3.4. which he needed not have done but for this
prophetical end; whereas the Apostle intimates here our slavery is past, and
our servitude also, in regard we are of slaves to the devil made now children
of God, and so need go no longer barefooted. But the truest meaning of this
place is, that by being shod we show a promptitude both in hearing, preaching,
and practicing the Word of God; as who should say, this promptitude were the
best preparation to bring in Christianity to all parts of the world. And the
Gospel of Christ is rightly called a Gospel of peace, because it brings tidings
of humane redemption, of fraternall dilection, and of salvation to those that
walk therein.

16. In all things imports here above all things, that we must take up the
shield of true faith, for that is it indeed which not only shows us to be
Christians, but defends us against all enemies of Christ, by breaking the
darts, and arrows of the devil which are shot against us, and are born off by
this buckler of faith, are received confidently, and shattered against it
assuredly; for no temptations enter the body, or the soul that are received
upon this buckler. By the fiery darts of the most wicked one, are understood
the temptations of the flesh which the devil leads us into; and such are those
of burning lust, but easily quenched by believing God's grace is sufficient to
extinguish them in us, as it was in S. Paul 2 Cor. 12. v. 9.

17. By the head-peice, or helmet of salvation the Apostle means the hope of
heaven given us by Christ his passion; for as a helmet secures the head as the
chief part of man, so this hope of heaven settles all our thoughts, rectifies
our intentions, and squares our actions to the right end that makes them
saving, and encourages us (for the hope we have of heaven) to rush in upon any
danger which is between us, and that blessed home, as men whose heads are armed
with a helmet do break into the thickest shower of their enemies darts or
swords. By the sword of the spirit, or spiritual sword is understood the Word
of God, the Gospel, the doctrine of Jesus Christ; whether written, or delivered
by the oraculous mouths of his twelve Apostles, and from thence brought down
unto this very time we live in 2 Thessal. 2.15. Isa. 59.20, 21. and which shall
be handed over from us to all after ages by the teachers and preachers of the
Holy Church. With the edge of this sword Christ slew the devil tempting him in
the desert, as we read Matthew. 4. when he said not in bread alone, but in every
word that falls from the mouth of God man is fed, and kept (spiritually) alive.
And thus we see a Christian soldier completely armed by the Apostle, from head
to foot with spiritual armor, and weapons, not only sufficient for
defensive, but even to secure him in an offensive war against his greatest
adversaries.

The Application.
1. THe 2 first verses of this Epistle give us warning of the worst encounter
charity has had as yet in all her tedious march; hear how they bid her
fortify, arm, and stand the enemy, the devil. But God be thanked there is a
friend at hand, The mighty power of our Lord. The 3d verse tells us it is not
Major General the Flesh, (who rallies still a new how often soever we beat him
out of the field) nor the Leivtenant General the World, but Captain General
himself, the worst of all the Devils hell can arm against us. The spiritual
of wickedness in the celestialls bids the Battle now, the same that never comes
to field without his Rectours, Princes, Potentates, and all the forces he can
muster up. The Explication above has fitted us to the fight, and taught us the
use of our arms.

2. Now Charity defend thy self and us, put up thy Royal standard, that of
Heavenly Grace fixed to the Cross of Christ: See how they charge thee on thy
right wing first, hark how their canons roar against thy Faith, while it is
Deity indeed they fight against, with Infidelity, Atheistry, Paganism,
Turcisme, Heresy, Judaisme, Sects and Schisms as many as there are fancies in
men's fickle brains. See at the same time how they charge thy left wing too, Thy
hope of everasting happiness. This they would fool thee out of by their only
facing thee with Liberty, (thy birthright) with honor, pleasure, profit,
treasure, and command; possessions better (as they say) then thy best of
expectations ought to fright thee from. But all the main charge is against thy
Faith, and this too given by the Captain General, the spiritual of wickedness
in the celestials; he that having lost himself would lose thee too; he that is
ashamed thou should enjoy the happiness he is deprived of, because he could
not love his Maker better then himself. See then the Battail's at an end; if
charity can love, God can crown her with the victory over him that lost the day
for lack of love. Be sure thy faith can never fail if thou be constant in thy
love; since all belief is rooted in charity: so we are taught Ephesians. 3.18.
Whilst we have Christ to dwell in our hearts by faith, rooted and founded in
charity; the same is of the Deity, and all the other mysteries of Faith we do
believe, and all of Hope. So whilst our charity keeps her Body close, her
virtues round about her, (those we call the works of love) her wings are safe,
the day, the field's her own, maugre all the enemies assaults: for say,
beloved, though we should admit (which yet we must not do) that Invisibles are
slender motives to make us relinquish all the present pleasures of the world,
yet of the two Invisibles, those that tie us up to goodness here, are safer
certainly then those that let us loose to all iniquity. So by force of reason
charity has won the day, while she believes, hopes in, and loves the unseen
Deity, by having seen the sayntity of his sacred Son: and in that faith, that
hope, that love, defies the unseen enemy to Deity the Devil, whose seen
iniquities affright us from the ruin he invites us to.

3. To conclude, if holy Church on the fifth Sunday after the Epiphany, upon
the danger of the enemy man assaulting her by night but to sow poisonous seed
upon her wholesome corn, did Body then, and draw her self into her Guards; no
marvel that to day, upon a greater onset, she Bodies too, and puts her self
into her Ranks, and Files, indeed into Battalia: and now begins her prayer, in
the self same words as then, though, being yet to make a further march, she
vari^s in the latter end of her petition. And because she knows the divine
protection will no longer continue to set her free from the worst of
adversities, those spiritual iniquities that would fain cut up Religion by the
roots, and fool us out of doing present good any longer, in hope of we know not
yet what future happiness in our celestials; therefore, to show the constancy
of her charity in doing good, holy Church begs it as a grace to day, that she
may not only persevere in good works, but further, do them exactly, and purely
in honor of Gods holy Name, least what may seem good in man's eye, prove bad
in the sight of his heavenly Majesty.

Say now the prayer above, and see if it be not suitable to this application.

The Gospel. Mat ^8.23. etc.
23 Therefore is the Kingdom of Heaven likened to a man being a King, that
would make an account with his Servants.

24 And when he began to make the account, there was one presented unto him
that owed him ten thousand talents.

25 And not having whence to repay it, his Lord commanded that he should be
sold, and his Wife, and his Children, and all that he had, and it to be repayed.

26 But that Steward falling down before him, said, Have patience toward me,
and I will repay thee all.

27 And the Lord of that Servant moved with pity, dismissed him, and forgave
him the debt.

28 And when that Servant was gone forth, he found one of his fellow servants,
that did ow him a hundred pence, and laying hands upon him, throtled him,
saying, Repay that thou owe.

29 And his fellow servant falling down besought him, saying, Have patience
toward me, and I will repay thee all.

30 And he would not, but went his way, and cast him into Prison till he
repayed the debt.

31 And his fellow servants seeing what was done, were very sorry, and they
came, and told their Lord all that was done.

32 Then his Lord called him, and said unto him; Thou ungraciou^ Servant! I
forgave thee all the debt, because thou besoughtest me, and ought not thou
therefore also to have mercy upon thy fellow servant, even as I had mercy upon
thee?

33 And his Lord being angry delivered him to the Tormentours until he had
repaid all the debt.

34 So also shall my heavenly Father do to you, if you forgive not every one
his Brother from your hearts.


The Explication.
23. THe sense of this verse is, that look what this Parable reports to be done
here between Debtour and Creditour on Earth, the same will be done in Heaven
between God and his Creatures: wherefore not so much the Kingdom of Heaven, as
the course of it is here described in this Parable.

24. By the number of ten thousand talents of money owing from the Servant to
the Master, is here assigned a certain, for an uncertain Debt, or indeed a
finite, for an infinite; namely, a mortal sin against Almighty God, which how
ever finite in the act is infinite in the malice, because committed against an
infinite Goodness. So that by deadly sin a man becomes debtour to God, and
stands bound to repay him all the Gifts, Virtues, and Graces infused into his
Soul by holy Baptism, and squandered away by any one deadly sin: so the debt
is of the treasure of Heaven, the grace of the holy Ghost; spent by a sinner,
which God trusted him with, and which by sin he has wasted.

25. By this command to sell the non-solvent debtour, as also his wife,
children, and all the goods he has, is intimated, that for any one mortal sin
a man, and all that is dear unto him is confiscate to Almighty God, and ought
to be sold; (to be cast into eternal pains) and so though this be nothing
toward repayment of the debt, yet since he had sold grace, Heaven, God and all
for sin, now by right God should sell his sin, body, soul and all to the devil,
though still his goodness (as long as man lives) reserves a place for
repentance, such as in the following verse we find. Note here, the
particularizing to sell wife, and children, adds nothing to the mystery more
then to show man loses himself, and all that is dear unto him by sin.

26. Alas! what can poor man afford toward the repayment of so great a
treasure when it is wasted by him? Hence the text says true, nature cannot make
good a debt of grace: But yet if the creature do humbly prostrate it self at
the feet of the Creator, and acknowledge with sorrow the fault o^ incurring so
great a debt, and beg of God grace to make good what nature cannot, then God
his goodness is so great, tha^ he gives such a sorrowing soul so great a help
of grace as makes him able to pay the debt, to recover what he lost; for so may
the debtour have again as much as he had spent to repay the Creditour, since
God the creditour accounts himself repaid for sin, by his servants recovering
grace which they had lost: for the very truth is, God cannot lose by any
creature, and he esteems so much of a creatures cooperation with his holy
grace, that in such a case he reckons his own gifts to man as a repayment of
man's debt to him.

27. This verse proves the former to be explicated in a right sense, so it
needs no more enlargement.

28. This verse besides the ingratitude it shows in man to God, not forgiving
his brother (Gods image) as himself was forgiven; so again it shows the
narrowness of man's heart, and the largeness of Gods, one forgiving an
infinite debt being but asked so to do, the other not remitting a petty one by
any entreaty whatsoever.

29. Strange that we cannot kneel with humble heart to God but he relents, and
yet to man no bow of knee, or heart prevails. Note here, patience, or
forbearance of the debt was truly, and properly demanded upon promise, and just
hope of payment after a while, because it is not out of man's power to pay man
what is due unto him, though it is impossible we can hope to make even scores
with God, unless he rather remit, then demand the debt. So the patience asked
by the servant of his Lord was rather an artifice to gain time, hoping by
intervention of Friends rather to get the debt remitted, then that there was
any likelihood of this servants payment of it, what fair promises so ever he
made in the instant of his being pressed, because that was a debt from a
creature to God; but this is only a debt between man and man, so here to delay
was not to delude, or elude the debt; and considering it was asked of him for a
little sum, who had before obtained remission of an infinite great one, truly
the debt ought by all means to have been forborne, if not forgiven.

30. Here we see how true it is that the rigor of the law, is highest injury.
This man did but use the rigor of the law, yet he had before a pattern set him
o^ mercy from his master, and therefore that ought to have moved him to show
some favor at least, and to forbear rigor. But by this* we are advertised,
how unchristian a thing it is in us to beg absolution for our own deadly sins
to God by means of confession, and yet to refuse a pardon to those men that do
but slightly offend us.

31. This verse rather tells what infirmity is in man to man on earth, then
that we can think the Saints or Angels run officiously to God, and provoke
him to take notice of our sins, rather then beg him to turn his face away
from them, or to cast them at least behind him, that (if it were possible) he
might not see them. So here the story is rather told to make it flow currantly
as an act between man and man, then as a true expression of the thing figured
in the story.

32. The following verse shows clearly God's ^tr^se of our ingratitude to him,
and our want of brotherly love to one another; so it needs no further
exposition.

33. 34. This wrath is just, and so not to be wondered at. By the tormenters
here are understood the devils: By lying till the debt be paid, is to say,
eternally; because no torment is punishment enough for mortal sin which is
of infinite malice, and which malice continues eternally if man unfortunately
die in deadly sin; so no marvel his pain be eternal, when the duration of
the malice is without end. All the doubt is here, whether a sin once forgiven
by God can be recalled, and man be damned for it as if he never had been
forgiven; so this story imports. But the true sense of this place is, that by
this example was presented so great an ingratitude that it became a mortal
sin, and consequently (deserving damnation) it did as good as bring back all
the formerly remitted debt of sin, since to be damned for one only, or for
many sins imports a desert of equal torments extensive, though not intensive,
that is to say, of as long, though not as cruel, or as bitter pains. But to the
thing intended by this Parable, which is the obligation we have under pain of
damnation to forgive our neighbor if we will hope to have God forgive us, the
story runs right enough, even in the rigor of the words, so it needs the
less glossing.

The Application.
1. AS this Gospel we see is parabolicall, so is it applicable at pleasure to
the best of piety we can cull out of it. Wherefore not to recapitulate what the
Illustration, or Explication above have told us already, we shall do well to
persuade our selves, this own example of Ingratitude in our wicked fellow
servant ought to be a motive to us of practicing the contrary virtue; not only
toward our common master who is ever obliging us, but also toward our fellow
servants who can never disoblige us, if we remember that all the hurt we
receive is from our selves.

2. And again, this Gospel minding us how the evil of Ingratitude was
punished, is therefore fitly placed after an Epistle of so much evil intended
us, (as there we have heard) to let us see that nothing but our good deeds can
preserve us from those evil machinations against us.

3. It is therefore as for a reward of doing good that Holy Church presumes to
beg protection from all adversity in her childrens way; and, for their better
means of doing good deeds sacred to the holy name of God, she has to day
drawn them all up into a Body, least the enemy finding any straggling soldier
of this holy Army, fall upon him at a lonely disadvantage. O Piety! O Prudence
of our holy Mother teaching us still

To pray in consequence to what we Christians should be at, according as she
preaches! See how the Prayer above is suitable to this.

On the two and twentieth Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Matthew. 22. v. 21. REnder unto Caesar these things that are
Caesar's, and to God those things which are Gods.

Verse. Let my Prayer, O Lord, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
O God our refuge, and strength, be present (thou the Author of all piety) to
the godly Prayers of thy Church, and grant that what we ask faithfully we may
obtain effectually.

The Illustration.
I Must confess that whosoever casts his eye upon the Antiphon, (taken out of
this days Gospel,) and Prayer above, will have small encouragement to think
they speak both one sense, and yet we must or make them do so, or in vain we
are come thus far toward the end of our Book, and to fail now were to suffer
shipwreck in our own haven, after the having escaped many a storm abroad at
Sea. First therefore, let us sound the depth of the water in this haven, see
the sense of the Prayer; which in the entrance steers us right, by bidding us
call upon the Author of piety, Almighty God, our refuge and strength; and to
petition he will be present to the godly prayers of holy Church; and to grant
that what we ask faithfully (sincerely, or cordially) we may obtain
effectually, even to the full of our desires. This certainly is the sense of
the Prayer, and further Gloss it needs not, nor God be thanked need we any
more to show it speaks the whole contents both of the Epistle, and Gospel of
the day: For see how the trust in Jesus Christ, which Saint Paul begins his
Epistle with to day unto the Philippians, speaks in other terms that which the
Prayer calls refuge; See how the strength of God is that whereby the good work
of Christianity in us begun is made perfect, even to the replenishing of us
with the fruits of justice by Jesus Christ unto the glory, and praise of God;
as this Epistle concludes the Philippians were so replenished. But that which
yet more peculiarly appropriates this Prayer unto the Epistle is the sincerity
which Saint Paul hopes will be the effect of their Christian charity, and such
an effect as to render them without offense unto the day of Christ. And indeed
it is this sincerity which opens this cabinet of rich connection to day between
all the parts of holy Churches service; since it is not to be hoped we shall
effectually obtain any thing that we do not sincerely (for that is here the
sense of faithfully) petition Almighty God; and consequently, if only the want
of sincerity debar us of our hopes, where that sincerity is not wanting there
we may hope to speed for all we ask; and this hope being given us in the Prayer
above renders this Epistle most conform unto the Prayer. As for the Gospel, if
we take the words, and do not mark to what sense they drive at, we may boldly
say, no Gospel can be more dissonant then this below is to the Prayer above.
But if we see that from the first unto the last of the Gospel, there is nothing
but a juggle in the Pharisees to entrap our Savior in his speeches, and then
surprise him most when they most do flatter him with the style of Master, of
learned, of upright, of unpartial, even unto Princes, and the like, when yet at
the same time we see they aimed at nothing more then to undermine him, and
bring him within the compass of high treason; when (I say) we see this to be
the drift of the Gospel on the Jews part, and that our Savior, seeing the
naughtiness of their thoughts, asks them plainly why they play the hypocrites
with him? then I presume no man that can tell twenty will marvel to see this
days Prayer beg fidelity; and sincerity of heart in us Christians at least;
when we see the Pharisaick Jews are convinced of so gross an infidelity, and
flattery, even when they pretend forsooth a tenderness of conscience; and when
we hear our Savior recommend the same fidelity which we petition for to day,
in commanding them faithfully to render that to Caesar which is Caesar's, and
that to God which is Gods; namely, their pecuniary tribute to Caesar, their
religious sincerity to God, and that especially when they pretend it, (as here
the Pharisees did, though they least intended it.) Let me therefore, beloved,
beg it as a boon, that you all say this Prayer to day, with such sincerity of
heart, as may render it, and you grateful in God Almighties sight, and
hearing; for then shall we pray most consonantly to what the Church does preach
to day, and then shall we be sure such our petitions will be granted
effectually, which are made unto God faithfully; and this assurance we have
both from the Epistle, Gospel, and Prayer of this present Sunday. A great
content I confess, after the fear of so great a loss as we were like to be at
for making good the grand design of our work, which as yet comes fairly home
when we might fear we had been farthest off.

The Epistle. Phil. 1. v. 6. etc.
6 We trust in God our Lord Jesus, that he which has begun in you a good work
will perfect it unto the day of Christ Jesus.

7 As it is reason for me this to think for you all, for that I have you in
heart, and in my bands, and in the defense, and the confirmation of the Gospel,
all you to be partakers of my joy.

8 For God is my witness how I covet you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ.

9 And this I pray, that your charity may more and more abound in knowledge,
and in all understanding.

10 That you may approve the better things, that you may be sincere, and
without offense unto the day of Christ.

11 Replenished with the fruit of justice by Jesus Christ, unto the glory, and
praise of God.


The Explication.
6. THe Apostle here speaks in the plural Number, because he writes this
Epistle as well in his companions name as his own, in Timothies; though
afterward (himself being only in Prison, and not Timothy) he speaks to them
in his own person, but directs his Epistle as from both, to show them, that
absent, or present, they are both of one mind. The work he confides to have
continued is their conversion. By the day of Christ he means the day of
Judgment, which is that of his second coming, the first being his birthday.

7. It is reason indeed for him to conside thus, because as their conversion
was by means of God his special grace, so he presumes the same goodness of God
will be continued which was begun in them; and because he hopes their
cooperation will not be wanting to persevere in the faith of Christ, as it was
not first to accept thereof. Hence his charity makes him hope this of them with
reason, and his faith makes him presume the other of God toward them. Yet not
so that hence the Reformers can infer (as they do) out of this place, that it
is impossible for one who is once called by God, and in grace, ever to lose the
same grace, or vocation. The Apostles words import no such thing; only a
religious hope, or confidence he has they will indeed persevere as they have
begun, to love, serve, and honor Almighty God; as his following words testify
in this Verse, because he professes here that he prays continually for their
perseverance, which argues it is not a thing to be hoped, but by endeavors and
pains on our parts. Nay, Saint Paul so plainly speaks to this sense, that he
seems to say, least their own endeavors toward this perseverance should not
suffice, he has made it even his hearts desire besides, and applies his
personal sufferings to this end, that God moved by his prayer, and persecution
may supply what is wanting in them toward perseverance by their own sole
endeavors. And it is Saint Augustines, and the Churches doctrine indeed, that
justifying grace alone suffices not toward perseverance, without new favors
of more and more grace do enable us to persevere. In the close of this verse
the Apostle alludes to the hope he has of Martyrdom, for the defense of the
faith of Christ against those who oppose it, and the confirmation of it in
those who have embraced it. And this he means by his joy whereof he prays they
may be made partakers.

8. And that he does thus pray he calls God to witness, and does this with such
earnestness, as if he were not himself happy enough to be in the bowels of
Jesus Christ, (which is in his bosom in Heaven,) unless he might find these
Philippians there also; or as if his love to them, and zeal of their salvations
were such, that he desired Jesus Christ should have them equally in his breast,
or bowels of affection with himself. Both these senses this text will bear very
well: as also, that by these words Saint Paul professes he loves them so
tenderly, that he cannot express it otherwise then by saying it is even with
the affection of Jesus Christ himself, following Christ's instruction, Joh.
13.34. Love one another, as I have loved you.

9. Here he prays for the superadded grace which above was said to be
necessary to perseverance, which is for their increase of charity: where that
abounds there is wanting neither knowledge of what is the true doctrine of the
Church of Christ, nor what is the true sense, and meaning thereof; since by
this abundant charity we see the ignorant Apostles were so illuminated, that
they could and did penetrate into the genuine sense of the deepest mysteries of
Christian faith, and religion.

10. This alludes to the sense as above in the former Verse, that by their
increase in love, and charity they might be able to distinguish between the
Apostles Christian, and Simon Magus his Judaical, and others heretical
doctrine, as finding that of Christianity the more powerful, and efficacious
to salvation. It seems by these words, the Apostle thinks the pretended charity
of heretics is not sincere love, and affection to God, and their Neighbor,
but has a mixture of hypocrisy in it, and makes use of the name of Christ to
cover the doctrine of those who indeed are opposite to him, by saying, this or
that is Christ his doctrine which indeed is not so, but proves (upon a strict
examine) the sense and doctrine of some private spirit that values it self
above others, and so to get repute will defend, and spread a false doctrine
under the name of the truth. And truly this S. Paul intimates, while he bids
them be sincere, not mixing adulterine with true doctrine; for if so, they
cannot be without fault, as he desires they may prove to have been at the day
of judgment. Nay, so free he wishes them from any offense there, as they may
be neither guilty of giving, nor taking offense, since in true Christianity no
man can be hurt but by himself, and therefore should not take offense, or be
angry at others upon any occasion whatsoever; angry he means to sin.

11. But instead of being guilty of offense, he prays they may be repleat
(abundantly filled) with the fruits of justice; meaning of all virtues
whatsoever, since every virtue is an act of justice, taking justice in the
large, and favorable sense, as here the Apostle does; All which acts we are to
practice by virtue of our Saviors passion, and consequently as his passion
was, so must our actions be to the honor and glory of God.

The Application.
1. SAint Paul in this Epistle exhorts the Philippians to perseverance in their
faith of Christ; and that they may persevere, makes it his instant prayer, even
when he was ready to lay down his life for confirmation of that Christianity he
had brought them to embrace, and wherein he prays their charity may more and
more abound, and testify their sincerity and innocence of life not only here
but at the day of judgment.

2. What was then the language of S. Paul to the Philippians is now the
Churches unto us that are Christian Catholics. O what a saintity would that
sincerity produce in us, which should carry us on without offense unto the day
of doom! And yet we are by this Epistle here exhorted to be no less sincere in
all the actions of our life, then we shall be in that where every thought (as
well as words and deeds) shall be sincerely opened unto all the world: at least
beloved if we cannot here be fully so sincere as there we must and shall be, we
have another less degree yet of sincerity recommended in this Epistle, which
may suffice to saint us here on earth; that which we did profess at holy
baptism who were never other then Catholics, that which we did profess at
our conversion who were bred otherwise, when we stood resolved to sacrifice our
lives and fortunes to the persecutours rather then not declare our selves to be
converted to the Catholic Religion. Yes, yes beloved, this sincerity at least
is requisite the longest day we live, since there is no less an account to be
made at the later doom of our walking worthy that vocation, then of our being
Catholics. It Is not the name, but the reality, and sincerity of the thing we
must account for then, and consequently now endeavor for. O could this
sincerity attend us at our prayers, wait on our words and works, what a
saintity would it produce in our souls both in the sight of God and man!

3. To conclude, what is great part of the guilt of every sin that lies upon
our conscience but a mere defect of this sincerity in our proceedings? Whence
holy Church to day prays in a language preaching nothing else to us but this
sincerity of soul to God and man, when she bids us not hope for what we ask
without it, and when she minds us of it in the preamble of her petition,
professing God alone to be our Refuge and our strength, and thereby cutteth off
all hope of other helps then what he must afford us: so that if we think on
what we say we needs must be sincere in this petition, and cannot hope for help
from God toward any thought or deed that is not pious and sincere in order to
his honor, in order to our own salvation.

Say then the Prayer, and see how home it is to this sincerity. The Gospel.
Matt. 22. v. 15.
15 Then the Pharisees departing, consulted among themselves to entrap him in
his speeches.

16 And they send to him their disciples, with the Herodians, saying, Master,
we know that thou art a true speaker, and teach the way of God in truth,
neither carest thou for any man, for thou do not respect the persons of men.

17 Tell us therefore what is thy opinion, is it lawful to give tribute to
Caesar?

18 But Jesus knowing their naughtiness, said, What do ye tempt me hypocrites?

19 Show me the tribute coin: and they offered him a penny.

20 And Jesus says to them, Whose is this image, and superscription?

21 They say to him Caesar's: Then he says to them, Render therefore the things
that are Caesar's to Caesar, and the things that are Gods to God.


The Explication.
15. AFter Christ had told them the Parable of the man coming to a wedding
feast without his nuptial garment, Then immediately the Pharisees consulted
amongst themselves how to entrap him in his speeches.

16. For which purpose they send him their instruments chosen for this purpose,
men of their own malicious minds: and to make it worse, they send as witnesses
against him some Herodians, men of the family, or retinue of Herod, a great
friend of Caesar's, or of the Roman Empire; because their hope was to wrest out
something from him that might be offensive to Caesar, and so to accuse him of
treason. Lo their subtle aggresse in calling him Master, whose disciples they
never meant to be, but rather studied to make themselves masters of his life.
By the way of God, they mean here the Law which leads men in the way to Heaven:
and since we look on thee as knowing exactly this Law, and as one that is
sincere, and will not dissemble with us, and art besides so equal to all men as
thou art partial to none, nor wilt flatter any one be he never so great; for by
respect here is understood only impartiality to all, not neglect to any.

17. The reason why they asked his opinion in this was, in hope he might (being
a Jew) have been infected with the heresy of Judas Galilaeus, even his own
countryman, who taught it was not lawful for the Jews (that were the chosen
people of God) to allow any sovereignty, or dominion to Princes of the
Gentiles; as if whom God had not elected to be his favorites, (as he did the
Jews) they could not pay duty, or homage to, be they never so great Princes:
and since namely Tiberius Caesar was a Gentile, hence they did hope Christ
would have denied tribute to be due unto him, and so they would have accused
him both of heresy at home, and treason abroad.

18. Here we see Christ gives a testimony of his Deity, because he knows their
thoughts to be malicious, however their words are fawning, and flattering: and
therefore that he might follow the exact rule of an answerer, he looks upon the
intention of the words of the asker; and he tells them plainly of their
dissimulation when he rebukes them, and their hypocritical temptations; for
though they flatter to destroy him, yet he reprehends to save them. And thus we
see an angry God is more profitable then a propitious man, since the one
cannot, the other may deceive us, or attempt at least so to do, as here these
people did, even when they made the fairest show of friendship to our Savior.

19. But Christ, intending to give them a further check by seeming to go yet on
toward the snares they had laid to entrap him, calls for a piece of that coin
which was called the tribute money, being a piece to the value of six pence.

20. And they giving him one of them, he demands whose picture that was which
he found stamped on the money; not that he who knew their thoughts before could
be ignorant whose coin it was they gave him, but that he was desirous to give
them a convincing answer to their capricious question, by taking the ground of
his answer out of their own mouths, and so to stop their mouths by
confounding them upon their own words.

21. They tell him boldly it was Caesar's; namely Tiberius his coin, the then
Roman Emperor, who had reigned eighteen years, as Saint Luke says, c. 3. v.
1. and was descended of Julius, the first who took the name of Caesar, as all
the Roman Emperors did after. Our Savior hearing them say this, answers in
such sort as if he had wondered they could doubt of what they asked, so be
instantly replies, (if it be Caesar's coin) Give that to Caesar which is
Caesar's, or rather surrender, restore (so reddite imports) to your Sovereign
the tribute of that coin which he gives you to repay it to him; for you cannot
your selves (without breach of the law) make your own coin, but must only use
such as your Sovereign stamps, and gives you as a token it is his, and not your
own, because it bears his picture on it as you see. And whereas you asked me
this question with a seeming regard to God, as if you would not have him
offended by his peoples paying tribute to Gentiles; know, God expects the
tribute of your hearts, and not that of your purses; open therefore your hearts
to God, your purses to your Princes, so shall you comply with your duties to
both. Not that by this answer our Savior did determine whether the Jews were
tyrannically subjected to the Roman Empire, for this was a question of some
intricacy; but that since he found themselves confess the coin they had was
Caesar's, and in using it that they did acknowledge themselves his subjects,
therefore he bid them give Caesar what was Caesar's, not determining the crown
but at least the coin to be his due. Yet if Christ had determined the crown to
be Caesar's too, the one hundred years prescription that the Roman Emperors
could pretend unto, by a tacit consent all that while on the Jews part, might
well have avouched that determination, and probably our Savior did so
conceive, and so determine too by this answer. Besides, the question was not so
much whether they were bound by humane Law, as by divine, for they seemed to
pretend conscience, and to think it might be a sin to God for a Jew to pay duty
to a Gentile; and to this Christ answers it may be lawfully, and safely done in
conscience if a Gentile be their lawful Sovereign.

The Application.
1. AS in this days Epistle sincerity is recommended, so in the Gospel
hypocrisy, the contrary vice unto it, is not only reprehended by our Savior,
but sincerity commended in bidding that be given unto Caesar which is Caesar's,
and that to God which appertains to God.

2. Nay more, as conscience was pretended for the doubt these hypocrites
proposed, so the command resolving must be conscientious, obliging under pain
of sin. O Christians! learn from hence to make a conscience of your actions,
learn to let them be sincere indeed, and not in show alone; so shall you make
your sincerity the testimony of your sayntity: if not, your non-sincerity will
still accuse you of iniquity.

3. Alas! what boots it to believe in God, unless that belief be perfected by
the like sincerity in our profession, as accompanies the confession of our
faith? For as faith without works is dead, so those works that are done without
sincerity are rather works of infidelity, then of true Christian faith. What
will hope in God avail us, when our actions leading to the fruition of our
hope, mis-lead us for lack of sincerity therein? What will that charity
befriend us, which is nothing but an unsincere affection to Almighty God, while
in sincerity of truth, it is but our selves we seek, our selves we love in most
of those professions which we make of serving, and of loving God? For remedy of
which transcending non sincerity in all our actions, holy Church Prays, as
above, to day that what we petition with sincere recourse to God, and with the
piety of our joint praying mother, may be effectually granted, because it is at
least sincerely asked.

On the three and twentieth Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Matthew. 9. v. 22. But Jesus being turned, and seeing her, said,
Have a good heart Daughter, thy faith has made thee safe.

Verse. Let my prayer, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
PArdon, we beseech thee O Lord, the offenses of thy people, that from the
bonds of our sins (which through our frailty we have contracted) by thy
benignity we may be delivered.

The Illustration.
HOw aptly do we pray to day for the pardon of our offenses, and to be
delivered from the bonds of our sins, (by the benignity of our Lord) which
through our own frailty we have contracted? since in this Epistle Saint Paul
weeping complains, that he finds (even among Christians) such grievous sinners
as are enemies to the cross of Christ, such as make their belly their God, and
for so doing have destruction their end, and confusion their glory: and since
he labors to reclaim them, by laying his own life a pattern of sanctity
before their eyes, beseeching them to have (as himself had) their conversation
in heaven, to emulate the gifts of glory, exposed for reward to those that are
good Christians; and encouraging them (the Philippians) that were good to
continue so, naming for example to the rest, certain godly matrons, Euodia, and
Syntiche. But how much more suitable is the Gospel to this prayer? wherein we
see the enormitie of sin set out by the figure of death in Jairus his
daughter, and by the nastinesse of a long continued issue of blood in another
woman: Both which corporal cures the Expositours apply unto a spiritual cure
of all sin whatsoever; when they will have the Jews to be represented by the
dead daughter of Jairus restored to life, and the Gentiles by the woman cured
of her bloody issue; and consequently all the bands of sin untied, by the
benignity of God, which were contracted through the frailty of humane nature,
when Christ our Lord came to show mercy, and give pardon not only to his own
chosen people the Jews, but even to all the Gentiles, to all sinners how
enormous soever. Tell me now, beloved, is it not with reason Saint Gregory
calls the prayers of holy Church Sacraments, Mysteries, when they are set to
the same tune that the mysterious Scripture sings unto the people out of the
Preachers mouths? (for such we may account the Expositours of holy Writ to be)
And what marvel if we find the Antiphon (leading the tune to the prayer) to
point at the latter of these two women, rather then at the former, since we
have heard this was a Gentile, that a Jew? For hence we that are Gentiles are
taught to pray peculiarly for pardon of our own sins, moved thereunto
especially by the benignity of our Lord, who though he first called the Jew,
yet he first converted the Gentile, because (as this Antiphon tells us) the
Gentiles faith was stronger then the Jews, and therefore the obstinate Jew
shall not be converted, till the latter day, when we are to have only one
shepherd, and one fold of sheep, one Christian Church made up both of Jews and
Gentiles: and for that reason we do not distinguish in the prayer between them,
because as it is now only our prayer to God, so hereafter it will be theirs,
as well as ours, without putting the Church to the trouble of a new prayer upon
that occasion of increasing the number of her children. And assuredly that
happy time will come (with the greater increase) if we with fervor say this
prayer in the mean time; first, for the am^ndment of our own lives, and for the
perfecting our selves, (as in this days Epistle Saint Paul exhorts us) and
next, for the conversion of the stiff necked Jews, prefigured to day in the
after reviving of Jairus his daughter from death to life, (though Christ went
first about that wor^) when he had before cured the woman of her twelve years
issue of blood: (first indeed calling the Jew, but last converting him as was
said above.) And for further reason of applying this prayer thus to the other
service of the day, I remit the pious Christian to the Expositours upon the
20.21.22. verses of the following Gospel. Suffice it here is enough to show
that the connection of parts in holy Churches services has not been wanting
hitherto in some measure or other; and out of that little I am able to find, I
doubt not but deeper souls (more habituated to meditation then I am) will
retrive much more.

The Epistle. Philip. 3. v. 17. etc. 4. v. 1. etc.
Chap. 3.17. Be ye followers of me, Brethren; and observe them that walk so as
you have our form.

18 For many walk, whom often I told you of, (and now weeping also I tell you)
the enemies of the Cross of Christ.

19 Whose end is destruction; whose God is the belly; and their glory in their
confusion; which mind worldly things.

20 But our conversation is in heaven: whence also we exspect the Savior our
Lord Jesus Christ.

21 Who will reform the body of our humility, configured to the body of his
glory, according to the operation whereby also he is able to subdue all things
to himself.

Chap. 1. Therefore my dearest brethren, and most desired, my joy, and my
crown, so stand in our Lord, my dearest.

2 Euodia I desire, and Syntiche I beseech to be of one mind in our Lord.

3 Yea and I beseech thee my sincere companion, help those women that have
labored with me in the Gospel, with Clement, and the rest my coadjutours,
whose names are in the book of life.


The Explication.
17. BE not only followers of my words, but of my actions: for so he means by
bidding them walk (live) as they do, who follow the form of his Apostolical
life and actions. Happy instructions for the Priests to do themselves, as they
exhort others to do; and in this show they are truly ministers of the new, not
of the old law! whence Christ bid the people hear, believe, and obey, but not
to do as they did themselves, that Mat. 23.4. laid huge burdens on their
neighbors shoulders, and would not carry the least burden on their own. Happy
sheep, that had now shepherds, who would not only let them out into the
pastures, but defend them from the wolves, by loosing their lives, rather then
expose their sheep to danger! as S. Paul did, who in persecution gave his flock
a pattern of constancy, even to the death, rather then he would not follow to a
tittle his own form, whereby he had taught them born in peace and persecution
how to serve God.

18. This verse again argues the Apostle reports to good life, as well as to
doctrine, when he tells them here many live contrary to the rule he had framed
for them: for though they believe rightly, yet they live ( they walk) awry,
they keep not the direct path of perfection, but follow ways of their own
invention, and are to those so fondly wedded, that rather then leave their own
brainsick imaginations, they will even deny what no reason can doubt of. These
are Schismatics and Sectaries, of whom the Apostle often warned the faithful,
and now (with tears in his eyes) moves the Philippians to beware of them
again; and tells them, they are so far from being Christians, that they are
enemies to Christ, for so he means here by the Cross of Christ. And why his
enemies? Because they mangle his doctrine in pieces, believing what they list
thereof, and rejecting what they please. Of this sort were in those days Simon
Magus, who said Christ himself went off from the Cross, and only left his
picture hanging there; and Cerinthus, who would needs separate Jesus from
Christ, and teach that Jesus did indeed truly die and rise again from the dead,
but that Christ was impassible, and so went off from the Cross leaving Jesus
there to die. Thus while they invent foolish pieties, they become blasphemously
impious; whence it was Saint Paul said, 1 Cor. 2.2. He knew nothing, but Jesus
Christ and him crucified, to show the fondness of those who would separate
Jesus from Christ, and deny Christ to have suffered at all: whence he calls
these the enemies not of Jesus, nor of Christ, but of the Cross of Christ,
that is, such as deny Christ to have been really and truly crucified: For
beating down of which the Church brought up the use of crucifixes erected in
all places. And those also who make such simple imaginations the ground of
Libertinisme, Saint Paul calls enemies to the Cross of Christ; those who teach
austeritie of life and mortification to be needless, under pretense that Jesus
has suffered all punishment due for sin, and so p^ofesse it a kind of
injury and prejudice to our Saviors passion, for any man since that time to
use mortification.

19. But see the Apostles judgment of such Sectaries, while he says their end
is destruction: And that you may know he means the Libertines above mentioned,
he tells you they are such, whose God is their belly, who worship Dagon, not
Jesus Christ, who delight in venery and gluttony. But see the sequel of such
worldlings; their glory (says the Apostle,) is their confusion; it shall fare
with them as with their God Dagon it did, 1 King. 5.4. whose head and hands
fell from him upon the approach of the Ark, (brought by the Philistaeans into
the Temple of their God Dagon, while the people rested themselves,) leaving
this broken-God nothing but the trunk of his body; to show, that the
preservation of his sordid parts were rather a confusion then a glory to them,
whilst the instruments of glory, the head and the hands, (betokening glorious
resolutions, and heroic actions) were destroyed. And indeed what so
contemptible, so useless as a man without hands or head? so while Dagon was
thus preserved, he had reserved only his infamy to be his future glory; and
this in token the Libertines that are his Adorers, can expect no other end then
what is infamous, as this. Let therefore such miscreants fear to come near the
Christian Ark, the Tabernacle of the holy Altar, lest they be in the sight of
God at least regarded but as Dagons ignominious Statue before the Ark.

20. See how far S. Paul is removed from those sordid, those earthly
cogitations, when he tells you his conversation is in heaven, his thoughts are
fixed on Almighty God; and by this means teaches us, that ours should be so
too, the form or rule of Christianity being to meditate heavenly, not earthly
things, and to hope for no good, but what descends from heaven upon us: whence
we may expect to see our Savior Jesus Christ coming to bring us (at the latter
day) the superabundant reward of all our days spent here in a holy
conversation.

21. And see the manner how he will impart this reward, declared in these words
that follow, by reforming the body of our humility; when our abject, vile, and
contemptible bodies shall become beautiful, noble, and glorious in the sight
of God, by having them reformed (transfigured) into another accidental, not
essential form; but remaining shaped as now they are, they shall of
corruptible become incorruptible, of passible impassible, of earthly
celestial, of lumpish agile, of dark lightsome; and thus reformed or
transfigured, they shall be configured (conformed) also to the body of Christ
his glory, as who should say, they shall be like, or conformable to the
glorious body of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. So immensely does he love
man, that in requital of the humane nature which he took of us, we shall take,
as it were, divine nature from him, while our bodies shall by heavenly glory be
like to that of Christ, which has its splendor not as ours from a created,
but as his from an increated glory, by the irradiation of his divinity, through
the cloud of our humanity; there being no personal difference in Christ
between God and man, however his two natures differ as much, as the creature
does from the Creator. And how this ineffable alteration is made, the Apostle
tells us in the close of this verse, namely by that operation of Christ,
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. Happy subjection to that
power which glories to exalt what it is able to subdue, and yet loses not the
glory of subduing death, while it gives eternal life to our dead bodies, and
glory to our corruption!

Cap. 4. v. 1. It is indeed an apt rise he takes to encourage the Philippians
in this fourth chapter to stand firm to his principles, to his rules of good
life, which in the former chapter he says he framed for them, when for their
so doing they shall have the reward as above. No marvel he calls them his
dearest, when he professes they are his joy, his crown, the fruits of his
labors, which God will reward with the joys of heaven, and with a crown of
glory, which shall have in it a precious stone of special beauty, for every
soul he has converted: And by this we see, besides the essential Beatitude,
(which consists in seeing God) those that are the means of others souls
salvation, shall have an accidental glory given them, as a particular reward
due unto them, not only for every soul they have been a means to save, but
also for every good deed wrought by those souls, who have followed the examples
of Gods Saints: but how that accidental glory differs from the essential, is
hard to say; the words we allow, the things we know not. See how he inculcates
here perseverance in good works. Stand, (persist, continue) my dearest, says
the Apostle, as you have begun, and then you make your selves and me happy
indeed, since it is the end that crowns the work; so to begin well little
avails, without you persevere in well-doing unto the end.

2. These were two remarkably famous women among the Philippians for saintity
of life, and for exhorting of people to the same by their good examples; so the
Apostle takes special notice of them, thereby to encourage them to go on, and
others to follow their footsteps: and lest their difference in the ways of
piety and devotion might make a division of minds in them, he exhorts them to
be of one mind, to direct their devotions to one end of Gods glory only, (for
that is to be of one mind in our Lord) not to affect singularity, but solidity
of devotion, they being otherwise free enough from faction or discord of mind,
though some impertinently infer hence, they were at variance.

3. It is left by Expositours uncertain who this dear companion was, though all
concur he was some holy man whom also S. Paul here exhorts: (as he did holy
women before) but sure enough it is not his wife; though some heretics will
have it so, yet without all ground, since the Apostle in another place
professes he was not married, but commends those who remained single; (as
himself was.) Neither does it follow, that women in those days did preach the
Gospel as well as men, though here the Apostle says Euodia and Syntiche did
labor with him in the Gospel, did suffer for their faith, for their belief in
Jesus Christ, and for following the doctrine of the Gospel, and did encourage
all others to do the like, by harboring the Apostles, and by relieving those
Christians that were in want. O that the Ladies of these days would give
Priests occasion (by following the examples of these two Ladies) to record
their holy memories, as the Apostle has done those of these two pious women!
Clement here mentioned, is the same who was the fourth Pope, succeeding Cletus,
who had Linus for his predecessor, that was S. Peter's immediate successor.
The close of this Epistle is liable to misconstruction; some make it the ground
of their error, saying, that those who are once in grace can never fall from
thence, and so have their names written in the book of life: (are predestinate,
and cannot choose but be saved) But this is far from the genuine sense of the
Apostle, who had before so much inculcated perseverance in good works, as in
this Epistle we have heard: his meaning therefore must be, that those who by
Baptism are first adopted children of God, (and by a holy life preserve their
favor in the sight of God) are at last written in the book of glory, as at
first they were in the book of grace; as who should say, he did exhort them
that were first innocents, to be at last Saints, and so deserve to be finally
enrolled Commanders of the heavenly Militia, after they had been once listed
soldiers of the militant Church of Christ.

The Application.
1. THe doctrine of sincerity last Sunday inculcated, is this day prosecuted by
S. Paul to the Philippians; and lest they should misunderstand him, he tells
them plainly, he requires as sincere a Christianity in them as they found to be
in himself, while he makes his own rule of life their pattern and example to
follow him by; and does not fear to fright them from their only nominall
Christianity, by declaring those to be enemies to the Cross of Christ who do
not really and sincerely take up the same and carry it, as well as they pretend
to do it, who have not their conversation in heaven, while they presume to hope
their bodies shall go thither, though their souls be wallowing here in the mire
of flesh and blood. Finally, lest they should be deterred from following S.
Paul's Rule, out of a despair of arriving to his perfection in Christianity;
(which in those days was, and still should be Synonyma with saintity) he
exhorts them at least to follow the examples of the two virtuous Matrones here
set before their eyes, Euodia, and Syntiche, as also those of his sincere
companion, (though not an Apostle) and of the rest of his Coadjutors in the
propagation of the faith of Christ.

2. Yes, yes beloved, it is a holy sincerity that now our charity must bring
along with her to her journeys end, and therefore no marvel it is two days
together inculcated by holy Church; nor can there be a greater sincerity then
that to day before our eyes, that of the Primitive Church, and consequently
that is it we should endeavor now to have indeed, and not to fain; for as we
glory to be Christian Catholics, so we should endeavor to be as sincerely
such as they from whom we are descended.

3. And for as much as holy Church knows rightly well there is no saintity on
earth free from iniquity, no sincerity that is not waited on by some hypocrisy
or other; therefore while she preaches perfection, she prudently prays for
absolution, especially now that she draws to the close of her annual piety,
now that she brings her charity toward her journeys end, lest vanity run
away with part of her holy labors. For that is the safest step to saintity
which tramples on iniquity, and treads it under foot; those stand firmest in
the grace of God, that are always begging new favors by asking pardon for old
offenses; and they show sincerity of their love to God, who desire to cancel
all their obligations to the devil, who are not content with pardon for their
guilt of sin, unless they may be loosened from the bands thereof, from their
affections unto sin. And for as much as charity is taught to march out of the
field of this life with such a sincerity, with such a sincere desire of
saintity, Therefore holy Church brings her toward her journeyes end now
praying for it, as above.

The Gospel. Mat. 9. v. 18. etc.
18 As he was speaking this unto them, behold a certain Governor approached,
and adored him, saying, Lord, my daughter is even now dead; but come, lay thy
hand upon her, and she shall live.

19 And Jesus rising up followed him, and his disciples.

20 And behold a woman which was troubled with an issue of blood twelve years,
came behind him, and touched the hemme of his garment.

21 For she said within her self, If I shall touch only his garment, I shall
be safe.

22 But Jesus turning and seeing her, said have a good heart, daughter, thy
faith has made thee safe. And the woman became whole from that hour.

23 And when Jesus was come into the house of the Governor, and saw minstrels,
and the multitude keeping a stir he said;

24 Depart, for the wench is not dead, but sleeps. And they laughed him to
scorn.

25 And when the multitude was put forth, he entered in and held her hand: and
the maid arose.

26 And this bruit went forth into all that country.


The Explication.
18. THat is, as he was giving a reason why his disciples did not fast so
rigorously as those of John the Baptist did, and as also the Pharisees were
wont to do, which were only voluntary and not legal fasts: Then came in this
Governor, who was a chief officer in the Synagogue called Jairus, which
signifies Illuminatour, or teacher of the people. By Adoration is here
literally meant falling at Christ's feet, which yet he did not do before news
was brought him by his servants, that now his daughter was dead: lo then he
believes firmly, and in testimony thereof prostrates himself, and in the very
manner of his language saying, now my daughter is dead, he blames his not
believing and asking help sooner; but to make amends for his not hoping Christ
could cure his sick daughter, he invites him to go home, and revive her, though
she now were dead: not that he doubted but his power at a distance would
suffice, but that he had heard Christ was accustomed to touch those whom he
healed in Capharnaam; and this was on the sea coast of Galilee, not far from
the same town famous for Christ his miracles.

19. That this is the genuine sense of the verse above is gathered the rather,
from Christ his going immediately to undertake the cure, even after the same
manner, namely by a touch of his sacred hand; for we do not hear any rebuke
given to Jairus for want of Faith, but Christ resting satisfied his belief was
full, resolved to give him full satisfaction to his Faith and hope, by reviving
(as was desired) his dead daughter, taking his disciples as witnesses to this
his gracious condescending, and working this miracle. Yet this notwithstanding,
the Centurions Faith was above this of Jairus, who only asked a word, (saying,
Mat. 8.8. speak the word only) and held himself not worthy the honor of
Christ his entering his house.

20 21. 22. Note, this woman was a Gentile; and it wants not mystery to have
the twelve years of her diseases continuation upon her here made mention of,
in regard it alludes to the twelve years age of Jairus daughter, whom Christ
was going to raise from death to life; and thereby gives us to understand,
Christ by his ordaining to do those two miracles at once, would let us know,
the dead child being a Jew represents the expiration of the Jewish Synagogue by
the plantation of the Church of Christ: For as this diseased Gentile fell sick,
when Jairus his child was born; so the Gentiles fell to their brutish Idolatry,
(figured by the Bloody Flux) when the Jews were born to right belief in
Abraham: and therefore as Christ went to raise this child from death to life,
and by the way first healed the diseased woman; so he came first to the Jews,
yet the Gentiles received and believed in him before the Jews, whose
conversion (or being raised from the death of infidelity to the life of Faith)
is not to be till after all Gentiles are first reduced, and then at last even
the Jews shall generally be converted. This is the mystical sense of the
present story prosecuted in these three verses: only we are to observe by this
woman's Faith, that the Gentiles are of much more easy and entire belief then
the Jews: besides this place gives a great ground for the Catholic doctrine
of revering relics; since here the woman was cured by the only touch of our
Saviors garments hemm: and Eusebius writes, that she, in memory of this favor
showed unto her, made a coat like that of our Saviors, and kept it religiously
in her house, and that diverse who were diseased went away from her perfectly
cured upon the sole touch of this garments hemm also.

23. 24. The music our Savior found here was only such as usually in those
days did accompany all burials. Our Saviors saying the child is not dead, did
not deny but she was so, for all that; only his meaning was, she should live
again, and therefore he accounted her death but a sleep in the sight of God,
because her soul was not summoned to the bar of Judgment, being to return
and lead a longer life in this world: though this saying of Christ might also
import his modesty, in not making difficult his works, to get thereby popular
applause: However they knew, and so did Christ, the child was really dead to
all humane power of recovery, but that they might see death to God, was but as
sleep to nature, since he that could out of nothing make all things, could much
more easily out of a dead body make a living creature; and so (as to God) death
and sleep are much alike, in respect of privation of life; whence it is
frequent for Christ to call death obdormition, or sleeping only: thus he did
in Lazarus his case, after he was four days buried, Joh. 11.44. and thus you
see here he does in this present case of the dead child. But as commonly men
judge of all things by outward appearances, and of other men's powers by
comparing them to their own; so here these mourners laugh at Christ for saying
the dead child was only asleep, as who should say, they held it impossible for
him to revive her; which argues they were sufficiently satisfied she was truly
dead to all this world.

25. 26. Note, his bidding them depart, when he says, she is not dead, argues
that their diffidence in his power did not deserve the honor to be
eyewitnesses of the miracle, how it was done, though afterward they had proof
enough, it was most true; and again, it argues he was not seeking popular
applause, when he went in alone, leaving the company without, taking only the
child's parents and his disciples with him: (S. Mark says Peter, James, and
John) to show, it was not ultroneous fasting that conferred sanctity, (of which
you heard before) but a lively Faith, and an ardent love to God, wherewith his
Apostles were endowed, and so fit to be now witnesses of his, and after workers
of as great miracles themselves, though they did not run the vainglorious
ways of Pharisaical fasting, or the like. Note, the Scripture phrase is here
pathetical, saying, Christ held the child's hand; in such sort probably as
officers take hold of such as they arrest, to carry away with them, and so show
their power over them: for thus our Savior seemed to snatch the body of this
child from death, and to command her soul from entering into hell, but to
animate again the body; thereby to show, he had perfect dominion over life and
death. And it seems the manner of this was extraordinary, when the story of it
ends by saying, it was divulged all the country over, for a famous miracle;
though St. Mark says, Christ gave the girl to her parents, bidding them say
nothing, Mar. 5.43. to show his modesty, and that he sought not the worlds
applause, but only Gods honor and glory: Yet their disobedience in this was
not unseemly.

The Application.
1. THis Gospel of the Jews and Gentiles Infidelity is (as we heard in the
Explication) made a whole Type of all Iniquity whatsoever; and yet is most
peculiarly proper to the Epistle inculcating so sincere a sayntity as above:
because as to that sayntity pardon of iniquity is necessary, and this pardon is
mystically represented in the raising Jairus his daughter from the brink of
death, which is the natural punishment of sin; so to the said sayntity there
is also necessary a detestation of all affection to sin, which detestation is
also represented by the cure upon the woman sick of the Issue of blood, not
unfitly likened to reiterated or accustomary sin, which argues a huge
affection thereunto.

2. What then more proper for Christians at the reading of this holy Text, then
first to procure an act of contrition for all guilt of sin upon their souls,
and next to detest all affection to any sin whatsoever, especially to those
which have been formerly to them accustomary? for those are properly bonds
which we have sealed to the devil, while we hamper our selves with giving them
up as our well advised acts, of our yet most abominable wicked deeds.

3. Say now, beloved, if our holy Mother have not framed a fitting Prayer, when
to this purpose she brings charity to day upon her knees, preparing her self
for the grand account she is next Sunday put in mind to make, By petitioning,
as above, an acquittance of her sinful debts by absolution from the guilt
thereof, and a cancelling of all her bonds to the devil by teating her
affections to sin in pieces, and planting her love from hence upon Almighty God
above.

On the four and twentieth Sunday after Pentecost.
The Antiphon. Matthew. 24.34. AMen I say to you, this Generation shall not
pass, until all be done: Heaven and Earth shall pass, but my word shall not
pass, says our Lord.

Verse. Let my prayer, etc.

Resp. Even as Incense, etc.


The Prayer.
Stir up, we beseech thee, O Lord, the wills of thy Faithful, that they more
diligently preparing the fruit of thy divine work, may receive the greater
remedies of thy mercy.

The Illustration.
WE are this day closing up the Ring of our devotion, which we desire all the
devotes of our sodality to wear, in testimony they are of that number, who
according to holy David's example, Psalm. 118.109. have their souls always in
their hands, that is to say, who make account their every thought, word, or
deed ought to be such, as together with the same they are ready to deliver up
their very souls into the hands of their Creator; and those souls so regulated
as in this sodalitie we are taught, (according to the pattern of the blessed
Virgin Mary, Luke 2.19. who conserved in her heart every word that fell from
the mouth of her sacred Son;) and as we shall then appear to conserve the
same, when out of the abundance of his holy word lodged in our hearts we make
our mouths to speak: and this we do, whilst all our prayers are abstracts of
the Word of God, and all our conversation answerable to those prayers: (as if
we can observe the method of this book, they will be.) And if, beloved, you
but look upon the first contriver of this devotion, Saint Gregory the great,
you will not undervalue it, because it had so mean a reviver as my self. Know,
it was he that called the Prayers of holy Church Mysteries, Sacraments; and
surely for this one reason, amongst the rest, because they did mysteriously
couch the sense of holy writ, as we have hitherto assayed at least to show; and
as to day we hope to make it appear, this prayer above contains the sum of both
Epistle, and Gospel following; though I confess no soul would think it at
first sight: for in all the book, there is not any prayer which holds a less
visible proportion with the holy Text then this; and yet (if I mistake not) we
shall find it comes as home, as heart can wish to our design, when once we
shall resolve what is meant by the fruit of the divine work: (for that's the key
to all the treasure of Devotion couched in this prayer.) What if we say that
fruit is our salvation? since this is a work so truly divine, that there is
none indeed but God himself can bring forth such a fruit; and yet so good a
God we serve, that he is pleased we shall our selves prepare this fruit, and
serve it up unto his heavenly Table; while we are bid pray this day, that
(since our understandings are already sufficiently instructed in our duties,
what they are and ought to be to God) our wills may be stirred up to a
performance of those duties, to the more diligent preparing the fruits of the
divine work, (the salvation of our souls) that by redoubled diligence we may
receive the greater remedies of God Almighties mercies; meaning, so much of his
grace in this life, as may secure us of his glory in the life to come: which
when with all the diligence imaginable we do obtain, it is still a mercy to us,
and must be gratis given, or else we may justly fear to go without it: (so
great a work it is to save a soul!) and therefore well is it called a work
divine. But what are we the nearer now for adjusting this Prayer unto the
Epistle and Gospel of the day? Admit this be the genuine sense of the Prayer
above, what report has it to Judgment, which is the subject of the Gospel?
Why, this at least; that the best preparative to save a soul is to remember the
dreadful day of doom: and therefore when the Prayer beggs, to have our wills
stirred up to a more diligent preparing the fruits of the divine work, (the
salvation of our souls) the Gospel puts us fitly in mind of the day of
Judgment, so to fright us into this diligence, least through our sloth the
Judge do want that crop of fruit, which then he comes to gather. And thus we
seem to draw a little more near at least to the end of our design: But if we
read the latter end of the Gospel, comparing the day of Judgment to the
sprouting out of a fig tree, we shall come nearer yet; and if we hearken to
the Expositours upon the 32 and 33 verses of this Gospel, how sweetly they
expound that Parable, we shall then come fully home to the sweetest harmony
imaginable between the Gospel and the Prayer. And for the Epistle it is
nothing else but an exhortation of Saint Paul to the Colossians (and in them to
us) how to prepare our souls to salvation, even in the very language of the
Prayer, for example, how to fructify in all good works, that we may at the
latter day of doom (whereof the Gospel minds us now) be made worthy to
partake of the lot of Saints, to be delivered from the power of darkness, and
translated into the Kingdom of the Son of Love, in whom we have redemption,
the remission of sins; in a word, the salvation of our souls, or the
ripening of that fruit which we must with all diligence prepare for the
heavenly Table, as being the work of our heavenly Lord. When (I say) we do
consider this, then we shall need no more to seek for a connection between the
preaching and the Prayer of holy Church to day in this period of our work,
wherein we were almost at a loss, even now that we stood in greatest need of
making good our whole design, in the close thereof. And who can marvel now
that this sweet Prayer should be suitable to the sower day of Judgment, when
we see that dreadful story in the Gospel closed up with the gladsome Parable
of a fruitful Spring? And why? to show that to the Blessed, the day of doom
is a time o^ Joy, and that the just alone are of consideration with Almighty
God. In a word, please but to read the Expositours upon that point, (as in the
gloss below you find them) and tell me then, whether this Prayer do want
connection unto that gloss of theirs? if not, then you will grant the Prayers
of holy Church to be (as Saint Gregory calls them) Sacraments, mysteries indeed
of Piety, but such, as when explained, are sweet as honey, and facile as we
can desire: For what more easy now, then to see this Prayer alludes to
Judgment, in the same sense that holy Church desires her children should be
ready for it; that is, to be prepared fruit for the heavenly Table; and by that
preparation to be worthy to receive the greater remedies of God Almighties
mercies at the day of Judgment against the corruption of humane nature,
namely, his gifts of glory added to those of grace? And thus we shall close up
the Ring of our devotion, with the same Christian duty we began it, whilst,
mindful of the day of doom, we pray our wills may be raised up to an
alacrity in our Christian duty, as they were by the same spirit of Prayer
raised upon the same subject on the first Sunday of Advent, which this four
and twentieth Sunday after Pentecost inclines unto, in like manner as all parts
of a circle bow to meet each other with a plie to circularitie; and so the
duty of a Christian is then best performed, when (having once begun to serve
God well) the whole continuance of endeavors is still to better that
beginning, still to begin anew, where last we did end; (as in this work you see
we do) setting the same fear of our Lord before our eyes in the end thereof,
the same memory of the day of Judgment, wherewith we first begun this practice
of Piety; which here I tender unto every one of our sodalitie, not doubting
but if we live an hundred years, we shall find of this devotion, that it will
always please though a hundred times repeated over; because the subject is so
sweet, as the more we suck, it comes the sweeter still. And since in the Title
of this Book we called it not only a Christian sodalitie, but a Hive of Bees,
I beseech God, we may find no drones amongst us in this Hive, no lazy Bees,
that will not fly abroad to suck the honey of devotion from the blossoms of
the word of God, which are growing in every leaf of this Book, the whole being
framed either of the holy Text, or of the Exposition of the same.

The Epistle. Coloss. 1. v. 9. etc.
9 Therefore we also from the day that we heard it cease not praying for you,
and desiring that you may be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all
wisdom, and spiritual understanding:

10 That you may walk worthy of God, in all things pleasing; fructifying in all
good works, and increasing in the knowledge of God.

11 In all power strengthened according to the might of his glory, in all
patience and longanimity with joy:

12 Giving thanks to God and the Father, who has made us worthy unto the part
of the lot of the Saints in the light.

13 Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us
into the kingdom of the Son of his love.

14 In whom we have redemption, the remission of sins.


The Explication.
9. THat is, from the day we heard you were converted to the faith of Christ,
upon the hope you had of heaven thereby, as in the precedent verses of this
chapter is expressed; and as soon as Epaphras our fellow labourer in the
vineyard of Christ brought us this happy news, and of your special love to me
and Timothy; From that time we cease not praying for your being still filled
more and more with the grace of God, and with the knowledge of his will, (with
the acknowledgement thereof) as being done in you by this your conversion. The
Apostle appositely mentions here wisdom and spiri^uall understanding, praying
they may be filled therewith, to show the difference between the folly of
profane learning, (such as was that the Simonians affected in those days, mere
humane and carnal wisdom) and that sacred learning which Christian doctrine
teaches; for that only he accounts true wisdom and true understanding, as
teaching us to walk spiritually not carnally in the Church of Christ which is
the school of Christianity.

10. And praying further, that you may walk worthy of God in all things
pleasing, that you may so far please God in all you do, as to make your
selves worthy of him, by receiving no less then himself for your reward of so
walking. By which we see, S. Paul here piously points at the now Catholic
doctrine which the pretended Reformers oppose, of meriting heaven by our good
works, (though perhaps this place does not directly prove it,) since he speaks
of making our selves worthy even of God himself; whereas there be those who
teach, we are only imputatively, and not really or de condigno justified by
Christ's merits, or made partakers of them. Again, lest he should in vain bid us
do what he thought sufficient to render us thus worthy, he tells us in the
following words how to be made so, namely, by fructifying in all good works, by
reaping fruit out of every laudable exercise, (and others we must not addict
our selves unto) and by increasing in the knowledge of God, by making it our
study better to understand the mysteries of our faith and religion, for thereby
it is we come to know God. See here the obligation we have to be daily diligent
in learning more and more of Christianity, and not to lose our time in studying
fooleries, for thereby we shall hazard the deserving Hell, and not God for our
reward.

11. See the sense of this verse explicated in the Epistle upon the eighteenth
Sunday after Pentecost, for the first part of it; and in the Epistle upon the
fourteenth Sunday for the second part the^eof, because there it is explicated
all at large: suffice it to note here, his aim is to stir them up to alacrity
even in persecution.

12. And to thank God the Father for the benefit of his grace, which gives them
that alacrity: he directs our thoughts to the Father, as knowing they will
thereby be more pleasing to his son our Savior Jesus Christ, who made
offering of all his own actions to his heavenly Father, thereby to show us we
must attribute more to the goodness of God, then even to the passion of
Christ, which was dignified from the Deity whereunto the humanity was united.
That has made us worthy, this shows how little we ought to confide in our own
merits, since even all the good we do is by the special grace of God, and must
have its value from God assisting, more then from our selves acting; yet by
both together we become worthy of God himself for our reward, as was said
above, much more of our share with the Saints in glory: though here the Apostle
alludes chiefly to the Colossians being made worthy with other Saints of the
light and glory of the Gospel by their conversion to the faith of Christ; which
he calls therefore the lot of the Saints, because it is a grace gratis given,
and no man can merit his conversion, which the Apostle calls the lot of the
Saints in the light of the Gospel, given by God the father gratis, through the
merits of our Saviors passion. Or if we shall take the complete sense of this
verse, it imports, the lot we have to share with those who live in the light of
the Gospel, is the beginning of the accomplishment of that lot, when we shall
live and reign with Christ and his Saints in the lot or happiness they have to
dwell in the light of eternal glory.

13. By the power of darkness is here understood the infidelity they were in
before conversion, when they were under the command of the Prince of darkness,
as being then in his power. By this Graecisme, or phrase common among the
Greeks, viz. the Son of his love, is here understood his beloved Son, the
second person of the Blessed Trinity: not that (as Sabellius would have it)
Christ was one and the same person with the holy Ghost, proceeding, as he did,
by an act of love; whereas we are taught the second person was begotten by the
understanding of his eternal Father, and the third (as some Divines hold)
proceeded by an Act of mutual love between the Father and the Son, but all
confess his procession to be from both, while it is from the Father, by the
Son.

14. True it is by the passion of our Savior we are redeemed; but if we ask
what it is to be redeemed, we cannot express it better, then here the Apostle
does by calling it remission of sins; for as by sin we were made slaves to
the devil, so by remission thereof (which we obtain by Christ his passion) we
are made children of God, and are thus redeemed from the captivity of the
devil; not unlike to men freed from prison by their creditours remitting unto
them their debts, for which they clapped them up: but we are in a more liberal
way redeemed from the prison of hell (that was our inheritance) when Christ
(not we) pays the debt, and so it is most freely remitted to us, since we
neither did, nor could pay it our selves.

The Application.
1. BLessed S. Paul! we have thee now in half a word; the Colossians were as
dear to thee as the Ephesians, the Romans, and all thy other Converts: what
thou did write to one upon the news of their conversion by thy preaching,
thou do in other terms, but in the same spirit write to all the rest. Again,
we know our holy mother the Church reads thy ancient lessons every day anew to
us, that we her children may be Christian Catholics like thy happy Converts:
And to that purpose she brings our charity to day with thy Epistle home to her
annual journeys end, as the best usher to lead her to this life's end also, and
to the entrance into everlasting life, that of eternal happiness and glory.

2. See how to day our holy Mother sets us all a preaching to our selves to
this effect, while she does make us pray to God that he will raise up our
affections to our own salvations. Why Blessed Jesu? is it come to that? must we
be courted to our own felicity? can we be less then willing to be saved? I
dare not say it, but I doubt it much: And therefore holy Church I see petitions
it, lest we should vainly think we had advanced far, when God Almighty knows
the many years that pass upon our heads are like so many labors lost; and
therefore at the end of every year it is piety to think we do but then begin to
wish we were but willing to be saved; yet we must wish it faithfully,
sincerely, earnestly; and we must pray withal, that God will graciously please
to raise our wish to the perfection of a will at last; that if we value not our
selves, we will not undervalue God Almighty, who looks upon us as the apples of
his eyes, as the fruits of all his labors, in creating, preserving, and
governing the world and us, in redeeming and saintifying of us, for no other
end but to save us at the last; and that at so easy a rate as can be possible,
our only cooperating with him to that happy end, our only being willing be
should work in us that saintity we cannot work in our selves without him.

3. To conclude, the many books of controversy in the point of merit may be
summed up all in this petition of the Churches Prayer to day; so deep, so
copious, so facund, and so fecund withal is the spirit of the Holy Ghost,
couched in those teaching Prayers. What is it else we say defending merit, but
that we must cooperate to our salvation; but that the more we do cooperate the
greater Saints we are; but that the improvement we make of one grace procures
us another greater then the former; but that we so take in hand the work of our
salvation, as we do not think it is, nor can be any work of ours, but must be
still the work of God in us, (though by us too) whose only part is to be
pulling down the greater remedies of his Piety toward us by improving his
lesser, and to be drawing from him grace upon grace so fast, until (by means
thereof) we render our selves a fruit of the work divine, as ripe as grace can
make us here, and ready then to be transplanted into heaven, where yet the
sun of glory will mature us more, so far indeed, as we shall never fear to
be corrupted, but shall hang upon the tree of everlasting life, an ornament to
the celestial Paradise?

Say now the Prayer above, and see how home it is to this construction in it
self, to this instruction of us by it, if we say it in the sense above. The
Gospel. Matthew. 24.15.
15 Therefore when you shall see the Abomination of desolation, which was
spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, standing in the holy place, (he that reads,
let him understand;)

16 Then they that are in Jewry, let them flee to the mountains:

17 And he that is on the house top, let him not come down, to take any thing
out of his house:

18 And he that is in the field, let him not go back to take his coat.

19 And woe to them that are with child, and that give suck in those days.

20 But pray that your flight be not in winter, nor on the Sabbath:

21 For there shall be then great tribulation, such as has not been from the
beginning of the world until now, neither shall be.

22 And unless those days had been shortened, no flesh should be saved: but
for the Elect the days shall be shortened.

23 Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or there, do not
believe him.

24 For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show
great signs and wonders, so that the Elect also (if it be possible) may be
induced into error.

25 Lo I have foretold you.

26 If therefore they shall say unto you, Behold he is in the desert, go ye not
out; behold in the closets, believe it not.

27 For as lightening comes out of the East; and appears even to the West,
so shall the Advent of the Son of man be.

28 Wheresoever the body is, thither shall the Eagles also be gathered together.

29 And immediately after the tribulation of those days, the Sun shall be
darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars shall fall
from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be moved.

30 And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then shall
all tribes of the earth bewail: and they shall see the Son of man comeing in
the clouds of heaven with much power and majesty.

31 And he shall send his Angels with a Trumpet, and a great voice: and they
shall gather together his Elect from the four winds, from the furthest parts of
heaven, even to the ends thereof.

32 And of the fig tree learn a Parable: when now the bough thereof is tender,
and the leaves come forth, you know that Summer is nigh.

33 So you also, when you shall see these things, know ye that it is nigh, even
at the doors.

34 Amen I say to you, that this generation shall not pass, till all these
things be done.

35 Heaven and earth shall pass, but my words shall not pass.


The Explication.
15. BY this Abomination of desolation Christ meant a most abominable
desolation; and most probably he alluded to that which was to follow, namely,
the Romans sacking of Jerusalem, as a punishment upon the Jews for having
there crucified the Savior of the world: how horrid and dreadful an
abomination that was Josephus his history best describes. But mystically we
may well interpret this abomination to be the sacrilegious defiling of the
Temple of Solomon, both by the barbarous murders therein committed by the Jews,
and the profaning the Altars thereof by the wicked Priests: much more is this
abominable, when Christian Priests profane their holy Altars, and become
wicked, Isa. 24.2. as the people, so the Priest of holy Church. And the like
abomination it is to receive the body of Christ into a sinful soul; for then
he is rather betrayed into the house of the devil, then received into the
Temple of the holy Ghost. Not unaptly also this abomination may allude to
Antichrist, setting himself upon the Altars of the Churches to be adored as
God. In fine, when any of these horrid iniquities are done, then we may piously
imagine the Judgment of God is not far of; since were it not for his mercy
sake, these abominations deserved immediate damnation.

16. By this verse is mystically meant, that when good men see these enormities
done commonly in the cities, they should fly from such evil cohabitations,
lest the houses of the city fall upon their heads, and run out up to the
mountains, thereby to show they are desirous of getting up as near to heaven,
as may be, when their houses become a hell unto them: Though literally our
Savior alludes to the advice he after (by revelation) gave the Christians,
when Jerusalem was to be destroyed, to fly from Jurie to the mountains beyond
Judea; (for the Roman forces had possessed those hills about Judea) whereas the
Jews hearing of the Romans approaching into their country fled all into
Jerusalem; God so ordaining it for their destruction, who yet thought they
should in that famous city be most safe.

17. They were bid fly from the tops of houses, if they happened to be there
when the news came of Titus with the Romans falling upon them, to show, those
powers were to come like a tide or torrent upon the Jews unavoidably: and
therefore, since in those days their houses were commonly built flat on the
top, and their use was to eat, and walk there as freely as now men do in lower
rooms, they were advised to make no stay for getting any goods away, but
immediately to run, and think themselves happy if they could save but their own
persons: insomuch that the sudden destruction of Jerusalem is by the Historian
described like to Noes flood, to the burning of Sodom with fire from heaven,
and to the drowning Pharaoh his forces in the red Sea.

18. This verse follows the strain of the former, by advising immediate flight
without regard to any thing else.

19. This expresses their danger, who by the reason of children either in
their wombs, or at their breasts, could not make speed enough to save
themselves, in regard of their burdens retarding their flight: Also it alludes
to the severity of Gods wrath over the Jewish Nation, who, to punish their
sins, would not spare the innocent infants of that race, but leave all a prey
to the devouring sword of the Romans, meeting them in their mothers bellies, or
nurses laps.

20. This shows, the clogg of winter ways and weather forbids (especially to
aged men) a speedy flight, such as was necessary to avoid this instantaneous
destruction: and the Jewish Law forbidding any man to walk above a mile (indeed
half a mile) on the Sabbath, shows that slow flight was inconsistent with this
speedy danger: for though Christ did abrogate the rigor of the Sabbath Law,
yet be alludes here to the Jews and Judaizing Christians, that were hardly
brought off from the superstitions of their old Traditions. Again, Christ here
insinuates it is vain to fly on the Sabbath, because Jerusalem (and so all)
was taken on the Sabbath day.

21. There is no doubt but the destruction of Jerusalem was a calamity
unparalled; for since Almighty God (in revenge of his sacred Sons being
butthered therein) had designed this city to exemplary punishment, he was
resolved to make the rigor of it such, as resembled rather Hell then any
horror less: only note, that here it is meant the particular destruction of
the Jews is unparalled by any particular nations destruction; not that the
final day of Judgment shall be less calamitous to all the world, then this
day was to the Jews alone.

22. This place literally alludes to the Jews, as the chosen people of God,
and so valued by him above all others, that he seems to say, if they be safe,
none else are in danger, because them chiefly he desires to preserve; yet
seeing they will not be gained by him, he then converts his love to the
Gentiles: and in this sense he goes on; meaning, unless the days of the Jews
subversion by the Romans had been shortened, no flesh (no Jew) in all the world
should be saved, but for the elect, for some very few converted Jews before,
for some in this confusion of their overthrow, and for others reserved for
conversion in the latter days to make one Church, as also for respect to many
Christians amongst them, God ordained that Titus the Commander should put a
limit to the fury of the sword, and after a time should give quarter even to
the Jews, insomuch that (as Josephus writes) forty thousand of them by the
mercy of Titus were saved; and but for this, not one Jew in all the world
either would or could have escaped the sword, so inveterate was the hatred of
the Romans to that persidious Nation: Hence we see the power of even a little
virtue in man, how great a sway it bears with God, that for never so little
good he averts a huge deal of mischief.

23. Many conceive Christ here passes from his report to the destruction of
Jerusalem, and falls on the day of general Judgment: but it is not so; for by
the word then he professes to continue his former sense: and this suites well;
for then the Jews knowing the time of the Messiah to be at hand, to save
themselves, and to flatter such as usurped the properties of the Messiah, they
(when persecuted by one party) would fly to this other, that adhered to such
impostours as then boasted themselves to be the Messiah: so our Savior, to
prevent danger to such as might be carried by this means to infidelity,
foretells them what arts would be used to ensnare them. And there were three
eminent men of this wicked faction, Eleazar the son of Simon, Jehu the son of
Leviah, and Simon the son of Goriah, each of these strove to be reputed the
Messiah; to these therefore and their flatterers this verse alludes, for these
would be called Christ, as the true Messiah was.

24. See how this verse verifies the sense of the former; for of these and such
like men, even of Arch-hereticks in future times also our Savior speaks here:
and such were David George, and John of Leyden, (King of the Anabaptists)
proclaiming himself to be Christ, and sending about his twelve Apostles, till
he was taken in Westphalia, and burnt alive for his abominable heresy. The
signs here mentioned shall be those of witchcraft, and other cheats to delude
the Faithful people; as Simon Magus by these arts cheated Nero and other
Romans, till by S. Peter's intercession he was brought down from the high pitch
of his artificial wings, and dashed his feet in pieces, to show, Gods Saints
are above the devils instruments, since by St. Peter's prayer he was made unable
to go, who by fraud pretended a power to fly. When he says by these arts the
Elect shall (if possible) err, he means it is not possible, morally speaking,
that when God pleases to assist his chosen people, any fraud of the devil
himself can delude them; though in a physical sense there is no impossibility
thereof, since even grace notwithstanding, men have physical power to sin: yet
supposing God have predestined any to salvation, then that may stand with
infallibility by supposition, which absolutely speaking would not do so. Note,
the Reformers fondly obtrude this practice to us, by exposing the B. Sacrament
to adoration; since therein we expose only an invisible Deity, whereas here
our Savior beats down the exposing any visible God in man's shape, any to be
Christ but himself: and that he left himself thus to be adored till the worlds
end we have it avouched from the Apostles, who did practice, and preach this
duty to be done to the B. Sacrament.

25. He means his prediction to after ages, as well as that to the Jews of
their impostures; so this warning serves us to beware of heresies and their
divulgers.

26. Christ here alludes to Simon Gerasenus son of Goriah, who went into the
desert and mountains, raising forces, under a pretense he would (as the
Messiah) vindicate the injuries done to the Jews by the Romans: the like did
Eleazar above men^ioned, and John, leaders of the Zelotes; only they pretended
in caves, and vaults, and chambers to supply the open worships due unto them in
Churches, and this with promise to restore them, as by the Messiah they did
hope to be restored, and thought their Captains to be indeed Messiah.

27. No the true Messiah comes not thus couched, but his coming shall be as
visible, as undoubted, as the lightening breaking in the East, and seen even to
the West: here indeed he alludes to his second coming in the latter day, when
the world shall be all on fire from East to West.

28. This he likens to be as sudden upon men, as the Eagle is upon her prey:
and though some think he only means the noble Eagles, that feed not on dead
food, but on living; yet his words incline to the vulturine Eagle, which
Aristotle mentions, and tells us he feeds on dead bodies, and discovering them
by the smell, is as soon upon them, as if he see them presently. Christ seems
to humble himself to this sort of Eagles, both in regard of his own body, which
was dead to purchase man's life; and in regard it suites better with our
corruption, which at the latter day is the prey of this Eagle Christ Jesus, who
comes as fiercely upon all mankind (then corrupted in their graves, when
summoned to Judgment,) as the Eagle does upon his prey, that lives by carrion;
to show us, there is then no hope of mercy if we prove corrupted carrion, but
we must be delivered over as a prey to the devouring Eagle, meaning the Judge,
converting corruptible into incorruptible flesh, their unsavory bodies into
sweet incense, to burn (and never be consumed, nor tormented) before his sacred
Deity.

29. See how he falls from the particular devastation of the Jews to the
general destruction of the whole world, telling us hence forward the signs of
this, as he did before the signs of the other; favoring in a sort the error
of the Apostles, who did believe by his speech the day of Judgment should
follow immediately after the destruction of Jerusalem: though indeed he speaks
thus to terrify men from sin, who after it may immediately fear Judgment; and
to show, that what to us is long a coming, to God is ever present: so he falls
out of the one into the other, as if they were both linked together. The Sun
shall be darkened, by which he means there shall be prodigious Eclipses before
this dismal day, and strange interpositions of vapors, to show the dark effect
of the child of darkness, sin. The Moon, having no light but from the Sun, can
give none when the Suns light is not seen. The Stars shall seem to fall, but
cannot do so, for each one is bigger then the earth; yet what with comets
playing in the air, what with the dazzeling of our eyes in that circumstance,
the stars shall seem to fall upon us. Mystically understand by Sun, Moon, and
Stars failing here, the fall of greater and lesser lights in holy Church by
the terror of the persecution of Antichrist at this time: by the virtues of
the heavens being moved, understand their usual influence into the creatures of
the earth to be disturbed; yet some others think, the very Angels, the movers
of the heavens, (and so called their virtues) shall be, as it were, afraid they
do fail in their offices, seeing the usual course of nature inverted, which may
seem even to discompose their constant and unmovable natures; not that indeed
it shall be so with them, but only it may see^ so to us.

30. This sign all allow to be the Cross of Christ, which for three causes
shall then appear; first to show Christ came to the glory of being Judge over
all the world by his former ignominy upon the Cross; secondly, to show, he was
truly crucified on the Cross for all men's redemption, and therefore brings it
now to confound those who were ungrateful for such a benefit, especially the
Jews; thirdly, to show that all who were religious worshippers of him, and of
his holy Cross, should now march under the banner of it into the Kingdom of
heaven: whence it is probable, the very self-same Cross that Christ dyed upon
shall be then made up, and placed there: (a thing not harder then for the dead
to rise.) By the bewailing of all tribes understand, that some of all tribes
shall be in a bewailing case for their inevi^able misery then laid before their
eyes: By the son of man is understood Christ Jesus himself, coming (after his
sacred banner is displayed) in the clouds, for three reasons; first, to
moderate the infinite splendor of his glory; next, because a cloud is a type
of the hidden mystery of his Deity; lastly, because he shall have his judiciary
Throne placed in a cloud, wrought out into the form of a moving chariot, so
that a cloud shall be both his seat and his footstool, whilst in the air he
appears to all the world below on his Throne of Judgment. He shall then come
in great power, to show, he could have done so too when he came a weakling, and
alone into the world at his Nativity. In great Majesty, by the attendance of
all the quires of Angels, and blessed Saints waiting upon him.

31. This verse does not keep the order of Judgment, but tells the manner: True
it is this shall be, but not after Christ has appeared, for it shall be done
before that, and many other of these signs; so it is put in here, lest the
story should come short of truth, not to observe the order of the passage. This
gathering of the elect from all corners of the world, and from heaven it self,
even the highest and lowest saints there, argues the care God has of them, and
that no distance of place can hinder them from coming to him, who sends his
Angels to bring them for their reward: it tells us also, we need not proclaim
our own good deeds, God sees them, be they done and kept never so secret to
avoid vainglory.

32. What was literally said before, is now anagogically prosecuted, by the
example of a fig tree, which never springs, but when the heat is strong, that
so the fruit thereof may be securely ripened, and not nipt with cold, and
because it is a tree bearing great store of fruit: so the Sun of Justice
appearing, the earth yields up all her fruits, all the Saints thereof, and
presents them to the Sun that must mature them for the table of his heavenly
Father, when the summer of the resurrection comes.

33. This example he uses to show, that however Judgment be terrible to those
that are in sin, yet to the just, and to God himself it is as welcome, as the
harvest which brings in the treasure of the year, and the fruit of time into
the barnes of Eternity. And that we may be frighted from sin, we are foretold
many of the calamities we see in all ages, are like some of these fore-running
signs to the latter day; so we may religiously fear our particular Judgment
at least is at hand, and when all the signs are fulfilled, we may be as sure
the general will follow, as we are sure the ripening Sun is near, when the
fig tree sends out her sap from her wary root; or mystically thus, when in the
cold winter of Antichrists persecution, we see the Saints (the spiritual
fig trees of holy Church) put forth with confidence their leaves and buds of
sanctity, we may rest assured those wise figge-trees are not deceived, and then
it is time for sinful fools to repent themselves, lest (if not then) it be too
late for ever so to do.

34. This verse only imports, that before the end of this world these signs
shall be seen, and this Judgment shall be unavoydable to mankind, for that is
it he means by this generation.

35. The heavens and earth shall pass, that is to say, shall be changed from
the present state and condition wherein they now are, and whereunto they were
ordained but for a time; so that their after state shall be of a far other
nature, liable to none of these changes, which are now frequent in them,
according to the present exigence and series of causes. Others understand by
the last words of this verse, our Savior speaks here comparatively, as if it
were more possible for the settled course of heaven and earth to fail all at
one instant, then for the least tittle of Christ his word to pass unverified:
and this sense is not improbable, being that which S. Chrysostom avows.

The Application.
1. LOok how the Christian year begins so must it end, with fear and love.
These were the plying virtues to the will of God that we begun the Rules of
this sodality withal on Advent Sunday, see the same virtues ply into the
perfect circle of the year to day, they bringing us to the end of our annual
devotion which began it; but with this difference, fear led us then unto the
duty of our love, now love has brought us to the duty of our fear; then we
remembered our Judge that we might love our Jesus, now we have loved him we need
but fear him in respect of others, who do not truly love him; because it love
bring us to the Judgment Seat, we may be sure to find a loving Judge such as
will never damn us: It is the oracular edict of his own veracity; I love those
that love me; and again, it was the first love-lesson we were taught when
charity began to march upon her own legs, on the third Sunday after Pentecost,
1 John 4. v. 17. Perfect charity fears not judgment: (meaning sure for her own
particular) Yet must have still a fear thereof in regard of others; and she may
fear too, in her own behalf, but that need only be a fear she does not love
enough.

2. It was no doubt with this design our Savior ended the frightfull story of
judgment with the comfortable parable of the springing fig tree, to show our
charity, that final day is dismal only to the damned souls, to those that
know not what it is to love their Jesu-Judge. We see the holy Fathers make that
exposition of it: And we know that every creature groans for grief at the delay
of that relieving day, Romans 8. v. 22. when they shall all be eased of their
obedience to the disobeying man they are made subject to, and when they shall
be set to a new series, and frame again, to be ever consistent in their
several degrees of perfection, without vicissitudes of fading to re-flourish:
those alterations were their punishments for men's prevarication, and for
working corruption in his body, who by sin had corrupted his own soul.
Judgment is therefore the longing of the just, to see that justice done at
last which is differed so long. And indeed all present chastisement is mercy in
comparison of that final punishment, which is therefore eternal, because the
wicked are unalterable in their malice, and so force a rigorous judgment from
the bowels of a merciful Judge.

3. To conclude, what other sense can holy Church have of this latter day, when
at the preaching on that frightfull Text she makes us such a comfortable
prayer, as bids us beg tho greater remedies of Gods piety then, his continual
graces, the gifts of his glory at the day of Judgment, to candy the
confections of his graces, to embalm the bodies of his Saints, and make them
incorrupt as are their souls? And all this favor she confidently bids us ask
in recompense only of our willingness to ripen our selves in the Sun of his
holy grace, that he may make us fruits of eternal glory, and by our
cooperating with him, give us the rewards of his own operations in us; whom he
makes labor in his vineyard here a while, that he may set us in eternal rest
at his own heavenly table: where though he be pleased to delight in us, yet we
shall be the only gainers, by enjoying him; for he gets nothing but to be
content that we get all, by being but willing to present our selves to him as
the humane subjects wherein he is pleased to produce the divine work of our
salvations, while he is satisfied to call us his fruit, that he may be our food
for all eternity.

Thus we are taught in the prayer above, and may, saying it with the same
spirit that made it, saint our selves, as is desired we should by the holy
Ghost, who gave us this sainting prayer for that holy purpose. FINIS.
On VVhitsunday.
The first Prayer.
O God, who on this day have taught the hearts of the Faithful by the
Illumination of the holy Ghost, grant unto us in the same spirit to relish
those things that are right, and ever to rejoice in his Consolation.

The Secret.
SAyntifie we beseech thee, O Lord, our offered gifts: and mundifie our hearts
by the Illustration of the Holy Ghost.

The post-Communion.
LEt the infusion of the Holy Ghost, O Lord, purify our hearts, and fertilize
them by the inward aspersion of his heavenly dew.

On Trinity Sunday.
The first Prayer.
ALmighty, everlasting God, who have granted to thy servants in confession of
the true Faith to acknowledge the glory of the eternal Trinity, and in the
power of Majesty to adore unity, we beseech thee heartily that in the
firmness of the same Faith we may ever be defended from all adversity.

The Secret.
SAyntifie we beseech thee, our Lord God, by the invocation of thy holy name
the Host of this oblation, and render us thereby unto thy self an eternal
present.

The post-Communion.
GRant, O Lord God, that the receiving of this Sacrament, and the confession of
the sempiternal Holy Trinity, and of the undivided unity thereof, may avail us
to the health both of our body and soul.

On the first Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
O God, the strength of those that trust in thee, be mercifully present to our
prayers, and because without thee mortal infirmity is of no ability, grant the
assistance of thy grace, that in doing what thou do command, we may please
thee both in word and will.

The Secret.
VOuchsafe appeased we pray thee to accept of these our offerings dedicated to
thee, O Lord, and grant that unto us they may afford perpetual help.

The post-Communion.
BEing filled with so great gifts, grant, O Lord, we beseech thee, that while
we receive these wholesome boones, we may never cease from praising thee.

On Sunday within the Octaves of Corpus Christi: being the second after
Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
MAke us, O Lord, equally to have both a continual fear and love of thy holy
name, because thou do never leave them destitute of thy government, whom thou
do instruct in the solidity of thy Love.

The Secret.
MAy this oblation sacred to thy name purify us, O Lord, we beseech thee; and
from day to day carry us to such actions as conduce unto our heavenly life.

The post-Communion.
NOw that we have received thy sacred gifts, we beseech thee, O Lord, that
together with frequenting this mystery, the effect of our salvation may
increase.

On the third Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
O God who art the Protector of those that hope in thee, without whom nothing
is valid, nothing is holy, multiply, we beseech thee, over us thy mercy, that
thou being our ruler, thou our guide, we may so pass by the temporal goods of
this world, as not to loose the eternal of the next.

The Secret.
LOok, we beseech thee, O Lord, upon the offerings of thy suppliant Church, and
grant that what we are to receive may by perpetual sanctification prove unto
the health of thy believing people.

The post-Communion.
MAy thy holy things, O Lord, received quicken us and prepare us (being
expiated) for thy everlasting mercy.

On the fourth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
GRant us, O Lord, we beseech thee, that by thy order our course in this world
may be peaceably directed, and that thy Church may enjoy a quiet devotion.

The Secret.
BE pacified, O Lord, we beseech thee, having received our oblations; and
propitiously compel unto thee our even rebellious wills.

The post-Communion.
MAy the received mysteries, O Lord, purify us, and by their bounty defend us.

On the fifth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
O God who have prepared invisible good things for those that love thee; infuse
into our hearts the desire of thy love, that loving thee in all things, and
above them all, we may attain unto thy promises, which surpass even all our
desires.

The Secret.
BE, O Lord, propitious upon our supplications, and take unto thee benignely
these offerings of thy servants of both sexes; that what every one has
presented in honor of thy name, may profit all of us to our salvation.

The post-Communion.
WHom thou, O Lord, have filled with thy heavenly gifts, grant we beseech thee,
that we may be cleansed from our hidden sins, and delivered from the snares
of our enemies.

On the sixth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
O God of powers, to whom all belongs that is best, ingraft in our breasts the
love of thy holy name, and grant in us the increase of Religion; that thou
may nourish those things which are good, and (being so nourished) maintain
them by the practice of piety.

The Secret.
TAke unto thee, O Lord, benignely these oblations of thy people, and be
propitious upon our supplications; and that no ones desires be frustrate, no
ones request in vain, grant we beseech thee that what we ask faithfully, we may
obtain efficaciously.

The post-Communion.
WE are, O Lord, full with thy gifts; we beseech thee grant that we may be
cleansed by their effect, and defended by their help.

On the seventh Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
O God, whose providence is so disposed as it never can be frustrated, remove,
we humbly beseech thee, all things that are hurtful, and grant whatsoever may
be beneficial unto us.

The Secret.
O God, who have concluded the diversity of the legal hosts under the
perfection of one sacrifice, receive the same from thy devout people, and
sanctify it as thou did the offerings of Abel; that what every one tenders
thee in honor of thy Majesty, may avail to the health of us all.

The post-Communion.
MAy thy medicinal operation clemently free us from our perversities, and
bring us to those things that are right.

On the eighth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
GRant us, O Lord we beseech thee, propitiously the spirit of thinking, and
doing what is right, that as we cannot be without thee, so we may live unto
thee.

The Secret.
REceive, O Lord we beseech thee, what of thy bounty we bring unto thee: that
these sacred mysteries, by the operative power of thy grace, may sanctify us
in the conversation of this present life, and lead us to eternal joys.

The post-Communion.
BE, O Lord, unto us this heavenly mystery a reparation both of soul and body,
that whose worship we perform his effect we may feel.

On the ninth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
LEt the ears of thy mercy, O Lord, be open to the prayers of thy suppliants:
and to the end thou may grant the things desired to those that ask, make them
ask such things as to thee are pleasing.

The Secret.
GRant unto us, O Lord, we beseech thee, that we may worthily frequent these
mysteries, because as often as the commemoration of this Host is celebrated,
the work of our Redemption is exercised.

The post-Communion.
WE pray, O Lord, that the communion of thy Sacrament may confer purity, and
give unto us unity.

On the tenth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
O God, who do manifest thy Omnipotence most of all by pardoning and taking
pity, multiply upon us thy mercy, that we running unto thy promises, thou
may make us partakers of thy Heavenly Treasures.

The Secret.
BE the consecrated sacrifices rendered unto thee, O Lord, which thou have
granted us so to be offered in honor of thy name, that withal thou have
allowed them to be remedies unto us.

The post-Communion.
WE beseech thee our Lord God, that whom thou do not cease to repair with
divine Sacraments, thou will not deprive them of thy favors being as thou art
benign.

On the eleventh Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
ALmighty everlasting God, who, out of the abundance of thy pity, do exceed
as well the merits of thy suppliants, as their desires; pour out thy mercy upon
us, that thou may forgive what our conscience is afraid of, and add even what
our prayers dare not presume to ask.

The Secret.
LOok we beseech thee, O Lord, propitiously upon our service, that what we
offer may be to thee an acceptable gift, and to our frailty a support.

The post-Communion.
MAy we find, O Lord we beseech thee, by the receiving thy Sacrament help of
soul and body; that being in both preserved we may glory in the plenitude of
the heavenly remedy.

On the twelfth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
OMnipotent and most merciful God, from whose bounty it proceeds that of thy
faithful people thou art worthily and laudably served, grant unto us, we
beseech thee, that we may run unto thy promises without offense.

The Secret.
LOok, we beseech thee O Lord, propitiously upon the hosts which on thy holy
altars we offer unto thee, that giving us pardon, they may also give honor
unto thy Name.

The post-Communion.
LEt the holy participation of this mystery quicken us, O Lord we beseech thee,
and equally give unto us expiation, and defense.

On the thirteenth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
ALlmighty and everlasting God, give unto us the increase of Faith, Hope, and
Charity; and that we may deserve to obtain what thou do promise, make us
love what thou do command.

The Secret.
BE propitious, O Lord we beseech thee, unto thy people, and to their
offerings, that appeased by this oblation thou both pardon us, and grant us our
requests.

The post-Communion.
HAving, O Lord, received the heavenly Sacraments, we beseech thee let them
avail us to the increase of our eternal Redemption.

On the fourteenth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
KEep, we beseech thee, O Lord, thy Church with perpetual propitiation; and
since without thee humane mortality fails, let it always by thy help be
withdrawn from such things as are hurtful, and directed to those that are
saving.

The Secret.
GRant unto us, we pray thee O Lord, that this wholesome offering may be a
purgation of our sins, and a propitiation of thy power.

The post-Communion.
LEt thy Sacraments, O God, always cleanse us, and bring us to the effect of
our eternal salvation.

On the fifteenth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
LEt thy continual mercy, O Lord, both cleanse and defend thy Church, and
because without thee it cannot stand securely, be it always governed by thy
bounty.

The Secret.
LEt thy Sacraments, O Lord, keep us and always defend us from the assaults of
the devil.

The post-Communion.
WE beseech thee, O Lord, let the operation of thy heavenly gift possess our
minds and bodies, that not our sense in us, but continually the effect of thy
said gift may prevent us.

On the sixteenth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
LEt thy Grace, we beseech thee O Lord, always go before, and follow us, and
make us continually intent unto good works.

The Secret.
CLeanse us, O Lord, we beseech thee, by the effect of this present sacrifice,
and mercifully work in us that we may be sharers of the same.

The post-Communion.
WE pray thee, O Lord, to purify benignely our souls, and to renew them with
thy heavenly Sacraments, that consequently we may have both present and future
helps for our bodies.

On the seventeenth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
GRant, we beseech thee, O Lord, that thy people may fly Diabolical contagion,
and follow thee, (the only God) with pure intention.

The Secret.
O Lord, we humbly beseech thy Majesty that these holy things which we bear
about us, may divest us of our present and future offenses.

The post-Communion.
BY thy sanctifications, Almighty God, be our sins cured, and may eternal
remedies accrue unto us.

On the eighteenth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
LEt, O Lord, the operation of thy mercy direct our hearts, because without
thee we cannot please thee.

The Secret.
O God, who by the venerable commerce of this sacrifice do make us partakers
of thy only and highest Deity, grant we beseech thee that as we acknowledge
thy truth, so we may by our behoofeful comportment attain the same.

The post-Communion.
WE give thee thanks, O Lord, for being nourished by thy sacred bounty,
beseeching thy mercy that thou will make us worthy to partake thereof.

On the nineteenth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
ALmighty and merciful God, vouchsafe propitiously to exclude all things which
are adverse unto us, that being set at liberty both in mind and body, we may
with free souls execute those things that appertain unto thee.

The Secret.
THese offerings which we make in the sight of thy Majesty, grant, O Lord we
beseech thee, that they may be saving unto us.

The post-Communion.
MAy thy medicinal operation, O Lord, clemently free us from our perversities,
and make us always adhere to thy commands.

On the twentieth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
WE beseech thee O Lord, (thou being pacified) grant unto thy faithful people
pardon and peace, that they may be both clean from all offenses, and serve thee
with secured souls.

The Secret.
WE pray thee, O Lord, to let these mysteries afford us heavenly remedy, and to
purge away the sins of our heart.

The post-Communion.
THat we may be rendered worthy of thy sacred gifts, we beseech thee, O Lord,
make us always obey thy commandments.

On the one and twentieth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
PReserve, we beseech thee O Lord, thy Family with continual Piety, that thou
protecting it may be free from all adversity, and in good works rest devoted
to thy holy Name.

The Secret.
REceive, O Lord, propitiously those hosts by which thou will have thy self
appeased, and health given unto us by thy mighty power.

The post-Communion.
HAving gotten the nourishment of Immortality, grant, we beseech thee O Lord,
that what we have received with our mouths, we may follow with pure souls.

On the two and twentieth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
O God, our refuge and strength, be present (thou the Author of piety) to the
godly Prayers of thy Church, and grant that what we ask faithfully we may
obtain effectually.

The Secret.
GRant, most merciful God, that this wholesome oblation may incessantly free us
from our own guilt, and defend us from all adversities.

The post-Communion.
WE have received, O Lord, the gifts of thy sacred mystery, humbly beseeching
thee, that what thou have commanded us to do in memory of thee may avail to the
help of our infirmity.

On the three and twentieth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
PArdon, we beseech thee O Lord, the offenses of thy people, that from the
bonds of our sins (which through our frailty we have committed) by thy bounty
we may be delivered.

The Secret.
WE offer unto thee, O Lord, for the increase of our duty the sacrifice of
praise, that what thou have given to the unworthy, thou will propitiously make
it availing.

The post-Communion.
WE beseech thee, Almighty God, that whom thou have made glad with the divine
participation, thou will not permit them to be subject unto humane dangers.

On the four and twentieth Sunday after Pentecost.
The first Prayer.
Stir up, we beseech thee, O Lord, the wills of thy Faithful, that they more
diligently preparing the fruit of thy divine work, may receive the greater
benefits of thy mercy.

The Secret.
BE, O Lord, propitious unto our supplications, and receiving both the
oblations and prayers of thy people, convert unto thee all our hearts, that
being freed from earthly desires, we may betake our selves to heavenly wishes.

The post-Communion.
GRant unto us, we beseech thee O Lord, that by these Sacraments which we have
received, whatsoever is vitiated in our souls, may be cured by the gift of
their medicinal virtue.

FINIS.
Errata. part 3.
N. 3. line 17. for draws, read draw. n. 23. l. 9. truly, r. freely. n. 66. l.
5. law, r. love. n. 71. l. 32. they are not, r. there are not. n. 91. l. 20.
reflection the, r. reflecting on the. n. 91. l. 20. of any man's conscience, r.
any man's conscience. n. 125. l. 5. few, r. a few. n. 131. l. 2. have, r. has.
n. 157. l. 26. showed, r. strewed. n. 162. l. 12. recreated, r. re-created. n.
187. l. 27. that is made, r. that is made void. n. 218. l. 17. these who do
those works, r. those who do these works. n. 225. l. 28. as he does, r. as he
is. n. 239. l. 21. law, r. love. n. 259. l. 3. No, r. Note. n. eod. after l.
14. add, And therefore justly, and necessarily is he blessed world without end,
because there never shall be any end of the world's blessing his endless being
over, through, and in all the world, as was said in the verse above. n. 262. l.
6. foootstool, r: footstool. n. 275. l. 37. rasier, r. easier. n. 298, l. 2. of
time, r. of present time. n. 298. l. 36. seem to, r. seems to. n. 306. l. 2.
soon, r. sooner. n. 314. l. 7. that we have, r. we have. n. 314. l. 26.
attached, r. attacked. n. 323. l. 5. this own, r. this one. n. 337. l. 24.
enormous, r. enormious. n. 348. l. 24. bloody flux, r. flux of blood. n. 351.
l. 24. above. r. alone. n. 373. l. 17. piety then, his, r. piety, then his. in
the first of the three prayers on the first Sunday after Pentecost, in word and
will, r. in will and work.


