LIbrum hunc, cui Titulus, The Royal College of Physicians of London founded
and established by Law, etc. dignum censemus, qui typis mandetur:

D. Whistler, Praeses.
Tho. Witherley, Johan. Atfield, Edvardus Brown, Tho. Alvey. Censores.

THE Royal College OF PHYSICIANS OF LONDON Founded and Established by Law; As
appears By Letters Patents, Acts of Parliament, adjudged Cases, etc.

AND An Historical Account of the College's proceedings against Empiricks and
unlicensed Practisers in every Princes Reign from their first Incorporation to
the Murder of the Royal Martyr, King Charles the First.

By CHARLES GOODALL, Dr. in Physic, and Fellow of the said College of
Physicians.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1684.

To the Right Honorable FRANCIS LORD GVILFORD, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal
of England, and one of his Majesty's Most honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
It Is now no less than seven years, since I adventured the prefixing of your
Lordship's name to a Book, written in defense of the College of Physicians,
against a bold and impudent Libell, published with design to expose that
Learned Society to contempt. Since which time, I have not only had the honor
of being made one of their Members, but have been entrusted with the search of
their Records, and received encouragement to publish a Collection of their
Royal Patents, Acts of Parliament, Trials with, and proceedings against
Empiricks; that so the Adversaries of this Society might be convinced of the
reason and Justice of their actings, against those illiterate and vile
Impostors; whose practice by Act of Parliament is declared to be, To the high
displeasure of God, great infamy 3 H. 8. c. 11.
to the faculty, and destruction of many of the King's Liege people.

Your Lordship knows very well the grounds, which first moved that noble and
renowned King Henry 8. in the tenth year of his Reign to constitute this Royal
foundation; whose Princely wisdom herein was highly approved by Act of
Parliament, in the 14, 15. years of 14, 15 H. 8. c. 5.
his Reign; in which, the King's Letters Patents, and all and every Grant,
Article, and other thing, contained and specified therein, were approved,
granted, ratified and confirmed.

About seventeen years after, a second Act of Parliament was granted to this
Society by the 32 H. 8. c. 42.
same King of glorious memory, for enlarging of their Privileges, with the
addition of many new ones.

In the first of Q. Mary (being but 29 or 30 1 Q. M. Ses. 2. c. 9.
years from the 14, 15 H. 8.) a third Act of Parliament was made, in
confirmation of the forementioned Statute; and many more privileges of great
moment, were added to the former.

Queen Elizabeth and King James of ever glorious memory; and his Sacred Majesty
now Reigning (whom God long preserve from all traitorous Associations and
Conspiracies of bloudthirsty and malicious men!) have by their several Royal
Patents granted them farther Liberties, K. James and K. Charles 2. in their
Royal Patents.
Powers and Privileges, by reason of the great increase of unskilful,
illiterate, and unlicensed practisers of Physic in London and within 7 Miles
thereof; who now, my Lord, are arrived to that height of impudence, not only
in their public writings, but even in the King's Courts of Judicature, that
they dare adventure to question the Authority of an Act of Parliament, though
owned as such, by those Royal Testimonies already named; by the Chief Justices
and Judges of the King's Bench and Common Pleas (such as Popham, Coke, Fleming,
Foster, Walmesly, Warburton, Daniel, Williams, Tanfield, Crook, Littleton,
etc.) in their several Books of Reports, and in their resolutions of several
questions (relating to the College of Physicians) wherein they gave their
opinions by an order from K. James, directed to the Right honorable Thomas
Lord Ellesmere Lord Chancellor of England, which opinions are inserted in this
book, etc. by its being printed in several Statute books and Abridgments of the
same, which were published (even in that King's Reign in which they were
enacted) by Robert Redman, Thomas Berthelet, Wyllyam Mydylton, Thomas Petyt,
and Thomas Powel, Printers to his Most Excellent Majesty; and since, in all the
Statute books and Abridgments that have been Printed to this time.

Nay more than this, In the Rolls Chapel; and in the Journal books formerly
collected by that famous Antiquary Sir Robert Cotton, and preserved by Sir
John, in his Father's Library; and in the Journal books of the Right honorable
the Earl of Clarendon (which I had the honor to look over) I find 36* Acts of
Parliament passed in that Session of 14, 15 Hen. 8. At the end of the twenty
fourth this is inserted,

Item diverse communes petitiones rem publicam concernentes, exhibit erant
dicto Domino Regi in Parliamento predicto, cum suis responsionibus, quarum
tenores sequuntur and sunt tales.

Amongst which (upon the same Roll) the 33th is an Act concerning Physicians;
and after the 36th, is entered the King's Commission to Cardinal Wolsey, Printed
p. 12. of this book, which finisheth that Roll of Parliament. In which, it is
thus expressed; Reverendissimus Dominus Legatus Cancellarius, Acta omnia in
presenti Parliamento pro bono publico edita and facta, ex mandato Domini Regis
recitari and publicari jussit. Quibus ex ordine per inicia recitatis and lectis
and singulis per Clericum Parliamenti responsione secundum annotationes Regie
voluntatis declarativas a dorso scriptas, facta, etc.

Add to this, that excellent and learned account given by the Lord Chief
Justice Hales (why the Royal Signature might not be entered by the Clerk of
Parliament in his transcript of the Original Rolls, under this Act of
Parliament and nine others passed in that Session) in a late Judgment given
against Huybert; As likewise the testimony of the Lord Herbert of Cherbury in
his excellent book of the Life and Reign of King Henry 8. drawn out of his
Majesty's Records: In which he acquaints us with the more famous Statutes
enacted in the Parliament of 14, 15 Henry 8. amongst which, we find this
relating to the College of Physicians.

Now, my Lord, from these Authorities and many others of the like kind; We
should be in some hopes, that these men being formerly driven from their old
plea of 34, 35 of Hen. 8. c. 8. (An Act made against Surgeons for their
unconscionable dealing with their Patients, and for giving liberty to all such,
who practice for Piety and Charity without taking money or gain, as appears by
a Judgment given against Butler p. 258) and from this their late Plea of Null
tiel Record; that our profession might flourish, and that as King James has
expressed it in his Royal Patent, by rejecting such illiterate and unskilful
Practisers, those that were Learned, Grave and Profound Practisers in that
Faculty should receive more bountiful reward; and also the industrious
Students of that profession would be the better encouraged in their Studies and
endeavors: But that we have to deal with a sort of men not of Academical, but
Mechanic education; who being either actually engaged in the late Rebellion,
or bred up in some mean and contemptible trades, were never taught the duty
they owe to God or their Sovereign, to their Native Country or the Laws,
thereof.

We hope therefore that Your Lordship will pardon us, in begging your Honor's
favor and Protection for the encouragement and defense of a Society (though
established by Royal Graunts and Acts of Parliament) thus rudely assaulted by
barbarous and illiterate Mechanics. Your Lordship's profound knowledge in the
Laws of your Country, as well as in all humane learning, is no less known and
admired; than your eminent, exemplary courage and constant faithfulness to the
Crown and Government in Church and State as it is now by Law established; to the
preservation of which, your Lordship's singular wisdom, vigilance and
unwearied endeavors have highly and successfully contributed. To which
purposes, that your Lordship may long live in the favor of your Prince, and
affections of all his Loyal and good Subjects; is and shall be the constant and
ardent desire of

Your Lordship's Most humble and devoted Servant, Charles Goodall.

THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS Established by LAW, etc.
3 H. VIII. C. 11.
An Act for the appointing of Physicians and Surgeons.
TO the King our Sovereign Lord, and to all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled: Forasmuch as the science and
cunning of Physic and Surgery (to the perfect knowledge whereof be requisite
both great learning and ripe experience) is daily within this Realm exercised
by a great multitude of ignorant persons, of whom the greater part
Inconveniences ensuing by ignorant Persons practicing Physic or Surgery.
have no manner of insight in the same, nor in any other kind of learning: Some
also can no letters on the Book, so far forth that common Artificers, as
Smiths, Weavers, and Women boldly and accustomably take upon them great Cures,
and things of great difficulty; in the which they partly use Sorcery and
Witchcraft, partly apply such Medicines unto the disease, as be very noious,
and nothing meet therefore to the high displeasure of God, great infamy to the
Faculty, and the grievous hurt, damage, and destruction of many of the King's
Liege people; most especially of them that cannot discern the uncunning from
the cunning: Be it therefore (to the surety and comfort of all manner people)
by the authority of this present Parliament enacted, That no person within the
City of London, nor within By whom every Physician and Surgeon shall be allowed.
seven miles of the same, take upon him to exercise and occupy as a Physician
or Surgeon, except he be first examined, approved and admitted by the Bishop of
London, or by the Dean of Paul's, for the time being, calling to him or them
four Doctors of Physic, and for Surgery, other expert persons in that faculty;
and for the first examination such as they shall think convenient, and
afterward always four of them that have been so approved; upon the pain of
forfeiture for every month that they do occupy as Physicians or Surgeons, not
admitted nor examined after the tenor of this Act, of 5 li. to be employed the
one half thereof to the use of our Sovereign Lord the King, and the other half
thereof to any person that will sue for it by Action of Debt, in which no wager
of Law nor Protection shall be allowed.

2. And over this, That no person out of the said City, and Precinct of seven
miles of the same, except he have been (as is aforesaid): approved in the same,
A. Physician or Surgeon allowed by the Bishop of the Diocese.
take upon him to exercise and occupy as a Physician or Surgeon, in any
Diocese, within this Realm, out if he be first examined and approved by the
Bishop of the same Diocese, or he being out of the Diocese, by his
Vicat-general: either of them calling to them such expert persons in the said
faculties, as their discretion shall think convenient, and giving their Letters
Testimonials under their Seal to him that they shall so approve, upon like pain
to them that occupy contrary to this Act (as is above said) to be levied and
employed after the form before expressed.

3. Provided always, That this Act nor any thing The Privileges of Oxford and
Cambridge.
therein contained, be prejudicial to the Universities of Oxford or Cambridge,
or either of them, or to any Privileges granted to them. (2) Memorand. That
Surgeons be comprised in this Act as Physicians, for like mischief of ignorant
persons presuming to exercise Surgery. Rast. Pla. fol. 426.

5 H. VIII. C. 6.
An Act concerning Surgeons to be discharged of Quests and other things.
Shows unto your discreet wisedoms, your humble Orators the Wardens and
Fellowship of the craft and mystery of Surgeons enfranchifed in the City of
London, not passing in number 12 persons, That whereas they and their
Predecessors, from the time that no mind is to the contrary, as well in this
noble City of London, as in all other Cities and Boroughs within this Realm, or
elsewhere, for the continual service and attendance that they daily and nightly
at all hours and times give to the King's The causes why Surgeons have been
exempt from bearing of Armor or other Services.
liege people, for the relief of the same according to their science, have been
exempt and discharged from all offices and business, wherein they should use or
bear any manner of Armor or Weapon, and with like privilege have been
entreated as Heralds of Arms, as well in battles and fields, as other places,
there for to stand unharnessed and unweaponed according to the Law of Arms,
because they be persons that never used feats of War, nor ought to use, but
only the business and exercise of their science, to the help and comfort of the
King's liege people in the time of their need. (2) And in the aforesaid City of
London, from the time of their first Incorporation, when they have been many mo
in number than they be now, were never called nor charged to be on Quest,
Watch, Surgeons discharged of Enquests, etc.
nor other Office, whereby they should use or occupy any Armor, or defenceable
geer of War, wherethrough they should be unready, and let to practice their
cure of men being in peril: (3) Therefore for that there be so small number of
the said fellowship of the craft and mystery of Surgeons, in regard of the
great multitude of Patients that be, and daily chance and infortune happens and
increases in the foresaid City of London, and that many of the King's liege
people suddenly wounded and hurt, for default of help in time to them to be
showed, perish, and so diverse have done, as evidently is known, by occasion
that your said suppliants have been compelled to attend upon such
Constableship, Watches and Iuries, as is aforesaid: (4) Be it enacted and
established by the King our Sovereign Lord, and the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and by the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by
authority of the same, that from henceforth your said Suppliants be discharged,
and not chargeable of Constableship, Watch, and of The Surgeons of London shall
be exempt from being Constables, bearing of Armor, or to be put in Watches or
Inquests.
all manner of office bearing any armor; and also of all Enquests and Iuries
within the City of London. (5) And also that this Act in all things do extend
to all Barber-Surgeons admitted and approved to exercise the said mystery of
Surgeons, according to the form of the Statute lately made in that behalf, so
that they exceed not, ne be at one time above the number of xii persons. Stat.
3 H. 8. 11. 32. H. 8. 42.

14, 15 H. 8. C. 5. according to the Exemplification.
The privileges and authority of Physicians in London.
CAROLUS SECUNDUS Dei gratia Anglie Scocie Francie and Hibernie Rex fidei
defensor, etc. Omnibus ad quos presents litere pervenerint Salutem. Inspeximus
Irrotulamen' cujusdam Actus Parliamen' Domini Henrici nuper Regis Anglie
inchoat' and tent' in Civitate London' quinto decimo die Aprilis Anno Regni sui
Quarto decimo and deinde prorogat usque Westmonaster' and ibidem tent' die
Veneris ultimo die Julii Anno ejusdem Regis quinto decimo and in Cur'
Cancellar' nostre Irrotulat' ac ibidem de Recordo remanen' in hec verba.
Parliamen' inchoatum and tentum in Civitate Londonniarum quinto decimo die
Aprilis Anno Regni metuendissimi ac potentissimi Regis Henrici Octavi fidei
defensoris quarto decimo and deinde prorogatum usque Westmonaster' and ibidem
tentum die Veneris ultimo die Julii Anno ejusdem Regis quinto decimo.

In the most humble wise shows unto your Highness your true and faithful
subjects and liegemen John Chamber Thomas Linacre Fernandus de Victoria your
Phisicions and Nicholas Halswell John Fraunces and Robert Yaxley and all oder
men of the same faculte within the City of London and seven miles about That
where your Highness by your most gracious Letters Patents bearing date at
Westminster the twenty third day of September the Tenth year of your most
noble A body Corporate of the faculty of Physic within London and 7 miles
compass.
Reign for the common Wealth of this your realm in due exercising and
practicing of the faculty of Physic and the good ministration of Medicyns to
be had have incorporate and made of us and of our company aforesaid one body
and perpetual Co^iaitie or fellowshipp of the faculty of Physic and to have
perpetual Succession and Common Seal and to chose yearly a President of the
same fellowshipp and Comonaltie to oversee rule and govern the said
fellowshipp and Comonaltie and all men of the same faculty with diverse oder
liberties and Privileges by your Highness to us granted for the Common Wealth of
this your Realm as in your said most gracious Letters Patents more at large is
specified and contained The tenor whereof follows in these words.

HENRICUS dei gratia Rex Anglie and Francie and Dominus Hibernie Omnibus ad
quos presents litere pervenerint Salutem. Cum Regii Officii rect. nostrimunus
nominavimus arbitremur dicionis nostre hominum felicitati omni ratione
consulere Id autem vel in primis fore si improborum conatibus tempestive
occurramus Apprime necessarium duximus improborum quoque hominum qui medicinam
magis avaricie sue causa quam ullius bone consciencie fiducia profitebuntur
unde rudi and credule plebi plurima incommoda oriantur audaciam compescere
Itaque partim been institutarum Civitatum in Italia and aliis multis Nationibus
exemplum imitati partim gravium Virorum Doctorum Johannis Chamber Thome Linacre
Fernandi de Victoria Medicorum nostrorum Nicholai Halsewell Johannis Francisci
and Roberti Yaxley medicorum ac precipue Reverendissimi in Christo Patris ac
Domini Domini Thome tituli Sancte Cecilie trans Tib'im Sacrosce' Roman
Ecclesie Presbiteri Cardinalis Eborum Archiepi' and Regni nostri Anglie
Cancellarij charissimi precibus inclinati Collegium perpetuum doctorum and
gravium virorum qui A perpetual College of Physicians erected and granted in
London and the Suburbs.
Medicinam.
Medicina in urbe nostra Londino and Suburbiis intraque septem Millia passuum
ab ea Urbe quaquaversus public exerceant institui Volumus atque imperamus
Quibus tum sui honoris tum public utilitatis nomine cure ut speramus erit
maliciosorum quorum meminimus Insciciam temeritatemque tam exemplo gravitateque
sua deterrere quam per Leges nostras nuper editas ac per Constitutiones per
idem Collegium condendas punire Que quo facilius rite peragi possint memoratis
Doctoribus Johanni Chamber Thome Linacre Fernando de Victoria Medicis nostris
Nicho' Halsewell Johanni Francisci
Francisco and Roberto Yaxley medicis concessimus quod ipsi omnesque homines
ejusdem facultatis de and in Civitate predict' sint in re and nomine unum
Corpus and Comunitas perpetua sive Collegium perpetuum Et quod eqdem Comunitas
sive Collegium singulis annis imperpetuum eligere possint and facere de
Comunitate illa aliquem providum virum and in facultate Medicine A Prefident of
the College and his office and duty.
expertum in Presidentem ejusdem Collegii sive Comunitatis ad supervidend'
recognoscend' and gubernand' pro illo anno Collegium sive Comunitatem predict'
and omnes homines ejusdem facultatis and negocia eorundem Et quod iidem
Presidens Collegium sive Comunitas habeant The College shall have perpetual
Succession and a Common Seal. They shall be of ability to purchase Land.
successionem perpetuam and comune sigillum negociis dict' Comunitatis and
Presidentis imperpetuum serviturum Et quod ipsi and successores sui imperpetuum
sint Person habiles and capaces ad perquirend' and possidend' in feodo and
perpetuitate Terras and Tenementa Redditus and alias possessiones quascunque.
Concessimus etiam eis and successoribus suis pro nobis and heredibus nostris
quod ipsi and Successores sui possint perquirere sibi and Successoribus suis
tam in dicta urbe quam extra terras and tenemen' quecunque annuum valorem
duodecim librarum non exceden' Statuto de alienatione ad manum mortuam non
obstante Et quod ipsi per nomina Presidentis, Collegij seu Comunitatis
facultatis medicine London placitare and implacitari possint coram They may sue
and be sued.
quibuscunque Judicibus in Cur' and actionibus quibuscunque Et quod predict'
Presidens Collegium sive Comunitas and eorum Successores Congregationes licitas
and honestas de seipsis ac Statuta and Ordinationes pro salubri They may make
lawful Assemblies and Ordinances for Government.
gubernatione supervisu and correctione Collegii seu Comunitatis predict' and
omnium hominum eandem facultatem in dicta Civitate seu per septem Miliaria in
circuitu ejusdem Civitatis exercen' secundum necessitatis exigenciam quocies
and quando opus fuerit facere valiant licite and impune sine impedimento nostr'
hered' vel successorum nostrorum Justic. Eschaetorum Vicecomitum and aliorum
Ballivorum vel Ministrorum nostrorum heredum vel successorum nostrorum
quorumcunque. Concessimus No man shall practice Physic in London or 7 miles
thereof unless he be allowed.
etiam eisdem Presidenti and Collegio seu Comunitati and successoribus suis
quod nemo in dicta Civitate aut per septem Miliaria in circuitu ejusdem
exerceat dictam facultatem nisi ad hoc per dict' Presidentem and Comunitatem
seu Successores eorum qui pro tempore fuering admissus sit per ejusdem
Presidentis and Collegii literas Sigillo suo comuni sigillat' sub pena Centum
solidorum pro quolibet mense quo non admissus eandem facultatem exercuit Dimid'
inde nobis and heredibus nostris and dimid' dict' Presidenti and Collegio
applicand'. Preterea Volumus and concedimus pro nobis and Successoribus nostris
quantum in nobis est quod per Presidentem and Collegium predicte Comunitatis
pro tempore existen' and eorum Successores imperpetuum quatuor singulis Four
Physicians of London shall be yearly chosen to have the oversight of the others.
annis per ipsos eligantur qui habeant supervisum and scrutinium correctionem
and gubernationem omnium and singul' dict' Civitatis Medicorum utentium
facultat' medicine in eadem Civitate ac aliorum medicorum forinsecorum
quorumcunque facultatem illam medicine aliquo modo frequentantium and utentium
infra eandem civitatem and Suburbia ejusdem sive intra septem Miliaria in
circuitu ejusdem Civitatis ac punicionem eorundem pro delictis suis in non been
exequend' faciend' and utend' illa Necnon supervisum and scrutinium omnimod'
Medicinarum and earum
eorum recept' per dictos Medicos seu aliquem eorum hujusmodi ligeis nostris
pro eorum infirmitatibus curand' and sanand' dand' imponend' and utend'
quotiens and quando opus fuerit pro comodo and utilitate eorundem ligeorum
nostrorum. Ita quod punicio hujusmodi medicorum utentium dicta facultate
Medicine sic in premissis delinquentium per fines amerciamenta and
Imprisonamenta corporum suorum and per alias vias rationabiles and congruas
exequatur. Volumus eciam and concedimus pro nobis heredibus and successoribus
nostris quantum in nobis est quod nec Presidens nec aliquis de Collegio
predicto Medicorum nec successores sui nec eorum aliquis exercens facultatem
illam quoquo modo in futur' infra Civitatem nostram predictam and suburbia
ejusdem seu alibi summoneantur aut ponantur neque eorum aliquis summoneatur aut
ponatur in aliquibus Assisis Juratis Inquestis Inquisitionibus Attinctis and
aliis Physicians shall not be summoned on Juries in London.
recogn' infra dict' Civitat' and suburbia ejusdem imposterum coram Major' and
Vicecomitibus seu Coronatoribus dicte Civitatis nostre pro tempore existen'
capiend' aut per aliquem Officiarium seu Ministrum suum vel Officiarios sive
Ministros suos summonend' licet iidem Jurati Inquisiciones seu recogniciones
summ' fuerint super brevi vel brevibus nostris vel heredum nostrorum de recto.
Sed quod dict' Magistri sive Gubernatores ac Comunitas facultatis antedicte and
Successores sui and eorum quilibet dict' facultatem exercentes versus nos
heredes and Successores nostros ac versus Majorem and Vicecomites Civitatis
nostre predict' pro tempore existen' and quoscunque Officiarios and Ministros
suos sint inde quieti and penitus exonerati imperpetuum per presents Proviso
quod litere nostre seu aliquid in eis content' non cedent in prejudicium
Civitatis nostre London seu libertat' ejusdem Et hoc absque fine seu feodo pro
premissis seu sigillacione presentium nobis faciend' solvend' vel aliqualiter
reddend' Aliquo Statuto Ordinacione vel Actu in contrarium ante hec tempora
fact' edit' ordinat' seu provis' in aliquo non obstan'. In cujus rei
Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Test meipso apud
Westmonaster' Vicesimo tertio die Septembris Anno Regni nostri Decimo. Per
ipsum Regem and de data predicta authoritate Parliamen'. Tunstall.

And forsomoch that the making of the said Corporation is meritorious and very
good for the Comon-wealth of this your Realm It is therefore expedient and
necessary to Provide that noe person of the said Polityke body and Comonaltie
aforesaid be suffered to exercise and practyse Physyk but oonly these persons
that be profound sad and discreet groundly learned and deeply studied in
Physyke.

In consideration whereof and for the further authoriseing The King's Letters
Patents and every Article therein confirmed.
of the same Letters Patents and also enlargeing of further Articles for the
said Comon-Wealth to be had and made Pleases it your Highness with the assent
of your Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled to Enact Ordeyne and establish that the said Corporation of the said
Comonaltie and fellowshipp of the faculty of Physyke aforesaid And all and
every Grant Articles and other thing contained and specified in the said
Letters Patents be approved granted ratified and confirmed in this present
Parliament and clearly authorized and admitted by the same good lawful and
avayleable to your said Body corporate and their Successors for ever in as
ample and large manner as may be taken thought and construed by the same. And
that it please your Highness with the assent of your said Lords Spiritual and
Temporal and the Commons in this your present Parliament assembled furtherlie
to enact ordeyne and stablishe that the Six Persons before said in your said
most gracious Letters Patents named as Principalles There shall be Eight Elects
of the Physicians of London.
and first named of the said Comonaltie and fellowshipp chosyng to them two
moo of the said Comonaltie from hensforward be called and clepyd Electys And
that the same Electys yearly chose one of them to be President of the said
Comonalty and as often as any of the Rowmes and places of the same Electys shall
fortune to be void by death or otherwise then the Survivours of the said
Electys within thirty or forty days next after the death of them or any of
them shall chose name and admit one or moo as need shall require of the most
cunyng and expert Men of and in the said faculty in London to supply the said
room and number of Eight persons So that he or they that shall be so chosen
be first by the said Supervisors straytly examined after a form devised by
the said Electys and also by the same Supervisors approved.

And where that in Dyocesys of England out of London it is not light to find
always men hable to sufficiauntly examyne after the Statute such as shall be
admitted to exercise Physyke in them that it may be enacted in this present
Parliament That no person from hensforth be suffered to exercise or practyse
in Physyke through England until such time that he be Physicians in other
places must be examined by the President and 3 of the Elects.
examined at London by the said President and three of the said Electys And to
have from the said President or Electys Letters Testimonialx of their
approveing and examination Except he be a Graduat of Oxford or Cantebrygge
which has accomplished all thing for his form without any grace.

The Commission according to the Exemplification.
Die Mercurii vicesimo nono die Mensis Julii Centesimo decimo sexto die
Parliamenti Peste indies magis and magis in Urbe Londino ac presertim circa
Palacium Domini Regis de Bridewell invalescente Reverendissimus dominus Legatus
Cancellarius exhibuit ostendidit and ostendit certis
ceteris dominis Spiritualibus and Temporalibus quandam Comissionem Domini
Regis magno figillo suo sigillatam Cujus tenor sequitur in hec verba.

HENRICUS Octavus Dei gratia Anglie and Francie Rex fidei defensor and Dominus
Hibernie Reverendissimo in Christo Patri intimoque ac dilectissimo Consiliario
suo domino Thome miseracione divina tituli Sancte Cecilie Sacrosancte Roman
Ecclesie Presbitero Cardinali Eborum Archiepiscopo Angl' Primati Apl'ice Sedis
etiam de latere Legato Cancellar' suo salutem. Sciatis quod propter infeccionem
aeris Pestiferi ubique per Civitatem nostram London invalescentem de avisamento
and assensu Consilii nostri assignavimus vos Ac vobis tenore Presentium
committimus potestatem and authoritatem Specialem ad presens Parliamentum
nostrum usque Westmonaster' ad diem Veneris proximum futur' Prorogand' and
continuand' ibidemque tenend'. Dantes ulterius universis and singulis tam
Archiepiscopis Episcopis Abbatibus Prioribus Ducibus Comitibus Vicecomitibus
Baronibus Militibus Civibus Burgensibus quam omnibus aliis quorum interest ad
dictum Parliamentum nostrum predict' conventur' tenore presentium firmiter in
mandatis quod vobis in premissis faciend' and exequend' pareant obediant and
intendant prout decet. In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras fieri
fecimus Patentes. Test meipso apud Westmonaster' vicesimo nono die Julii anno
regni nostri Quintodecimo.

Quaquidem Comissione public per Clericum Parliamenti l'ca dictus
Reverendissimus dominus Legatus Cancellarius virtute ejusdem Comissionis
Prorogavit continuavit and adjournavit presens Parliamentum usque Westmonaster'
ad diem Veneris tunc proxime futur' ibidemque tenend' hora consueta. Mandavit
insuper dictus Reverendissimus Dominus Legatus Cancellarius Attorn' and
Solicitatori Domini Regis quod assumpta secum dicta Comissione die sequente
accederent in Domum Comunem intimaturi eis de domo Comuni dictam Prorogacionem
Continuacionem and adjornacionem lecturique coram eis dictam Comissionem ad
intencionem quod ipsi Comunes diem prefixum apud Westmonaster' observent prout
decet. Die Jovis tertiodecimo die Mensis Augusti CXXX die Parliamenti ad horam
ferme
firm sextam post Meridiem Domino Rege in Solio Majestatis sedente in Camera
vulgariter dicta Camera Parliamentorum infra Palacium suum Westmonaster'
assiden --
assedentibus dominis tam Spiritualibus Supple quam Temporalibus
habitibus sive Robis Parliamentalibus decoratis Present etiam de domo Comuni
sive inferiori toto populo and plebe Thomas Moore Miles eorum Prolocutor
silencio prius indict' graviter eloquent' and magno cum honoris and humilitatis
ac Modestiae
modestum honestament' Regiam affatus est Majestatem eandem summis and merit'
quidem extollens laudibus dotes graves nature and fortune eidem
eedem sue Majestati a Deo Maximo concessas copiosissime prosequebatur magnam
in Prudencia excellenciam promptam fortitudinis agilitat' mirum tempe --
temporancie moderamen divinum Justicie ardorem innatam Clemency erga subditos
benignitatem Subditorum erga eandem suam Majestatem amorem obedienciam ac
debitam observanciam multa per exempla declarabat. In cujus rei comprobacionem
quoddam scriptum Indentatum concessionem cujusdam maximi subsidii in se
continens Regie Majestati optulit Argumentum certe evid --
evedentissimum sum devocionis bonorum Regem Subditorum. Cui tam excellenti
excellent oracioni fine
finem tum
tam imposito dictus Reverendissimus dominus Legatus Cancellarius Domino Rege
prius consult' singula egregie recitando respondebat Quo fact' idem
Reverendissimus Dominus Legatus Cancellarius Acta omnia in presenti Parliamento
pro bono publico edita and facta ex mandato Domini Regis recitari and publicari
jussit Quibus ex ordine per inicia recitatis and lectis and singulis per
Clericum Parliamenti responcione secundum annotaciones Regie voluntatis
declarativas a dorso scriptas facta dictus Reverendissimus dominus Legatus
Cancellarius exhortando and admonendo nomine Regis omnes Dominos ac Comunes
supradictos ut diligent' Ordinat' and Statuta pro bono publico in hoc
Parliamento observarent and ab aliis observari procurarent Post graciar' ex
part Domini Regis accionem dict' Dominis and Comunibus pro eorum diligenti and
laboriosa perseverantia circa expedicionem premissorum Parliamentum predictum
nomine Regio duxit finiend' and dissolvend' and illud realit' finivit penitus
perit and dissolvit concedens omnibus liberam ad propria prodeundi
prodendi facultatem Anno Regni supradicti metuendissimi ac potentissimi domini
nostri Regis Quintodecimo.

Nos autem tenorem Premissorum predictorum ad requisicionem Georgii Ent Militis
in Medicinis Doctoris ac Presidentis dicti Collegii Medicorum London duximus
exemplificand' per presents. In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras
fieri fecimus Patentes. Test meipso apud Westmonaster' vicesimo septimo die
Februarii Anno regni nostri vicesimo quinto.

Examinat' per nos Will'm Child and S. Clerk in Cancellaria Magistror' duos.

MEMORANDUM.
THere are 36 Acts stitched together on the same Roll of Parliament, amongst
which the Physicians Act is to be found. 26 Of these were signed at the bottom
of each Act, Respons. Regis, Le Roy le veult; The other 10 (whose titles are as
follow) were stitched to the former 26 in order as they are underwritten. At
the bottom of which (upon the same Roll) you may find the foregoing Commission
which was exemplified with the Physicians Act and Patent at the request of the
College of Physicians.

27 An Act for the Haven or Port of Southampton. 28 An Act for George Guleford
to lay out a new way. 29 An Act that the 6 Clerks of Chauncery may Marry. 30 An
Act for George Roll to hold his place. 31 An Act for the Clothiers in Suffolk.
32 An Act concerning Cordwayners. 33 An Act touching Physicians. 34 An Act for
payment of Custom. 35 An Act against tracing of Hares. 36 A discharge of
Edmond Shaa.
32 H. 8. C. 40.
For Physicians and their Privileges.
IN most humble wise shows unto your Majesty, your true and faithful
subjects and liege men, the President of the Corporation of the Comminalty and
fellowship of the Science and faculty of Physic in your City of London, and
the Commons of the Fellows Privileges granted to Physicians in London.
of the same, that whereas diverse of them many times having in cure, as well
some of the Lords of your most honorable Council, and diverse times many of
the Nobility of this Realm, as many other your faithful and liege People,
cannot give their due attendance to them and other their Patients with such
diligence as their duty were and is to do, by reason they be many times
compelled, as well within the City of London, and suburbs of the same, as in
other Towns and Villages, to keep Watch and Ward, and be chosen to the Office
of Constable, and other Offices within the said City and suburbs of the same,
as in other places within this your Realm, to their great fatigation and
unquieting, and to the peril of their Patients, by reason they cannot be
conveniently attended: It may therefore please your most Excellent Majesty,
with the assent of your Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same, to enact, ordain,
and establish, That the said President of the Comminalty and fellowship for the
time being, and the Commons and Fellows of the same, and every Fellow thereof
that now be, or that at any time hereafter shall be their Successors, and the
Successors of every of them, at all time and times after the making of this
present Act, shall be discharged to keep any Watch The Physicians in London
shall be discharged to bear certain Offices there.
and Ward in your said City of London, or the suburbs of the same, or any part
thereof; and that they or any of them shall not be chosen Constable, or any
other Office in the said City or suburbs. And that if any time hereafter the
said President for the time being, or any of the said Commons or Fellows for
the time being, by any ways or means be appointed or elected to any Watch or
Ward, Office of Constable, or any other Office within the said City or suburbs,
the same appointment or election to be utterly void and of none effect; any
order, custom, or Law to the contrary before this time used in the said City
notwithstanding.

2. And that it may please your most Royal Majesty by the authority aforesaid,
that it may be further enacted, ordained and established, for the common wealth
and surety of your loving subjects of this your Realm, in and for the
administration of medicines to such your said subjects as shall have need of
the same, that from henceforth the said President for the time being, Commons
and Fellows, and their Successors, may yearly, at such time as they shall think
most meet and convenient for the same, elect and choose four Persons of the said
Commons and Four Physicians shall be chosen yearly to search Apothecary-wares
in London.
Fellows, of the best learned, wisest and most discreet, such as they shall
think convenient, and have experience in the said faculty of Physic: And that
the said four persons so elected and chosen, after a corporal oath to them
ministered by the said President, or his Deputy, shall and may, by virtue of
this present Act, have full authority and power, as often as they shall think
meet and convenient, to enter into the house or houses of all and every
Apothecary, now or any time hereafter using the mystery or craft of Apothecary
within the said City, only to search, view, and see such Apothecary-wares,
drugs and stuffs, as the Apothecaries, or any of them have, or at any time
hereafter shall have in their house or houses: And all such wares, drugs and
stuffs, as the said four persons shall then find defective, corrupted and not
meet nor convenient to be ministered in any Medicines for the health of man's
body, the same four Persons calling to them the Wardens of the said mystery of
Apothecaries within the said City for that time being, or one of them shall
cause to be brent, or otherwise destroy the same, as they shall think meet by
their discretion. And if the said Apothecaries or any of them, at any time
hereafter, do obstinately or willingly refuse or deny the said four persons
yearly elected and chosen, as is beforesaid, to enter into their said house or
houses for the causes, intent and purpose before rehearsed; That then they and
every of them so offending contrary to The forfeiture of an Apothecary that
refuses to have his house searched.
this Act, for every time that he or they do so offend, to forfeit C. s. the
one half to your Majesty, and the other half to him that will sue for the same
by Action of debt, bill, plaint, or information, in any of the King's Courts,
wherein no wager of Law, essoin, or Stat. 1 M. 9.
protection shall be allowed: And if the said four persons or any of them so
elected and chosen as before is said, do refuse to be sworn, or after his said
oath to him or them administered, do obstinately refuse to The forfeiture of
such as being elect refuse to be sworn or to make search.
make the said search and view once in the year at such time as they shall
think most convenient by their discretions, having no lawful impediment by
sickness or otherwise to the contrary; That then for every such wilful and
obstinate default every of the said four persons making default to forfeit
forty shillings.

3. And forasmuch as the science of Physic does comprehend, include and
contain the knowledge of Surgery, as a special member and part of the same,
Therefore be it enacted, That any of the said Company or Fellowship of
Physicians, being able, chosen Any of the Physicians in London may practice
Surgery.
and admitted by the said President and Fellowship of Physicians, may from time
to time, as well within the City of London, as elsewhere within this Realm,
practice and exercise the said science of Physic in all and every his members
and parts; any Act, Statute or Provision made to the contrary notwithstanding.

32 H. 8. C. 42.
For Barbers and Surgeons.
THE King our Sovereign Lord, by the advice of his Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, by all the common assents, duly pondering, among other
things necessary for the common wealth of this Realm, that it is very expedient
and needful to provide for men expert in the science of Physic and Surgery,
for the health of man's body, when infirmities and sickness shall happen, for
the due exercise and maintenance whereof, good and necessary Acts be already
made and provided: Yet nevertheless, forasmuch as within the City of London,
where men of great experience, as well in speculation as in practice of the
science and faculty of Surgery, be abiding and inhabiting, and have The
authority and liberties of Barbers and Surgeons in London being made of one
Company.
more commonly the daily exercise and experience of the same science of
Surgery, than is had or used within any parts of this Realm; and by occasion
thereof many expert persons be brought up under them as their servants,
Apprentices and others, who by the exercise and diligent information of their
said Masters, as well now as hereafter, shall exercise the said science within
diverse other parts of this Realm, to the great relief, comfort and succor of
much People, and to the sure safeguard of their bodily health, their limbs and
lives: And forasmuch as within the said City of London there be now two several
and distinct Companies of Surgeons, occupying and exercising the said science
and faculty of Surgery, the one Company being commonly called the Barbers of
London, and the other Company called the Surgeons of London; which Company of
Barbers be incorporated to sue and be sued by the name of Masters or Governors
of the Mystery or Comminalty of the Barbers of London, by virtue By whom and at
what time the Barbers of London were incorporate.
and authority of the Letters Patents under the great Seal of the late King of
famous memory, King Edward the fourth, dated at Westminster the four and
twentieth day of February, in the first year of his Reign, which afterward, as
well by our most dread Sovereign Lord, as by the right noble and virtuous
Prince, King Henry the seventh, Father unto the King's most excellent Highness,
now being, were and be confirmed, as by sundry Letters Patents thereof made,
amongst other things in the same contained more at large may appear; and the
other Company called the Surgeons, be not incorporate, nor have any manner
Corporation: which two several and distinct Companies of Surgeons were
necessary to be united and made one body incorporate, to the intent that by
their union and often assembly together, The benefit like to ensue by joining
the Barbers and Surgeons in one Company.
the good and due order, exercise and knowledge in the said science or faculty
of Surgery, should be as well in speculation as in practice, both to
themselves, and all other their said servants and Apprentices, now and
hereafter to be brought up under them, and by their learning, and diligent and
ripe informations, more perfect, speedy and effectual remedy should be, than it
has been, or should be if the said two Companies of Barbers and Surgeons
should continue severed asunder, and not joined together, as they before this
time have been, and used themselves, not meddling together: Wherefore in
consideration of the Premises, Be it enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord,
and by the Lords spiritual and temporal, and by the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, That the said two
several and distinct Companies of Surgeons, that is to say both the Barbers and
the Surgeons, and every person of them, being a Freeman of either of the said
Companies after the custom of the said City of London, and their Successors,
from henceforth immediately be united, and made one entire The Barbers and
Surgeons of London made one Company and incorporated.
and whole Body Corporate, and one Comminalty perpetual which at all times
hereafter shall be called by the name of Masters or Governors of the Mystery
and Comminalty of Barbers and Surgeons of London for evermore, and by none
other name: And by the same name to implead, and be impleaded before all manner
of Justices, in all Courts, in all manner of Actions and Suits: And also to
purchase, enjoy and take, to them and to their Successors, all manner of Lands,
Tenements, Rents, and other Possessions whatsoever they be: And also shall have
a common Seal, to serve for the business of the said Company and Corporation
for ever. And by the same name, peaceably, quietly and indefeizably shall have,
possess and enjoy, to them and to their Successors for ever, all such Lands and
Tenements, and other Hereditaments whatsoever, which the said Company or
Comminalty of Barbers have and enjoy, to the use of the said Mystery and
Comminalty of Barbers of London: And also shall peaceably and quietly have and
enjoy all and singular Benefits, Grants, Liberties, Privileges, Franchises and
free Customs, and also all manner of other things at any time given or granted
unto the said Companies of Barbers or Surgeons, by whatsoever name or names
they or any of them were called, and which they or any of them now have, or any
of their Predecessors have had, by Acts of Parliament, Letters Patents of the
King's Highness, or other his most noble Progenitors, or otherwise by any
lawful means had at any time before this present Act, in as large and ample
manner and form, as they or any of them have, had, might or should enjoy the
same, this union or conjunction of the said Companies together notwithstanding:
And as largely to have and enjoy the premises, as if the same were, and had
been specially and particularly expressed and declared with the best and most
clearest words and terms in the Law, to all intents and purposes: And that all
persons of the said Company now incorporate by this present Act, and their
Successors that shall be lawfully admitted and approved to occupy Surgery,
after the form of the Statute in that case ordained The Barbers and Surgeons in
London shall be exempt from bearing of arms, or to be in Watches or Inquests.
5 H. 8. 6.
and provided, shall be exempt from bearing of Armor, or to be put in any
Watches or Inquests: And that they and their Successors shall have the search,
oversight, punishment and correction as well of Freemen as of foreign, for such
offenses as they or any of them shall commit, or do against the good order of
Barbery or Surgery, as before this time among the said Mystery and Company of
Barbers of London has been used and accustomed, according 19 H. 7. 7.
to the good and politic Rules and Ordinances by them made and approved by the
Lords Chancellor, Treasurer, and two Chief Justices of either Bench, or any
three of them, after the form of the Statute in that case after ordained and
provided.

2. And further be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the said Masters
or Governors of the Mystery and Comminalty of Barbers, and Surgeons of London;
and their Successors yearly for ever after their said discretions, at their
free liberty and pleasure shall and may have and take without contradiction,
The Surgeons may take yearly four condemned Persons for Anatomies.
four persons condemned, adjudged, and put to death for felony by the due order
of the King's Laws of this Realm, for Anatomies, without any further suit or
labor to be made to the King's Highness, his Heirs or Successors for the same;
And to make incision of the same dead bodies, or otherwise to order the same,
after their said discretions, at their pleasures, for their further and better
knowledge, instruction, insight, learning and experience in the said Science or
faculty of Surgery: Saving unto all persons, their heirs and successors, all
such right, title, interest and demand, which they or any of them might
lawfully claim to have in or to any of the lands and tenements, with the
appurtenances, belonging unto the said Company of Barbers and Surgeons, or any
of them at any time before the making of this Act, in as ample manner and form
as they or any of them had or ought to have had heretofore; Any thing in this
present Act comprised to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

3. And forasmuch as all persons using of the Mystery or faculty of Surgery,
oftentimes meddle and take into their cure and houses, such sick and diseased
persons as been infected with the Pestilence, great Pocks, and such other
contagious infirmities, do use or exercise Barbery, as washing or shaving, and
other feats thereunto belonging, which is very perilous for infecting the
King's liege People resorting to their shops and houses, there being washed or
shaven: Wherefore it is now enacted, ordained and provided by the Authority
aforesaid, That no manner No Barber in London shall use Surgery.
person within the City of London, Suburbs of the same, and one mile compass of
the said City of London, after the feast of the Nativity of our Lord God next
coming, using any Barbery or Shaving, or that hereafter shall use any Barbery
or Shaving within the said City of London, Suburbs, or one mile circuit of the
same City of London, he nor they, nor none other for them, to his or their use,
shall occupy any Surgery, letting of blood, or any other thing belonging to
Surgery, (drawing of teeth only except.) And furthermore in like manner,
whosoever that uses the Mystery or Craft of Surgery within the circuit
aforesaid, as long as he shall No Surgeon in London shall use the craft of
shaving.
fortune to use the said Mystery or Craft of Surgery, shall in no wise occupy
nor exercise the Feat or Craft of Barbery or Shaving, neither by himself, nor
by none other for him, to his or their use: And moreover, that all manner of
Persons using Surgery for the time being, as well Freemen as Foreigns, Aliens
and Strangers within the said City of London, the Suburbs thereof, and one mile
compass of the same City of London, before the Feast of St. Michael the
Archangel next coming, shall have an open Sign on the Street side where they
Every Surgeon in London shall have a Sign at his door.
shall fortune to dwell, that all the King's liege people there passing by, may
know at all times whither to resort for their remedies in time of necessity.

4. And further be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, That no manner of
person after the said feast None shall be a Barber in London but a Freeman of
that Company.
of St. Michael the Archangel next coming, presume to keep any Shop of Barbery
or Shaving within the City of London, except he be a freeman of the same
Corporation and Company.

5. And furthermore at such times as have been heretofore accustomed, there
shall be chosen by the same Company, four Masters or Governors of the Four
Wardens shall be chosen and their authority.
same Corporation or Company, of the which four, two of them shall be expert in
Surgery, and the other two in Barbery; Which four Masters, and every of them,
shall have full power and authority from time to time, during their said
office, to have the oversight, search, punishment and correction of all such
defaults and inconveniences as shall be found among the said Company using
Barbery or Surgery, as well of Freemen as Foreigns, Aliens and Strangers,
within the City of London, and the circuits aforesaid, after their said
discretions: And if any person or persons using any Barbery or Surgery, at any
time hereafter offend in any of these Articles aforesaid; then for every month
the said Persons so offending, shall lose, forfeit and pay The forfeitures of
the Offenders.
five pounds, the one moiety thereof to the King our Sovereign Lord, and the
other moiety to any person that will or shall sue therefore by action of debt,
bill, plaint or information in any the King's Courts, wherein no Wager of Law,
Essoin or Protection shall be admitted or allowed in the same.

6. Provided that the Barbers and Surgeons, and every of them, shall bear and
pay lot and scot, and such other charges as they and their predecessors have
been accustomed to pay, within the said City of London; This Act nor any thing
therein contained to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

7. Provided always, and be it enacted by Authority aforesaid, That it shall be
lawful to any of the Any person may keep a Barber or Surgeon as his Servant.
King's subjects, not being Barber or Surgeon, to retain, have and keep in his
house, as his servant, any person being a Barber or Surgeon, which shall and
may use and exercise those arts and faculties of Barbery or Surgery or either
of them, in his Master's house or elsewhere by his Master's license or
commandment; Any thing in this Act above-written to the contrary
notwithstanding.

34, 35 H. 8. C. 8.
A Bill that persons being no common Surgeons, may minister Medicines,
notwithstanding the Statute.
WHERE in the Parliament holden at Westminster, in the third year of the
King's Any person being no common Surgeon may minister outward Medicines.
most gracious Reign, amongst other things, for the avoiding of Sorceries,
Witchcrafts and other inconveniences, it was enacted, That no person within
the City of London, nor within seven miles of the same, should take upon him to
exercise and occupy as Physician or Surgeon, except he be first examined,
approved and admitted by the Bishop of London and other, under and upon certain
pains and penalties in the same Act mentioned: Sithence the making of which
said Act, the Company By what means the Surgeons of London have abused the
Statute of 3 H. 8. 11. for their own gain.
and Fellowship of Surgeons of London, minding only their own lucres, and
nothing the profit or ease of the diseased or Patient, have sued, troubled and
vexed diverse honest persons, as well men as women, whom God has endued with
the knowledge of the nature, kind and operation of certain Herbs, Roots and
Waters, and the using and ministering of them, to such as been pained with
customable diseases, as Women's Breasts being sore, a Pin and the Web in the
Eye, Vncomes of hands, Scaldings, Burnings, Sore mouths, the Stone, Strangury,
Saucelim and Morphew, and such other like diseases: And yet the said persons
have not taken any thing for their pains or cunning, but have ministered the
same to poor people only for neighborhood and God's sake, and of pity and
charity. And it is now well known, that the Surgeons admitted will do no Cure
to any Person, but where they shall know to be rewarded with a greater Sum or
reward then the Cure extends unto; for in case they would minister their
cunning unto sore people unrewarded, there should not so many rot and perish to
death for lack of help of Surgery as daily do: but the greater part of Surgeons
admitted, been much more to be blamed then those persons that they trouble.

2. For although the most part of the persons of the said Craft of Surgeons
have small cunning, yet they will take great sums of money, and do little
therefore, and by reason thereof they do oftentimes impair and hurt their
Patients, rather then do them good. In consideration whereof, and for the ease,
comfort, succor, help, relief and health of the King's poor Subjects,
inhabitants of this his Realm, now pained or diseased, or that hereafter shall
be pained or diseased;

3. Be it ordained, established and enacted by the authority of this present
Parliament, That at all It shall be lawful for any person to cure outward
sores notwithstanding the Statute of 3 H. 8. 11.
time from henceforth it shall be lawful to every person being the King's
subject, having knowledge and experience of the nature of Herbs, Roots and
Waters, or of the operation of the same, by speculation or practice within any
part of the Realm of England, or within any other the King's dominions, to
practice, use and minister in and to any outward sore, uncome, wound,
apostemations, outward swelling or disease, any herb or herbs, ointments,
baths, pultes and emplaisters, according to their cunning, experience and
knowledge in any of the diseases, sores and maladies beforesaid, and all other
like to the same, or drinks for the Stone and Strangury, or Agues, without
suit, vexation, trouble, penalty, or loss of their goods, the foresaid Statute
in the foresaid third year of the King's most gracious Reign, or any other Act,
Ordinance or Statute to the contrary hereof made, in any wise notwithstanding.

1 Q. M. according to the Exemplification.
Sessio 2. C. 9.
An Act touching the Corporation of the Physicians in London.
CAROLUS SECUNDUS Dei gratia Anglie Scotie Francie and Hibernie Rex fidei
defensor, etc. Omnibus ad quos presents litere pervenerint Salutem. Inspeximus
irrotulament' cujusdam Actus Parliamen' Domine Marie nuper Regine Anglie tent'
per prorogationem apud Westm' vicesimo quarto die Octobris Anno Regni sui primo
and ibidem continuat' usque in sextum diem Decembris Anno predict' quo die
dissolutum erat in Cur' Cancellar' nostre irrotulat' ac ibidem de Recordo
remanen' in hec verba. Exhibita est Regie Majestati in Parliamento predicto
Billa quedam formam Actus in se continens.

Where in the Parliament holden at London the fifteenth day of April in the
fourteenth year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King Henry the
eighte and from thence adjourned to Westminster the last day of July in the
fifteenth year of the Reign of the same King and there holden It was enacted
that a certain grant by Letters Patentes of Incorporation made and granted
by our said late King to the Physicians of London and all Clauses and Articles
contained in the same Grant should be approved granted ratified and
Confirmed by the same Parliament: For the consideration thereof Be it enacted
by authority of this present Parliament that the said Statute A confirmation
of the Statute of 14 H. 8. 5. touching the corporation of Physicians in London.
or Act of Parliament with every Article and Clause therein contained shall
from henceforth stand and continue still in full strength force and effect Any
Act Statute Law Custom or any other thing made had or used to the contrary
in any wise notwithstanding. And for the better reformation of diverse
Enormities happening to the Commonwealth by the evil using and undue
administration of Physic and for the enlarging of further Articles for the
better execution of the things contained in the said Grant enacted Be it
therefore now enacted That whenever the President of the College or
Commonaltie of the faculty of Physic of London for the time being or such as
the said President and College shall yearly according to the tenor and
meaning of the said Act authorize to search examine correct and punish all
Offenders and Transgressors in the said faculty within the same City and
precinct in the said Act expressed shall send or commit any such Offendour or
Offenders for his or their Offenses or disobedience contrary to any Article
or Clause contained in the said Grant or Act Whosoever shall be committed to
Prison by the President of the College of Physicians in London shall be
received and kept thereby.
to any Ward Gayle or Prison within the same City and Precinct The Tower of
London except That then from time to time the Warden Gailour or Keeper Wardenns
Geylours or Keepers of the Wards Gayles or Prisons within the City and
Precinct aforesaid (Except before excepted) shall receive into his or their
Prisons All and every such Person and Persons so offending as shall be so
sent or committed to him or them as is aforesaid and there shall safely keep
the Person or Persons so committed in any of their Prisons at the proper
Costs and Charges of the said person or persons so committed without Bail or
Maineprise until such time as such offender or offenders or disobedientes be
discharged of the said Imprisonment by the said President and such Persons as
by the said College shall be thereunto authorized upon pain that all and
every such Wardeyn Gaylor or Keeper doing the contrary shall lose and forfeite
the double of such fine and amerciament as such Offender and Offenders or
disobedientes shall be assessed to pay by such as the said President and
College shall The offenders forfeiture and who shall have it and by what
means.
authorize as aforesaid So that the same fine and amerciament be not at any
one time above the sum of Twenty pounds The moytie thereof to be employed to
the use of our Soveraygne Lady the Queen her Heirs and Successoures The
other moitie unto the said President and College. All which forfeitures to be
recovered by action of Debt Bill Plainte or Information in any of the Queens
her Heirs and Successoures Courts of Records against any such Wardeyn
Gaylour or Keeper so offending In which suite no Essoigne Wager of Law nor
protection shall be allowed ne admitted for the defendant. And further be it
enacted by the authority aforesaid for the better execution of the search and
view of Poticarye Wares Drugges and Searching in London for Apothecary wares.
Compositions according to the tenor of a Statute made in the Two and
thirtieth year of the Reign of the said late King Henry the eight That it
shall be lawful for the Wardeins of the Grocers or one of them to goo with
the said Physicians in their view and search That if the said Wardein or
Wardeins do refuse or delay his or their coming thereunto furthwithe and
immediatelye when the said President or four of his College elect as
aforesaid do call upon him or them That then the said Physicians may and shall
execute that search and view and the due Punishment of the Poticaries for any
their evil and fawty stuff according to the Statute last before mentioned
without the assistance of any of the said Wardeines Any Clause in the
aforenamed Statute to the contrary hereof notwithstanding. And every such
Person or Persons as will or shall resist The penalty for resisting of search
of Apothecary wares.
such search shall forfeite for every such resistance Ten Pounds the same
Penalty to be recovered in form aforesaid without any of the delays
aforesaid to be had in suite thereof.

And further be it enacted That all Justices Other Magistrates shall assist the
Physicians in their search.
Majors Shrieffes Bailiefes Constables and other Ministers and Officers within
the City and precinct abovewritten upon request to them made shall help aid
and assist the President of the said College and all persons by them from time
to time authorized for the due execution of the said Acts or Statutes upon
pain for not giving of such aid help and assistance to run in contempt of
the Queens Majesty her Heirs and Successoures.

Cui quidem Bille perlecte and ad plenum intellecte per dictam dominam Reginam
ex authoritate Parliamenti predicti sic responsum est, La Reign le veult. Nos
autem tenorem premissorum ad requisitionem Georgii Ent Militis Presiden'
Collegii Medicorum London' per presents duximus Exemplificand'. In cujus rei
Testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Test meipso apud
Westmonaster' decimo tertio die Julii Anno Regni nostri Vicesimo sexto.

Grimston Ha.
Examinat' per nos Lacon Wm Child and Miles Cook in Cancellaria Magistrorum
duos.



Q. Elizabeth 's Charter for Anatomies.
ELIZABETH dei gratia Anglie Francie and Hibernie Regina fidei defensor, etc.
Omnibus ad quos presents Litere pervenerint Salutem. Cum Preclarissime memory
Pater noster Henricus octavus nuper Rex Anglie inter nonnullas alias in
commodum and utilitatem regni sui Anglie preclare admodum sancitas and
stabilitas Ordinationes saluti subditorum suorum summopere invigilans per
Litteras suas Patentes Collegium perpetuum quorundam gravium virorum medicorum
qui medicinam in Urbe sua Londino and Suburbiis ejusdem intraque septem
miliaria ab ea Urbe quaqua versus public exercerent instituerit and
incorporaverit eos in Corpus corporatum and Politicum per nomen President'
supple and
Collegii seu Communitat' facultatis medicine Londini and concesserit eidem
Presidenti rect. and Collegio sive Communitati
Collegii sive Communitatis predicte and successoribus suis diversas libertates
and privilegia QUAS Litteras Patentes ac omnia in eis contenta idem Pater
noster non solum per Senatus consultum seu Parliamentum suum tentum Annis
quartodecimo and quintodecimo regni sui confirmavit Sed eciam per idem statutum
in multis adauxit and amplificavit QUODQUIDEM pium institutum dicti Patris
nostri quandoquidem in rei public commoditatem cessit manifestam and in
majorem indies cessurum verosimile sit si nos quod rem medicam profitentibus
maxim necessarium est concesserimus predictis Presidenti and Collegio
Collegii sive Communitati predicte and successoribus suis imperpetuum
quotannis quedam humana corpora ad anatomizandum ut informamur Sciatis quod nos
non modo preclaram institutionem dicti Patris nostri merito recolentes verum
eciam regii officii nostri munus arbitrantes regiminis nostri Subditorum
incolumitati saluti and securitati quantum in nobis est providere de gratia
nostra speciali ac ex certa sciencia and mero motu nostris concessimus ac per
presents pro nobis heredibus and successoribus nostris concedimus prefato
Presidenti Collegii sive Communitatis
Communitati facultatis medicine Londini predict' and successoribus suis sive
eorum assignatis quod habeant and accipiant annuatim Temporibus futuris
imperpetuum una vice vel diversis Anni vicibus ad discrecionem voluntatem and
libertatem predict' Presidentis pro tempore existen' and successorum suorum
Unum duo tria vel quatuor corpora humana ad discindend' and anatomizand' quod
jure publico hujus regni furti homicidii vel cujuscumque felony condemnatum
and mortuum fuerit vel que jure publico hujus regni furti homicidii vel
cujuscumque felony condemnat' and mort' fuerint infra Comitatum Midd' vel
infra Civitatem London' predictam vel alibi ubicumque infra sedecim miliaria
predict' Civitatis prox' in quocumque Comitatu sine impedimento nostri heredum
vel successorum nostrorum aut Vicecomitum Ballivorum Servient' ad clavam seu
aliorum Officiariorum aut Subditorum nostrorum quorumcunque sive eorum alicujus
ET QUOD licebit eidem Presidenti Collegii and Communitatis
Communitati predict' and successoribus suis and aliis quibuscumque eorum
assignatis medicine professoribus seu expertis eadem corpora secare dividere
and aliter pro voluntate and judicio suo cum ea reverencia que humane carni
debetur tractare ad incrementum cognicionis medicine experimentum ejusdem and
ad salutem ligeorum nostrorum sine contradictione alicujus ET hoc absque ulla
pecuniarum summa vel ullis pecuniarum summis pro eisdem reddend' seu cuicumque
solvend' PROVISO semper quod cum hujusmodi anatomia de tempore in tempus
transacta and perfecta fuerit predicta corpora sumptibus ipsorum Presidentis
and successorum suorum debitis exequiis and sepulture committantur. EO QUOD
expressa mencio de vero valor Annuo aut de aliquo alio valor vel certitudine
premissorum sive eorum alicujus Aut de aliis donis sive concessionibus per nos
vel per aliquem progenitorum nostrorum prefatis Presidenti and Collegio
Collegii sive Communitati facultatis medicine Londini ante hec tempora factis
in presentibus minime fact' existit Aut aliquo Statuto Actu ordinatione
proclamatione provisione sive restrictione inde in contrarium habit' fact'
edit' ordinat' sive provis Aut aliqua alia re causa vel materia quacumque in
aliquo non obstante. IN CUJUS rei testimonium has litteras nostras fieri
fecimus Patentes. TEST me ipsa apud Westmonasterium vicesimo quarto die
Februarii Anno regni nostri Septimo.

Per breve de privato Sigillo, etc. Nailour.

A Royal Charter granted to the College of Physicians 8 October. 15 Jac.
JAMES by the grace of God King of England Scotland Preamble.
France and Ireland defendor of the faith, etc. To all to whom these Presents
shall come greeting. WHEREAS our most noble and renowned Predecessor King Henry
the Eighth late King of this our Realm of England in his Princely wisdom
deeply considering and by the example of foreign well governed States and
Kingdoms truly understanding how profitable beneficial and acceptable it would
be unto the whole body of this Kingdom of England to restrain and suppress
the excessive number of such as daily professed themselves learned and profound
practisers in the faculty of Physic whereas in truth they were men
illiterate and unexperienced rather propounding unto themselves their private
gain with the detryment of this Kingdom than to give relief in time of need:
And likewise duly considering that by the rejecting of those illiterate and
unskilful practisers those that were learned grave and profound practisers in
that faculty should receive more bountiful reward and also the industrious
Students of that profession would be the better encouraged in their studies and
endeavors.

For these and many other weighty motives causes and considerations our Royal
and Princely Predecessor Recital of the Patent of Incorporation.
King Henry the Eighth by his Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster the
three and twentieth day of September in the Tenth year of his Reign of his
especial grace and princely favor did erect found and establish a College
Comminaltie or Incorporation of Physicians in the City and Suburbs of London
and for seven miles every way in distance from the same to be remain and
have existence for ever. And by the same Letters Patents our foresaid noble
Predecessor did further give and grant unto John Chamber Thomas Linacre
Ferdinando de Victoria Nicholas Halsewell John Francis and Robert Yaxley then
learned discreet and profound Practisers in the said faculty of Physic in the
foresaid City of London that they and all of the said faculty of Physic of
and in the foresaid City of London should for ever from thenceforth be in name
and deed one Body Comminaltie and College.

And further by the said Letters Patents did give and grant unto the said
College and Comminaltie full power ability and authority for ever annually
to elect and make one of the said College or Comminalty to be President of the
said College Corporation and Comminaltie. And that the said President so
elected and made and the said College and Comminaltie should have perpetual
succession and a Common Seal for the behoof and benefitt of the said President
College and Comminaltie and their Successors for ever.

And also by the said Letters Patents did further give and grant unto the said
President College and Comminaltie and their Successors diverse and sundry other
libertyes Privileges Immunityes power abilitye and authority not only to and
for the benefitt advantage and commodity of the foresaid President College and
Commonaltie and their Successors but also for the more certain and easyer
discovery speedy restraint and certain repressing of the before mentioned
unskilful and illiterate Practisers in the said faculty of Physic as
aforesaid As by the foresaid Letters Patents remaining of record amongst other
things therein contained more plainly and fully it does and may appear.
Which said Letters Patents and all And that the same was confirmed by Act of
Parliament.
and every grant article and other thing contained and specified in the same
were by Act of Parliament made in the fourteenth year of the Reign of our
said noble Predecessor King Henry the eighth approved granted ratified and
confirmed and clearly authorized and admitted by the same good lawful and
availeable to the said Body corporate and their Successors for ever And that
the best construction that might be invented should be made thereof and of
every part and parcel thereof for the best benefitt behoof power and
authority of the foresaid President College and Corporation of Physicians as
aforesaid.

And further by other several Acts of Parliament diverse and sundry other
privileges liberties ability power and authority are and were established
ordained And whereas by other Acts other Privileges are given, and yet diverse
Enormities abound;
given and granted unto the said President College and Corporation of
Physicians and their Successors As by the said several Acts of Parliament
thereof made more fully and at large it does and may appear. Sithence the
making of which said Letters Patents and several Acts of Parliament we do
nevertheless daily find that diverse enormities and abuses not as yet
sufficiently provided for and reformed do abound and increase to the apparent
damage of us and our loving Subjects of this our Realm of England by and
through the unskilfulness fraud and deceit of Physicians Apothecaries
Druggists and such like and are likely much more to abound unless timely and
festine remedy be by us provided and applied for the curing of so public a
disease.

KNOW ye therefore that we graciously affecting so pious and charitable a work
and intending hereby a His Majesty hereby
more full and perfect reformation of the said abuses grievances and enormities
which these latter times have abundantly brought forth in this our Realm out
of our princely disposition and care for the repressing thereof and of our
special grace certain knowledge and mere motion at the humble petition as
well of our trusty and well-beloved Henry Atkins Doctor in Physic now
President of the said College and one of our Physicians Theodorus de Mayerne
Doctor in Physic one other of our Physicians Thomas Mondford and Edward
Lister Doctors of Physic Fellows and Elects of the said College as of other
the Doctors of the said College Have given granted ratifyed approved allowed
and confirmed and by these presents do for us our heirs and successors give
grant ratify approve allow and confirm Approves of and confirms the
Premises.
unto the foresaid President and College or Comminalty and their Successors
the said Letters Patents of our said noble Predecessor King Henry the Eighth
herein before mentioned and every Article clause gift and grant therein
contained and not herein altered for the honor peace and quiet of the said
College And that the said President and College or Comminaltie and their
Successors shall and may for ever hereafter have receive take reteyne keep use
exercise and enjoy all and singular such rightes titles liberties privileges
immunities freedoms executions abilitye power authority and other things as
by the said Letters Patents or by any Acts of Parliament are or were given
granted or confirmed or were thereby mentioned or intended to be given
granted or confirmed notwithstanding the not using misusing or abusing of the
same And that the same Letters Patents and every Article and Clause theerein
contained shall be adjudged taken and construed most benignely and favorably to
and for the best benefitt avayle and advantage of the foresaid President and
College or Comminaltie or their Successors Any Ordinance Custom or usage to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And whereas our said noble
Predecessor by the foresaid Letters Patents (amongst other things theerein
contained) has given and granted unto the foresaid President and College or
Comminalty and their Successors and thereby expressly appointed and provided
that noe person whatsoever should exercise the said faculty of Physic within
the foresaid City of London or within seven miles in Circuit thereof unless
the said person should first be admitted to do the same by the foresaid
President and College or Comminaltie or their Successors by Letters
Testimonial of the said President and College or Comminaltie sealed with
their Common Seal upon pain of forfeyting of five pounds for every month
wherein the said person should exercise the said faculty being not admitted
thereunto The one half thereof to be forfeyted and given to our said
Predecessor his heirs and successors the other half thereof to be forfeyted
and given to the said President and College or Comminaltie and their
Successors as by the said Letters Patents may appear:

NOW KNOW ye that We in our Princely wisdom deeply considering how needful
it is and will be that all and singular person and persons practicing or
exercising the said faculty of Physic contrary to the intent and true
meaning of the foresaid Letters Patents shall be duly and condignely punished
And for the better encouragement of the foresaid President and College or
Comminaltie and their Successors to sue for the said penalty of five pounds
specified and mentioned by the said Letters Patents of our special grace
certain knowledge and mere motion have given and granted and by these
presents for us our heirs and successors do give and grant unto the said
President and College or Comminaltie and their Successors full power and
lawful authority Power to sue for the Penalties;
in the name of us our heirs and successors or otherwise in their own name by
the name of the President and College of the faculty of Physic within the
City of London in any our Courts of Record or in any other place or places
within this our Realm according to our Laws to sue for recover and have
execution of and for all and singular such peualties forfeytures sum and
sums of money as now are or hereafter from time to time shall accrewe or
grow due unto us our heirs or successors or to them by force or virtue of the
foresaid Letters Patents or any the said Statutes or any Clause or thing in
them or in these presents contained other then the recognizance hereafter
expressed or by reason or means of any Offense or Misdemeanor whatsoever
committed perpetrated or done or hereafter to be committed perpetrated or done
contrary to the intent and meaning thereof. And after the same shall be duly
recovered levied or received as aforesaid we will and by these presents for us
our heirs and successors do give and And to retain them to their own use.
grant the same penalties forfeytures and sums of money and every part and
parcel thereof to the said President and College or Comminaltie and their
Successors to be retained had taken converted and enjoyed to their sole and
proper use benefitt and behoof without rendering making or yiedling unto us our
heirs or successors any part or parcel thereof or any rent account or
recompense for the same other then the yearly rent hereafter by these presents
reserved The said Letters Patents or any the said Statutes before mentioned or
any clause article or reservation in them or any of them contained to the
contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And We do further by these Presents of our especial grace certain
knowledge and mere motion for us our heirs and successors give and grant
unto the foresaid President and College or Comminaltie and their Successors
That the four persons to be annually chosen by the said President and College
or Comminaltie for the time being and their Successors according to the intent
and meaning of the foresaid Letters Patents of our said Predecessor King Henry
the eighth now commonly called the four Censors of the said College or any
three of them for the time being shall have full power and lawful authority
at all time and times hereafter when and as often as to the said four Censors
or any three Power to the Censors to examine and Correct Physicians,
Apothecaries, etc. and their Medicines;
of them shall seem requisite and convenient to examine survey govern correct
and punish all and singular Physicians and practisers in the faculty of
Physic Apothecaries Druggists Distillers and Sellers of waters or oyses
Preparers of Chemical Medicynes to be sold or impsoyed for gain and all and
every other person and persons practicing in the same faculty or using the art
or mystery of an Apothecary or the Trade or Craft of a Druggist Distiller
Preparer or Seller of any Oils Waters or Medicynes as aforesaid or that shall
sell or put to sale any Stuffs Druggs Oils Waters or Medicynes or other thing
whatsoever fit apt and used or pretended to be fit apt and used for Medicine
either simple or compounded at or in any place or places within the foresaid
City and Suburbs of London or within seven And to punish them by fine,
imprisonment or otherwise.
miles of the same by fines amerciaments and Imprisonments and by other lawful
ways and means according as the nature and quality of his or their offense
or offenses in the Premises shall deserve or require.

And we do further of our like especial grace certain knowledge and mere
motion for us our heirs and successors give and grant unto the foresaid
President and College or Comminaltie and their Successors and do by these
Presents declare oux will and Power granted to the Censors to call before them
Physicians and examine them, and to fine them that refuse to come.
pleasure to be That the said four Censors of the foresaid College for the
time being or any three of them for ever hereafter when and as often as to the
said Censors or any three of them shall seem meet and convenient shall have
full power and authority to send for summon convent and cause to appear and
come before them the said four Censors for the time being or any three of them
all and every Physician and Physicians practiser and practisers in the said
faculty of Physic within the foresaid City and Suburbs of London or within
seven miles thereof at such times and places as by the said Censors or any
three of them shall be reasonably lymited prefixed and appointed And to examine
them concerning their skill or practice of the said faculty of Physic and
their manner of practice therein. And if any Physician or Practiser in the said
faculty of Physic upon reasonable summons and garnishment to be made and
given in that behalf shall make default and not appear before the said Censors
or any three of them at such time and place as by the said Censors or any three
of them shall be reasonably limited prefixed and appointed or shall refuse to
answer or to be examined as aforesaid That then and so often the said four
Censors for the time being or any three of them shall and may lawfully assesse
and impose a reasonable penalty fine or amerciament upon every or any such
delinquent or offender for every several default of appearance made upon
several summons or for every several refusal to answer or to be examined as
aforesaid at several times upon several appearances made So as the same
penalty fine or amerciament so to be imposed for any one default of
appearance or refusal to answer or to be examined as aforesaid do not at any
one time exceed the sum of forty shillings of Current English money. And if
any person or persons so summoned or warned as aforesaid do make his or their
personal appearance before the foresaid Censors at such time and place as is
or shall be lymited and appointed as aforesaid and it shall then and there
appear unto the said Censors that such person or persons has or have
administered or prescribed Medicine or Physic unto any person or persons or
has or have practiced in the said faculty of Physic at any one or more time
or times within the foresaid City or Suburbs of London or within seven miles
thereof without admission and license first had and obtained of and from the
said President and College or Comminaltie or their Successors by Letters
testimonial under their Common Seal according to the meaning of the Letters
Patents before mentioned Then it shall To impose a fine upon such as practice
without license, and to imprison them.
and may be lawful to and for the said four Censors or any three of them to
assesse and impose a reasonable penalty fine or amerciament upon every such
person and persons so practicing for every such his and their offense and
default in that behalf So as the same exceed not the sum of three pounds of
lawful English money and to imprison him by the space of seven days or under
for such his offense and not to deteyne him in prison any longer unless he
shall not have made satisfaction and payment of the same fine so imposed upon
him for the same offense In which case it shall be lawful to deteyne him in
prison until the same fine be satisfied. And if it shall then and there
appear unto the said Censors or any three of them as aforesaid that any such
person or persons so making his or their appearance has at any time
administered or prescribed any noisome unwholesome or unfitt Medycine or Physic
unto any person or persons within the lymitts aforesaid Then the said Censors
shall and may from time to time punish the said delinquent or offender by
reasonable amerciament fine or imprisonment according unto their discretion to
be by them imposed as aforesaid So as the same fine do not exceed the sum
of Tenn pounds and so as the imprisonment for such offense exceed not the
space of fourteen days unless it shall be for non-payment of such fine for
which it shall be lawful to deteyne such offender in prison until the same
fine be satisfied. And to the end that the said Offenders in the premises may
be the better known and discovered and may be for their said misdemeanors and
offenses duly and condignely punished according to the merits of their said
offenses We do therefore of our more abundant grace certain knowledge and
mere motion for us our heirs and successors give and grant unto the said
President and College or Comminaltie and their Successors full power and
lawful authority that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
President and College or Comminaltie and their Successors by any precept or
process to be made under their Common Seal to summon and warn any person or
persons whatsoever whom Apothecaryes, etc. to testify against undue practisers
of Physic.
they shall know or think meet being an Apothecary Surgeon Druggist or
employed in or about ministering of any physic or medicynes or Attendant or
servant upon any that shall have received physic or medicine to declare
testify or prove against any such delinquent or offender in the premises his
or their misdemeanors or offenses upon reasonable summons and warning to
appear and come before the said President and College or Comminaltie and
their Surcessors or the said Censors or any three of them to be examined
touching his or their knowledge of the said offenders and their misdemeanors
and offenses in the Premises and upon his or their appearance made as
aforesaid to administer and give to him or them so to be produced to testify
as aforesaid an Oath or Oaths and him and them to swear upon the Holy
Evangelists to testify and declare the truth of his and their knowledge
concerning the said offenders in the premises and their said misdemeanors and
offenses or otherwise to examine him or them without oath as they shall think
fit. And that if any such person or persons If they refuse to testify, they
are to forfeit twenty Shillings.
as shall be thought fit as aforesaid to declare and testify concerning the
said offenses upon reasonable summons and warning given as aforesaid shall
wilfully make default and shall not accordingly appear before the said
President and College or Comminaltie and their Successors or the said Censors
or any three of them Or if he or they shall appear and yet nevertheless shall
refuse to take such Oath or Oaths as shall be then offered or tendered unto him
or them as aforesaid Or otherwise shall refuse to be examined without Oath Or
shall refuse to make answer to such questions as shall be then asked or demanded
of him or them by the said President and College or Comminaltie and their
Successors or the said Censors or any three of them concerning his or their
knowledge touching the said offenses and misdemeanors or any of them or any
other matter or thing concerning the same or the discovery thereof Then every
such person and persons shall for every such default or refusal as aforesaid
forfeyt and pay to the said President and College or Comminaltie and their
Successors the Sum of twenty Shillings of lawful English money.

And we do further of our especial grace certain knowledge and mere motion
for us our heirs and Successors give and grant unto the said President and
College or Comminaltie and their Successors That the said four Censors for the
time being or any Power to search and destroy
three of them shall and may have full and absolute power and lawful authority
at all time and times when and as often as to them as aforesaid shall seem
meet and convenient at fit and reasonable times to enter into the House
Shop Cellar Vault Workehouse or Warehouse or any other rooms of the house of
any Apothecarie Druggist Distiller and Seller of Waters Oils or other
compositions for the ends aforesaid or of any other person or persons that now
does or hereafter shall put or set to sale any medicine druggs waters oils or
stuffs fit apt or used or pretended to be fit apt or used for medicine within
the foresaid City or Suburbs of London or within seven miles thereof And
then and there to view search try examyne and see the said medycines wares
druggs The Drugs and Medicines of Apothecaries, etc.
waters oils medicines and stuffs of such Apothecaries Druggists Distillers
preparers or sellers of waters oils or medicines or other person or persons as
aforesaid and to examyne them upon oath or without And to examine them upon
Oath or otherwise concerning the same.
oath as they shall think best concerning the receipts and compositions thereof
And all such medicines wares druggs waters oils and stuffs as the said four
Censors or any three of them as aforesaid shall find or conceive to be
defective corrupted or not meet nor convenient to be ministered or used in
medicine for the health of man's body the said four Censors or three of them
shall or may take burn or otherwise destroy the same or cause to be taken
burned or otherwise destroyed according to their discretions.

And we do further for us our heirs and successors give and grant unto the
said President or College and Comminaltie and their Successors That the said
four Censors for the time being or three of them shall and may have full and
absolute power and authority at all times when and as often as to them shall be
thought meet and reasonable to send for summon Power to convent Apothecaries,
etc.
convent and cause to appear before them the said four Censors for the time
being or any three of them at such times and places within the foresaid City
and Suburbs of London or within seven miles thereof all or any such
Apothecaries Druggists Distillers preparers or sellers of such waters oils or
medicynes as aforesaid or any other person or persons whatsoever using the art
or mystery of an Apothecarie or Druggist or the Trade or Craft of a distiller
preparer or seller of waters oils or medicines or that shall put or set to
sale any stuffs druggs waters oils medicines or other things whatsoever apt
fit or used for medicine either simple or compound within the foresaid City
and Suburbs of London or within seven miles from the same. And if any such
person or persons so summoned or warned as aforesaid upon reasonable summons
and garnishment to him or them made in that behalf shall not accordingly make
his or their personal appearance before the said Censors for the time being or
any three of them at such time and place as by the said Censors or any three of
them is or shall be reasonably lymitted and appointed Then We do by these
presents declare that it shall and may be lawful to and for the foresaid four
Censors for the time being or any three of them to impose and inflict such
reasonable penalty fine and amerciament upon And to fine them for
Nonappearance 20 s.
every such person or persons so making default of appearance as the said four
Censors or any three of them shall think meet in that behalf so as such fine
or amerciament for any one such default exceed not the sum of twenty
shillings of lawful English money. And if any person or persons summoned as
aforesaid shall make his or their personal appearance before the aforesaid
four Censors for the time being or any three of them at such time or place as
is or shall be limited and appointed and then and there it shall appear unto the
said four Censors or any three of them that the said person or persons so
appearing then or of late did put or set to sale keep or retain in his or
their shop or shopps house or howses any wares druggs waters oils medicines
or stuffs defective corrupted and not meet or convenient to be ministered in
medicine for the health of man's body or that any such person or persons so
summoned and appearing as aforesaid then or of late did make or compound or
deliver out any medicine either simple or compounded differing from and not
agreeable in name nature and quantity unto the prescripte or direction
delivered unto the said person or persons before the making compounding or
delivery of the said medicine then the said four Censors for the time being or
any three of them shall have full power and authority to impose a reasonable
penalty fine and amerciament upon all and every person and persons so
offending so as the same penalty fine or amerciament for any And to fine them
for defective Medicines 3 l. and Imprisonment.
one default or offense exceed not at any one time the sum of three pounds of
lawful English money And further to imprison such offender until he have made
satisfaction and payement of the same fine so imposed upon him for the same
offense.

And We do further of our especial grace certain knowledge and mere motion
for us our heirs and successors give and grant unto the foresaid President
Grant of fines, etc. to the College.
and College or Comminaltie and their Successors all and singular the fines
and amerciaments penaltyes and forfeytures and every of them hereafter to be
forfeyted assessed or imposed upon any Physician or practiser in Physic as
aforesaid or to be forfeyted imposed or assessed upon any Apothecary Druggist
or other person or persons for or by reason of any misdemeanor offense contempt
or default whatsoever before in these presents declared mentioned or specified
And that the said President and College or Commiualtie and their Successors
shall and may by the name of the President and College of the faculty of
Physic within the City of London at all times hereafter and from time to time
in any our Courts of Record according to our Laws sue for recover levy and
take execution of and for the said fines amerciaments penalties and forfeytures
and every or any part thereof and the same being recovered and levied to have
take retain and enjoy to the only use behoof and benefitt of the said
President and College or Comminaltie and their Successors without the let
disturbance or interruption of us our heirs or successors or of any the
Officers or Ministers of us our heirs or successors and without giving or
rendering any account or recompense thereof to us our heirs or successors. And
that if any offender upon whom any such fine or amerciament shall be imposed
shall be present before the four Censors or any three of them at the time of such
fine or amerciament imposed and shall not then pay the same That then it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said four Censors or any three of them by
whom such fine or amerciament shall be imposed to commit such offender to
prison and deteyne him in prison until he shall have satisfied the said fine
or amerciament and noe longer.

And further We will and by these presents for us our heirs and successors of
our especial grace and favor do grant unto the said President and College
or Comminaltie and their Successors That it shall and may be lawful to and for
them or the greater part of them to have appoint retain and enjoy a certain
Hall or Councill-howse within our City To have an Hall,
of London or the liberties of the same And that the said President for the
time being and his successors shall and may when and as often as to him shall
seem meet and necessary call assemble and keep within the same Hall or
House a certain Court or Convocation And call a Convocation.
of the said President and College or Comminaltie and their Successors to the
number of six persons or more whereof the said President for the time being to
be always one And that in the same Court or Convocation the same President and
College or Comminaltie and their Successors to the number of sire persons or
more whereof the President for the time being to be one shall and may treat
confer consult and consider of Articles Statutes Acts and Ordinances touching
and concerning the said President and College or Comminaltie and their
Successors and the good rule state and government of the same and the
reformation and redress of the abuses mischiefs and enormities herein before
mentioned and hereby intended and meant to be provided for and suppressed in
the time to come.

And further We will and by these presents for us our heirs and successors
do grant to the said President and College or Comminaltie and their
Successors That the said President and College or Comminaltie and their
Successors to the number of Six persons or more whereof the said President for
the time being to be always one upon public summons thereof first made being
assembled together in their said Hall or House shall and may have full power
and lawful authority from time to time to ordain constitute make and set
down in writing such wholesome and reasonable Acts Ordinances Qrders Decrees
Articles To make Ordinances.
and Constitutions as to the said six persons or more of them so assembled or
the greater part of them so assembled whereof the said President to be one
shall seem good profitable and necessary according to their good direction for
the good rule order and government of the said President and College or
Comminaltie and their Successors and of all other practisers of Physic and
other the persons beforenamed and all others offending in the said faculty or
any other way touching or concerning the same for the reformation and redress
of the abuses deceipts misdemeanors and enormities and other the premises
herein before mentioned or expressed. And that the said President and College
or Comminaltie and their Successors to the number of six persons or more
whereof the said President to be one shall and may punish all and every
Delinquent or Offender against the same Acts Ordinances Orders Decrees and
Constitutions or any of them by imprisonment of his and their bodies or by fine
and amerciament to be by them as aforesaid adjudged imposed and inflicted from
time to time as need shall require And that the said President and College or
Comminaltie and their Successors shall and may lawfully levy receive have and
take the said fines and amerciaments to their own proper use benefitt and
behoof without the impeachment or impediment of us our heirs or successors or
of any the Officers or Ministers of us our heirs or successors and without any
account to us our heirs or successors to be rendered or made for the same other
then the rent hereafter reserved. All which said Acts Statutes Ordinances
Articles and Constitutions so as aforesaid to be made We will shall be observed
and kept under the pains and penaltyes in the same to be lymited and contained
So as the same Acts Statutes and Ordinances Imprisonments fines and
amerciaments be not contrary or repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of this our
Realm of England.

And further We will and by these presents for us our heirs and successors
do grant to the said President and College or Comminaltie and their
Successors that they and their successors or the greater part of them
assembled together in their said Hall shall and may nominate elect and appoint
one honest and discreet person which shall be and be called the Register to the
said College who shall from time to To have a Register.
time be attendant on the said President and College or Comminaltie and their
Successors at their Assemblies Courts Congregations or meetings and shall set
down in writing register and enter into a book all such Rules Orders
Statutes Decrees Acts Ordinances and other things as shall from time to time be
had made done provided and ordained by the said President and College or
Comminaltie and their Successors or the greater part of them assembled
together in their said Hall Which said Register so to be named elected and
made as aforesaid shall be and continue in the said office and place for and
during the will and pleasure only of the said President and College or
Comminaltie and their Successors or the greater part of them whereof the
President to be one The said Register first taking his corporal oath upon the
Holy Evangelists before the said President Who shall be sworn for the true
performance of his Office.
and four Censors for the time being or any three of them whereof the President
to be one for the doing and performing of his true and faithful service to
them in the said office and place from time to time.

AND We do likewise will and for us our heirs and successors do by these
presents grant unto the said President and College or Comminaltie and their
Successors that they and their successors or the greater part of them
assembled in their said Hall shall and may from time to time when and as often
as to them shall seem meet ordain make constitute and appoint such and so
many other fit and meet Officer or Officers Minister or Ministers as to the
Power to appoint other Officers, and to give them an Cath.
said President and College or Comminaltie and their Successors or the greater
part of them shall be thought fit and necessary for their service and
benefitt. Unto all and every which said Officers or Ministers it shall be lawful
to the said President and College or Comminaltie and their Successors or to
the Censors or any three of them assembled together in their said Hall to
administer and give oaths upon the said Holy Evangelists for the due
performance and erecution of his and their office and place. And the same
Register and all and every other Officer and Minister by them to be elected
made constituted or appointed as aforesaid from time to time upon reasonable
and just cause to remove expel and put out And them upon just cause to remove.
of his and their said offices and places and to elect and put others into his
and their rooms and places when and as often as to the said President and
College or Comminaltie and their Successors or the greater part of them shall
seem meet and convenient.

AND further We do for us our heirs and successors give and grant unto the
said President and College or Comminaltie and their Successors that it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said President and four Censors for the time
being or any three of them whereof the President to be one to cause such
persons which shall be convented for any the offenses aforesaid and shall be found
offenders therein to become bound to us our heirs or successors and to our use
in one or more several recognizaunces in Power to take Recognizances to his
Majesty's use.
such sum as they shall think fit not exceeding the sum of one hundred
pounds with conditions for restrayning them to offend any more in that behalf
as to the President and four Censors or any three of them shall seem meet.
And if such person shall refuse to become so bound by such recognizance with
such condition That then it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
President and four Censors or any three of them whereof the President to be one
to commit such person to prison and him to deteyne in prison until he shall
become bound in such recognizance with such condition as aforesaid.

And We do further of our especial favor certain knowledge and mere
motion for us our heirs and successors give and grant unto the foresaid
President and College or Comminaltie and their Successors special license
free and lawful liberty power and authority to acquire purchase receive and
take To purchase Lands.
unto the said President and College or Comminaltie and their Successors
Manors Lands Tenements Tithes Rents Reversions and Hereditaments of or from
any person or persons whatsoever not exceeding in the whole the clear yearly
value of one hundred Marks of lawful English money above all charges and
reprises So as the same Manors Lands Tenements Tithes Rents Reversions and
Hereditaments by virtue hereof to be acquired and purchased be not holden of us
our heirs or successors immediately in Chief or by Knights service or of any
other person or persons by Knights service the Statute of Alienation in
Mortmayne or any other Statute Law Ordinance or Provision to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

AND We do further give and grant for us our heirs and successors unto the
foresaid President and College or Comminaltie and their Successors that all
and every Physician and Physicians that now is or are or that hereafter shall be
elected admitted and made a member of the foresaid College or Comminaltie
shall from time to time be wholly and absolutely freed exempted and discharged
of and from providing and bearing of any Armor or other munition Discharged
from bearing Arms.
within our said City of London and the Liberties thereof or within seven
miles compass as aforesaid Any Statute Act Ordinance Constitution or usage to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

AND We do further for us our heirs and successors give and grant unto the
foresaid President and College or Comminaltie and their Successors and by
these presents declare and manifest our pleasure for ever to be That the said
President and College or Comminaltie and their Successors shall and may have
take receive use exercise and enjoy all and singular the gifts graunts
liberties privileges immunities freedoms benefitts advantages profitts
commodities power abilitye and authority herein before mentioned or otherwise
by any other former Letters Patents given granted or confirmed unto the
President and College or Comminaltie or any of them without the let
hinderance interruption or disturbance of us our heirs or successors or of any
the Officers or Ministers of us our heirs or successors or of any other person
or persons whatsoever.

AND further of our like especial grace certain knowledge and mere motion
We will and for us our heirs and successors do promise and grant to and
with the said President and College or Comminaltie and their Successors by
these presents That at the next Parliament or Session of Parliament To have
this confirmed the next Parliament.
of us our heirs or successors to be holden within this our Realm of England
We our heirs or successors will give and grant our royal and free assent
and consent to any Act Bill or Petition by the said President and College or
Comminaltie or their Successors or any of them in the same Parliament or
Session of Parliament to be exhibited or preferred and by the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal and the Comminaltie of the said Parliament to be approved and
assented unto for the better enabling authorizing and investing of the said
President or College and Comminaltie and their Successors to and with the
several graunts powers privileges authorities exemptions immunities and other
matters and things in these presents to them given granted and confirmed or
intended to be to them given granted or confirmed according to our gracious
intent and meaning herein before specified and expressed.

AND further We will and by these presents for us our heirs and successors
do grant unto the said President and College or Comminaltie and their
Successors That these our Letters Patents and all and singular the gifts
graunts authorities powers privileges and immunities and other things therein
contained shall be good firm avayleable and effectual in the Law to the
intents and purposes aforesaid and shall be in all and every our Courts of
Record and elsewhere had taken construed and adjudged most strongly against us
our heirs and successors and most benignely favorably and beneficially to and
for the said President and College or Comminaltie and their Successors Any
Statute Act Ordinance Custom Usage Gift Grant or any other matter or thing
heretofore had made used ordained or provided to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

NEVERTHELESS We will and our intent and meaning is That the said President
and College or Comminaltie and their Successors shall answer and pay to us
our heirs and successors for and in respect of the fines amerciaments
penaltyes forfeytures and sums of money herein before mentioned and by these
Presents to them granted as aforesaid the yearly rent of six pounds of
lawful money of England at the receipt of our Exchequer at Westminster To pay
to his Majesty 6 l. per ann.
at the feasts of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Marie and St. Michaell
the Archangell by even and equal portions Any thing herein contained to the
contrary notwithstanding Although express mention of the true yearly value or
certainty of the premises or any of them or of any other gifts or graunts by
us or any of our Progenitors or Predecessors to the foresaid President and
College or Comminaltie heretofore made in these presents is not made Or any
Statute Act Ordinance Provision Proclamation or Restraint to the contrary
thereof heretofore had made ordained or provided Or any other matter cause or
thing whatsoever to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

IN WITNESS whereof We have caused these our Letters to be made Patents.
WITNESS our self at Westminster the eighth day of October in the fifteenth
year of our reign of England France and Ireland and of Scotland the one and
fiftieth.

Per breve de privato Sigillo, Young.
Irr. in Memorand' Scaccarii de anno octavo Regis nostri Caroli, viz. inter
Record' de Termino Sancti Michaelis To. ex part Rememorat' dicti Domini Regis.
A Royal Charter granted to the College of Physicians in London 26 Martii 15
Car. 2.
CHARLES THE SECOND by the grace of God King of England Scotland France and
Ireland defender of the faith, etc. To all to whom these presents shall come
greeting. WHEREAS our most noble and renowned Predecessor King Henry the eighth
late King of this our Realm of England in his princely wisdom deeply
considering and by the example of foreign well governed States and Kingdoms
truly understanding how profitable beneficial and acceptable it would be unto
the whole Body of this Kingdom of England to restrain and suppress all such
persons as would take upon themselves to be practisers in the faculty of
Physic being illiterate and altogether unskilful in that faculty rather
propounding unto themselves their private gain with the detriment of his
Majesty's subjects than to give relief in time of necessity And likewise duly
considering that by the rejecting of those illiterate and unskilful practizers
those that were learned grave and profound practisers in that faculty And
also the industrious Students of that profession would be the better
encouraged and enabled in their studies and endeavors: For which and many
other weighty motives causes and considerations our said Royal and Princely
Predecessor King Henry the Grant of H. 8.
eighth by his Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster the three and
twentieth day of September in the tenth year of his Reign of his especial
grace and princely favor did erect found and establishe a College Comonaltie
or Incorporation of Physicians in the City and Suburbs of London and for
seven miles every way in distanee from the same to be remain and have
existence for ever. And by the same Letters Patents our aforesaid noble
Predecessor did further give and grant unto John Chamber Thomas Linacre
Ferdinando de Victoria Nicholas Halsewell John Francis and Robert Yaxley then
learned discreet and profound practisers in the said faculty of Physic in the
aforesaid City of London that they and all of the said faculty of Physic of
and in the aforesaid City of London should for ever from thenceforth be in
name and deed One body Comonaltie and College. AND further by the same Letters
Patents did give and grant unto the said College and Comonaltie full power
ability and authority for ever annually to elect and make one Power to choose
a President.
of the said College or Comonaltie to be President of the said College
Corporation and Comonaltie And that the same President so elected and made and
the said College and Comonaltie should Perpetual succession. A Common Seal.
have perpetual succession and a Common Seal for the behoof and benefitt of
the said President College and Comonaltie and their Successors for ever. And
also by the said Letters Patents did further give and grant unto the said
President College and Comonaltie and their Successors diverse and sundry other
liberties privileges immunities power ability and authority not only to and
for the benefitt Several Privileges.
advantage and comodity of the aforesaid President College and Comonaltie and
their Successors but also for the more certain and easier discovery speedy
restraint and certain repressing of the before mentioned unskilful and
illiterate practizers in the faculty of Physic aforesaid as by the same
Letters Patents Letters Patents, etc.
remayneing of Record amongst other things therein contained more plainly and
fully it does and may appear. WHICH said Letters Patents and all and every
Grant Article and other thing contained and specified in the same were by Act
of Parliament Confirmed A o. 14 H. 8. by Act of Parliament.
made in the fowerteenth year of the Reign of our said noble Predecessor King
Henry the Eighth approved ratified and confirmed and clearly authorized and
admitted to be good lawful and avayleable to the said Body Corporate and
their Successors for ever And that the best construction that might be Best
construction to be made thereof.
invented should be made thereof and of every part and parcel thereof for the
best benefitt behoof power and authority of the aforesaid President College
and Corporation of Physicians as aforesaid. AND further by several other Acts
of Parliament diverse and sundry other privileges liberties ability power and
Several other Powers given by several Acts of Parliament.
authority are and were afterward established ordained given and granted to
the said President College and Corporation of Physicians and their Successors
As by the same several Acts of Parliament thereof made more fully and at large
also does and may appear. AND whereas nevertheless our Royal Preamble to the
Grant of K. James.
Grandfather James late King of England of ever blessed memory out of his great
wisdom and circumspection perceiving that diverse enormities and abuses not
then sufficiently provided for and reformed did daily abound and increase to
the apparent damage of his Royal Majesty and of his loveing subjects of this
Realm of England by and through the unskillfullness fraud and deceit of
Physicians Apothecaries Druggists and such like which were then most likely
much more to abound unless tymely and festine remedy were duly provided and
applied for the cureing of so public a dissease. AND our said Royal
Grandfather graciously affecting so pious and charitable a work and intending
a more full and perfect reformation of the said abuses grievances and
enormities in this our Realm out of his princely disposition and care of
repressing thereof at the Petition of Henry Atkins Doctor in Physic then
President of the said College and of diverse other learned Doctors in Physic
then Fellows elect or members of the said College or Corporation by his
Letters Patents under the great Seal of England bearing date at Westminster
the eighth day of October in the fifteenth year of his Reign over England for
the honor peace and quiett of the said College Did Grant of K. James.
give grant ratify allow approve and confirm unto the said then President
and College or Comonalty Confirmation.
and their Successors the said Letters Patents of our said noble Predecessor
King Henry the Eighth herein before mentioned and every Article Clause Gift
and Grant therein contained and not altered by the said Letters Patents of our
said Royal Grandfather. AND further our said Royal Grandfather Grant of
several other Privileges.
did by his said Letters Patents give and grant unto the said President and
College or Comonaltie and their Successors diverse and sundry other liberties
privileges immunities powers ability and authority not only to and for the
benefitt advantage and comoditie of the aforesaid President and College or
Comonaltie and their Successors but also for the more speedy certain better
and easier discovery restraint punishment and repressing as well of the before
mentioned unskillfull unlicensed and illiterate practizers in the faculty of
Physic aforesaid as also of the said fraud and deceipts of the said
Apothecaries and Druggists and other the abuses grievances and enormities
aforesaid As in and by the same Letters Patents of our said Royal Grandfather
remaining of Record amongst other things therein contained more fully and at
large it does and may appear. AND whereas notwithstanding all the care
travail and endeavor Preamble to this Grant.
had and taken in the creating modelling and establishing of the Constitution
and Corporation aforesaid and the many and great liberties powers and
privileges thereunto given granted and confirmed by the said several Letters
Patents and Acts of Parliament aforesaid And notwithstanding the constant and
indefatigable pains and endeavors of the President and College aforesaid on
all opportunities had and taken in putting the same in due execution to the
ends aforesaid Itt has been made most apparent and evident unto us that the
number of unskillfull illiterate and unlicensed practizers of Physic in and
about our said City of London has of later years much increased and at
present do daily multiply together with the renewed frauds abuses and
deceipts of diverse Apothecaries Druggisss and others inhabiting in the same
City frequently exercised and practiced in the making prepareing ordering and
venting of Druggs and other things relateing to the said faculty of Physic
to the great dishonor of this Nation and of the sage and learned professors
of that faculty so noble and necessary and to the detriment of us and our
good subjects The chief cause or ground whereof as we are given to understand
arises from some defects in the said Constitution the Coercive and Penal
Powers thereof being not aptly and usefully placed and settled By means
whereof subtle and crafty men wholly ignorant and unskilled in the faculty of
Physic have in defiance of authority dared publicly to profess and
practice Physic in our said City of London and by new inventions and
delusions deceived much people thereby advanceing their private commodity in
the great detriment of the public and yett have evaded the just and condign
punishment provided and intended by the Charters and Acts of Parliament
aforesaid for such presumptuous Offenders. Which to prevent in the future And
that a due and seasonable reformation may be had in all the premises and an
apt proper and legal constitution and incorporation may be had and established
of grave and learned Doctors and other able and experienced practisers of
Physic in and about our said City of London endowed with powers and
privileges convenient and requisite for the ends aforesaid KNOW ye That We of
our especial The Grant.
grace certain knowledge and mere motion and at the humble Petition of Sir
Edward Alston Knight now President of the said College or Comonaltie and of
diverse other learned Doctors of the said College or Comonalty Have willed
ordained constituted declared given and granted And by these presents for us
our heirs and successors do will ordeyne constitute declare give and grant
unto the said President and College or Comonalty That they from henceforth for
ever hereafter shall be continue and remain by virtue of these presents One
body Corporate Body Politic.
and Politic in deed fact and name by the name of the President Fellows and
Comonaltye of the Kings College of Physicians in the City of London And them
and their Successors by the name of the President Fellows and Comonaltie of
the Kings College of Physicians in the City of London into one Body
Corporate and Politic in deed fact and name really and fully for us our
heirs and successors We do erect make ordeyne constitute declare and create
by these presents. AND that by the same name they shall have perpetual
succession And also that they and their successors by the same Perpetual
succession.
name of the President Fellows and Comonalty of the Kings College of
Physicians in the City of London shall be and remain at all times hereafter
for ever persons able and in Law capeable to have Capable to purchase.
purchase receive possess hold and enjoy any Manors Lands Tenements Liberties
Privileges Franchises Jurisdictions and Hereditaments whatsoever of what name
nature quality kind or condition soever the same or any of them shall be to
them and their successors in fee and perpetuity or otherwise And also Goods
and Chattells and all other things of what name nature quality or kind soever
the same be. And also by the same name to give grant demise alien assign and
dispose the said Manors Lands Tenements To grant and dispose.
and Hereditaments Goods and Chattells And also to do and execute all other
things lawful necessary and convenient for the common profitt of the said
College. And also by the same name of the President Fellows and Comonalty of
the Kings College of Physicians in the City of London They shall and may for
ever hereafter plead and To sue and be sued.
be impleaded answer and be answered unto defend and be defended in all and
whatsoever Courts and places and before whatsoever Judges and Justices and
other Persons and Officers of us our heirs and successors in all and singular
Actions pleas suites quarrels causes matters and demands whatsoever of what
name nature quality or kind soever the same are or shall be in the same manner
and form as any other subjects of this our Kingdom of England being persons
able and capeable in Law or any other body Corporate or Politic within this
our Kingdom may or can have purchase receive possess give grant demise alien
assign and dispose plead and be impleaded answer and be answered unto defend
and be defended do perform or execute. And also that they and their
successors shall and may for ever hereafter have a Common Seal to serve and
use for all Common Seal.
causes matters things and affairs whatsoever of them and their successors
which shall always be and remain in the custody and keeping of the President
of the said College of Physicians for the time being. And that it shall and
may be lawful to and for the President and Fellows of the same College or
the major part of them for the time being to break alter change or make new
the said Seal from time to time at their wills and pleasures and as to them
shall seem requisite and fit. AND also from time to time and at all times
hereafter to use and dispose of the Common Seal of the said College for the
time being in and about all things matters and affairs whatsoever of or
concerning the same College and Corporation in such manner as to them shall
seem fit and requisite. AND for the better order rule and government of the
said College and Corporation and the matters and things thereof and the due
and orderly correcting and punishing of all offenses and offenders within the
power and jurisdiction of the same College and Corporation WE do by these
presents for us our heirs and successors will ordeyne constitute declare and
grant that there be and for ever hereafter shall be forty Fellows of the said
College and Corporation hereby constituted And Forty fellows constituted.
that thereof at present and for ever hereafter there be one President Tenn
Elects and four Censors One President, Ten Elects and four Censors.
duly appointed nominated and chosen to be and shall be respectively
President Elects and Censors of the same College and Corporation And all the
same Fellows President Elects and Censors respectively to be and shall be from
time to time nominated elected and chosen and have being and continuance as
such respectively in manner and form and to all intents and purposes as in and
by these presents is hereafter mentioned and declared. AND further To be
chosen as hereafter mentioned. The first forty Fellows.
We do by these presents for us our heirs and successors will ordeyne
constitute and appoint Sir Edward Alston Knight Sir Francis Prujean Knight
Baldwyn Hamey Francis Glisson Peter Salmon George Ent George Bate Alexander
Frazier William Stane John Micklethwait Nathan Pagett Jonathan Goddard Edmond
Trench John King Thomas Cox Henry Stanley Daniell Whistler Charles Scarburgh
Thomas Wharton Christopher Merrett Samuel Collins Luke Rugeley John Wilby Sir
William Petty Knight Christopher Terne Sir John Baber Knight John Hale Edward
Greaves Thomas Croydon Gabriell Beauvoir Thomas Wolf Martin Luellin Sir John
Finch Knight Thomas Baynes William Quarterman James Hide Humfry Whitmore Robert
Waller Peter Barwicke and Robert Morrison Doctors in Physic the first and
present Fellows of the same College and Corporation And to be and continue
Fellows of the same College and Corporation and to hold exercise and enjoy
the office or place of Fellows of and in the same College and Corporation
respectively for and dureing their several and respective natural For life
if not removed for cause.
lives unless in the mean time for evil government or misbehaving
themselves in the same office or place or for Nonresidence (otherwise than
while they or any of them respectively shall be or continue in the service of us
our heirs or successors) without License under the Seal of the College and
Corporation aforesaid or under the Privy Seal of us our heirs or successors
or for any the like reasonable cause they or any of them respectively shall be
removed. AND We do by these presents for us our heirs and successors will
ordain constitute and appoint the said Sir Edward Alston Knight the first and
present President Sir Edward Alston to be the first President.
of the same College and Corporation And to be and continue President of the
same College and Corporation and to hold exercise and enjoy the same office or
place of President of and in the same College and Corporation from the making
hereof until the morrow of the feast of Saint Michaell the Archangell next
ensueing the date hereof and from thenceforth until another President shall
be in due manner elected and sworn according to the tenor true intent and
meaning of these presents. AND We do further by these presents for us our
heirs and successors will ordeyne constitute and appoint the said Sir Edward
Alston Sir Francis Prujean Baldwyn Ten first Elects.
Hamey Francis Glisson George Ent George Bate Alexander Frazier William Stane
John Micklethwaite and Nathan Pagett to be the first and present Elects of the
same College and Corporation and to be and continue Elects of the same
College or Corporation and to hold exercise and enjoy the office or place of
Elects of the same College and Corporation for and dureing their several and
respective natural lives unless in the mean time for any reasonable For
lives if, etc.
cause as aforesaid they or any of them shall be removed. AND We do by
these presents will ordain constitute and appoint the said George Ent John
Micklethwaite Daniell Whistler and Christopher Merrett the first and present
Censors of the same College Four Censors to continue till the morrow of St.
Michael.
and Corporation and to be and continue Censors of the same College and
Corporation and to hold exercise and enjoy the office or place of Censors of
and in the same College and Corporation until the morrow of the feast of
Saint Michaell the Archangell next ensueing the date hereof and from
thenceforth until some other Censors of the same College and Corporation
shall be in due manner elected and sworn according to the tenor true intent
and meaning of these presents. AND for the better supply and continuance of
the said several parts and members of the said College and Corporation, WE
will and by these presents for us our heirs and successors Do ordain and
grant that Nominations and Elections shall and may from time to time when and
as often as occasion shall require be duly made Elections duly to be made.
of the President Elects Censors and Fellows of the said College and
Corporation according to the tenor true intent and meaning of these presents
(that is to say) That all and every President and Presidents of the College
and Corporation aforesaid hereafter to be nominated and chosen shall be from
time to time nominated and chosen only by and out of the Elects of the same
College and Corporation for the time being according to the power in that
behalf hereafter given and declared And that every such President so
nominated and chosen and duly sworn according to the contents of these
presents shall be and continue President of the same College and Corporation
until the morrow of the feast of Saint Michaell the Archangell next ensueing
such his Election and from thenceforth until some other of the Elects of the
same College and Corporation shall be in due manner elected and sworn in
that office or place of President according to the true intent and meaning of
these presents unless he in the mean time for ill Government Non-residency
or misbehavior in the same office or place or any the like reasonable cause
shall be removed from such his office or place whom in such case we will shall
be removeable according to the tenor of these presents. And for the better
effecting thereof that it shall and may be lawful to and for the Elects of
the said College for the time being or any five of them whereof the President
of the same College for the time being or in his absence the Vice President of
the same College for the time being to be one On the morrow of the feast day
of Saint Michaell the Archangell next ensueing the date hereof or within three
days after And on the morrow of that feast day yearly or within three days
next ensueing for ever after to assemble and meet together in the Common Hall
of the said College or other convenient place within the said City of London
and then and there to nominate elect and choose some one of the Elects of the
same College for the time being to be President of the same College and
Corporation for the year then next ensueing. Which person so from time to
time yearly to be chosen being duly sworn according to the tenor of these
presents shall be and continue President of the same College and Corporation
for and dureing such time and until such further election of a new President
shall be made as aforesaid unless in the mean time he shall be removed as
aforesaid. AND FURTHER in case any President of the said College shall happen
to depart this life before the morrow of the said feast of Saint Michaell the
Archangell next ensueing his election or in the mean time shall be putt out or
removed for cause as aforesaid That then and in every such case itt shall and
may be lawful to and for the Elects of the same College for the time being
or any five of them in convenient time after the death or removal of every
such President to meet and assemble in the said Common Hall or other place
aforesaid and then and there to nominate elect and choose some one of the
Elects of the same College for the time being to be President of the same
College for the remainder of the year then in being And which said President
so chosen shall be and continue President of the same College for and
dureing the remainder of the same year respectively And until such further
election of a new President shall be made for the year then next ensueing as
herein is declared And that in all things according to the tenor true intent
and meaning of these presents. AND WE FURTHER will and grant that it shall
and may be lawful to and for the President of the said College for the time
being by writeing under his hand and seal from time to time at his will and
pleasure to nominate constitute and appoint any one of the Elects of the same
College Power to make a Vice President.
for the time being to be Vice President of the same College and to be and
continue in the same office or place of Vice President dureing the pleasure of
the same President And such his Vice President from time to time to amove and
discharge and a new one again to make of any of the said Elects as aforesaid
at his will and pleasure And that every such Vice President so constituted
being duly sworn according to the contents of these presents shall and may
from time to time in the absence of the President of the same To exercise the
place and power of the President in his absence.
College for the time being have do use exercise and enjoy all and every the
powers liberties privileges matters and things that the President of the same
College for the time being may might should or ought to have do use exercise
or enjoy by virtue of these presents or any the Charters Acts of Parliament or
Graunts abovementioned. AND WE do further will and ordain that the Censors
of the said College shall from time to time be chosen out of Censors to be
chosen out of the Fellows.
the Fellows of the said College in manner and form following (that is to
say) The President and Fellows of the College aforesaid for the time being
How.
at a Court to be holden on the morrow of the said feast day of Saint
Michaell next ensueing the date hereof or within three days after and on the
morrow of that feast day or within three days next ensueing yearly for ever
after shall and may assemble together in the Common Hall of the same College
or other convenient place aforesaid and then and there nominate elect and
choose any four of the Fellows of the same College for the time being to be
the Censors of the same College for the year then next ensueing which four
persons so from time to time yearly to be chosen being duly sworn
according to the contents of these presents and every of them respectively
shall be and continue Censors of the same College until the morrow of the
feast of Saint Michaell next after such election and further until other
Censors shall be duly chosen and sworn into their respective places unless
in the mean time they or any of them shall be removed for reasonable cause.
AND FURTHER in case the Censors aforesaid from time New Election of Censors in
case of death or removal.
to time to be chosen as aforesaid or any of them shall happen to depart this
life before the morrow of the feast day of Saint Michaell the Archangell next
ensueing their or any of their respective election or elections or in the
mean time shall happen to be putt out or removed for cause as aforesaid That
then and in every such case it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
President and Fellows of the said College at a Court to be holden in
convenient time after the death or removal of every or any of the said Censors
of the College aforesaid to assemble and meet in the Common Hall or other
place aforesaid and then and there to elect nominate and choose any one or more
of the Fellows of the same College for the time being to be Censor and
Censors of the same College in the place and room of such Censor and Censors
as shall be then vacant by death or removal as aforesaid Which person and
persons so nominated and chosen being duly sworn according to the contents of
these presents shall be and continue Censor and Censors of the same College
for and dureing such time and in such manner as the person or persons in whose
room or place he or they shall be so chosen should or ought to have been
or continued by virtue of these presents subject always to be removeable for
reasonable cause as aforesaid. AND WE do further will and ordain That the
Elects of the said College shall be chosen out of the Fellows of the same
College in manner and form following (that is to say) In case of death New
Elects to be chosen on death or removal.
or due removal of any the Elects of the said College hereby constituted or
of any the Elects of the said College hereafter by virtue of these presents
to be elected nominated and chosen the President and Elects of the same
College for the time being or any five of them whereof the President for the
time being to be always one from time to time and at any time after such
death or deaths removal or removalls respectively shall and may assemble and
meet at their said Common Hall or other convenient place in our said City of
London and then and there elect nominate and choose any of the then Fellows of
the said College into the place or places of such and so many of the said
Elects as shall be then void by death or removal as aforesaid. Which persons
so to be chosen being duly sworn according to the tenor of these presents
shall be and continue Elects of the said College dureing their respective
lives unless for reasonable cause they shall be removed as aforesaid. AND WE
DO further will and ordeyne that the Fellows of the said College shall be
chosen out of the Comonaltie of the said College in manner and form following
(that is to say) In How the Fellows are to be chosen.
case of death or due removal of any of the Fellows abovementioned and hereby
constituted or of any of the Fellows of the said College hereafter by virtue
of these presents to be nominated or chosen the President and Fellows of the
same College shall and may from time to time and at any time after such death
or deaths removal or removalls respectively assemble and meet at a Court to
be holden in their Common Hall or other convenient place as aforesaid and then
and there elect nominate and choose any one or more such and so many of the
most learned and able persons skilled and experienced in the said faculty of
Physic then of the Comonalty or Members of the said College and Corporation
to be Fellow and Fellows of the same College and Corporation in the place
and places of such and so many of the said Fellows of the said College and
Corporation as shall be then void by death or removal as aforesaid. Which
persons so to be chosen being duly sworn according to the tenor of these
presents shall be and continue Fellows of the said College dureing their
respective lives unless for reasonable cause they shall be removed as
aforesaid. AND WE WILL and by these presents for us our heirs and successors
do give and grant unto the President Fellows and Comonaltye of the Kings
College of Physicians aforesaid and their successors Power to remove any of
the Elects, Fellows or Censors for cause.
that it shall and may be lawful for the President and Fellows of the said
College at any Court or Courts to be holden at their Common Hall or other
convenient place from time to time and as often as occasion shall require to
summon hear and admonish any of the said Fellows Elects and Censors of the
same College And for cause of evil Government Non-residence otherwise then as
aforesaid without License under the Seal of the said College and Corporation
or under the Privy Seal of us our heirs or successors as aforesaid or for
misbehaveing themselves in their respective places or any other just or
reasonable cause from time to time to expel and amove any of the same Fellows
Elects or Censors from his and their respective place and places in the same
College And after due publication and entry made thereof in the Register of
the same College and Corporation from time to time to proceed to new
Elections to supply the place or places of such person or persons so removed
or expelled according to the provision above mentioned and the tenor of these
presents. AND WE WILL and hereby declare That neither the President
Vice President Elects or Each person his single voice in Election.
Censors or any of them for the time being by color of any double capacity as
such and also Fellows of the said College and Corporation shall have or give
more or other then each several and respective person his or their several
and respective voice in all or any Election or Elections or other matter or
thing whatsoever directed or granted or to be done or acted by virtue of
these presents Except only in such case and cases where the voices shall
happen to be even and equal And then and in every such case wherein the
President or in his absence the Vice President of the said College and
Corporation for the time being is to be one We will and by these presents
for us our heirs and successors do Ordeyne and Grant that the President or
in his absence the Vice President of the said College and Corporation for the
time being shall have and give a casting voice to the end Where voices even, a
casting voice to the President.
that all Elections matters and debates relateing to the said College and
Corporation may the more easily certeinely and peaceably be settled and
determined. AND We will and further by these presents for us our heirs and
successors do Ordain and Establish That all and every the Fellows and also
the President Elects and Censors above named and hereby constituted and every
of them And also all and every the Fellows President or Vice President Elects
and Censors and other Officers and Ministers whatsoever of the College and
Corporation aforesaid hereafter by virtue of these presents to be nominated
and elected and every of them shall severally and respectively take his and
their several and respective The President and all Fellows and Officers to be
sworn duly to execute, etc.
corporal Oath on the Holy Evangelists before the several and respective
persons hereby directed and empowered to administer the same well truly and
faithfully to attend and execute his and their several and respective office
or place in all things touching and concerning the same respectively And that
from time to time before he or they respectively do Act or intermeddle
therein And also the several known Oaths of Obedience and of Supremacy
before such And to take the Oaths of Obedience and Supremacy.
person and persons as by the Law and Statutes of this Land now are or
hereafter shall be authorized or appointed to administer the same. AND WE DO
by these presents for us our heirs and successors give and grant unto our
trusty and well-beloved Sir Geffrey Three persons to swear the present
President, Elects, Censors and Fellows.
Palmer Knight and Baronett our Attorney General Sir Heneage Finch Knight and
Baronett our Solicitor General Sir William Wild Knight and Baronett one of
our Sergeants at Law and Recorder of our City of London and to every or any
one of them full power and authority to give and administer unto the said Sir
Edward Alston and all and every the persons abovenamed and by these presents
constituted the first and present Fellows of the said College and Corporation
his and their said corporal Oath on the Holy Evangelists well truly and
faithfully to attend and execute his and their several and respective office
or place of Fellow of the same College and Corporation in all things touching
and concerning the same. AND ALSO to give and administer unto the said Sir
Edward Alston hereby constituted the first and present President of the same
College and Corporation his said corporal Oath on the Holy Evangelists well
truly and faithfully to attend and execute the same office or place of
President of the same College and Corporation in all things touching and
concerning the same. AND ALSO to give and administer as well unto the ten
persons abovenamed and hereby constituted the first and present Elects of the
same College and Corporation as unto the four persons abovenamed and hereby
constituted the first and present Censors of the same College and Corporation
their said several and respective corporal Oaths on the Holy Evangelists
well truly and faithfully to attend and execute their several and respective
offices or places of Elects and Censors of the same College and Corporation in
all things touching and concerning the same respectively. AND We do further
by these presents for us our heirs and successors give and grant unto the
said President Fellows and Comminaltie of the Kings College of Physicians
aforesaid and their successors That it shall and may be lawful to and for
the Elects of the Power to the Elects or any two of them to swear the
Presidents hereafter chosen.
College and Corporation aforesaid for the time being and to any two of them
full power and authority from time to time to give and administer unto all and
every President and Presidents of the same College and Corporation hereafter
and by virtue of these presents and according to the tenor thereof to be
nominated elected or chosen his and their like corporal Oath and Oaths on
the Holy Evangelists well truly and faithfully to attend and execute the said
office or place of President of the same College and Corporation for and
dureing such time and so long as he or they or any of them respectively shall
be or continue in the same office or place And also full power and authority
unto the President of the said College for the time being in the presence of
the Elects of the same College or any two of them for the time being from time
to time as often as occasion shall require to give and administer to all and
every person and persons whatsoever that at any time hereafter by virtue of
these presents and according to the contents thereof shall be nominated
elected made or chosen to be Vice President Fellow Elect or Censor Power to
the President to swear the Fellows and all other Officers hereafter chosen.
or other Officer or Minister of the same College his and their like
corporal Oath on the Holy Evangelists well truly and faithfully to attend and
execute his and their several and respective office or place into which he
or they shall be so nominated elected made or chosen And that in all things
touching and concerning the same respectively. AND for the better Government
of the said College and speedier reforming the enormities and abuses aforesaid
and more facile and certain doing and accomplishing the things and ends
intended by these presents WE WILL and by these presents for us our heirs
and successors Of our more especial grace and favor Do grant unto the said
President Fellows and Comonaltie of the Kings College of Physicians in the
City of London and their Successors That it shall and may be lawful to and
for the said President and Fellows of the same College and Corporation and
their Successors to have appoint reteyne and enjoy a Hall or Councill-house
within our To have a Hall.
said City of London or the liberties of the same AND that the said President
for the time being and his Successors shall and may when and as often as to him
shall seem meet and necessary call assemble and keep within the same Hall or
House a certain Court President to call a Court.
or Convocation of the said President and Fellows of the said College and
Corporation and their Successors for the time being or of any competent part
Not less than 15. President one of them.
or number of them not less then fifteen whereof the President or in his
absence the Vice President of the same College for the time being always to
be one And of every such Court or Convocation so to be called and held shall
by a known Officer of the same College and Corporation give convenient notice
or summons to the Fellows of the same College or Corporation for the time
being And that in every such Court or Convocation the said President and
Fellows and their Successors for the time being or the major part of them
then present (being not less in number then fifteen whereof the President for
the time being or in his absence the Vice President for the time being to be
always one) shall and may have full power and authority from time to time to
do act perform and execute all and every matter and matters thing and things
by these presents appointed to be done performed and executed by the
President and Fellows of the said College AND ALSO To treat of matters, etc.
to Treat Confer Consult and Consider of Articles Statutes Acts Ordinances
and other things touching and concerning the said President Fellows and
Comonaltie of the College aforesaid and their Successors and the good Rule
State and Government of the same and the Reformation and redress of the
abuses mischiefs and enormities herein before mentioned and hereby intended to
be provided for and suppressed in the time to come And also to Ordain To make
Laws.
Constitute make and set down in writeing such sitting wholesome and
reasonable Laws. Acts Ordinances Orders Decrees Articles and Constitutions as
to them shall seem good profitable and necessary according to their good
discretions for the good Rule Order and Government of the said President
Fellows and Cominaltie and their Successors and of all their Officers and
Ministers Goods Lands Tenements and Hereditaments And also of all other
practicers of Physic and other the persons aforenamed for the reformation and
redress of the abuses deceipts misdemeanors and enormities and other the
premises herein before mentioned or expressed And also for inflicting upon all
and every Delinquent Offender and Offenders against all or any such Laws Acts
Ordinances Orders Decrees Articles and Constitutions so to be made as
aforesaid or any of them such reasonable pains penalties and punishments by
imprisonment To punish by fine or imprisonment.
of the body or by fines and amerciaments any or all of them as to the said
President and Fellows and their Successors or to the Vice President and
Fellows in the absence of the President or the major part of them as aforesaid
shall seem reasonable and fitting. To all which said Laws Acts Ordinances
Orders Decrees Articles and Constitutions to be made as aforesaid We will and
require all due obedience and observance under the pains and penalties therein
contained Yett so as always the said Laws Acts Ordinances Orders Decrees
Articles So as not repugnant to the Laws of the Kingdom.
and Constitutions be not repugnant but agreeable to and with the Laws
Statutes Rights and Customs of this our Kingdom of England and be approved
and confirmed according to the Statute in that behalf made. And We will and
by these presents for us our heirs and successors in reference and with
respect to the said Grant of our said noble Predecessor King Henry the Eighth
And the said Act of Confirmation thereof in this behalf Do give and grant
unto the said President Fellows and Comonaltie of the College aforesaid and
their Successors And do hereby ordain appoint and strictly command That noe
person or persons whatsoever of what condition or quality soever he or they
be being noe member of the said Corporation nor heretofore Licensed under the
Common Seal of the said College of Physicians Do or shall from henceforth
use or exercise the said faculty of Physic within our said Cities of London
and Westminster or None to practice in London or within seven miles, except
licensed as herein expressed.
within seven miles any ways in circuit thereof unless such person and
persons shall be first admitted or licensed to do the same by the President
and Fellows of the said College for the time being Assembled in Court or
Convocation as aforesaid And such their License or Admittance be attested by
Letters Testimonialls of the said President and Fellows of the said College
for the time being sealed with the Common Seal of the same College upon pain
of forfeiting unto the said President Fellows and Comminaltie of the College
aforesaid and their Successors Ten pounds for every Month wherein any Under
pain of 10 l. for every Month.
such person or persons shall so exercise the said faculty being not admitted
or licensed thereunto as aforesaid. And that it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said President Fellows and Commonaltie of the College aforesaid
and their Successors by the name of the President Fellows and Commonaltie of
the Kings College of Physicians in the City of London in any Court or Courts
of Record of us our heirs or successors at Westminster or in any other of our
Courts of Record within the Jurisdiction whereof the offense aforesaid shall be
committed according to the due course of Law to sue for recover and Power to
sue for the same.
have execution of and for all and every such penalties forfeitures sum and
sums of money as shall at any time hereafter accrue grow due or payable or
become forfeited unto the said President Fellows and Commonaltie of the
College aforesaid or their Successors as aforesaid In which Actions Suite or
Suites so to be brought as aforesaid noe Essoyne wager of Law or protection
shall be admitted or allowed for any Defendant or Defendants therein. AND We
do further by these presents of our especial grace certain knowledge and
mere motion for us our heirs and successors give and grant unto the
aforesaid President Fellows and Comonaltie of the College aforesaid and
their Successors That the President and Censors and in the absence of the
President the Vice President and Censors of the same College for the time
being or any three of them whereof the President and in his absence the
Vice President for the time being to be one shall have full power and lawful
authority at all times hereafter when and as often as to them or any three of
them whereof the President and in his absence the Vice President for the time
being to be one it shall seem requisite and convenient to supervise examine
survey Power to the President, Vice President and Censors, or any three of them
to supervise practisers, etc.
correct and punish all and singular Physicians and Practizers in the said
faculty of Physic Apothecaries Druggists Distillers and Sellers of Waters or
of Oils preparers of Chymicall Medicines to be sold or employed for gain and
all and every other person and persons practizeing in the said faculty or
useing the Art or Mystery of an Apothecary or the Trade or Craft of a Druggist
Distiller Preparer or Seller of any Oils Waters or Medicines for gain as
aforesaid or that shall sell or put to sale any Stuff Druggs Oil Water or
Medicines or other thing whatsoever used or to be used for Medicines either
simple or compounded at or in any place or places within our said Cities of
London and Westminster or Suburbs thereof or within seven miles of the same by
Fines Amerciaments and Imprisonments and by other lawful ways and means or
any of them according as the nature and quality of his and their offense or
offenses in the premises shall deserve or require. AND WE DO further of our
like especial grace certain knowledge and mere motion for us our heirs and
successors give and grant unto the aforesaid President Fellows and Comonalty
of the said College and their Successors And We do by these presents
declare our will and pleasure to be that the said President and Censors and in
the absence of the President the Vice President and Censors of the same
College for the time being or any three of them whereof the said President or
in his absence the Vice President for the time being to be one for ever
hereafter Power in them to summon, censure and punish any Practisers offending.
when and as often as to them or any three of them (whereof the President or in
his absence the Vice President for the time being to be one) shall seem meet
and convenient shall have full power and authority to send for summon convent
and cause to appear and come before them the said President Vice President and
Censors or any three of them for the time being (whereof the President or in
his absence the Vice President to be one) all and every Physician and
Physicians Practizer and Practizers in the said faculty of Physic within the
aforesaid City and Suburbs of London or within seven miles thereof at such
time and places as by the said President and Censors or Vice President and
Censors or any three of them for the time being (whereof the President or in
his absence the Vice President to be one) shall be reasonably prefixed and
appointed and to examine them concerning their skill or practice To examine.
of and in the said faculty of Physic and their manner of practice therein.
And if any Physician or Practizer in the same faculty of Physic upon
reasonable summons and garnishment to be made and given in that behalf shall
make default and not appear before the said President and Censors or
Vice President and Censors or any three of them for the time being as aforesaid
having noe reasonable cause to the contrary at such time and place as by them
or any three of them as aforesaid shall be reasonably limited or appointed Or
shall refuse to answer or be Refuse to answer.
examined as aforesaid That then and so often the said President and Censors
and in the absence of the President the Vice President and Censors or any three
of them for the time being (whereof the President or in his absence the
Vice President to be one) shall and may lawfully Assesse and impose a
reasonable penalty Fine or Amerciament upon every or any such Delinquent or
Offender for every several default of appearance made upon several Summons
having noe reasonable cause for his excuse to be made appear to the said
President or Vice President and Censors or any three of them as aforesaid and
for every several refusal to answer or to be examined as aforesaid at one
or more several time or times upon one or more several appearance or
appearances made or to be made So as the same Penalty Fine or Amerciament
so to be imposed for any one default of appearance or refusal to answer or
be examined as aforesaid do not at any time exceed the sum of forty
shillings of Current English money. And if Not to exceed 40 s.
any person or persons so summoned or warned as aforesaid do make his or
their personal appearance before the said President and Censors and in the
absence of the President before the Vice President and Censors or any three of
them for the time being (whereof the President or in his absence the
Vice President to be one) at such respective time and place as in that
behalf shall be limited or appointed as aforesaid And if it shall then and
there appear unto the said President or Censors or Vice President and Censors
in the absence of the President or any three of them for the time being
(whereof the said President or in his absence the Vice President to be one)
that any such person or persons so making his or their appearance has at
any time ministered or prescribed any noisome unwholesome or unfitt medicine or
physic unto any person or persons within the limitts aforesaid Then and in
every such case the said President and Censors or Vice President and Censors in
the absence of the President or any three of them for the time being (whereof
the said President or in his absence the Vice President to be one) shall and
may from time to time punish every such delinquent Power to fine for giving
unwholesome Physic at will, not exceeding 10 l.
or offender by reasonable Amerciament Fine or Imprisonment according to their
discretions to be by them imposed as aforesaid so as any such fine do not
exceed the sum of Ten pounds of lawful money of England And so as the
Imprisonment Also to imprison, not exceeding 14 days.
for such offense exceed not the space of fowerteene days unless it shall
be for non-payment of such fine for which it shall be lawful to deteyne such
Offender in prison until the same fine be satisfied. And to the end that the
said Offenders in the premises may be the better known and discovered and may
be for their said misdemeanors and offenses duly and condignely punished
according to the meritts of their said offenses, WE do therefore of our more
abundant grace certain knowledge and mere motion for us our heirs and
successors give and grant unto the said President Fellows and Cominalty of
the said College and Corporation and their Successors full power and lawful
authority That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said President and
Censors or Vice President and Censors (in the absence of the President of the
same College for the time being) or any three of them (whereof the President
or in his absence the Vice President to be one) by any precept or process to
be made under their respective Power to summon persons by Precept, under hand
and Seal.
hands and seals to summon and warn any person or persons whatsoever whom
they shall know or think meet in or about ministering of any Physic or
Medicines or attendant or servant upon any that shall have received Physic or
Medicines upon payment or tender to them and every of them of their reasonable
charges in that behalf to declare testify or prove against any such Delinquent
or Offender in the premises his or their misdemeanors or offenses upon
reasonable summons and warning to appear and come before the said President
and Censors or any three of them to be examined touching his or their
knowledge of the said Offenders and their misdemeanors and offenses in the
premises. And upon his or their appearance made as aforesaid to administer and
give to him or them so to be produced to testify as aforesaid an Oath or
Oaths and him or them to To give an Oath.
swear upon the Holy Evangelists to testify and declare the truth of his and
their knowledge concerning the said Offenders in the premises and their said
misdemeanors and offenses or otherwise to examine him or them without Oath as
they shall think fit. And that if any such person or persons as shall be
thought fit as aforesaid to declare and testify concerning the said offenses
upon reasonable summons and warneing given as aforesaid and upon tender of his
and their reasonable charges as aforesaid shall wilfully make default and
shall not accordingly appear The person summoned as a Witness to forfeit 20 s.
if not appear, or not depose, or refuse the Oath, etc.
before the said President and Censors or any three of them (whereof the
President or in his absence the Vice President to be one) or if he or they
shall appear and yett nevertheless shall refuse either to take such Oath or
Oaths as shall be then offered or tendered unto him or them as aforesaid or
otherwise shall refuse to be examined without Oath or shall refuse to make
answer to such questions as shall be then asked or demanded of him or them by
the said President and Censors or Vice President and Censors in the absence of
the President of the same College for the time being or any three of them
(whereof the President or in his absence the Vice President to be one)
concerning his or their knowledge touching the said offenses and misdemeanors
or any of them or any other matter or thing concerning the same or the
discovery thereof Then every such person and persons shall for every such
default or refusal as aforesaid forfeit and pay to the said President Fellows
and Cominaltie of the said College and Corporation and their Successors the
sum of twenty shillings of lawful English money. AND WE DO further of our
especial grace certain knowledge and mere motion for us our heirs and
successors give and grant unto the said President Fellows and Cominalty of
the said College and Corporation and their Successors That the said Censors
or any three of them for the time being shall and may have free full and
absolute power and lawful authority at all time and times when and as often
as to them as aforesaid shall seem meet and convenient at fit and
seasonable times of the day to enter into the House Shopp Cellar Vault
Workhouse or Warehouse Power to the Censors to enter houses and search.
or any other the room or rooms of the house or houses of any Apothecary
Druggist Distiller of Waters Oils or other Compositions for the ends aforesaid
or of any other person or persons that now does or hereafter shall putt or set
to sale any Medicine Druggs Waters Oils or Stuff used or to be used for
Medicines within the aforesaid Cities or Suburbs of London and Westminster or
within seven miles thereof And then and there to search view try examine and
see the said Medicines Wares Druggs Waters Oils Medicines and Stuffes of such
Apothecaries Druggists Distillers Preparers or Sellers of Waters Oils or
Medicines or other person or persons as aforesaid and to examine them upon Oath
To examine upon Oath.
or without Oath as they shall think best concerning the Receipts and
Compositions thereof And all such Medicines Wares Druggs Waters Oils and
Stuff as the said Censors or any three of them as aforesaid shall find to be
defective corrupted or not meet or convenient to be ministered or used in
Medicine for the To burn or destroy such Medicines, etc. as they find defective
or corrupted.
health of man's body they the said Censors or any three of them shall or may
take burn or otherwise destroy the same or cause to be taken burned or
otherwise destroyed according to their discretions. AND in case any opposition
or denial shall be made so that by occasion thereof such entry search and
examination as is aforesaid cannot be made according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents That then and so often and in every such case every
person and persons so opposeing or denying and occasioning the same shall for
every such offense forfeit and pay unto the President Fellows and Comonalty of
the College and Corporation aforesaid and their Successors the sum of forty
shillings of lawful money of England to be had and recovered by leavy and
sale of the goods of the person and persons so offending or imprisonment of
his or their person and persons until payment thereof shall be duly made or
otherwise in such manner as other Fines and Amerciaments or any of them
hereafter mentioned are or may be had leavied or recovered. AND We do further
for us our heirs and successors give and grant unto the said President
Fellows and Cominaltie of the said College and Corporation and their
Successors That the President and Censors or Vice President and Censors of the
College and Corporation aforesaid in the absence of the President or any three
of them for the time being (whereof the President or in his absence the
Vice President to be one) shall and may have full power and absolute authority
at all times when and as often as to them shall be thought meet and reasonable
to send for summon Power to summon all Druggists, etc.
convent and cause to appear before them the said President and Censors or
Vice President and Censors of the same College and Corporation in the absence
of the President or any three of them for the time being whereof the President
or in his absence the Vice President for the time being to be one at such
time and place times and places within the aforesaid City and Suburbs of
London and Westminster or within seven miles thereof all or any such
Apothecaries Druggists Distillers Preparers or Sellers of such Waters Oils or
Medicines as aforesaid or any other person or persons whatsoever useing the Art
or Mystery of an Apothecary or Druggist or the Trade or Craft of a Distiller
Preparer or Seller of Waters Oils or Medicines or that shall putt or set to
sale any Stuff Druggs Waters Oils Medicines or other things whatsoever apt
fit or used for Medicines either Simple or Compound within the aforesaid City
and Suburbs of London or within seven miles from the same. AND if such person
or persons so summoned or warned as aforesaid upon reasonable summons and
garnishment to him or them in that behalf made having noe reasonable cause to
the contrary shall not accordingly make his or their personal appearance
before the President and If not appear,
Censors or Vice President and Censors of the College aforesaid in the absence
of the President or any three of them for the time being as aforesaid at such
time and place as by the said President and Censors or Vice President and
Censors or any three of them as aforesaid shall be reasonably limited or
appointed THEN We do by these presents declare That it shall and may be
lawful to and for the aforesaid President and Censors or Vice President and
Censors or any three of them for the time being as aforesaid to impose and
inflict such reasonable Penalty Fine and To fine them at pleasure, not
exceeding 20 s.
Amerciament upon every such person or persons so making default of
appearance as the said President and Censors or Vice President and Censors or
any three of them as aforesaid shall think meet in that behalf so as such
Fine or Amerciament for any one such default exceed not the sum of twenty
shillings of lawful English money. AND if any person or persons summoned as
aforesaid shall make his or their personal appearance before the aforesaid
President and Censors or Vice President and Censors for the time being or any
three of them as aforesaid at such time and place as is or shall be lymitted
or appointed And then and there it shall appear unto the said President and
Censors or Vice President and Censors or any three of them as aforesaid That
the said person or persons so appeareing then or of late had putt or set to
sale any Wares Druggs Waters Bad Medicines.
Oils Medicines or Stuffes defective corrupted or not meet or convenient to
be ministered in Medicine for the health of man's body or that any such person
or persons so summoned and appeareing as aforesaid then or of late had made or
compounded or delivered out any Medicine either simple or compounded differing
from and not agreeable in name Medicines not made according to direction, etc.
nature and quantity unto the prescript or direction delivered unto the said
person or persons before the making compounding or delivery of the said
Medicine Then the said President and Censors or Vice President and Censors in
the absence of the President or any three of them for the time being whereof
the President or in his absence the Vice President to be one shall have full
power and authority to impose a reasonable Penalty Fine and Amerciament upon
all To fine the party, not exceeding 3 l. for any one offense.
and every person and persons so offending so as the same Penalty Fine and
Amerciament for any one fault or offense exceed not at any one time the sum
of three pounds of lawful English money and further to imprison such offender
until he have To imprison him till payment.
made satisfaction and payment of the same fine so imposed upon him for the
same offense. AND FORASMUCH as We are well satisfied in our self and hold it
most reasonable and requisite that a like care and consideration should be had
and taken of all our good subjects inhabiting or resident in other the
Diocesses and parts of this our Realm of England not herein abovementioned nor
provided for in matters concerning the good and health of their bodies which to
effect and to the end that the abuses and irregularities abovementioned may in
those parts be seasonably corrected or tymely prevented and none but able
learned and well qualified persons admitted to exercise and practice in
Physic in the parts of this our Kingdom without our said City of London and
Westminster and the lymitts of seven miles aforesaid, OUR WILL AND PLEASURE is
And We do by these presents for us our heirs and successors Grant
Constitute and Ordeyne that all and every All practisers of Physic in the
Country, out of the limits aforesaid, to be licensed by the President and
Elects, or any four of them.
person and persons whatsoever now or hereafter willing or desirous to exercise
or practice Physic in any the parts of this our Kingdom without the Cities
and lymitts aforesaid Do and shall before he or they or any of them
respectively make any open profession thereof Offer and submitt themselves to
the examination and trial as to their several abilities and qualifications
requisite in that faculty of the President and Elects or Vice President and
Elects in the absence First to be examined.
of the President of the College aforesaid or any four of them for the time
being (whereof the President or in his absence the Vice President for the time
being to be always one) To the end that such person and persons as on such
Examination or Trial shall appear to be able and qualified for the exercise
of that faculty may be approved and allowed of by If able approved, etc. By
testimonial under the hands of the particular tryers.
testimonial in writing under the particular hands of the persons respectively
so examining and approveing them. AND WE DO hereby will and require and by
these presents for us our heirs and successors give and grant unto the
President and Elects of the College aforesaid and in the absence of the
President to the Vice President and Elects of the same College for the time
being or any four of them (whereof the President or in his absence the
Vice President for the time being to be one) from time to time to receive send
for and call before them all and every such person and persons that is or shall
be willing or desirous or shall begynn or venture to exercise Power to the
President and Elects, etc. to summon, examine and give Testimonials, etc.
or practice in the said faculty of Physic within any the parts of this our
Realm of England without the City and lymitts aforesaid And them and every of
them well faithfully and exactly to examine and make trial of their several
and respective qualifications and abilities as to the said faculty of Physic
and the exercise and practice thereof And to allow license and approve of such
and so many of them as shall be by the said Examiners respectively as
aforesaid adjudged able and qualified for that profession And thereupon to make
and give unto them and every of them so approved of as aforesaid a
testimonial in writing under the hands of the Examiners respectively as
aforesaid AND also to refuse suppress and reject all and every such person
and persons as to Reject persons unfit.
the said Examiners respectively appointed as aforesaid shall from time to time
appear to be insufficient or not duly qualified for the exercise of that
faculty AND FURTHER by all just and lawful ways and means possible in the
future to the utmost of their power to prevent or tymely to reform and correct
the abuses irregularities and enormities aforesaid in all and every the parts
of this our Realm without our said City of London and Westminster and lymitts
of seven miles aforesaid. AND our further will and pleasure is And We do by
these presents for us our heirs and successors Grant Constitute and Ordain
that noe person or persons whatsoever Except None to practice in the Country,
till licensed, under pain of 5. l. per Mensem, except Graduates in the
Universities.
he or they be a Graduate or Graduates of Oxford or Cambridge which have or
has accomplished all things for his or their form without any grace shall do
or may from henceforth exercise or practice or be permitted to exercise or
practice in the said Art or Faculty of Physic in any part or parts of this
our Realm of England without our said City and the lymitts aforesaid until
he or they respectively shall be examined tried and approved of as aforesaid
and have and receive a Testimonial thereof in writing as aforesaid upon pain
of forfeiting of five pounds of lawful money of England unto the said
President Fellows and Comonalty of the College aforesaid and their Successors
for every Month wherein any such person or persons shall so exercise or
practice in the said Art or Faculty of Physic as aforesaid being not duly
examined and approved of or having not had or received his Testimonial as
aforesaid All and every such forfeiture sum and sums of money to be had and
recovered in such manner and by such ways and means as the said penalty or
forfeiture of Tenn pounds the Month for practicing without To be recovered as
the 10 l. forfeiture.
license within our said City of London or seven miles thereof as aforesaid
is ought or may be had sued for obtained or recovered And in which Actions
Suite or Suites to be had brought or prosecuted* noe Essoyne wager of Law or
protection shall or ought to be admitted or allowed for or to any Defendant or
Defendants therein. AND WE WILL and for us our heirs and successors Do
hereby grant that the Playntiffe and Playntiffs in all and every Action and
Actions Bill Suite Plaint or Information hereafter brought or to be brought
exhibited or prosecuted for the recovery and obteyneing of the said several
pains or forfeitures of Tenn pounds the Month and five pounds the Month any
or either of them wherein such Playntiffe or Playntiffs shall or ought to have
recover or obtain his or their Judgment therein respectively shall have and
recover his and their reasonable Costs of suite to be from time to time taxed
and assessed by the Judge Judges or Justices of the Court wherein such Action
or Actions Bill Playnt or Information shall be brought or prosecuted as
aforesaid and shall also have his and their Execution and Executions for the
same in such manner to all intents and purposes as in any Action of debt Case
or Trespass is now used or ought to be had given or done in any of our Courts
of Record at Westminster And that the Defendant and Defendants in every such
Action and Suite Bill Playnt or Information wherein Judgment is or ought to be
given for such Defendant or Defendants shall have and recover his and their
Costs of suite in such manner as in any Action or Actions of Debt Case or
Trespass is now used or ought to be had or given in any of our Courts
aforesaid. AND WE DO hereby for us our heirs and successors empower and
enjoyne all Judges and Justices of us our heirs and successors to act and
perform accordingly any Act Statute Law Usage or Provision whatsoever to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. AND WE WILL and by these
presents for us our All Fines, Forfeitures and Amerciaments to be approved by
the next Court, and registered, before any levy or execution be had thereof, and
after by Warrant to commit the party until, etc. or levy it of his goods.
heirs and successors Do ordain and declare that all and every the Fynes
Penalties Forfeitures and Amerciaments hereafter to be set adjudged imposed or
inflicted upon any person or persons whatsoever by force or color of these
presents or of any the Letters Patents or Acts of Parliament aforesaid or by
force or color of any Acts Ordinances Decrees or Constitutions made or to be
made by virtue of these presents or any the Graunts or Authorities aforesaid
before any Action be commenced or any Levy or Execution be had or made
thereof respectively the said several penalties and forfeitures of Tenn pounds
and five pounds per Mensem above mentioned always excepted The 10 l. and 5 l.
per Mensem excepted.
shall be reported to and approved of by the Court or Corporation of the said
President and Fellows of the Kings College of Physicians aforesaid to be
held by virtue of these presents or by any fifteen or more of the Fellows of
the same College for the time being then present at such Court whereof the
President or in his absence the Vice President for the time being to be one
and then entered and registered in the Common Register Book of the same
College And that from and after such approbation and entry thereof it shall
and may be lawful to and for the President and Censors or Vice President and
Censors of the same College of Physicians for the time being in the absence of
the President or any three of them (whereof the said President or in his
absence the Vice President for the time being to be one) by Warrant under the
hand of the said President and Censors or Vice President and Censors for the
time being in the absence of the President or any three of them (whereof the
said President or in his absence the Vice President for the time being to be*
one) duly made and directed to any Officer and Officers of the same College
in this behalf to be appointed to Commit and send every such person and
persons so offending and on whom any such Fine Penalty or Amerciament shall
be imposed set or inflicted as aforesaid or by whom any forfeiture shall be
made as aforesaid to any of our Goales or Prisons (except our Tower of London)
within our said City of London or the Suburbs thereof for the time being there
to remain until he or they shall pay and satisfy unto the said President and
Fellows of the same College of Physicians and their Successors for the time
being the several and respective fine or fynes penalty or penalties forfeiture
or forfeitures Amerciament or Amerciaments for which he or they respectively
shall be so Committed or charged as aforesaid or otherwise by like Warrant to
levy all and every such fine and fynes penalty and penalties forfeiture and
forfeitures Amerciament and Amerciaments by distress and sale of any of the
Goods and Chattells of any or every such person or persons respectively
offending as aforesaid rendering the overplus to be ymployed and disposed as
hereafter in and by these presents is directed. PROVIDED always that if any
person or persons on whom any Fine Penalty or Amerciament shall be set or
imposed as aforesaid shall find or conceive Appeal to,
himself grieved thereby That then it shall and may be lawful to and for
every such person and persons Within one Month after the Fine approved in Court.
within one Month after such approbation and entry thereof made as aforesaid
or sooner to appeal unto such person and persons for his or their releife
therein as in and by these presents are hereafter nominated constituted and
empowered in that behalf. AND We will and by these presents for us our heirs
and successors Do make ordeyne constitute and appoint Visitors Constituted.
our right trusty and right welbeloved Cousin and Councellor Edward Earl of
Clarendon our High Chancellor of England our right trusty and welbeloved Sir
Robert Foster Knight Chief Justice of our Court of Kings Bench Sir Orlando
Bridgman Knight and Baronett Chief Justice of our Court of Common Pleas and
Sir Matthew Hale Knight Chief Baron of our Court of Exchequer the present
Visitors of the said College and Corporation and the Lord Chancellor of
England or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England Lord Chief Justice of
the said Court of Kings Bench Lord Chief Justice of the said Court of Common
Pleas and Lord Chief Baron of the said Court of Exchequer hereafter for the
time being from time to time and for ever hereafter Visitors of the same
College and Corporation. AND We do by these presents for us our heirs and
successors give and grant unto them the said Visitors hereby constituted and
every or any Power to receive and determine Appeals, etc.
two or more of them full power and authority to receive entertain hear
examine adjudge and determine alter mitigate reverse or confirm all and every
such Matter Cause Complaynt Judgment Decree or Sentence whatsoever which at
any time hereafter shall come or be brought before them or any two or more of
them by way of Appeal hereafter to be made by any person or persons whatsoever
for or concerning any Fine Penalty or Amerciament or other matter or thing
whatsoever according to the tenor true intent and meaning of these presents as
to them or any two or more of them shall seem just and fitting. AND to that
end that it shall and may be lawful to and for our said Lord High Chancellor
of England Lord Chief Justice of our said Court of Kings Bench our said Chief
Justice of our said Court of Common Pleas and our said Chief Baron of our said
Court of Exchequer now being or any two or more of them and to and for all and
every other Lord Chancellor of England or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England Lord Chief Justice of the said Court of Kings Bench Lord Chief
Justice of the said Court of Common Pleas and Lord Chief Baron of the said
Court of Exchequer hereafter for the time being or any two To the said
Visitors, or any two of them.
or more of them from time to time to send for remove or cause to come before
them or any two or more of them all and every such Cause Complaynt To remove
the Cause before them.
Judgment Decree and Sentence and all or any the proceedings thereof
respectively whereupon or wherein any Appeal shall be made to them or any two
or more of them as aforesaid and from time to time to order and appoint
certain days times and places for the hearing and adjudging thereof and to
summon hear and examine upon Oath or otherwise all To summon and swear
Witnesses.
and every person and persons that know or can say or testify any matter of
fact or other thing conduceing to the manifestation or discovery of the truth
of the matter in question to the end a just and clear judgment and
determination may be had and made therein AND FURTHER to act proceed perform
and do by all such just and lawful ways and means as shall be requisite or
necessary for the better and speedier effecting of the premises in all things
according to the best of their Judgments and to the truth of the matter
appeareing before them. AND FURTHER that it shall and may be lawful to and
for the said Visitors or any two or more of them for the time being from time
to time and at any time after such cause or matter heard or determined by them
After sentence to remit the Cause.
or any two of them as aforesaid to remitt and certify back again to the said
President Fellows and Cominalty of the said College of Physicians their
judgment and proceedings therein respectively To the end that due execution and
proceeding may be had and made thereupon according to the tenor true intent
and meaning of these presents. AND We will and by these presents for us our
heirs and successors do constitute ordain declare and grant that all and
every Judgment Sentence and Decree hereafter All Judgments in such Appeal to
stand good, and no further relief or appeal after.
made or to be made by the Visitors aforesaid or any two or more of them upon
any Appeal or Appeals of in or concerning the premises shall be and stand
firm and good and be binding and concluding to all and every person and
persons party and parties concerned therein respectively and noe further or
other Appeal or releife to be had sought made or given therein in any Court
of Law or Equity or elsewhere or otherwise however. PROVIDED always and We
will and by these presents for us our heirs and successors do constitute
ordain and grant that in case of neglect or delay of prosecution of any
Appeal or Appeals Provided if neglect of prosecution, or the Appeal not
determined within six Months, the President and Censors to proceed as if no
Appeal therein.
hereafter to be had or made in the premises according to the tenor of these
presents or that Judgment Decree or Sentence be not from time to time had and
obtained in all and every such Appeal and Appeals at the prosecution of the
party or parties respectively so Appealing within six Months after every
such Appeal or Appeals from time to time respectively made That then and in
every such Case it shall and may be lawful to and for the President Fellows
and Commonalty of the College aforesaid and their Successors and to and for
the said President and Censors or Vice President and Censors of the same
College for the time being in the absence of the President or any three of
them as is above mentioned to act and proceed in and upon every such Matter
Cause Judgment Sentence or Decree on which such Appeal or Appeals shall be
so made as aforesaid and neglected delayed or not determined in time by the
Visitors as aforesaid in such manner and to all intents and purposes as if such
Appeal or Appeals had never been or been made Any thing in these presents
contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. AND WE DO by
these presents To proceed on Judgment in Appeal after remitted, as in other
case before Appeal.
for us our heirs and successors further grant constitute and ordeyne that
itt shall and may be lawful to and for the President Fellows and Cominalty
of the College of Physicians aforesaid and their Successors and to and for the
President and Censors or Vice President and Censors of the same College for
the time being in the absence of the President or any three of them as is above
mentioned to act do and proceed by way of Action Distress Imprisonment or
otherwise in and upon all and every matter cause and thing judgment sentence
and decree whatsoever hereafter to be made given ratified or confirmed by the
Visitors aforesaid or any twoe or more of them in or upon any Appeal or
Appeals to them to be made as aforesaid and by them from time to time
remitted as aforesaid in such and the like manner to all intents and purposes
as by these presents they or any of them may or are empowered to do in the
same or the like Cases when noe Appeal or Appeals shall be had or made
therein Any thing in these presents contained to the contrary thereof in any
wise notwithstanding. PROVIDED also and our will and pleasure is That Provided
that no Offender be questioned but within a year after the Offense committed.
noe person or persons whatsoever shall at any time hereafter be ympeached
sued fined amerced or otherwise punished by virtue of these presents or for any
offense or other matter cause or thing whatsoever therein specified or
contained unless he or they respectively be from time to time impeached sued
fined amerced or otherwise questioned or punished for such his or their offense
or other matter cause or thing aforesaid within one whole year next after the
same shall be committed or done or such person or persons liable to be
questioned or punished for the same. AND WE DO further of our especial grace
certain All Fines and Amerciaments given to the College.
knowledge and mere motion for us our heirs and successors give and grant
unto the said President Fellows and Cominalty of the Kings College of
Physicians aforesaid and their Successors all and singular the Fynes
Amerciaments Penalties and Forfeitures and every of them by virtue of these
presents or any Act of Parliament hereafter to be made in pursuance or
Confirmation thereof or of any the Letters Patents or Acts of Parliament
Ordinances Decrees or Impositions aforesaid hereafter to be assessed forfeited
set or imposed upon any Physician or Practizer of Physic as aforesaid or to
be forfeited set or imposed upon any Apothecary Druggist or other person or
persons whatsoever for or by reason of any misdemeanor offense contempt or
default whatsoever before in or by these presents or any the Letters Patents
Acts of Parliament Ordinances Decrees or Impositions mentioned or specified to
be ymployed and disposed as hereafter in and by these presents is declared
(The penalties and forfeitures of the Recognizances hereafter in and by these
presents mentioned Except the penalties and forfeitures on Recognizances.
and directed to be taken in the name of us our heirs and successors always
excepted) AND that the said President Fellows and Cominalty of the College of
Physicians aforesaid and their Successors shall and may by the name of the
President Fellows and Cominalty of the Kings College of Physicians in the
City of London at all times hereafter and from time to time in any of our
Courts of Record according to the due course of Law sue for recover levy and
take execution of and Power to sue for them, and levy them as aforesaid.
for the said Fynes Amerciaments Penalties and Forfeitures and every or any
part thereof or otherwise levy or obtain the same and every part thereof
(Except the said penalties and forfeitures of Tenn pounds and five pounds per
Mensem) by Imprisonment of the Bodies or distress and sale of the Goods of the
persons offending as aforesaid in manner and form aforesaid. AND FURTHER We
will and hereby do order and direct that all and every sum and sums of
money had made accrewing or ariseing by or out of the same Fynes Forfeitures
Penalties All the Fines (charges deducted) to go to the poor.
and Amerciaments any or all of them other then the said forfeitures of Tenn
pounds per Mensem and five pounds per Mensem the just and reasonable charges
and expenses in the sueing for or obteyning thereof respectively being first
deducted and retained shall from time to time for ever hereafter within three
Months after payment recovery or obteyning thereof be well and duly employed
distributed and disposed of by the said President and Fellows of the said
College of Physicians and their Successors or the major part of them for the
time being (whereof the President for the time being to be one) to and amongst
the poor of the Parish or Place Parishes or Places respectively wherein the
Offense or Offenses for which such Fine or Fynes Amerciament or Amerciaments
respectively shall be set or imposed as aforesaid is are or shall be
respectively done or committed in such manner and by such proportions as to
them shall seem fitting and requisite without the let disturbance or
interruption of us our heirs or successors or any the Officers or Ministers of
us our heirs or successors and without giveing or rendering any account or
recompense thereof or therefore to us our heirs or successors. NEVERTHELESS
We 6 l. per ann. reserved to the King.
will and our intent and meaning is That the said President Fellows and
Comonalty of the said College and Corporation and their Successors shall
answer and pay unto us our heirs and successors for and in respect of the
said penalties and forfeitures of Tenn pounds per Mensem and five pounds per
Mensem herein before mentioned and to them by these presents granted as
aforesaid the yearly Rent of six pounds of lawful money of England in liew
and stead of the like yearly rent of six pounds reserved and payable in and by
the Letters Patents of our said Royal Grandfather above mentioned to be paid
at the Receipt of our Exchequer at Westminster at the feast of Saint
Michaell the Archangell and the Annunciation of the blessed Lady Mary the
Virgin by even and equal portions Any thing in these presents contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. AND for the preventing of any
question that may arise concerning a double rent KNOW YE further that We of
our especial grace certain knowledge and mere motion HAVE remised released
acquitted and discharged. And by these presents for us our heirs and
successors Do remise release acquitt and discharge as well the said President
and College or Comonalty in the Letters Patents aforesaid specified and their
Successors as the said President Fellows and Commonalty and their Successors
and every of them of and from the said yearly rent of six pounds reserved and
payable by the said Letters Patents of our said Royal Grandfather as aforesaid
and of and from all and every part and parcel thereof And all our right
interest title claim and demand of in or to the same every or any part
thereof. AND We will and by these presents for us our heirs and successors
do grant unto the said President Fellows and Commonalty of the Kings
College of Physicians aforesaid and to their Successors that the President and
Fellows or the Vice President and Fellows of the same College for the time
being in the absence of the President or the major part of Power to choose a
Register.
them present being not less in number then fifteen whereof the President or
in his absence the Vice President to be one being assembled together in their
Hall or Council-house aforesaid shall and may from time to time Nominate Elect
and Appoint One honest and discreet person being one of the Fellows of the
said College who shall be and shall be called the Register to the same
College and shall from time to time be attendant on the President and
Fellows of the said College and their Successors and shall set down in
writing register and enter into a Book His duty.
all such Rules Orders Statutes Decrees Acts Ordinances and other things as
shall from time to time be had made done provided or ordained by the said
President and Fellows and their Successors or the greater part of them at
such their Courts Meetings and Assemblies aforesaid and also shall and may
from time to time when and as often as to them shall seem meet ordain make
constitute and appoint such and so many other meet Officer or Officers
Minister Power to choose other Officers.
or Ministers as to the said President and Fellows or Vice President and
Fellows in the absence of the President and their Successors or the greater
part of them assembled as aforesaid from time to time shall be thought fit
and necessary for their service and benefitt. WHICH Register Officers and
Ministers shall from time to time be duly and severally sworn before the
President or in his absence To be sworn.
the Vice President of the same College for the time being according to the
prescript and directions abovesaid and the true intent and meaning of these
presents AND the same Register and all and every other Officer and Minister by
them to be so elected made constituted or appointed as aforesaid shall and
may from time to time upon reasonable and just cause remove expel and putt out
of his and their said Offices and To put them out again, etc.
Places and elect and putt others in his and their rooms and places when and
as often as to the said President and Fellows or Vice President and Fellows
in the absence of the President or the greater part of them (whereof the
President or in his absence the Vice President for the time being to be one)
shall seem meet and convenient. AND FURTHER We do for us our heirs and
successors To take Recognizances of Offenders.
give and grant unto the said President Fellows and Commonalty of the Kings
College of Physicians aforesaid and their Successors that itt shall and may
be lawful to and for the said President and Censors or Vice President and
Censors of the same College for the time being in the absence of the President
or any three of them (whereof the President or in his absence the
Vice President to be one) to cause such persons as shall be convented for any
the offenses aforesaid and shall be found offenders therein to become bound
unto us our heirs and successors and to our use in one or more several
Recognizances in such sum or sums as they shall think fit not exceeding
the sum of One hundred pounds with Conditions thereunto for restrayning them
to offend any more in that behalf as to the rect. President and Censors or to
the Vice President and Censors in the absence of the President or any three*
President or Vice President and Censors in the absence of the President and
Censors or any three of them whereof the President or in his absence the
Vice President for the time being to be one shall seem meet. And if such
person or persons shall refuse to become so bound by such Recognizance with
such condition that then itt shall and may be lawful to and for the said
President and Censors or Vice President and Censors of the same College for
the time being in the absence of the President or any three of them whereof the
President or in his absence the Vice President to be one to commit such person
and To commit such as refuse to enter into Recognizance.
persons to prison and him and them to deteyne in prison until he or they
shall become bound in such Recognizance with such condition as aforesaid. AND
WE WILL and by these presents for us our heirs and successors do enjoyne
order and command all and every Warden Jailer and Keeper Wardens Goalers and
Keepers of our Wards Goales and Goalers to receive and detain the Prisoners.
Prisons within our said City of London and the limitts and precincts
aforesaid (Except before excepted) that they and every of them do from time to
time yield and give all due obedience and observance to the said President and
Censors or Vice President and Censors of the College aforesaid for the time
being in the absence of the President and to all and every such Warrant and
Warrants as by them or any three of them for the time being (whereof the said
President or in his absence the Vice President to be one) shall by virtue of
these presents or any the Letters Patents or Acts of Parliament aforesaid be
duly made and directed to any the Wardens Goalers or Keepers of our Prisons
aforesaid or any of them And that they and every of them do and shall receive
into his or their Custody in such prison or prisons (whereof he or they shall
then be Warden Jailer or Keeper) all and every such person and persons as by
virtue of such Warrant or Warrants shall be sent or committed to him or them
and there shall safely keep every such person and persons so Committed in any
of their Prisons at the proper costs and charges of the said person or persons
so Committed without Bail or Mainprise according to the tenor form and
effect of such Warrant and Warrants until such person or persons shall be
duly discharged upon pain that all and every such Warden Jailer or Keeper
doing the contrary shall loose and forfeit the double of all and every such
Fine or Fynes Amerciament Penalty.
and Amerciaments sum and sums of money for which or Non-payment whereof
such person or persons respectively were or shall be so Committed as
aforesaid PROVIDED that any such Fine Amerciament or Sum of money be not at
any one time above the sum of Twenty pounds The one moiety thereof to be
ymployed to the use of us our heirs and successors and the other moiety to the
said President and Fellows of the Kings College of Physicians aforesaid to
and for the use of the poor aforesaid and to be disposed and distributed as
aforesaid. AND all the same forfeitures to be recovered by Action of debt Bill
Playnt or Information in any Court of Record of us our heirs or successors
against any such Warden Jailer or Keeper so offending in which suite noe
Essoyne wager of Law nor Protection shall be allowed or admitted for the
Defendant. AND WE DO FURTHER of our especial grace certain knowledge and
mere motion for us our heirs and successors give and grant unto the said
President Fellows and Cominalty of the Kings College of Physicians and their
Successors that itt shall and may be lawful to and for the President and
Fellows of the same College for the time being and their Successors yearly
and every year for ever hereafter at their free liberty and pleasure to have
and take at once or several times without contradiction the dead Bodies of
six several persons of Men Liberty to take six Bodies yearly for Anatomies,
or Women condemned adjudged and putt to death for Felony or other offense by
the due course and order of the Laws of this our Realm within our said City
of London or our Countyes of Middlesex and Surrey or either of them for
Anatomies without any further Surte License or Commission to or from us our
heirs or successors to be had made or obtained for the same And from time to
time to make incision of the same dead bodies or otherwise to order the same
after their discretions at their liberty and pleasures for their further and
better knowledge instruction insight learning and experience in the faculty and
science of Physic and Surgery. PROVIDED always and We will and direct
that Provided they be buried after.
all and every such dead body and bodies had taken or used for or as Anatomies
be from time to time after such use made thereof as aforesaid decently buried
at the costs and charges of the said President and Fellows and their
Successors. AND We do further of our especial favor certain knowledge and
mere Liberty to purchase Lands.
motion for us our heirs and successors give and grant unto the said President
Fellows and Cominalty of the Kings College of Physicians and their Successors
special license free and lawful liberty power and authority to acquire
purchase receive and take unto the said President Fellows and Cominalty of the
same College and their Successors for ever to the use of them and their
Successors for ever And also to all and every other person and persons full
and free power license and authority to give grant and convey unto them the
said President Fellows and Cominalty of the College aforesaid and their
Successors for ever to the use of them and their Successors for ever any
Manors Messuages Lands Tenements Tithes Rents Reversions and Hereditaments so
as the same do not exceed in the whole the clear yearly value of Two hundred
pounds above all charges and reprises The Statute of Alienation 200 l. per ann.
in Mortmaine or any other Statute Act Law Ordinance or Provision heretofore
made ordained or provided or any other matter cause or thing to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding And this without any Writ or Writts of Ad quod
dampnum or other License or Letters Patents Inquisitions or Mandates of us our
heirs or successors to be had made prosecuted sued for or obtained in that
behalf. AND WE WILL and by these presents for us our heirs and successors
Do give and grant unto the said President Fellows and Comonalty of the Kings
College of Physicians and their Successors That all and every Physician and
Physicians that now is or are or that hereafter shall be Elected Admitted and
made a Member of the same College shall from time to time be wholly and
absolutely freed exempt and discharged of and from serving or appearing in any
Jury or Iuries for the trial of any matter or Physicians not to be of Juries,
nor Churchwarden, Constable, nor Scavenger in London, or seven miles distant,
etc.
cause or taking finding or executing of any Commission or Inquisition
whatsoever and of and from being or chosen to be Churchwarden Constable
Scavenger or any such or the like Officer or Officers And of and from the
undertakeing execution and exercise of all and every the same and such like
Office and Offices Place and Places and every of them And also of and from all
Watch and Ward Watch and Ward. Bearing and providing Arms.
and of and from beareing and providing Arms within our Cities of London or
Westminster or either of them or any the Suburbs or Liberties of the same
Cities or either of them or within seven miles compass thereof. AND in case
they or any of them shall at any time hereafter by any ways or means be
designed appointed nominated or chosen into or to undergo or bear or perform
any of the said Office or Offices Place or Places Duty or Duties or any of
them within our said Cities or the Suburbs or Liberties thereof or lymitts
aforesaid That all and every such designation appointment nomination and
election shall be utterly void and of none effect any Statute Act Ordinance
Constitution Order Custom or Law to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding. AND We do Confirmation of all former Grants,
further for us our heirs and successors give and grant unto the said
President Fellows and Commonalty of the said Kings College of Physicians
aforesaid and their Successors AND by these presents declare and manifest our
pleasure for ever to be That the said President Fellows and Cominalty and
their Successors shall and may have take hold receive use exercise and enjoy
all and singular the Gifts Graunts Liberties Privileges Immunities Freedoms
Benefitts Advantages Proffitts Commodities Power Ability and Authority herein
before mentioned or by any Act or Acts of Parliament heretofore given granted
or confirmed unto the President College or Cominalty aforesaid or any of them
and not hereby altered changed made void or nulled Not hereby altered.
without the let hinderance interruption or disturbance of us our heirs or
successors or of any the Officers or Ministers of us our heirs or successors
or of any other person or persons whatsoever And that as fully and amply to all
intents and purposes as the said President College or Cominalty or any the
Members thereof or any of them had used exercised or enjoyed or may might could
or ought to have had used exercised or enjoyed the same or any thereof. AND
FURTHER of our like especial grace certain knowledge and mere motion WE
WILL and for us our heirs and successors Do promise and To consent to a Bill
in Parliament for Confirmation.
grant to and with the said President Fellows and Cominalty of the Kings
College of Physicians aforesaid and their Successors by these presents that in
the present or next Parliament or Session of Parliament of us our heirs or
successors now held or hereafter to be called and held within this our Realm
of England We our heirs and successors will give and grant our Royal and
free assent and consent to any Act Bill or Petition by the said President
Fellows and Cominalty or their Successors or any of them in Parliament as
aforesaid to be exhibited or preferred and by the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal and the Commonalty of the said Parliament to be approved and
assented unto for the better inabling authorizing and investing of the said
President Fellows and Commonalty and their Successors to and with the several
Graunts Powers Privileges Authorities Exemptions Immunities and other matters
and things to them in or by these presents given granted or confirmed or
intended to be to them given granted or confirmed according to our gracious
intent and meaning herein before specified and expressed. AND FURTHER We will
and by these presents for us our heirs and successors Do grant unto the said
President Fellows and Cominalty of the Kings College of Physicians aforesaid
and their Successors that these our Letters Patents and all and singular the
Gifts Graunts Authorities Powers Privileges and Immunities and other things
herein contained shall be good firm avayleable and effectual in the Law to
the intents and purposes aforesaid And shall be in all and every of our Courts
of Record and elsewhere had taken construed and adjudged most strongly against
us our heirs and successors and most benignely favorably and beneficially to
and for the said President Fellows and Cominalty and their Successors any
Statute Act Ordinance Custom Usage Gift Grant or any other matter or thing
heretofore had made used ordained or provided to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. ALTHOUGH EXPRESS MENTION of the true yearly value or
certainty of the Premises or of any of them or of any other Gifts or Graunts
by us or any of our Progenitors or Predecessors heretofore made to the said
President Fellows and Cominalty of the Kings College of Physicians aforesaid
in these presents is not made or any Statute Act Ordinance Provision
Proclamation or Restriction heretofore had made enacted ordained or provided or
any other matter cause or thing whatsoever to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding. IN WITNESS whereof We have caused these our Letters to be
made Patents. WITNESS our self at Westminster the Sir and twentieth day of
March in the Fifteenth year of our Reign.

By the King.
HOWARD.

A Royal Charter granted to the Apothecaryes of London 30 Maii 13 Jacobi.
REX omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem. Cum antehac per Litteras nostras Paten' sub
magno sigillo nostro Anglie confect' geren' dat' apud Westm' nono die Aprilis
Anno regni nostri Anglie Francie and Hibernie Apothecaries and Grocers made one
Corporation, 4 Jac.
quarto and Scocie de gratia nostra speciali voluerimus ordinaverimus and
concesserimus quod omnes and singuli liberi homines mysterii Grocer' and
Pharmacopol' Civitat' London and Successores sui deinceps imperpetuum pro
meliori ordine gubernatione and regimine hominum myster' Grocer' and
Pharmacopol' Civitatis London ac pro utilitate commodo and relevamine bonorum
and proborum ac formidine and correctione malorum dolosorum and improborum
forent and essent vigore earundem Litterarum Paten' unum Corpus corporatum and
politicum in re facto and nomine per nomen Custod' and Communitatis myster'
Grocer' Civitat' London and eosdem per nomen Custod' and Communitat' myster'
Grocer' Civitat' London unum corpus corporatum and politicum in re facto and
nomine realiter and ad plenum pro nobis heredibus and successor' nostris per
easdem Litteras nostras. Paten' adtunc erexerimus fecerimus ordinaverimus
constituerimus and declar averimus and quod per idem nomen successionem h'erent
perpetuam prout per easdem Litteras nostras Paten' (inter alia) before liquet
and apparet. Jam vero quum nobis sit The grounds for this New Charter.
demonstratum ex part dilectorum subditorum nostrorum Pharmacopol' Civitat'
nostre London necnon nobis affirmatum and approbatum per dilectos nobis
Theodorum de Mayerne and Henricum Atkins in Medicinis Doctores Medicos nostros
discretos and fideles Quod hiisce proximis annis quamplurimi Empirici and
homines Empiricks.
ignari and inexperti in Civitate nostra London ac ejusdem Suburbiis inhabitant
and commorantur qui in Pharmacopoli art and mysterio haud instituti sed in
eadem imperiti and rudes quamplurima insalubria nociva Hurtful Medicines.
falsa corrupta and perniciosa faciunt and componunt medicamenta eademque in
plurimas hujus regni nostri Anglie parts vendunt and assidue transmittunt in
convitium and opprobrium non solum Medicine sciencie illius colende
Medicorumque hujus regni nostri Anglie literat' eandem profitentium necnon
Pharmacopoeiorum Civitat' nostre London in eadem art and mysterio educat' and
expert' verum eciam in subditor' nostror' pericula and assidua vite discrimina.
Cumque ad jura nostra regia and regimen supremum quo universos subdit' nostros
singulasque regni nostri parts membra and societates temperamus and
complectimur spectat ut probono publico and temporum ratione novas Societates
atque nova Corpora corporat' and politica creare erigere instituere and
superinducere ad beneplacitum nostrum possumus tam ex personis que prius plane
separat' and in null' corpus redact' and collect' fuerunt quam ex membris
Corporum corporat' veter' ubi hoc ad melius regimen populi nostri videbitur
expedire. Nos igitur considerantes officii nostri Regii munus esse subditorum
nostrorum saluti and bono publico omnibus viis and modis providere and
consulere ac nobiscum perpendentes quomodo improborum istorum hominum conatibus
The Apothecaries separate from the Company of Grocers.
tempestive occurramus (de advisament' Consilii nostri in legibus eruditi)
apprime necessarium duximus Pharmacopoeios Civitat' nostre London ab hominibus
liberis myster' Grocer' ejusdem disunire disjungere separare and dissociare ac
eosdem Pharmacopoeios per seipsos solum and divisim ac ab hominibus liberis
myster' Grocer' predict' ad omnes intentiones and proposit' disunitos and
separatos in unum Corpus corporat' and And made an Incorporation.
Politicum erigere creare and constituere ad quos omni futuro tempore
incommodorum istorum cura and correctio demandata and commissa foret. Ita tamen
ut Subject to the Magistracy of the City, as well as others.
superior' ac general' regimin' Civitat' nostre London and Magistrat' ejusdem
in modum aliarum Societat' subjiciantur. SCIATIS igitur quod nos dilectorum and
fidelium Medicor' nostrorum Theodori de Mayerne and Henrici Atkins necnon
Pharmacopoeiorum predict' precibus inclinati potissimum vero ex regali nostra
cura and solicitudine Statum Reipublice promovendi ac bonum publicum procurandi
ut Empiricorum and hominum ignaror' and inexpert' predictor' inscitia
temeritasque compescatur unde plurima incommoda and pericula rudi and credule
plebi assidue oriantur Ac ut Pharmacopoei inferius nominati tam a predicto
Corpore politico liberorum hominum myster' Grocer' Civitat' London quam a
quibuscunque aliis corporibus Politicis Societat' sive Communitat' quarumcunque
aliar' artium facultat' sive myster' in eadem Civitate nostra London
disuniantur separentur and disjungantur ac in Corpus unum Politicum and
Corporatum per seipsos per nos facti constituti and creati imposterum perpetuis
futuris temporibus ad omnia proposita and intentiones sint and remaneant quam
pro aliis causis urgentibus nos specialiter moventibus de gra' nostra speciali
ac ex certa sciencia and mero motu nostris volumus ac per presents pro nobis
heredibus and successor' nostris Willielmo The persons first incorporated, were
these 114.
Besse, Edmundo Phillipps, Laurencio Mansfeild, Thome Colthurst, Richardo
Bacon, Stephano Higgins, Willielmo Compton, Richardo Trowt, Georgio Sheeres,
Willielmo Hutton, Willielmo Chaphin, Willielmo Quick, Thome Whitley, Johanni
Parkinson, Radupho Clayton, Willielmo Gwyn, Humfrido Gravenor, Laurencio Lind,
Johanni Huett, Nicholao Gibson, Johanni Slater, Petro Watson, Willielmo
Checkley, Thome Tomlinson, Danieli Darnelley, Willielmo Clark Senior', Adriano
Barton, Willielmo Wells, Richardo Edwards, Richardo Palmer, Willielmo Peck,
Josie Harris, Thome Bullard, Israeli Wolf, Jacobo Colwell, Thome Cristie,
Thome Hicks, Roberto Hudson, Johanni Sheppard, Thome Fones, Gabrieli Sheriff,
Johanni Warkehowse, Johanni Walter, Jacobo Fothergill, Samueli Jones, Thome
Bate, Georgio Walsham Senior', Timotheo Read, Lodovico Moreton, Thome Bell
Senior', Edvardo Cook, Roberto Bourman, Tobie Wincks, Johanni Lested,
Willielmo Shambrooke, Edvardo Tasborough, Johanni Dason, Leonardo Stone,
Johanni Hinson, Isaaco Young, Willielmo Nock, Richardo Salter, Johanni Evans,
Willielmo Spencer, Simoni Drew, Jolif Lownes, Samueli Lenn, Richardo Young,
Roberto Vawdry, Jacobo Everett, Nicholao Goffe, Petro Howell, Francisco
Baldwyn, Edvardo Clarke Junior', Johanni Wheeler Junior', Gilberto Johnson,
Roberto Elkyn, Johanni Brown, Thome Broom, Richardo Glover, Willielmo Bell
Junior', Roberto Hoar, Stephano Chase, Samueli Moss, Philippo Griffeth,
Samueli Harrison, Johanni Morecroft, Jacobo Rand, Johanni Hide, Jacobo Walsham,
Abrahamo Webb, Johanni Tailor, Radulpho Yardley, Thome Rashton, Johanni Sares,
Georgio Houghton, Rogero Harris, Georgio Steward, Richardo Swetson, Roberto
Mace, Johanni Kellett, Richardo Brag, Miloni Sparks, Jacobo Tomkins, Richardo
Ashbie, Zachary Warren, Richardo Blackwell, Willielmo Cleyton, Willielmo
Roberts, Francisco Unrayne, Richardo Moore, Carolo Munck, Samueli Tubman, and
Michaeli Eason, ac omnibus aliis personis quibuscunque subditis nostris
naturalibus in art facultate sive Natural Subjects,
mysterio Pharmacopoeior' educat' and perit' eandemque artem facultatem sive
mysterium hoc tempore exercen' sive existen' liberis hominibus myster' Grocer'
Civitat' London ac cum eisdem conjunctim and promiscue in unum Corpus
corporatum and Communitat' (ut prefertur) fact' and constitut' sive existent'
liberis hominibus aliquar' aliar' artium facultatum sive myster' in Civitat'
London ac cum eisdem in unum Corpus corporat' Societat' sive Communitat'
antehac per nos seu per aliquem vel aliquos Progenitor' nostrorum fact'
incorporat' sive constitut' Quod ipsi and eorum unusquisque una cum omnibus and
singulis eorum Apprenticiis qui ante dat' And their Apprentices.
Presencium coram Custod' myster' Grocer' predict' seu coram Custod' sive
Magistris aliquar' aliar' artium facultat' sive myster' in Civitat' London
alicui Pharmacopoeio sive aliquibus Pharmacopoeiis posuerunt seipsos
Apprenticios tam a predicto Corpore Politico and Communitat' liberor' hominum
myster' Grocer' predict' quam ab omnibus aliis Corpor' Politicis Communitat'
sive Societat' aliquar' aliar' artium facultat' sive myster' in Civitat' London
quibuscunque disuniantur separentur divellantur disjungantur ac dissocientur
eosdemque Pharmacopoeios and eorum quemlibet ante nominat' sive mencionat' una
cum omnibus and singulis eorum Apprenticiis predict' ex regali nostra
prerogativa and Jure regio disunimus separamus divellimus disjungimus and
Separated from the Grocers,
dissociamus and eosdem Pharmacopoeios una cum omnibus and singulis eorum
Apprenticiis predict' virtute harum Literarum nostrarum Paten' immunes liberos
acquietat' exoneratos and penitus exemptos (ad omnia proposita and intentiones)
quam de and ab omnibus Jurament' Jurisdictionibus Potestat' Authoritat' Statut'
Ordinationibus Constitution' Supervis' Scrutin' Summonition' Convocationibus
Conventionibus Regim' Gubernationibus Ordinationibus Correction' Impositionibus
Taxation' Collection' denarior' solutionibus and Oneribus Finibus amerciament'
imprisonament' districtionibus And exempt from all Fines, Amerciaments, etc.
from the same.
penis and penalitat' quibuscunque Custod' and Communitat' myster' Grocer'
predict' pro tempore existen' aut eorum successor' quam alior' quorumcunque
Corpor' Politicor' Communitat' sive Societat' in Civitat' nostra London and
successor' suorum per presents volumus esse and remanere deinceps imperpetuum
aliquibus Statut' Act' Parliament' Ordination' Provisionibus Consuet'
Concession' Confirmation' Privileg' Chart' aut Literis Paten' nostri vel
aliquor' Progenitor' nostrorum Custod' and Communitat' myster' Grocer' London
predict' fact' in contrarium inde non obstant'. Et ulterius de ampliori gra'
nostra speciali and ex certa scientia and mero motu nostris ut ars myster' sive
facultat' Pharmacopoeie jam diu collapsa and despecta melius ad amplitudinem
dignam promoveatur pro nobis hered' and successoribus nostris concedimus per
presents prefatis Willielmo Besse, Edmundo Phillipps, Laurencio Mansfeild,
Thome Colthurst, Richardo Bacon, Stephano Higgins, Willielmo Compton, Johanni
Wolfgangfumler, Lodovico Myreo, Gideoni de Laune, Georgio Sheres, Edvardo de
Plewris, Richardo Trout, Willielmo Hutton, Willielmo Clapham, Thome Whitley,
Johanni Parkinson, Radulpho Clayton, Willielmo Gwyn, Humfrido Gravener,
Laurencio Lund, Johanni Huett, Nicholao Gibson, Johanni Slater, Petro Watson,
Willielmo Checkley, Thome Tomlinson, Danieli Darnelley, Willielmo Clark Sen',
Adriano Barton, Willielmo Wells, Richardo Edwards, Richardo Palmer, Willielmo
Peck, Josie Harris, Thome Bullard, Israeli Wolf, Jacobo Colwell, Thome
Cristie, Thome Hicks, Roberto Hudson, Johanni Sheppard, Richardo Weston, Thome
Fones, Gabrieli Sheriff, Johanni Warkhowse, Johanni Walter, Jacobo Fothergill,
Samueli Jones, Thome Bate, Georgio Walsam Senior', Timotheo Read, Lodovico
Moreton, Thome Bell Sen', Edvardo Cook, Roberto Boreman, Tobie Wincks, Johanni
Lested, Johanni Eason, Willielmo Shambrooke, Edvardo Tasborough, Leonardo
Stone, Johanni Hinson, Isaaco Young, Willielmo Nock, Richardo Saulter, Johanni
Evans, Willielmo Spencer, Simoni Drew, Jolliff Lownes, Samueli Lenne, Richardo
Young, Roberto Vawdry, Jacobo Everett, Petro Howell, Edvardo Clarke Jun',
Nicholao Goffe, Francisco Baldwyn, Johanni Wheeler Jun', Gilberto Johnson,
Richardo Ashbie, Roberto Elkyn, Johanni Brown, Thome Broom, Richardo Glover,
Willielmo Bell Jun', Roberto Hoar, Stephano Chase, Samueli Moss, Philippo
Griffeth, Samueli Harrison, Johanni Morecroft, Jacobo Rand, Johanni Hide,
Jacobo Mulsam, Abrahamo Webb, Johanni Tailor, Radulpho Yardley, Thome Rushton,
Johanni Sares, Georgio Houghton, Rogero Harris, Roberto Mace, Georgio Steward,
Richardo Swetson, Johanni Kellett, Richardo Bragg, Troman' Parkins, Miloni
Sparks, Jacobo Tomkins, Richardo Besse, Zachary Waring, Richardo Blackwell,
Willielmo Clayton, Willielmo Roberts, Francisco Unrayne, Richardo Moore, Carolo
Munck, Paulo Lovetto, and Samueli Tubman, ac omnibus and singulis allis
personis quibuscunque in art myster' sive facultat' Pharmacopol' educat' and
perit' eandemque artem myster' seu facultatem exercentibus modo existen'
liberis hominibus myster' Grocer' predict' aut existen' liberis hominibus
aliquar' aliarum artium myster' sive facultat' in Civitat' London (dummodo in
art and facultate Pharmacopol' educat' and expert' fuerint) quod ipsi omnesque
hujusmodi liberi homines ejusdem artis myster' sive facultat' Pharmacopol' de
and in Civitat' predict' and in Suburbiis ejusdem and infra septem miliar'
Civitat' predict' sint and erunt unum Corpus corporatum and Politicum in re
facto and nomine per nomen Magistr' Custod' and Societat' artis and myster'
Pharmacopol' Civitat' London. Ac eos per nomen By the name of the Master,
Wardens, etc. made a Body Politic.
Magistri Custodum and Societatis artis and myster' Pharmacopol' Civitat'
London in unum Corpus corporat' and Politicum in re facto and nomine realiter
and ad plenum pro nobis heredibus and successor' nostris erigimus facimus
ordinamus constituimus creamus and declaramus per presents. Et quod per idem
nomen successionem habeant perpetuam. Et quod ipsi and successores sui per
nomen Magistri Custod' and Societatis artis and mysterii Pharmacopol' Civitat'
London sint and erunt perpetuis futuris temporibus person habiles and in lege
capaces ac Corpus corporatum and Politicum and in lege capax ad habend'
perquirend' possidend' gaudend' and Capable to purchase Lands, etc. by the same
name.
retinend' Maner' Messuagia terras tenementa libertat' privileg' Franches'
Jurisdiction' and Hereditamenta quecunque cujuscunque generis nominis natur'
qualitat' vel speciei fuerint sibi and successor' suis in feodo simplici and In
Fee-simple.
perpetuitat' sive pro termino anni vel annorum aut aliter For term of years,
or otherwise.
quocunque modo Ac eciam bona and Catalla and quascunque alias res cujuscunque
nominis nature generis qualitat' sive speciei fuerint. Necnon ad concedend'
dimittend' alienand' assignand' and disponend' Maner' terr' tenementa and
hereditamenta and ad omnia and singula al' fact' and res faciend' and exequend'
per nomen predict'. Et quod per idem nomen Magistri Custod' and Societat' artis
and myster' Pharmacopol' Civitat' London placitare and implacitari respondere
and responderi To sue and be sued.
defendere and defendi valiant and possint in quibuscunque Curiis Placit' and
locis ac coram quibuscunque Judicibus and Justiciariis ac aliis personis and
officiar' nostris ac heredum and successor' nostrorum in omnibus and singulis
actionibus placitis sect' querel' causis mater' and demand' quibuscunque
cujuscunque sint aut fuerint.
erint generis qualitat' seu speciei eisdem modo and forma prout aliqui alii
ligei nostri Anglie person habiles and capaces in lege sive aliquod aliud
Corpus corporatum and Politicum infra regnum nostrum Anglie habere perquirere
recipere possidere and gaudere retinere dare concedere dimittere alienare
assignare and disponere placitare and implacitari respondere and responderi
defendere and defendi facere permittere sive exequi possint aut valiant. Et
quod iidem Magister Custod' and Societas artis and mysterii Pharmacopol'
Civitat' London predict' habeant To have a Common Seal.
imperpetuum Commune Sigillum pro causis and negotiis suis ac successor' suor'
quibuscunque agend' deservitur'. Et quod been liceat and licebit eisdem
Magistro Custod' and Societat' artis and mysterii Pharmacopol' London predict'
and successor' suis sigillum illud ad libitum suum de tempore in tempus
frangere mutare and de novo facere At pleasure to be broken or altered.
prout eis melius fieri videbitur. Et ulterius volumus and ordinamus ac per
presents pro nobis hered' and successor' nostris concedimus prefat' Magistro
Custod' and Societat' artis and myster' Pharmacopol' predict' and successor'
suis quod de cetero imperpetuum perpetuis futuris temporibus sit and erit unus
de Societate artis and myster' Pharmacopol' predict' in forma in hiis
presentibus mencionat' eligend' and nominand' qui nominabitur Power to choose a
Master.
and vocabitur Magister artis and Societatis predict' Ac quod similiter sint
and erunt duo de Societate artis and Two
myster' predict' in forma in his presentibus express' eligend' and nominand'
qui erunt and nominabuntur Custodes artis myster' and societat' predict'. Ac
eciam Wardens, and 21
quod similiter sint and erunt viginti and unus de Societate predict' in forma
in hiis presentibus inferius similiter mencionat' eligend' qui erunt and
nominabuntur Assistentes artis and societatis Pharmacopol' Civitat' London
Assistants.
ac de tempore in tempus erunt assistentes and auxiliantes Magistro and Custod'
Mysterii and Societat' predict' pro tempore existen' in omnibus causis rebus
and materiis dict' Magr' and Societat' tangen' sive concernen'. Et ulterius
volumus ac per presents pro nobis hered' and successor' nostris concedimus
prefatis Magistro Custod' and Societat' artis and myster' Pharmacopol' Civitat'
London predict' and successor' suis quod been liceat and licebit eisdem
Magistro Custod' and Societat' and Successor' suis habere perquirere retinere
and appunctuare quandam Aulam sive Domum Conciliar' infra Civitat' nostram To
have an Hall or Council-house.
London Quodque idem Magr' and Custod' myster' predict' vel aliqui duo eorum
quorum Magistrum pro tempore existen' unum esse volumus quoties eis opportunum
and necessarium fore videbitur convocare and tenere infra eandem Aulam sive
domum quandam Curiam To keep Court, or a Convocation.
sive Convocationem de eisdem Magistro Custod' and Assistent' predict' ad
numerum tredecim personarum vel plurium (quorum Magistrum and unum Custod'
myster' and societat' predict' pro tempore existen' ut prefertur duos esse
volumus) ad libitum and licite possint and valiant perpetuis futuris
temporibus. Quodque in eadem Curia sive Convocatione tractare refer
consultare consulere and decernere valiant and possint de Statutis To consult
about Statutes, Laws, Articles, etc.
Legibus Articulis Ordinationibus and Constitutionibus myster and societat'
predict' ac bonum regimen statum and gubernationem eorundem tangen' and
concernen' juxta eorum sanas discretiones vel juxta sanas discretiones majoris
partis eorundem (quorum Magistrum and unum Custod' myster' and societat'
predict' pro tempore existen' duos esse volumus) sic ut prefertur congregat'.

Et ulterius volumus ac per presents pro nobis hered' and successor' nostris
concedimus prefat' Magistro Custod' and societati artis sive mysterii
Pharmacopol' Civitat' London and Successoribus suis quod Magister Custodes and
Assistentes myster' predict' pro tempore The Master, Wardens, etc. being 13 in
number,
existen' ad numerum tredecim personarum vel plurium (quorum predict' Magistrum
pro tempore existen' unum esse volumus) super Summonitionem publicam inde
fiend' ad hoc congregat' in Aula sive domo societatis predict' habeant and
habebunt plenam potestatem facultatem and authoritatem condend' constituend'
ordinand' and faciend' de tempore in tempus Leges Statuta To make Laws
Constitutiones Decreta and Ordinationes rationabiliter inscript' quecunque que
eis aut majori parti eorundem (quorum Magistrum myster' and societatis predict'
pro tempore existen' unum esse volumus) bona salubria utilia honesta and
necessaria juxta eorum sanas discretiones fore videbuntur pro bono regimine and
gubernatione eorundem Magistri Custod' Assisten' and societatis For the
Government of the Society.
myster' Pharmacopol' predict' ac omnium and singular' aliar' personar' artem
sive myster' Pharmacopol' predict' infra Civitat' London predict' libertates
and Suburbia ejusdem ac infra septem Miliaria ejusdem Civitat' exercent' and
occupant' ac pro declaratione quo modo and ordine iidem Magister Custodes and
Societas ac omnes and singuli Apprenticii Officiar' and Ministri myster' and
societat' predict' in officiis functionibus minister' Tyrociniis artific' and
negotiis suis infra Civitat' predict' ac libertates and suburbia ejusdem ac
infra septem miliaria ejusdem Civitat' sese habebunt gerent and utentur pro
uberiori bono publico communi utilitate and bono regimine myster' and societat'
predict' ac gubernatione earundem ac rebus and causis aliis quibuscunque
myster' and societat' predict' tangen' seu quoquo modo concernen'. PROVISO
semper quod pro tot and tal' Ordinationibus In their Orders, concerning
Medicines, to advise with the President and four Censors of the College of
Physicians.
que medicamenta aut compositiones and usum earundem concernent advocabunt de
tempore in tempus President' and quatuor Censores seu Gubernat' Colleg' and
Communitat' Medicorum London aut alios Medicos per Presidentem predict'
nominand' pro advisamento in hac part. Quodque iidem Magister Custodes and
Assistentes myster' predict' pro tempore existen' ad numerum tredecim
personarum vel plurium (quorum Magistrum myster' predict' pro tempore existen'
unum esse volumus) quotiescunque hujusmodi Leges institutiones Jura
Ordinationes and Constitutiones fecerint condiderint ordinaverint vel
stabiliverint hujusmodi and tales penas punitiones and penalitat' per fines To
punish by Fines and Amerciaments.
and amerciamenta vel per eorum utrumque erga and super omnes delinquentes
contra hujusmodi Leges institutiones Jura Ordinationes and Constitutiones sive
eorum aliquod sive aliqua qual' and que eisdem Magistro Custod' and Assisten'
myster' predict' pro tempore existen' vel majori parti eorundem (quorum
Magistrum myster' and societatis predict' pro tempore existen' unum esse
volumus) necessar' requisit' and opportun' pro observatione earum legum
ordinationum and constitutionum melius fore videbitur facere ordinare limitare
and providere possint. Ac quod iidem Magister Custodes and societas myster'
predict' and successores sui eadem fines and amerciamenta per ministros
proprios eorundem Magistri Custod' and societatis pro tempore existen' per
discretionem vel aliter secundum leges and consuetudines regni nostri Anglie
levare habere and capere possint and valiant ad usum Magistri Custodum and
societat' To the use of the Master, etc.
predict' and successor' suorum absque impedimento nostri heredum and
successor' nostror' aut alicujus vel aliquorum Officiar' vel Ministror'
nostror' heredum vel successor' nostrorum and absque aliquo computo nobis
Without giving account.
heredibus vel successor' nostris inde reddend' seu faciend'. Que omnia and
singula Ordinationes Jura and Constitutiones sic (ut prefertur) fiend'
observari volumus sub penis in eisdem continend'. Ita tamen quod leges
constitutiones fines and amerciamenta hujusmodi fint rationabilia and non sint
repugnan' nec contrarian But to be moderate, and not contrary to Law.
legibus Statut' consuetudinibus sive Juribus regni nostri Anglie. Et pro
meliori executione voluntatis and concessionis nostr' in hac part assignavimus
nominavimus creavimus and constituimus dilectos nobis predictum Edmund'
Phillipps fore and esse primum and modern Edm. Phillipps first Master.
Magistrum artis sive myster' and societat' predict' Ac eciam predict'
Stephanum Higgins and Thomam Fones fore and esse primos and modernos Custodes
mysterii and societatis Stephen Higgins and Tho. Fones first Wardens.
predict' continuand' in eisdem officiis a dat' presentium usque ad vicesimum
diem Augusti proxim' sequen' and deinde quousque tres alii ad officia illa
Magistri and Custodum artis sive mysterii and societatis predict' debito modo
electi and prefecti fuerint juxta ordinationes and provisiones in hiis
presentibus express' and declarat' si iidem Edmundus Phillipps, Stephanus
Higgins and Thomas Fones tam diu vixerint (nisi interim pro mala gubernatione
aut male se gerend' in ea part aut pro aliqua alia causa rationabili ab
officiis illis amoti erunt aut eorum aliquis amotus erit) Et assignavimus eciam
ac nominavimus creavimus constituimus and fecimus ac per presents pro nobis
heredibus and successor' nostris assignamus creamus nominamus constituimus and
facimus dilectos nobis predict' Johannem Wolfgangfumler, Gideonem de Lawne,
Lodovicum First Assistants.
Myreum, Richardum Bacon, Thomam Whitley, Johannem Parkinson, Johannem Huett,
Willielmum Checkley, Danielem Darnelley, Willielmum Wells, Adrianum Barton,
Josiam Harris, Thomam Cristie, Johannem Sheppard, Gabrielem Sheriff, Thomam
Bullard, Richardum Edwards, Jacobum Colwell, Thomam Hicks, Edvardum Cook and
Johannem Warkhowse in art and mysterio Pharmacopol' edoct' educat' and expert'
fore and esse primos and modernos Assistentes ejusdem mysterii and societatis
Pharmacopol' continuand' in eisdem officiis and locis durant' vitis suis
naturalibus nisi interim pro mala gubernatione seu male se gerend' in ea part
aut pro aliqua alia causa rationabili amoti fuerint aut eorum aliqui vel
aliquis amotus erit vel amoti erunt. Qui quidem Assistentes mysterii and
societat' predict' sacramenta sua corporalia coram Francisco Bacon Milite
Attornat' nostro General', To take an Oath before the Attorney General, etc.
Henrico Yelverton Milite Solicit' nostro generali, Theodoro de Mayerne and
Henrico Atkins in Medicinis Doctoribus and Johanne Towneley. Armigero vel coram
duobus eorum Quibus quinque vel eorum duobus plenam potestatem and authoritatem
sacramenta predict' Assisten' myster' predict' dare and administrare damus and
concedimus per presents infra quadraginta dies post dat' presentium ad officia
sua predict' been and fideliter exequend' prestabunt. Ac eciam predict'
Magister myster' predict' and Custodes myster' and societat' The Master and
Wardens to be sworn before the Assistants.
predict' sacramenta sua corporalia coram Assisten' myster' predict' vel majore
part eorundem infra quinquaginta dies post dat' presentium been and fideliter
ad dictum officium Magistri and Custod' myster' and societat' predict'
exequend' in omnibus eisdem Officiis tangen' seu concernen' prestabunt. Et sic
de tempore in tempus toties quoties Magister and Custodes Myster' and
Societatis predict' elect' and prefect' fuer' antequam ad executionem predict'
Officii admittantur seu eorum aliquis admittatur.

Et ulterius volumus ac per presents pro nobis hered' and successor' nostris
concedimus prefat' Magistro Custod' and Societati mysterii in art Pharmacopol'
predict' and successor' suis quod Magister Custodes and Assistentes Mysterii
and Societatis predict' pro tempore existen' and successor' sui ad numerum
tredecim personar' vel plurium (si tot convenienter congregari possint) de
tempore in tempus perpetuis futuris temporibus potestatem and authoritatem
habeant and habebunt annuatim and quolibet anno imperpetuum in and super
vicesimum diem Augusti vel infra octo dies proxim' post dictum vicesimum diem
Augusti eligend' and nominand' Et quod eligere and nominare possint and valiant
tres de probioribus and discretioribus Power to the Assistants to choose a
Master and Wardens.
hominibus Societatis predict' quorum unus erit Magister and alteri duo erunt
Custodes Mysterii and Societatis predicte pro uno anno integro tunc proxim'
sequen' and deinde quousque tres alii probi and discreti homines myster'
predict' elect' and prefect' fuerint juxta Ordinationes and Provisiones in hiis
presentibus express' and declarat'.

Et ulterius volumus ac per presents pro nobis heredibus and successor'
nostris concedimus prefatis Magistro Custod' and Societati Myster' Pharmacopol'
Civitat' London predict' and Successor' suis Quod si contigerit Magistrum and
Custodes Myster' and Societat' predict' aut eorum aliquos vel aliquem aliquo
tempore infra unum annum postquam ad Officia Magistri and Custod' Myster' and
Societatis predict' sic ut prefertur elect' and prefect' fuerint aut eorum
aliquis vel aliqui fuerit vel fuerint obire aut ab officiis illis amoveri (quos
quidem Magistrum and Custodes ac eorum quemlibet pro mala gubernatione aut pro
aliqua causa rationabili per reliquos Magist' and Custod' non offenden' vel
delinquentes and Assistentes myster' and societatis predict' pro tempore
existen' ad numerum tredecim personar' vel plurium de tempore in tempus
amobiles esse volumus) quod tunc and toties been liceat and licebit tantis and
tot eorundem Magist' Custod' and Assistent' qui adtunc supervixerint vel
remanserint ad numerum tredecim personar' vel plurium ad libitum suum unum
alium vel plures alios in Magistrum and Custodem vel Power to choose others in
case of death or removal.
Custodes Myster' and Societatis predict' eligere and preficere secundum
ordinationem and provisionem in hiis presentibus declarat' ad exequend' and
exercend' prefat' officia Magistri and Custod' myster' and societatis predict'
usque ad vicesimum diem Augusti tunc proxim' sequen' vel infra octo dies ante
vicesimum diem Augusti and exinde quousque tres alii probi and discreti homines
myster' and societatis predict' in officia Magistri and Custod' myster' and
societatis predict' elect' and nominat' erunt juxta ordinationes and
provisiones in hiis presentibus declarat' and express' and sic toties quoties
casus sic acciderit.

Et ulterius volumus ac per presents pro nobis heredibus and successor'
nostris ordinamus and concedimus prefat' Magist' Custod' and societati mysterii
predicti and successor' suis quod quandocunque contigerit aliquem vel aliquos
de predict' viginti and uno Assisten' pro tempore existen' myster' and
societatis predict' obire aut pro aliqua causa rationabili ab officiis suis
Assisten' myster' and societatis predict' amoveri (quos quidem Assistentes and
eorum quemlibet se non been gerentes aut gerentem in officiis illis aut pro
aliqua alia causa rationabili de tempore in tempus per Magistrum Custod' and
Assisten' ad numerum tredecim personar' vel plurium qui adtunc remanserint vel
supervixerint amobiles esse volumus) ad libitum suum de tempore in tempus unum
alium vel plures alios de probioribus and dignioribus personis existen' de
myster' and societat' predict' in locum sive loca ipsius Assistentis vel
ipsorum To choose new Assistants,
Assistentium myster' and societatis predict' sic mori vel amoveri contingen'
vel contingent' eligere nominare and preficere ad supplend' predictum numerum
viginti and unius Assistentium predict'. Quodque ille sive illi postquam sic
(ut prefertur) elect' and nominat' fuerit vel electi and nominati fuerint
antequam ad executionem predict' officii Assistentis vel Assistentium myster'
and societat' predict' admittantur sive eorum aliquis admittatur Sacramentum
Corporale super sacrosanct' Evangel' coram Magistro and Custod' myster' and And
swear them.
societat' predict' pro tempore existen' ad officia illa recte been fideliter
and honest exequend' and ad ea omnia secreta tenend' que in Cur' Assisten'
presentia ipsius vel ipsorum erunt communicat' vel colloqunt' prestabit and
prestabunt and sic toties quoties casus acciderit.

Damus insuper ac per presents pro nobis heredibus and successor' nostris
concedimus prefatis Magistro Custod' and Societat' artis and myster'
Pharmacopolar' predict' and successor' suis quod Magister and Custodes myster'
and societat' predict' pro tempore existen' habeant and habebunt plenam
potestatem and authoritatem de tempore in tempus ad tradend' and ministrand'
Sacramentum Corporale super sacrosanct' Evangelium Power to administer the Oath
to the Master, Wardens, etc.
tam omnibus Magistris Custod' and Assisten' myster' and societat' predict'
imposterum eligend' and in eadem officia sive loca ut prefertur admittend ac
omnibus Officiar' myster' and societat' predict' pro debit' executione
officior' suor' recte been and fideliter in omnibus separatim officia sua
tangen' sive concernen' quam omnibus Apprenticiis ac aliis liberis hominibus
myster' predict' quibuscunque.

Et ulterius ut nos subditor' nostror' saluti ac bono publico quantum in nobis
est consulamus ac ut pericula and incommoda illa assidue accidentia per
imperitos and inexpertos dolosos and improbos homines artem Pharmacopol'
predict' exercen' melius devitentur volumus and de gratia nostra speciali certa
sciencia and mero motu nostris per presents pro nobis heredibus and successor'
nostris concedimus prefatis Magistro Custod' and Societati myster' Pharmacopol'
predict' and successor' suis quod non liceat aut licebit deinceps imposterum
alicui person vel aliquibus personis quibuscunque jam existen' aut imposterum
futuris liberis hominibus myster' Grocer' predict' aut aliquar' aliar' artium
facultat' sive myster' in Civitate London ac in eisdem art facultate sive
myster' educat' vel educand' officinam vel shopam Pharmacopol' instruere tenere
vel habere aut No Grocer to keep an Apothecaryes shop,
medicamenta quecunque facere miscere condere componere preparare propinare
applicare aut administrare aut ulla medicamenta composita aut compositiones
medicinales viz. aquas distillatas compositas vel olea chymica, apozemata,
syrupos, conservas, eclegmata, electuaria, condita medicinabilia, pilulas,
pulveres, trochiscos, olea, unguenta, emplastra ullo modo divendere propalare
edere exercere aut venditioni alicui personae vel aliquibus personis
quibuscunque exponere aut aliter quocunque modo art facultate sive myster'
Pharmacopol' aut aliqua ejus part uti aut exercere infra Civitatem London ac
libertat' ejusdem aut infra septem miliaria ejusdem Civitat' sub pena quinque
libratum Under the penalty of 5 l. Per Mensem.
pro quolibet mense quo hujusmodi persona sive person artem and myster'
Pharmacopol' (ut prefertur) exerceat aut exerceant contra veram intentionem
harum Liter' Paten' Que quidem forisfactur' and penalit' per districtionem vel
per actionem debiti in nomine Custodis Junioris pro tempore existen'
prosequend' aut aliter in aliquibus Curiis nostris apud Westm' de tempore in
tempus leventur and recuperentur dimidium inde ad usum predict' Magistri
Custod' and Societatis myster' Pharmacopol' capiend' and applicand'.

Volumus eciam ac per presents pro nobis heredibus and successoribus nostris
concedimus prefat' Magistro Custod' and Societati myster' Pharmacopol' Civitat'
London predict' and successor' suis quod nulla persona sive person quecunque
officinam aut shopam Pharmacopol' No person to keep a Shop,
habeat teneat aut instruat habeant teneant aut instruant aut artem sive
myster' Pharmacopol' exerceat aut exerceant aut quecunque medicamenta faciat
misceat condat componat preparet propinet applicet administret aut ulla
medicamenta composita aut compositiones ullo modo divendere propalare edere
exercere aut venundare alicui person vel aliquibus personis quibuscunque infra
Civitatem London and libertat' ejusdem aut infra septem miliaria ejusdem
Civitat' nisi hujusmodi Till he have served seven years Apprentiship.
persona and person per spatium septem annorum ad minus ut Apprenticius vel
Apprenticii cum aliquo vel aliquibus Pharmacopol' eandem artem exercen' and
libero homine ejusdem mysterii existen' educat' instruct' and No Apprentice to
be made free, unless allowed by the President, or some Physician deputed by
him, who is to be present at his Examination by the Master and Wardens.
edoct' fuerit vel fuerint. Et postquam hujusmodi septem Anni servicii sive
Tyrocinii (ut prefertur) fuerint elapsi and extract' quod tunc unusquisque
talis Apprenticius coram Magistro and Custod' pro tempore existen' appareat and
presentetur Ac per eosdem Magistrum and Custod' (advocat' sibi President'
Collegii seu Communitat' facultat' medicine London pro tempore existen' aut
aliquo medico aut aliquibus medicis per dictum Presidentem nominand' and ad hoc
de tempore in tempus assignand' si super monitionem inde fact' tal' pred'
Medicus vel tal' predicti Medici adesse voluerit vel voluerint and advisament'
cum eodem vel eisdem habit') circa cognitionem and electionem Simplicium and
circa medicament' preparationem dispensationem tractationem commixtionem and
compositionem examinetur And be examined.
probetur tentetur ac per eosdem medicos Magistrum and Custodes spectatus and
approbatus fuerit priusquam officinam Pharmacopol' habere tenere instruere aut
medicamenta quecunque preparare facere permiscere condere componere propinare
administrare propalare edere exercere divendere aut venditioni exponere aut
aliter quocunque modo artem Pharmacopol' aut aliquam ejusdem partem exercere
infra Civitatem London and libertat' ejusdem aut infra septem miliaria ejusdem
Civitat' presumat.

Ac ulterius de uberiori gratia nostra speciali and ex certa sciencia and mero
motu nostris pro meliori regimine and gubernatione omnium and singular'
personarum que modo exercent aut imposterum exercebunt artem sive myster'
Pharmacopol' predict' infra Civitat' London seu suburbia ejusdem vel infra
septem miliaria ejusdem Civitatis dedimus and concessimus ac per presents pro
nobis heredibus and successoribus nostris damus and concedimus prefat' Magistro
Custod' and Societati myster' Pharmacopol' Civitat' London predict' and
successor' suis Quod Magist' and Custod' myster' predict' pro tempore existen'
and successores sui de cetero imperpetuum plenam potestatem and authoritatem
habeant and habebunt de tempore in tempus capere and habere supervis'
scrutinium examinationem gubernationem and correctionem omnium and omnimod' tam
liberorum hominum quam alior' quorumcunque uten' sive exercen' artem myster'
sive facultat' Pharmacopol' aut aliquam (ut prefertur) ejusdem partem del. tam.
tam infra dictam Civitat' nostram London libertat' and suburbia ejusdem
Civitat' tam infra libertates quam extra ubi aliqua persona uten' sive exercen'
artem mysterium sive facultatem Pharmacopoeie aut aliquam ejusdem partem
inhabitabit aut commorabit seu inhabitare and commorare contigerit. Quodque
iidem Magist' and Custod' and eorum successores aut eor' aliqui vel aliquis aut
aliqui Assisten' per Magistrum and Custod' nominand' and assignand' temporibus
congruis and convenien' ac modo and forma convenien' and legitim' de tempore in
tempus quoties eisdem Magistro and Custodibus videbitur expedire ingredi and
intrare possint and valiant in aliquam vel aliquas officinam vel officinas
shopam vel shopas domum vel domos Power to enter Shops and Houses*
aliquar' personar' sive alicujus person cujuscunque uten' sive exercen' artem
sive myster' Pharmacopol' aut aliquam ejusdem partem infra Civitat' London
suburbia and ejusdem libertat' predict' aut infra septem miliaria ejusdem
Civitat' tam infra libertat' quam extra ubi aliqua medicamenta simplicia vel
composita merces drogma recept' aque distillat' olea chymica syrupi conserve
eclegmata electuar' pilule pulveres trochisci olea unguenta emplastra aut
aliqua alia quecunque que ad artem sive mysterium Pharmacopol' (ut prefertur)
pertinent sive spectant probabiliter sive verisimiliter inveniri poterint Et ad
supervidend' scrutand' and proband' To search and try Medicines.
si eadem medicamenta simplicia vel composita merces drogma recept' aque
distillat' olea chymica syrupi conserve eclegmata electuaria pilule pulveres
trochisci olea unguenta emplastra aut aliqua alia quecunque ad artem sive
mysterium Pharmacopol' predict' pertinent' sint aut erunt bona salubria
medicinabilia apta and idonea ad Curam salutem and relevamen subditor' nostror'
Ac eciam quod prefat' Magist' and Custod' myster' predict' and Assisten'
predict' pro tempore existen' ad hoc per Magistrum and Custod' nominand' and
assignand' and successores sui de tempore in tempus plenam potestatem and
authoritatem habeant and virtute presentium habebunt ad examinand' and proband'
omnes and singulas personas profiten' uten' sive exercen' aut qui imposterum
profitebuntur utentur aut exercebunt artem sive myster' Pharmacopol' aut
aliquam ejusdem partem infra predict' Civitat' London suburbia aut libertates
ejusdem aut infra septem miliaria ejusdem Civitat' tam infra libertates quam
extra de and concernen' eorum and eorum cujuslibet cognitione peritia and
sciencia in predict' art sive myster' Pharmacopol' Et ad omnes illos quos
imposter' aut imperit' inscient' and insufficientes vel ad examinand' vigore
presentium obstinatos and repugnant' in art and myster' predicto invenient ab
exercitio usu and pract' myster' sive artis predict' amovend' and prohibend'
Nec non ad omnia and singula medicamenta merces drogm' recept' aquas distillat'
olea chymica syrupos conservas eclegmata electuaria pilulas pulveres trochiscos
olea unguenta and emplastra ceteraque omnia and singula ad artem predict'
pertinentia que falsa illegitima adulterat' And burn all unwholesome and
hurtful Medicines.
inveterat' exoleta insalubria corrupta immedicinabilia perniciosa aut nociva
inveniunt ante delinquentium fores comburend' mulctamque eciam ac al' penas and
penalitat' per fines and amerciamenta in tales delinquentes statuant exponant
and exequantur secundum eorum sanas discretiones and ordinationes per ipsos and
successores suos sic (ut prefertur) fiend' and constituend'.

Volentes ac per presents pro nobis heredibus and successor' nostris firmiter
injungend' precipientes and mandantes omnibus and singulis Majoribus Justiciar'
Ballivis Constabular' and omnibus aliis officiar' ministris Officers to be
assistant to the Master, Wardens, etc. in their search.
and subditis nostris quibuscunque quod sint assistentes auxiliantes and
confortantes prefat' Magistro Custod' and Assisten' myster' and societatis
Pharmacopol' predict' and eorum cuilibet and successor' suis ad faciend'
gaudend' habend' and exequend' ea omnia and singula per nos prefat' Magistro
Custod' and Societati and Successor' suis per has literas nostras Paten'
concess' and quamlibet sive aliquam inde partem and parcell'.

Et ulterius volumus ac per presents de ampliori gratia nostra speciali certa
sciencia and mero motu nostris pro nobis hered' and successor' nostris
concedimus prefat' Magistro Custod' and Societati myster' Pharmacopol' Civitat'
London predict' and fuccessor' suis Quod ipsi prefati Magist' Custodes and
Societas myster' Pharmacopol' predict' habeant teneant retineant and gaudeant
ac habere retinere and gaudere valiant and possint tot tanta talia eadem
hujusmodi and consimil' Franches' privilegia consuetudines immunitates
acquietan' proficua commoditates increment' advantag' and emolumenta quecunque
in aromatibus Pharmacis drogmis and aliis rebus and materiis quibuscunque ad
artem sive myster' Pharmacopol' spectan' and pertinen' emend' mercand' seu
Power to buy and sell Drugs, etc*
comparan' quot quant' qual' and que ac in tam amplis modo and forma prout
antehac unquam habuerunt tenuerunt and gavisi fuerunt aut habere tenere and
gaudere aliquo modo debuerunt quando cum predict' liberis hominibus myster'
Grocer' remanser' ac unum Corpus corporatum and Politicum promiscue and
indivisim cum eisdem fecerunt and fuerunt.

Et ulterius volumus ac per presents pro nobis heredibus and successor'
nostris concedimus and licenciam specialem liberamque and licitam facultat'
potestatem and authoritatem damus prefat' Magistro Custod' and Societati
mysterii sive artis Pharmacopol' predict' and successor' suis habend'
recipiend' and perquirend' sibi and successor' Power to purchase Lands, etc.
suis imperpetuum maner' messuag' terr' tenementa prata pascua pastur' boscos
subboscos Rectorias Decim' reddit' reversiones and alia hereditamenta quecunque
in fra regnum nostrum Anglie seu alibi infra dominia nostra tam de nobis
heredibus and successor' nostris quam de aliqua alia persona sive aliquibus
aliis personis quibuscunque (que de nobis hered' and successor' nostris non
tenentur immediate in Capite vel per servicium militare) dummodo eadem maner'
Messuag' terr' tenementa prat' pasc' pastur' bosc' subbosc' Rector' decim'
reddit' reversion' servic' and hereditamenta sic per ipsos habend' recipiend'
and perquirend' non excedant in toto clarum annuum valorem quadragint' librarum
per ann' ultra omnia onera and repris' Statut' de terr' and tenementis ad manum
mortuam non ponend' aut aliquo alio Statuto Actu Ordinatione vel Provisione
antehac fact' ordinat' sive provis' aut aliqua alia re causa vel materia
quacunque in contrarium inde in aliquo non obstan'.

Damus eciam and per presents pro nobis hered' and successor' nostris
concedimus cuicunque subdito nostro sive aliquibus subditis nostris hered' and
successor' nostrorum licenciam specialem liberamque and licitam potestatem
facultatem and authoritat' Quod ipsi sive eorum aliquis sive aliqui maner'
messuag' terr' tenementa prat' pasc' pastur' bosc' subbosc' Rect' decim'
reddit' reversiones servicia and alia hereditamenta quecunque que non tenentur
de nobis hered' and successor' nostris immediate in Capite vel aliter per
servic' militare prefatis Magistro Custod' and Societati mysterii predict' and
successor' suis dare concedere vendere legare vel alienare Power to sell.
possint and valiant Ita quod omnia predict' Maner' Messuag' terr' tenementa
prat' pasc' pastur' bosc' subbosc' Rector' decim' reddit' reversiones servicia
and alia hereditamenta sic eisdem Magistro Custod' and Societati myster' and
artis predict' and successor' suis virtute presentium dand' concedend' legand'
vel alienand' non excedant in toto clarum annuum valorem quadragint' librarum
per ann' ultra omnia onera and repris' Statut' de terr' and tenement' ad manum
mortuam non ponend' aut aliqua alia re causa vel materia quacunque antehac
habit' fact' edit' ordinat' sive provis' in contrarium inde in aliquo non
obstant'.

Volumus eciam and per presents pro nobis hered' and successor' nostris
concedimus prefatis Magistro Custod' and Societati myster' sive artis
Pharmacopol' Civitat' London predict' and successor' suis Quod prefat' Magist'
Custod' and Assisten' pro tempore existen' vel eorum successor' vel major pars
eorundem de cetero imperpetuum nominare and eligere possint unum probum and
idoneum virum qui erit and nominabitur Communis To choose a Clerk. Who is also
to be sworn.
Clericus Societatis predict' Quodque talis Clericus antequam ad officium illud
exequend' admittatur Sacramentum Corporale coram Magistro and Custod'
Societatis predicte pro tempore existen' ad officium illud predictum secundum
ejus scienciam in omnibus illud tangen' recte and fideliter exequend' prestabit
Et quod post hujusmodi Sacramentum sic prestitum officium illud exerceat and
utatur durante beneplacito Magistri Custod' and Assisten' societatis predict'
pro tempore existen' aut majoris partis eorundem quorum Magist' artis and
myster' predict' pro tempore existen' unum esse volumus.

Ac ulterius volumus ac per presents pro nobis hered' and successor' nostris
concedimus prefatis Magistro Custod' and Societati myster' Pharmacopol'
predict' and successor' suis quod prefat' Magist' Custodes and Assistentes pro
tempore existen' and eorum successores vel major pars eorundem de tempore in
tempus de cetero nominare and eligere possint and valiant unum aptum and
idoneum hominem qui erit and nominabitur Bedell' societatis predict' Quodque
talis Bedell' sic (ut Power to choose a Beadle, And give him his Oath.
prefertur) electus and nominat' antequam ad officium illud exequend'
admittatur Sacrament' Corporale coram Magistro and Custod' Societatis predict'
pro tempore existen' ad officium illud predictum in omnibus officium illud
tangen' recte and fideliter exequend' prestabit Et quod post hujusmodi
Sacramentum sic prestitum officium illud exerceat and teneat duran' beneplacito
Magistri Custod' and Assisten' predict' and successor' suor' pro tempore
existent' (quorum Magistrum artis and myster' predict' pro tempore existen'
unum esse volumus.)

Et denique volumus ac regiam nostram intentionem esse per presents declaramus
quod he Litere nostre Paten' seu aliquod in eis content' non cedent in
prejudicium Presidentis and Collegii sive Communitatis Medicor' A saving of the
power of the President and College of Physicians, and their Authority.
Civitat' London nec ad eorum Presidentis and Collegii sive Communitatis and
Successor' suor' Jurisdictionem authoritatem supervis' aut correctionem in
Pharmac' Civitat' London tollend' infringend' aut dirimend' Sed quod iidem
Presidens and Communitas Medicor' omnesque and singuli medici de eodem Collegio
sive Communitate and Successores sui sicut and Medici Regis Regine and
Principum imposterum debeant and pro arbitrio suo possint artem medicam in
omnibus suis partibus exercere and insuper gaudebunt utentur and fruentur and
gaudere uti and frui valiant and possint eisdem and consimil' Jurisdictionibus
authoritat' supervis' and Correctionibus' ac omnibus aliis potestatibus
privileg' and libertat' qualibus unquam antehac Pharmacopol' usi and gavisi
fuerunt and preterea generaliter omnibus aliis authoritatibus privilegiis and
potestatibus ipsis quandocunque vel quacunque de causa antehac concess' ratione
vel pretextu aliquar' Literar' Paten' per nos seu per aliquos vel aliquem
progenitor' nostror' aut ratione vel pretextu alicujus Actus Parliament' vel
aliquor' Actuum Parliamentor' aut aliquo alio regali modo quocunque eisdem
President' and Collegio sive Communitat' Medicor' and Successor' suis dat'
concess' seu confirmat'. Volumus nihilominus and ordinamus per presents quod
in quocunque casu Prefidens and Colleg' Medicor' Civitat' London predict'
habuerint serutinium medicamentor' advocand' sibi aliquem de Societate Grocer'
vigore Act' Parliamenti quod in eodem and consimili casu predict' Presidens and
Colleg' habebunt gaudebunt and exercebunt consimilem potestatem and
authoritatem The College to have the same power, in their searches, to call
the Master and Wardens of the Apothecaryes Company, as of the Grocers.
advocandi sibi Magistrum and Custodes Pharmacopol' predict' Absque eo quod
omnino licebit imposterum eisdem Medicis aliquos myster' Grocer' predict'
advocare ad hujusmodi scrutinium Aliquo in hujusmodi Statut' in contrarium in
aliquo non obstant'. Proviso eciam quod he Litere nostre Patentes seu aliquod
in eisdem concess aut content' non cedent in prejudicium Civitat' nostre London
seu libertat' ejusdem neque ullo modo derogabunt libertat' Franches' Regimin'
Jurisdiction' aut consuetud' ejusdem Civitatis.

Et denique volumus and intentionem nostram esse declaramus quod Chirurgi
experti and approbati eorum artem and facultatem exercere possint omnesque and
singuli eorum practica sibi propria uti and frui valiant What Medicines
Surgeons may have for their own use.
quantum ad compositionem and applicationem medicamentor' externor' solummodo
pertinet and spectat Ita tamen ut ea medicamenta minime vendant aut venditioni
aliis exponant secundum morem vulgarem Pharmacopol' Civitat' nostre London Eo
quod expressa mentio de vero valor annuo aut de certitudine premissor' sive
eorum alicujus aut de aliis donis sive concessionibus per nos seu per aliquem
Progenitor' vel Antecessor' nostror' prefat' Magistro Custod' and Societati
myster' Pharmacopol' Civitat' London predict' ante hec tempora fact' in
presentibus minime fact' exist' seu aliquo Statuto Actu Ordinatione Provisione
Proclamatione sive Restrictione in contrarium inde antehac habit' fact' edit'
ordinat' seu provis' aut aliqua alia re causa vel materia quacunque in aliquo
non obstant'. In cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus
Patentes. Test meipso apud Westm' Tricesimo die Maii Anno Regni nostri Anglie
Franc' and Hibernie tertio decimo and Scocie quadragesimo octavo.

Per breve de privato sigillo. Cartwright.

A Recovery against Edmund Gardener according to the Exemplification, 11 Feb. 6
Jac.
JACOBUS Dei gratia Anglie Scocie Franc' and Hibernie Rex fidei defensor, etc.
Omnibus ad quos presents Litere nostre pervenerint salutem. Inspeximus quoddam
Recordum coram nobis habitum in hec verba. SS. Placita coram domino Rege apud
Westm' Termino Sancti Michaelis Anno regni domini Jacobi nunc Regis Anglie
Tertio Rotulo CCCC xxxviij. SS. London SS. Memorand' quod alias scilicet
Termino Sancte Trinitat' ultimo preterito coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven'
Thomas Langton in Medicinis Doctor Presidens Collegii sive Communitatis
facultatis Medicine London qui tam pro domino Rege quam pro seipso and Collegio
predicto sequit' per Laurencium Gibson Attorn' suum Et protulit hic in Cur'
dicti domini Regis tunc ibidem quandam billam suam versus Edmundum Gardener in
Custod' Marr' etc. de placito debiti Et sunt pleg' de pros. scilicet Johannes
Do and Richardus Roo. Que quidem billa sequitur in hec verba. SS. London SS.
Thomas Langton in Medicinis Doctor Presidens Collegii sive Communitatis
facultatis medicine London qui tam pro domino Rege quam pro seipso and Collegio
predicto sequit' querit' de Edmundo Gardener in Custod' Marr' Maresc' domini
Regis coram ipso Rege existen' de placito quod reddat eidem domino Regi ac
prefat' Presiden' and Collegio predict' sexaginta libras legalis monete Anglie
quas eis debet and injuste detinet pro eo videlicet Quod cum Dominus Henricus
octavus nuper Rex Anglie per Literas suas Paten' magno sigillo suo Anglie
sigillat' Cur'-que hic prolat' geren' dat' apud Westm' in Com' Midd' vicesimo
tertio die Septembris Anno regni sui decimo pro publico bono hujus regni in
debito exercitio facultat' Medicine and bona administratione medicinar' habend'
incorporasset and fecisset de Johanne Chamber Thoma Linacre and Ferdinando de
Victoria adtunc Medicis ejusdem nuper Regis and Nicholao Halswell Johanne
Francisci and Roberto Yaxley and omnibus aliis viris ejusdem facultat' tunc de
and infra Civitat' London unum Corpus and perpetuam Communitatem sive
Societatem facultat' Medicine Et ad habend' perpetuam successionem and commune
sigillum and ad eligend' annuatim unum President' ejusdem Societatis sive
Communitatis ad supervidend' regend' and gubernand' eandem Societatem sive
Communitat' and omnes homines ejusdem facultatis cum diversis aliis privileg'
and aliis rebus per predictum nuper Regem eis concess' pro republica hujus
regni prout in predictis Literis Paten' before continetur Quar' tenor sequitur
in hec verba. SS. Henricus Dei gratia Rex Anglie and Franc' and Dominus
Hibernie Omnibus ad quos presents Litere pervenerint salutem. Cum regii
officii nostri munus arbitremur ditionis nostrae
ditione nostra hominum felicitat' omni ratione consulere id autem vel imprimis
fore si improbor' conatibus tempestive occurramus apprime necessarium duximus
improbor' quoque hominum qui Medicinam magis avaritie sue causa quam ullius
bone consciencie fiducia profitebuntur
profetibuntur unde rudi and credule plebi plurima incommoda oriantur audaciam
compescere Itaque partim been institutar' Civitatum in Italia and multis aliis
nationibus exemplum imitat' partim gravium viror' Doct' Johannis Chamber Thome
Linacre Ferdinandi de Victoria medicor' nostror' Nicholai Halswell Johannis
Francisci and Roberti Yaxley medicor' ac precipue reverendissimi in Christo
Patris ac Domini Thome tituli Sancte Cecilie trans Tiberim Sacrosancte Roman
Ecclesie Presbyteri Cardinalis Eboracen' Archiepiscopi and regni nostri Anglie
Cancellarii charissimi precibus inclinat' Collegium perpetuum doctor' and
gravium Viror' qui medicinam in urbe nostra London and Suburbiis
Suburbibus intra septem Mill' passuum ab ea urbe quaquaversus public
exerceant institui volumus atque imperamus quibus tum sui honoris tum public
utilitatis nomine cure ut speramus erit maliciosor' quor' meminimus inscitiam
temeritatemque tam exemplo gravitat'que sua deterrere quam per leges nostras
nuper edit' ac per constitutiones per idem Collegium condend' punire Que quo
facilius rite peragi possint memoratis Doctoribus Johanni Chamber Thome Linacre
Ferdinando de Victoria Medicis nostris Nicholao Halswell Johanni Francisci and
Roberto Yaxley medicis
medicinis Concessimus quod ipsi omnesque homines ejusdem facultat' de and in
Civitate predicta sint in re and nomine unum Corpus and Communitas perpetua
sive Collegium perpetuum Et quod eadem Communitas sive Collegium singulis annis
imperpetuum eligere possint and facere de Communitate illa aliquem providum
virum and i^ facultate medicine expertum in Presidentem ejusdem Collegii sive
Communitat' ad supervidend' recognoscend' and gubernand' pro Anno illo
Collegium sive Communitatem predictam and omnes homines ejusdem facultatis and
negotia eor'dem. Et quod idem Presidens and Collegium sive Communitas habeant
successionem perpetuam and commune sigillum negociis dict' Communitat' and
Presiden' imperpetuum servitur' Et quod ipsi and successores sui imperpetuum
sint person habiles and capaces ad perquirend' and possidend' in feodo and
perpetuitate terr' and tenementa reddit' and al' possessiones quascunque.
Concessimus etiam eis and successoribus suis pro nobis and heredibus nostris
quod ipsi and successores sui possint perquirere sibi and successoribus suis
tam in dicta urbe quam extra terras and tenementa quecunque annuum valorem
duodecim librar' non exceden' Statuto de alienatione ad manum mortuam non
obstan'. Et quod ipsi per nomina Presidentis Collegii sive Communitat'
facultatis Medicine London placitare and implacitari possint coram quibuscunque
Judicibus in Curiis and actionibus quibuscunque. Et quod predict' Presidens and
Collegium sive Communitas and eor' successores congregationes licitas and
honestas de seipsis ac Statuta and Ordinationes pro salubri gubernatione
supervisu and correctione Collegii sive Communitatis predicte and omnium
hominum eandem facultat' in dicta Civitate seu per septem Milliaria in circuitu
ejusdem Civitat' exercen' secundum necessitat' exigenc' quoties and quando opus
fuerit facere valiant licite and impune sine impedimento nostri heredum vel
successor' nostror' Justic' Eschaetor' Vic' and alior' Ballivor' seu Ministror'
nostror' heredum vel successor' nostror' quor'cunque. Concessimus eciam eisdem
President' and Collegio seu Communitati and Successoribus suis quod nemo in
dicta Civitate aut per septem milliar' in circuitu ejusdem exerceat dictam
facultatem nisi ad hoc per dict' President' and Communitatem seu Successores
eor' qui pro tempore fuerint admissus sit per ejusdem Presiden' and Collegii
Literas Sigillo suo communi figillat' sub pena centum solidor' pro quolibet
mense quo non admissus eandem facultatem exercuerit dimid' inde nobis and
heredibus nostris and dimid' dict' Presiden' and Collegio applicand'. Preterea
volumus and concedimus pro nobis and successoribus nostris quantum in nobis est
quod per President' and Collegium dicte Communitatis pro tempore existen' and
eor' successores imperpetuum quatuor singulis annis per ipsos eligantur qui
habeant supervisum scrutinium correctionem and gubernationem omnium and
singulor' dicte Civitat' Medicor' utentium facultate medicine in eadem Civitate
ac alior' Medicor' forinsecor' quorumcunque facultatem illam Medicine aliquo
modo frequentan' and uten' infra eandem Civitat' and Suburb' ejusdem sive infra
septem mill' in circuitu ejusdem Civitat' ac punitionem eorundem pro delict'
suis in non been exequen' faciend' and utend' ill'. Nec non supervisum and
scrutinium omnimodar' medicinar' and ear' recept' per dictos medicos seu
aliquem eor' hujusmod' ligeis nostris pro eor' infirmitatibus curand' and
sanand' dand' imponend' and utend' quoties and quando opus fuerit pro commodo
and utilitate eorundem ligeor' nostror' Ita quod punitio hujusmodi medicor'
uten' dict' facultat' medicine sic in premissis delinquen' per fines
amerciament' and imprisonament' corpor' suor' and per alias vias rationabiles
and congruas exequatur. Volumus eciam and concedimus pro nobis heredibus and
successoribus nostris quantum in nobis est quod nec Presidens nec aliquis de
Collegio predicto medicor' nec successor' sui nec eor' aliquis exercen'
facultat' ill' quoquo modo in futur' infra Civitatem nostram predict' and
suburb' ejusdem seu alibi summoneantur aut ponantur nec eor' aliquis
summoneatur aut ponatur in aliquibus Assisis Jurat' Inquest' Inquisitionibus
Attinct' and aliis recognitionibus infra dictam Civitat' and Suburb' ejusdem
imposterum coram Majore aut Vic' seu Coronat' dicte Civitatis nostre pro
tempore existen' capiend' aut per aliquem Officiar' seu Ministr' suum vel
Officiarios sive Ministros suos summonend' licet iidem Jur' Inquisitiones seu
recognitiones summon' fuerint super brevi vel brevibus nostri vel heredum
nostror' de rect' Sed quod dicti Magistri sive Gubernatores ac Communitas
facultat' antedicte and successores sui and eor' quilibet dictam facultat'
exercen' versus nos heredes and successores nostros ac versus Majorem ac Vic'
Civitat' predicte pro tempore exiften' and quoscunque Officiar' and Ministros
suos sint inde quiet' and penitus exonerat' imperpetuum per presents Proviso
quod Litere nostre seu aliquid in eis content' non cedent in prejudicium
Civitat' nostre London seu libertat' ejusdem Et hoc absque fine seu feodo pro
premissis seu sigillatione presentium nobis faciend' solvend' seu aliqualit'
reddend' Aliquo Statuto Ordinatione vel Actu in contrarium ante hec tempora
fact' edit' ordinat' seu provisis in aliquo non obstan'. In cujus rei
testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Test meipso apud
Westm' vicesimo tertio die Septembris Anno regni nostri decimo. Cumque eciam in
Statuto in Parliament' dicti nuper regis Henrici octavi tent' apud London
decimo quinto die Aprilis Anno regni sui quartodecimo and abinde adjornat'
usque Westm' in Com' Midd' ultimo die Julii Anno regni dicti nuper Regis
quintodecimo and tunc and ibidem tent' inactitat' fuit quod predicta Corporatio
predicte Communitat' and Societat' facultat' Medicine predict' Et omnia and
singula concessio articul' and al' res content' and spec' in predictis Literis
Paten' forent approbat' concess' ratificat' and confirmat' and clare
authorizat' and admiss' bona legitima and valida Anglice avayleable prefat'
Corpori incorporat' and eor' successoribus imperpetuum in tam amplo and largo
modo quam posset capi putari and construi pro eadem prout in eodem Statuto int'
alia before continetur. Predictus tamen Edmundus Gardener qui ad dictam
facultat' exercend' per Presidentem and Communitatem facultatis medicine London
predict' per literas President' and Collegii predicti sigillo suo communi
sigillat' non admissus est nec unquam ante hec admissus fuit Statutum predictum
minime ponderans nec penam in predictis Literis Paten' content' verens dictam
facultatem medicine per spacium duodecim mensium jam ult' elaps. and prox'
preceden' ante diem impetrationis hujus bille scilicet ultimum diem Maii Anno
regni domini Jacobi nunc Regis Anglie Tertio in Civitate London predicta
videlicet in parochia beat Marie de Arcubus in Warda de Cheap London exercuit
and adhuc exercet contra formam Literar' Paten' predictar' and Statut' predict'
per quod actio accrevit eidem Presidenti qui tam, etc. ad exigend' and habend'
de prefato Edmundo Gardener pro predicto domino Rege nunc and eidem Presidenti
and Collegio predicto predictas sexaginta libras videlicet pro quolibet mense
predictor' duodecim mensium Centum solidos. Predictus tamen Edmundus licet
sepius requisit', etc. predictas sexaginta libras prefat' domino Regi and eidem
Presidenti and Collegio predicto seu eor' alteri nondum solvit sed illas
ill' ei hucusque solvere omnino contradixit and adhuc contradic' ad dampnum
ipsius Presidentis qui tam, etc. quadraginta librar' and inde tam pro eodem
domino Rege quam pro eodem Presidente and Collegio predicto produc' sectam,
etc. Et modo ad hunc diem scilicet diem Mercurii prox' post octabas sancti
Michaelis isto eodem Termino usque quem diem predictus Edmundus Gardener habuit
licenc' ad billam predictam interloquendi and tunc ad respondend', etc. Coram
domino Rege apud Westm' ven' tam predictus Presidens qui tam, etc. per Attorn'
suum predictum quam predictus Edmundus Gardener per Willielmum Stamp Attorn'
suum Et idem Edmundus defend' vim and injur' quando, etc. Et dic' quod predict'
Presiden' and Collegium qui tam, etc. Actionem suam predictam inde versus eum
habere seu manutenere non debet Quia dic' quod per quendam Actum in Parliamento
dicti domini Henrici nuper
nunc Regis Anglie octavi apud Westm' predictam in dicto Com' Midd' Anno regni
sui Tricesimo quarto and Tricesimo quinto tent' edit' recitando in eodem Actu
Cum in Parliament' tent' apud Westm' in Anno tertio regni dicti nuper Regis
Henrici octavi int' alia pro evacuatione incantamentor' magie and al'
inconvenienciar' inactitat' fuisset quod nulla persona infra Civitatem London
nec infra septem milliar' ejusdem susciperet super se exercere and occupare
tanquam Medicus vel Chirurgus nisi ipse primo examinat' approbat' and admissus
foret per Episcop' London and al' sub and super certis penis and penalitatibus
in eodem Actu mentionat'. Post confectionem cujus quidem Actus Communitas and
Societas Chirurgor' London intenden' tanquam sua propria lucra and nichil
proficuum vel easiament' egrotor' vel Patientium sectassent tribulassent and
vexassent diversas honestas personas tam viros quam mulieres quos Deus ornaret
anglice had endued
indue cum cognitione nature generis and operationis certar' herbar' radicum
and aquar' and usus and ministrationis earundem talibus qui fuerunt tent'
anglice payned cum consuet' morbis prout pectoribus mulier' existen' ulcerat'
morbo
morbos voc' a Pynne and Web in oculo morbo voc' uncomes manuum lez
Scaldynges Combustionibus ulcerat' oribus calculo Stranguria morbo vocat'
Saucelym and vitiligine and talibus consimilibus morbis. Et tamen predicte
person non cepissent aliquid pro labor vel cognitione suis sed ministrassent
eosdem pauperi populo solummodo pro vicinagio and Dei causa ac pro pietate and
charitate. Et tunc been cognit' fuit quod Chirurgi admissi facerent nullam
curam alicui person nisi ubi ipsi cognoscerent fore remunerati cum majore
summa vel munere quam cura extenderet quo
qua in casu si ipsi ministrare vellent cognitionem suam egroto populo minime
remunerati tam multi non putrifierent and perirent ad mortem pro defectu
auxilii Chirurgie prout quotidie fecerunt Sed magna pars Chirurgor' admissor'
fuerunt multo magis culpari quam tal' person quas ipsi tribulabant Licet enim
major pars personar' predicti mysterii Chirurgor' habuerunt parvam noticiam
tamen ipsi vellent capere magnas pecunie summas and fac' parvum proinde Et
ratione inde ipsi sepius deteriorabant and ledebant
ledabant patient' suos potius quam facere eis aliquod bonum. In consideratione
cujus ac pro aisiamento solatio levamine auxilio relevio and sanitate pauperum
subditor' dicti nuper Regis Henrici octavi inhabitantium hujus regni sui tunc
detent' anglice payned and morbos. aut qui extunc imposterum forent detent' and
morbosi int' al' inactitat' and stabilit' fuit authoritate ejusdem Parliamenti
tent' in predictis annis tricesimo quarto and tricesimo quinto dicti nuper
Regis Henrici octavi quod ad omnia tempora extunc imposterum licitum foret
cuilibet person existen' subdit' dicti nuper Regis habenti cognitionem and
experienc' nature herbar' and radicum and aquar' aut operationis eorundem per
speculationem sive practizationem infra aliquam partem hujus regni Anglie aut
infra aliquod dominior' dicti nuper Regis practizari uti and ministrare in and
ad aliquam exteriorem penam anglice Sore le uncome vulnus apostemationes
exteriorem intumationem vel morbum aliquam herbam vel herbas unguentum lavacra
lez pultes and emplastra secundum noticiam experienc' and cognitionem in aliquo
morbor' penar' and lez maladies pred' and omnibus aliis eis consimilibus aut
potiones de Calculo and Stranguria vel febribus absque sect' vexatione
tribulatione penalitate vel perditione bonor' suor' Statuto predicto in dicto
Anno tertio regni dicti nuper Regis Henrici octavi aut aliquo alio Actu
Ordinatione vel Statuto in contrarium inde ante tunc fact' in aliquo modo non
obstan' prout per eundem Actum factum in Annis tricesimo quarto and tricesimo
quinto supradictis int' alia before apparet. Quor' pretextu idem Edmundus
existens subdit' dicti domini Regis nunc natus infra hoc regnum Anglie
videlicet apud London videlicet in Parochia beat Marie de Arcubus in Warda de
Cheap London ac habens cognitionem and experienciam nature herbar' radicum and
aquar' ac operationis eorundem per tempus predictum in narratione predicta
superius spec' apud London predictam in Parochia and Warda predictis
practizabat usus fuit and ministrabat in and ad diversas exteriores penas les
uncomes vulnera impostumationes exteriores intumationes and morbos diverse.
herbam and herbas ungent' lavacra lez pultesses and emplastra ac potiones de
Calculo and Stranguria and febribus secundum cognitionem experienciam and
noticiam suas in morbis penis and lez maladyes predict' secundum formam and
effectum predicti Actus edit' in Annis tricesimo quarto and tricesimo quinto
supradictis. Absque hoc quod idem Edmundus dictam facultatem medicine infra
Civitatem London predictam alit' seu alio modo exercuit seu exercet prout
predictus Presidens and Collegium qui tam, etc. per narrationem suam predictam
superius versus eum queritur Et hoc parat' est verificare unde pet' judicium si
predict' Presidens and Collegium qui tam, etc. actionem suam predictam inde
versus eum habere seu manutenere debeat, etc. Et predictus Thomas Langton qui
tam, etc. dic' quod ipse per aliqua per predictum Edmundum Gardener superius
placitando allegat' ab action sua predicta versus ipsum Edm' habend' precludi
non debet. Quia dic' quod per quendam Actum in Parliamento domine Marie nuper
Regine Anglie tent' per prorogationem apud Westm' in Com' Midd' vicesimo quarto
die Octobris Anno regni ipsius nuper Regine primo and ibidem continuat' usque
sextum diem mensis Decembris extunc prox' sequen' recitan' Quod cum in dicto
Parliamento tent' apud London dicto decimo quinto die Aprilis Anno decimo
quarto regni dicti Regis Henrici octavi and inde adjornat' usque ad Westm'
predict' ultimo die Julii in Anno decimo quinto regni ejusdem Regis and adtunc
tent' inactitat' existit quod dicta concessio Corporationis per Literas Patent'
fact' and concess. per eundem nuper Regem medicis London and omnes Clausul' and
Articul' content' in eadem concessione essent approbat' concess. ratificat' and
confirmat' per idem Parliamentum pro consideratione inde stabilit' existit in
dicto Parliamento dicte nuper Regine Marie quod Statutum illud sive Actus
Parliamenti cum quolibet Articulo and Clausula in eodem content' extunc
deinceps staret and continuaret semper in plenis robore vigore and effectu
aliquo Actu Statuto Lege consuetudine vel aliqua alia re fact' habita vel usa
in contrarium in aliquo non obstan' prout per idem statutum Anno regni dicte
nuper Regine Marie primo supradicto edit' before liquet. Et hoc parat' est
verificare. Unde ex quo predictus Edmundus practiciam and exercitium predicte
facultatis Medicine superius cogn' idem Thomas Langton qui tam, etc. pet'
judicium and debitum predictum tam dicto domino Regi quam eidem Thome and
Collegio predicto una cum dampnis suis occasion detentionis debiti illius sibi
adjudicari, etc. Et predictus Edmundus Gardener dic' quod placitum predictum
per predictum Thomam Langton modo and forma predictis superius replicando
placitat' materiaque in eodem content' minus sufficien' in lege existunt ad
actionem predicti Thome Langton predictam versus ipsum Edm' Gardener habend'
manutenend' ad quod idem Edmundus Gardener necesse non habet nec per legem t're
tenetur aliquo modo respondere. Unde pro defectu sufficien' replicationis in
hac part idem Edmundus Gardener ut prius pet' Judicium Et quod predictus
Thomas Langton ab action sua predicta versus ipsum Edm' Gardener habend'
precludatur, etc. Et predictus Thomas Langton qui tam, etc. dic' quod placitum
predictum per ipsum Thomam modo and forma predictis superius replicando
placitat' materiaque in eodem content' bona and sufficien' in lege existunt ad
actionem ipsius Thome Langton predictam versus predictum Edm' Gardener habend'
manutenend' Quod quidem placitum materiamque in eodem content' idem Thomas
Langton parat' est verificare and probare prout Cur', etc. Et quia predictus
Edmundus Gardener ad placitum illud non respond' nec ill' hucusque aliqualiter
dedic' idem Thomas Langton ut prius pet' Judicium and debitum predictum tam
dicto domino Regi quam eidem Thome and Collegio predicto una cum dampnis suis
predictis occasion detentionis debiti illius sibi adjudicari, etc. Et quia
Cur' domini Regis hic de Judicio suo de and super premissis reddend' nondum
advisatur dies inde dat' est partibus predictis coram domino Rege apud Westm'
usque diem Jovis prox' post octabas sancti Hillarii de Judicio suo de and super
premissis audiendo, etc. eo quod Cur' domini Regis hic inde nondum, etc. Ad
quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' parts predicte per Attornat' suos
predictos. Et quia Cur' domini Regis hic de Judicio suo de and super premissis
predictis reddend' nondum advisatur dies ulterius inde dat' est partibus
predictis coram domino Rege apud Westm' usque diem Mercurii prox' post xviij
Pasche de Judicio inde audiend', etc. eo quod Cur' domini Regis hic inde
nondum, etc. Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' parts predicte
per Attorn' suos predictos. Et quia Cur' domini Regis hic de Judicio suo de and
super premissis predictis reddend' nondum advisatur dies ulterius inde dat' est
partibus predictis coram domino Rege apud Westm' usque diem Veneris prox' post
Crastinum Sancte Trinitat' extunc prox' sequen' de Judicio inde audiendo eo
quod Cur' domini Regis hic inde nondum, etc. Ad quem diem coram domino Rege
apud Westm' ven' parts predicte per Attorn' suos predictos Super quo visis and
per Cur' domini Regis hic before intellectis omnibus and singulis premissis
maturaque deliberatione inde habita pro eo quod videtur Cur' domini Regis hic
quod placitum predictum per predictum Thomam Langton qui tam, etc. superius
replicando placitat' materiaque in eodem content' bon' and sufficien' in lege
existit ad actionem ipsius Thome Langton qui tam, etc. versus predictum Edm'
habend' manutenend'. Ideo cons. est quod predictus Thomas Langton qui tam, etc.
recuperet versus prefat' Edm' debitum predictum Unde dominus Rex habeat unam
medietatem Et predictus Thomas Langton qui tam, etc. and Collegium predictum
habeant alteram medietatem juxta formam Literar' Paten' predictar' and Statut'
predict'. Quodque idem Thomas Langton qui tam, etc. recuperet versus predictum
Edm' sex libras tresdecim solidos and quatuor denarios pro dampnis suis que
sustinuit tam occasion detentionis debiti predicti quam pro mis. and custagiis
suis per ipsum circa sectam suam in hac part apposit' eidem Thome Langton qui
tam, etc. per Cur' domini Regis hic ex assensu suo adjudicat'. Et predictus
Edmundus in misericord', etc. Postea scilicet die Sabbati prox' post octab'
Sancti Martini Anno regni domini Jacobi nunc Regis Anglie sexto coram eodem
domino Rege apud Westm' ven' predictus Presidens per Attorn' suum predictum Et
cogn' se esse satisfactum per predictum Edm' Gardener de tota part sua debiti
predicti and de dampnis predictis que ad ipsum President' pertinet Ideo ipse
idem Edmundus de tota part ill' and de dampnis illis sit quiet', etc. Quod
quidem Recordum coram nob' sic habitum duximus exemplificand'. In cujus rei
testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Test Thoma Flemynge
apud Westm' undecimo die Februarii Anno regni nostri Anglie Franc' and Hibernie
sexto Et Scotie quadragesimo secundo.

Byng and Byng.

Dr. Langton versus Gardener, Croke 's Reports 2 d Part, p. 121.
DEBT upon the Statute 14 H. 8. cap. 5. by the Plaintiff, as President of the
College of Physicians in London, and of the Corporation of Physicians there:
For that the Defendant used the Art of Physic in London, without License from
the College there, against the Statute and their Charter: For which he
demanded 5 l. for every month, being the penalty given by the Statute. The
Defendant pleaded the Statute of 34 H. 8. which enables every one to practice
Physic or Surgery, being skillful therein, notwithstanding any Act to the
contrary. The Plaintiff replies, and shows the Statute Primo Mar. cap. 9. which
confirms their Charter, and every Article thereof to stand in force; any Act,
Statute, Law or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding. Hereupon the Defendant
demurred; First, because this general clause in this Law does not restrain the
Statute of 34 H. 8. Secondly, that this pleading is a departure: For it ought
to have been shown before. Stephens argued for the Plaintiff. First, That the
Act of 34 H. 8. is repealed by the Statute of prim. Mar. quoad the College of
Physicians in London, as fully as if it had been by express words recited and
repealed: For when it confirms the Charter of 14 H. 8. and appoints, that it,
and every part thereof shall stand, and be avayleable; the Statute of 34 H. 8.
cannot stand with it; Quia leges posteriores leges priores contrarias abrogant,
4 Ed. 4. Porter's Case, Co. 1. fol. 25. Secondly, that it is not any departure,
Because there is not any new matter: but matter pleaded in reviving of the
former, or fortification thereof: And a Record was shown, Mich. 10 and 11 Eliz.
betwixt Bomelins and -- where the Record was in the same manner as this Record
is; And there the Plaintiff had Judgment: Wherefore, etc. And there being none
on the Defendants parts to argue, The Court upon hearing of the Record, gave
rule, That Judgment should be entered for the Plaintiff, unless, etc.

Dr. Atkins versus Gardener, Croke 's Reports 2 d Part, p. 159.
SCir. fac. Upon a Judgment in Debt upon the Statute 14 H. 8. by Dr. Langton,
President of the College of Physicians in London, who died before execution
had; and thereupon the Successor brought a Scir. fac. to have Execution; It was
thereupon demurred, because the Scir. fac. ought to be brought by the Executor
or Administrator of him who recovered, and not by the Successor. But upon
hearing of the Record, without argument the Court held, That the Successor
might well maintain the Action; For the suite is given to the College by a
private Statute: And the suite is to be brought by the President for the time
being; And he having recovered in right of the Corporation, the Law shall
transferr that duty to the Successor of him who recovered, and not to his
Executors; The Action being brought, for that he practiced Physic in London
without License of the College of Physicians, against the Statute of 14 H. 8.
Wherefore it was adjudged for the Plaintiff.

A Recovery against Dr. Bonham according to the Exemplification, 13 Febr. 6
Jacobi.
JACOBUS dei gratia Anglie Scotie Franc' and Hibernie Rex fidei defensor, etc.
Omnibus ad quos presents Litere nostre pervenerint salutem. Inspeximus quoddam
Recordum coram nobis habitum in hec verba. SS. Placita coram domino Rege apud
Westm' Termino Sancti Michaelis Anno regni domini Jacobi nunc Regis Anglie
Quinto Rotulo CC lxxxxix. SS. London SS. Memorand' quod alias scilicet Termino
Sancte Trinitat' ultimo preterito coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' Presidens
Collegii sive Communitat' facultat' Medicine London qui tam, etc. pro domino
Rege quam pro eodem Presidente and Collegio predicto sequitur per Laurencium
Gibson Attorn' suum Et protulit hic in Cur' dicti domini Regis tunc ibidem
quandam billam suam versus Thomam Bonnam in Custod' Marr' etc. de placito
debiti Et sunt pleg' de pros. scilicet Johannes Do and Richardus Roo. Que
quidem billa sequitur in hec verba. SS. London SS. Presidens Collegii seu
Communitat' facultat' Medicine London, etc. qui tam pro domino Rege quam pro
eodem Presidente and Collegio predicto sequitur queritur de Thoma Bonnam in
Custod' Marr' Maresc. domini Regis coram ipso Rege existen' de placito quod
reddat eidem domino Regi and prefat' President' and Collegio predicto sexaginta
libras legalis monete Anglie quas eis debet and injuste detinet pro eo
videlicet Quod cum Dominus Henricus octavus nuper Rex Anglie per Literas suas
Patentes magno sigillo suo Anglie sigillat' Cur'que hic prolat' geren' dat'
apud Westm' in Com' Midd' vicesimo tertio die Septembris Anno regni sui decimo
pro publico bono hujus regni in debito exercitio facultat' Medicine and bona
administratione medicinar' habend' incorporasset and fecisset de Johanne
Chamber Thoma Linacre and Ferdinando de Victoria adtunc Medicis ejusdem nuper
Regis and Nicholao Halswell Johanne Francisci and Roberto Yaxley and omnibus
aliis viris ejusdem facultatis tunc de and infra Civitat' London unum Corpus
and perpetuam Communitatem sive Societatem facultat' Medicine Et ad habend'
perpetuam successionem and commune sigillum and ad eligend' annuatim unum
President' ejusdem Societatis sive Communitatis ad supervidend' regend' and
gubernand' eandem Societatem sive Communitatem and omnes homines ejusdem
facultatis cum diversis aliis privilegiis and aliis rebus per predictum Regem
eis concess' pro republica hujus regni prout in predictis Literis Paten'
before continetur Quar' tenor sequitur in hec verba. SS. Henricus Dei gratia
Rex Anglie and Franc' and Dominus Hibernie Omnibus ad quos presents Litere
pervenerint salutem. Cum regii officii nostri munus arbitremur ditionis.
ditioni nostre hominum felicitat' omni ratione consulere id autem vel imprimis
fore si improbor' conatibus tempestive occurramus apprime necessarium duximus
improbor' quoque hominum qui Medicinam magis avaritie sue causa quam ullius
bone consciencie fiducia profitebuntur unde rudi and credule plebi plurima
incommoda oriantur audaciam compescere Itaque partim been institutar' Civitat'
in Italia and multis aliis nationibus exemplum imitat' partim gravium
graviorum viror' Doct' Johannis Chamber Thome Linacre Ferdinandi de Victoria
medicor' nostror' Nicholai, Halswell Johannis Francisci and Roberti Yaxley
medicor' ac precipue reverendissimi in Christo Patris ac Domini D. Thome tituli
Sancte Cecilie trans Tiberim Sacrosancte Roman Ecclesie Presbyteri Cardinalis
Eboracen' Archiepiscopi and regni nostri Anglie Cancellarii charissimi precibus
inclinat' Collegium perpetuum doctor' and gravium Viror' qui medicinam in urbe
nostra London and Suburbiis intraque septem Mill' passuum ab ea urbe
quaquaversus public exerceant institui volumus atque imperamus Quibus tum sui
honoris tum public utilitatis nomine cure ut speramus erit maliciosor' quor'
meminimus inscitiam temeritatemque tam exemplo gravitateque sua deterrere quam
per leges nostras nuper edit' ac per constitutiones per idem Collegium condend'
punire Que quo facilius rite peragi possint memoratis Doctoribus Johanni
Chamber Thome Linacre Ferdinando de Victoria Medicis nostris Nicholao Halswell
Johanni Francisci and Roberto Yaxley medicis Concessimus quod ipsi omnesque
homines ejusdem facultat' de and in Civitate predicta sint in re and nomine
unum Corpus and Communitas perpetua sive Collegium perpetuum Et quod eadem
Communitas sive Collegium fingulis annis imperpetuum eligere possint and facere
de Communitate illa aliquem providum virum and in facultate medicine expertum
in Presidentem ejusdem Collegii sive Communitat' ad supervidend' recognoscend'
and gubernand' pro Anno illo Collegium sive Communitatem predictam and omnes
homines ejusdem facultatis and negotia eorundem Et quod idem Presidens and
Collegium sive Communitas habeant successionem perpetuam and commune sigillum
negociis dict' Communitat' and Presiden' imperpetuum servitur' Et quod ipsi and
successores sui imperpetuum sint person habiles and capaces ad perquirend' and
possidend' in feodo and perpetuitate terr' and tenementa reddit' and al'
possessiones quascunque. Concessimus eciam eis and successoribus suis pro nobis
and heredibus nostris quod ipsi and successores sui possint perquirere sibi and
successoribus suis tam in dicta urbe quam extra terras and tenementa quecunque
annuum valorem duodecim librar' non exceden' Statuto de alienatione ad manum
mortuam non obstan' Et quod ipsi per nomina Presidentis Collegii seu
Communitatis facultatis Medicine London placitare and implacitari possint coram
quibuscunque Judicibus in Curiis and actionibus quibuscunque Et quod predict'
Presidens Collegium sive Communitas and eor' Successores congregationes licitas
and honestas de seipsis ac Statuta and Ordinationes pro salubri Gubernatione
supervisu and Correctione Collegii seu Communitatis predicte and omnium hominum
eandem facultat' in dicta Civitate seu per septem milliar' in circuitu ejusdem
Civitat' exercen' secundum necessitat' exigenc. quoties and quando opus fuit
facere valiant licite and impune sine impedimento nostri heredum vel successor'
nostror' Justiciarior' Escaetor' Vic. and alior' Ballivor' vel Ministror'
nostror' hered' vel successor' nostror' quorumcunque. Concessimus eciam eisdem
Presidenti and Collegio seu Communitati and Successoribus suis quod nemo in
dicta Civitate aut per septem milliar' in circuitu ejusdem exerceat dictam
facultatem nisi ad hoc per dict' President' and Communitatem seu Successores
eor' qui pro tempore fuerint admiss. sit per ejusdem President' and Collegii
literas sigillo suo communi sigillat' sub pena Centum solidor' pro quolibet
mense quo non admissus eandem facultat' exercuit dimid' inde nobis and
heredibus nostris and dimid' dicto Presidenti and Collegio applicand'. Preterea
volumus and concedimus pro nobis and successoribus nostris quantum in nobis est
Quod per President' and Collegium predicte Communitatis pro tempore existen'
and eor' successores imperpetuum quatuor singulis annis per ipsos eligantur qui
habeant supervisum scrutinium correctionem and gubernationem omnium and
singulor' dicte Civitat' Medicor' uten' facultat' medicine in eadem Civitate ac
alior' medicor' forinsecor' quorumcunque facultatem ill' medicine aliquo modo
frequentan' and uten' infra eandem Civitatem and suburbia ejusdem sive infra
septem Milliar' in Circuitu ejusdem Civitatis ac punitionem eorundem pro
delictis suis in non been exequend' faciend' and utend' ill' Necnon supervisum
and scrutinium omnimodar' medicinar' and earum
eor' recept' per dictos medicos aut aliquem eor' hujusmodi ligeis nostris pro
eor' infirmitatibus del. and hujusmodi
and hujusmodi curand' and sanand' dand' imponend' and utend' quoties and
quando opus fuerit pro commodo and utilitate eorundem ligeor' nostror' ita quod
punitio hujusmodi medicor' uten' dicta
dicte facultat' medicine sic in premissis delinquen' per fines amerciament'
and imprisonament' corpor' suor' and per alias vias rationabiles and congruas
exequatur. Volumus eciam and concedimus pro nobis heredibus and successoribus
nostris quantum in nobis est quod nec Presidens nec aliquis de Collegio
predicto medicor' nec successor' sui nec eor' aliquis exercen' facultat' ill'
quoquo modo in futur' infra Civitatem nostram predict' and suburb' ejusdem seu
alibi summoneantur aut ponantur nec eor' aliquis summoneatur aut ponatur in
aliquibus Assisis Jurat' Inquest' Inquisitionibus Attinct' and aliis
recognitionibus infra dictam Civitat' and Suburb' ejusdem imposterum coram
Majore aut Vic' seu Coronat' dicte Civitatis nostre pro tempore existen'
capiend' aut per aliquem Officiar' seu Ministrum suum vel Officiarios sive
Ministros suos summonend' licet iidem Jur' Inquisitiones seu recognitiones sum'
fuerint super brevi vel brevibus nostri vel heredum nostror' de recto Sed quod
dicti Magistri sive Gubernatores ac Communitas facultat' antedict' and
successores sui and eor' quilibet dictam facultat' exercen' versus nos heredes
and successores nostros ac versus Majorem ac Vic' Civitat' nostre predicte pro
tempore existen' ac quoscunque Officiar' and Ministros suos sint inde quiet'
and penitus exonerat' imperpetuum per presents Proviso quod Litere nostre seu
aliquod in eis content' non cedent in prejudicium Civitat' nostre London seu
libertat' ejusdem Et hoc absque fine seu feodo pro premissis seu sigillatione
presentium nobis faciend' solvend' seu aliqualit' reddend' Aliquo Statuto
Ordinatione vel Actu in contrarium ante hec tempora fact' edit' ordinat' seu
provis' in aliquo non obstan'. In cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras
fieri fecimus Patentes. Test meipso apud Westm' vicesimo tertio die Septembris
Anno regni nostri decimo. Cumque eciam in Statuto in Parliamento dicti nuper
regis Henrici octavi tent' apud London decimo quinto die Aprilis Anno regni sui
quartodecimo and abinde adjornat' usque Westm' in Com' Midd' ultimo die Julii
Anno regni dicti nuper Regis decimoquinto and tunc and ibidem tent' inactitat'
fuit quod predicta Corporatio predict' Communitat' and Societat' facultat'
Medicine predicte Et omnia and singula concessio articul' and al' res content'
and spec' in predictis Literis Paten' forent approbat' concess' ratificat' and
confirmat' in eodem Parliamento and clare authorizat'
authoritat' and admiss' per idem Parliamentum bona legitima and valida Anglice
avayleable prefat' Corpori incorporat' and eor' successoribus imperpetuum in
tam amplo and largo modo quam posset capi putari and construi per eadem prout
in eodem Statuto int' alia before continetur. Predictus tamen Thomas Bonnam
qui ad dictam facultat' exercend' per Presidentem and Communitatem facultatis
medicine London predict' per literas President' and Collegii predicti sigillo
suo communi sigillat' non admissus est nec unquam ante hec admissus fuit
Statutum predictum minime ponderans nec penam in predictis Literis Paten'
content' verens dictam facultatem medicine per spacium duodecim mensium jam
ult' elaps. and prox' preceden' ante diem impetrationis hujus bille scilicet
vicesimum quintum diem Junii Anno regni domini Jacobi nunc Regis Anglie Quinto
in Civitat' London predicta videlicet in parochia beat Marie de Arcubus in
Warda de Cheap London exercuit and adhuc exercet contra formam Literar' Paten'
predictar' and Statut' predict' Per quod actio accrevit eidem Presidenti qui
tam, etc. ad exigend' and habend' de prefato Thoma pro^dicto domino Rege nunc
ac eodem Presidente and Collegio predicto predictas sexaginta libras videlicet
pro quolibet mense predictor' duodecim mensium Centum solidos. Predictus tamen
Thomas licet sepius requisit', etc. predictas sexaginta libras prefat' domino
Regi and eidem Presidenti and Collegio predicto seu eor' alteri nondum solvit
sed ill' eis hucusque solvere omnino contradixit and adhuc contradic' ad
dampnum ipsius Presidentis qui tam, etc. Centum librar' and inde tam pro dicto
domino Rege quam pro eodem Presidente and Collegio predicto produc' sectam,
etc. Et modo ad hunc diem scilicet diem Veneris prox' post octab' Sancti
Michaelis isto eodem Termino usque quem diem predictus Thomas Bonnam habuit
licenc' ad billam predictam interloquendi and tunc ad respondend', etc. Coram
domino Rege apud Westm' ven' tam predictus Presidens Collegii seu Communitatis
dicte facultatis Medicine London qui tam, etc. per Attorn' suum predictum quam
predictus Thomas Bonnam per Willielmum Edwardes Attorn' suum Et idem Thomas
defend' vim and injur' quando, etc. Et dic' quod predict' Presidens Collegii
seu Communitat' dicte facultat' medicine London qui tam pro dicto domino Rege
quam pro eodem Presidente and Collegio predicto sequitur actionem suam
predictam inde versus eum habere seu manutenere non debet Quia dic' quod been
and verum est quod predictus dominus Henricus Octavus nuper Rex Anglie per
predictas literas suas Patent' magno sigillo suo Anglie sigillat' geren' dat'
apud Westm' in predicto Com' Midd' predicto vicesimo tertio die Septembris Anno
regni sui decimo supradict' pro publico bono hujus regni in debito exercitio
facultat' medicine and bona administratione medicinar' habend' and pro causis
and considerationibus in eisdem Literis Patentibus expressis incorporasset and
fecisset de predictis Johanne Chamber Thoma Linacre and Ferdinando de Victoria
adtunc medicis ejusdem nuper Regis and Nicholao Halsewell Johanne Francisci and
Roberto Yaxley and omnibus aliis viris ejusdem facultatis tunc de and infra
dictam Civitatem London unum Corpus and perpetuam Communitatem sive societatem
facultatis Medicine and adhabend' perpetuam successionem and Commune sigillum
Et ad eligend' annuatim unum Presiden' ejusdem societatis sive Communitatis ad
supervidend' regend' and gubernand' eandem societatem sive Communitatem and
omnes homines ejusdem facultat' cum diversis aliis privilegiis and al' rebus
per dictum nuper Regem eis concess' pro republica hujus regni prout in
predictis Literis Paten' ut prefertur before continetur. Ac quod predictus
nuper Rex concessit eciam per easdem Literas Patent' eisdem tunc Presidenti and
Collegio seu Communitat' and successoribus suis quod nemo in dicta Civitate aut
per septem Milliar' in circuitu ejusdem exerceret dictam facultatem nisi ad hoc
per dict' President' and Communitat' seu successores eor' qui pro tempore
fuerint admiss. soret per ejusdem Presiden' and Collegii literas sigillo suo
communi sigillat' sub pena Centum solidor' pro quolibet mense quo non admiss.
eandem facultatem exerceret dimid' inde dicto domino nuper Regi and heredibus
suis Et dimid' dicto Presidenti and Collegio applicand'. Ac eciam quod
predictus nuper Rex ulterius concessit eisdem tunc Presidenti and Collegio seu
Communitat' and successoribus suis omnia and singula alia in eisdem Literis
Paten' superius ut prefertur specificat' and content' modo and forma prout
predict' Presidens qui tam, etc. superius narrando allegavit. Quodque eciam in
predicto Statuto in dicto Parliamento dicti nuper Regis Henrici octavi tent'
apud London predicto decimo quinto die Aprilis Anno regni sui quartodecimo and
abinde adjornat' usque Westm' in predicto Com' Midd' ultimo die Julii Anno
regni dicti nuper Regis decimo quinto and tunc ibidem tent' inactitat' fuit
quod predicta Corporatio predicte Communitatis and societatis facultatis
medicine predicte and omnia and singula concess. articul' and al' res content'
and specificat' in predictis Literis Paten' foret approbat' concess. ratificat'
and confirmat' in eodem Parliamento and clare authorizat'
authoritat' and admiss. per idem Parliamentum bona legitima and valida anglice
Avayleable prefat' Corpori incorporat' and eor' successoribus imperpetuum in
tam amplo and largo modo quam possit capi putari and construi per eadem prout
in eodem Statuto int' alia before continetur modo and forma prout predictus
Presidens qui tam, etc. superius similit' narrando allegavit. Et predictus
Thomas Bonnam ulterius dic' quod in predicto Statuto ulterius inactitat' fuit
Quod predict' sex. person in eisdem Literis Paten' nominat' ut principales and
primo nominat' de predict' Communitate and Societate eligen' ad se duos vel
plur' de dict' Communitate ab inde anglice from thenceforthe vocarentur and
nuncuparentur Electi anglice Elects Ac quod iidem Electi annuatim eligerent
unum ex eis fore Presidentem dicte Societatis, toties quoties aliquis locor'
Anglice any of the rooms and places
place eorundem Elector' contigeret esse vacuum per mortem vel alit' tunc
superviventes Anglice the supervivors eorundem Elector' contingeret
infra Triginta vel quadraginta dies prox' post mortem eorundem vel alicujus
eor' eligerent nominarent and admitterent unum vel plures prout necessitas
requireret de peritissimis and expertissimis viris de and in dicta facultate in
London ad supplend' dictum locum and numerum octo personar. Ac eciam recitando
in dicto Statuto quod cum in Dioces. Anglic^
anglice extra London tunc non verisimile fuit invenire semper homines habiles
ad examinand' sufficient' (secundum Statutum anglice according to the Statute)
tales qui admitterentur ad exercend' Medicinam in eisdem anglice to exercise
Physic in them ulterius inactitat' fuit in eodem Statuto quod nulla persona
abinde anglice from thenceforthe permitteretur ad exercend' vel practizand' in
Medicina Anglice in Physic per Angliam anglice thoroughe England usque tale
tempus quo ipse examinaretur apud London per predictum Presidentem and tres
Elector' predictor' and ad habend' a prefat' Presidente vel Electis literas
testimoniales de eor' approbatione and examinatione nisi ipse foret Graduatus
anglice a Graduat Oxonie vel Cantabrigie qui adimplevisset omnia anglice had
accomplished all things pro forma sua sine aliqua gratia. Et predictus Thomas
Bonnam ulterius dic' quod ipse idem Thomas diu ante predictum vicesimum quintum
diem Junii Anno regni dicti domini Regis nunc Anglie quinto supradicto scilicet
secundo die Julii Anno Domini Millesimo quingentesimo nonagesimo quinto in alma
Academia Cantabrigie suscepit gradum and dignitat' Doctoris in Medicinis and
adtunc and ibidem scilicet eodem secundo die Julii Anno Domini Millesimo
quingentesimo nonagesimo quinto supradicto apud Cantabrigiam predictam in Com'
Cantabr' rite and legitime ordinat' and fact' fuit Graduat' Anglice a Graduate
Cantabrigie predicte videlicet Doctor in Medicinis secundum Leges Statuta
Constitutiones and Ordinationes dicte Academie Cantabrigie. Quodque idem Thomas
tunc and ibidem adimplevit omnia anglice did accomplish all things pro forma
sua sine aliqua gratia. Quor' pretextu idem Thomas hujusmodi Graduat'
Cantabrigie videlicet Doctor in Medicinis in forma predicta existen' qui
adimplevisset omnia anglice had accomplished all things pro forma sua sine
aliqua gratia dictam facultatem medicine per predictum spacium duodecim mensium
ult' elaps. and prox' preceden' ante diem impetrationis bille predicte scilicet
predictum vicesimum quintum diem Junii Anno regni dicti domini Regis nunc
Anglie quinto supradicto in dicta Civitate London videlicet in predicta
parochia beat Marie de Arcubus in Warda de Cheap London exercuit modo and
forma prout predictus Presidens qui tam, etc. superius versus eum narravit
prout ei been licuit. Et hoc parat' est verificare. Unde pet' Judicium si
predictus Presidens qui tam, etc. actionem suam predictam inde versus eum
habere seu manutenere debeat, etc. Et predictus Presidens Collegii seu
Communitatis facultat' medicine London predict' qui tam, etc. dic' quod ipse
per aliqua per predictum Thomam Bonnam superius placitando allegat' ab action
sua predicta versus ipsum Thomam habend' precludi non debet. Quia dic' quod
placitum predictum per ipsum Thomam modo and forma predictis superius placitat'
materiaque in eodem content' minus sufficien' in lege existunt ad ipsum
President' qui tam, etc. ab action sua predicta versus predictum Thomam Bonnam
inde habend' precludend' Ad quod idem Presidens qui tam, etc. necesse non habet
nec per legem t're tenetur aliquo modo respondere. Unde pro defectu sufficien'
respons. in hac part idem Presidens qui tam, etc. pet' judicium and debitum
predictum tam dicto domino Regi quam eidem President' and Collegio predicto
unacum dampnis suis occasion detentionis debiti illius sibi adjudicari, etc.
Et predictus Thomas Bonnam dic' quod placitum predictum per ipsum Thomam modo
and forma predictis superius placitat' materiaque in eodem content' bona and
sufficien' in lege existunt ad predictum Presidentem qui tam, etc. ab action
sua predicta versus ipsum Thomam habend' precludend'. Quod quidem placitum
materiamque in eodem content' idem Thomas parat' est verificare and probare
prout Cur', etc. Et quia predictus Presidens qui tam, etc. ad placitum illud
non respond' nec illud hucusque aliqualiter dedic' idem Thomas Bonnam ut prius
pet' Judicium Et quod predictus Presidens qui tam, etc. ab action sua predicta
versus ipsum Thomam Bonnam inde habend' precludatur, etc. Et quia Cur' domini
Regis hic de Judicio suo de and super premissis reddend' nondum advisatur dies
inde dat' est partibus predictis coram domino Rege apud Westm' usque diem
Sabbati prox' post Octabas Sancti Hillarii de Judicio suo de and super
premissis reddend', etc. eo quod Cur' domini Regis hic inde nondum, etc. Ad
quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' tam predictus Presiden' qui tam,
etc. quam predictus Thomas Bonnam per Attorn' suos predictos. Et quia Cur'
domini Regis hic de Judicio suo de and super premissis reddend' nondum
advisatur dies ulterius inde dat' est partibus predictis coram domino Rege apud
Westm' usque diem Mercurii prox' post xviij Pasche extunc prox' sequen' de
Judicio inde audiend' eo quod Cur' domini Regis hic inde nondum, etc. Ad quem
diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' parts predicte per Attorn' suos
predictos. Et quia Cur' domini Regis hic de Judicio suo de and super premissis
reddendo nondum advisatur dies ulterius inde dat' est partibus predictis coram
domino Rege apud Westm' usque diem Veneris prox' post Crastinum Sancte
Trinitat' extunc prox' sequen' de Judicio inde audiendo eo quod Cur' domini
Regis hic inde nondum, etc. Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven'
parts predicte per Attorn' suos predictos. Et quia Cur' domini Regis hic de
Judicio suo de and super premissis reddend' nondum advisatur dies ulterius inde
dat' est partibus predictis coram domino Rege apud Westm' usque diem Lune prox'
post Octab. Sancti Michaelis de judicio inde audiend' eo quod Cur' domini Regis
hic inde nondum, etc. Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' tam
predictus Presiden' qui tam, etc. quam predictus Thomas Bonnam per Attorn' suos
predictos. Et quia Cur' domini Regis hic de Judicio suo de and super premissis
reddend' nondum advisatur dies ulterius inde dat' est partibus predictis coram
domino Rege apud Westm' usque diem Lune prox' post Octabas Sancti Hillarii
extunc prox' sequen' de judicio inde audiend' eo quod Cur' domini Regis hic
inde nondum, etc. Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' tam predictus
Presidens qui tam, etc. quam predictus Thomas Bonnam per Attorn' suos predictos
Super quo vis' and per Cur' domini Regis hic before intellectis omnibus and
singulis premissis maturaque deliberatione inde habita pro eo quod videtur Cur'
domini Regis hic quod placitum predictum per prefat' Thomam Bonnam modo and
forma predictis superius placitat' materiaque in eodem content' minus
sufficien' in lege existunt ad ipsum Presiden' qui tam, etc. ab action sua
predicta versus ipsum Thomam habend' precludend' Ideo cons. est quod predictus
Presiden' qui tam, etc. recuperet versus predictum Thomam Bonnam debitum
predictum unde dominus Rex habeat unam medietatem and predictus Presiden' and
Collegium alteram medietatem juxta formam Literar' Paten' predictar' and
Statut' predict'. Quodque idem Presiden' qui tam, etc. recuperet versus
predictum Thomam Bonnam duodecim libras pro dampnis suis que sustinuit tam
occasion detentionis debiti predicti quam pro miss. and custagiis suis per
ipsum circa sectam suam in hac part apposit' eidem Presiden' qui tam, etc. per
Cur' domini Regis hic ex assensu suo adjudicat'. Et predictus Thomas Bonnam in
misericord', etc. Quod quidem Recordum coram nob' sic habitum duximus
exemplificand'. In cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus
Patentes. Test Thoma Flemynge apud Westm' Tertio decimo die Februarii Anno
regni nostri Anglie Franc' and Hibernie sexto Et Scotie quadragesimo secundo.

Byng and Byng.

Dr. Bonham's Case as reported by Sr. Edward Coke late Lord Chief Justice of
England, Hill. 7. Jacobi. In the Common Pleas, p. 585. Edit. 1680.
THomas Bonham Doctor in Philosophy and Physic brought an Action of false
imprisonment Action of false imprisonment.
against Henry Atkins, George Turner, Thomas Moundford, and John Argent,
Doctors in Physic, and John Tailor and William Bowden, Yeomen, For that the
Defendants the 10 of November. 4 Jacobi did imprison him, and detain him in
Prison by the space of 7 days. The Defendants pleaded the Letters Patents of
King Henry the 8. bearing date the 23 of September, in the 10 year of his
Reign, by which he recites; Quod cum regii officii sui munus arbitrabatur
ditionis suae hominum foelicitati omni ratione consulere, id autem vel imprimis
fore si improborum conatibus tempestive occurreret, etc. By the same Letters
Patents the King granted to John Chamber, Thomas Linacre, Ferdinando de
Victoria, John Halswell, John Frances, and Robert Yaxley, quod ipsi omnesque
homines ejusdem facultatis de and in Civitate London sint in re and nomine unum
corpus and communitas perpetua, per nomen Presidentis and Collegii, sive
communitatis facultatis medicinae London, etc. And that they might make
meetings and Ordinances, etc. But the Case at Bar does principally consist upon
two clauses in the Charter: The first, Concessimus etiam eisdem Presidenti and
Collegio seu Communitati and successoribus suis, quod nemo in dicta Civitate
aut per septem milliaria in circuitu ejusdem exerceat dictam facultatem
Medicinae, nisi ad hoc per dict' President' and Communit' seu successores suos,
qui pro tempore fuerint, admissus sit per ejusdem Presidentis and Collegii
literas sigillo suo communi sigillat' sub poena centum solidorum pro quolibet
mense quo non admissus eandem facultatem exercuerit, dimidium inde domino Regi
and haeredibus suis, and dimidium dict' Presidenti and Collegio applicand',
etc. The second clause is which immediately follows in these words, Preterea
voluit and concessit pro se and successoribus suis (quantum in se fuit) quod
per President' and Collegium predict' Communitat' pro tempore exist' and eorum
successores imperpetuum quatuor singulis annis per ipsos eligerentur qui
haberent supervisum and scrutinium, correctionem and gubernationem omnium and
singulorum dict' Civitatis medicorum, utentium facultat' Medicinae in eadem
Civitate, ac aliorum Medicorum forinsecorum quorumcunque facultatem illam
Medicinae aliquo modo frequentantium and utentium infra eandem Civitatem and
Suburbia ejusdem, sive infra feptem milliaria in circuitu ejusdem Civitatis, ac
punitionem eorundem pro delictis suis in non been exequend' faciend' and utend'
illa: nec non supervisum and scrutinium omnium Medicinarum and earum
receptionem per dictos Medicos seu aliquem eorum hujusmodi ligeis dict' nuper
Regis pro eorum infirmitatibus curand' and sanand' dand' imponend' and utend'
quoties and quando opus fuerit, pro commodo and utilitat' eorundem ligeorum
dicti nuper Regis: Ita quod punitio eorundem Medicorum utentium dict' facultate
Medicinae sic in premiss. delinquentium, per fines, amerciamenta and
imprisonament' corporum suorum, and per alias vias rationabiles and congruas
exequeretur, as by the said Charter more fully appears. And that by force of
the said Letters Patents, The said Thomas Chamber, Thomas Linacre, etc. and all
the men of the same faculty in the said City were unum Corpus and communitas
perpetua sive Collegium perpetuum. And afterward by Act of Parliament, An. 14
H. 8. It was enacted, That the said Corporation, and every Grant, Article, and
other things in the said Letters Patents contained and specified, should be
approved, granted, ratified and confirmed in tam amplo and largo modo prout
poterit acceptari, cogitari and constitui per easdem Literas Patentes. And
further it was enacted, That the said six persons named in the said Letters
Patents, as Principal of the said College, and two others of the said College,
should be named Electi, and that the said Elects should choose one of them to be
President, as by the said Act appears. And further they pleaded the Act of 1
Mariae, by which it is enacted, Quod quaedam concessio per Literas Patentes de
incorporation' fact' per predict' nuper Regem Medicis London and omnes
clausulae and articuli content' in eadem concessione approbarentur,
concederentur, ratificarentur and confirm' per praedict' nuper Parl'. In
consideratione cujus inactitat' fuit authoritate ejusdem Parliamenti, quod
praed' Statut' and Act' Parliament' in omnibus Articulis and Clausulis in eodem
content' extunc imposterum starent and continuarent in pleno robore, etc. And
further it was enacted, That whenever the President of the College or
Commonalty of the faculty of Physic of London for the time being, or such as
the said President and College shall yearly, according to the tenor and meaning
of the said Act, authorize to search, examine, correct and punish all offenders
and transgressors in the said faculty, etc. shall send or commit any such
offender or offenders for his or their offense or disobedience contrary to any
Article or Clause contained in the said Grant or Act, to any Ward, Gaol or
Prison within the same City, (the Tower of London except) that then from time
to time the Warden, Jailer or Keeper, etc. shall receive, etc. such person so
offending, etc. and the same shall keep at his proper charge without Bail or
Mainprize, until such time as such offender or disobedient be discharged of
the said imprisonment by the said President and such persons as shall be
thereunto authorized, upon pain that all and every such Warden, Jailer, etc.
doing the contrary shall lose and forfeit the double of such Fines and
amerciaments as such offender and offenders shall be assessed to pay by such as
the said President and College shall authorize as aforesaid, so that the Fine
and amerciament be not at any one time above the sum of 20 pound, the one
moiety to the King, the other moiety to the President and College, etc. And
further pleaded, That the said Thomas Bonham the 10th of April within London,
against the form of the said Letters Patents and the said Acts, exercebat artem
Medicinae non admissus per Literas praed' Praesidentis and Collegii sigillo
eorum communi sigillat' ubi revera praed' Tho. Bonham fuit minus sufficiens ad
artem Medicinae exercend'. By force of which the said Thomas Bonham 30 April.
1606. was summoned in London by the Censors or Governors of the College, to
appear before the President and Censors or Governors of the College aforesaid,
at the College, etc. the 14 day of April next following, super praemissis
examinand. At which day the said Thomas Bonham came before the President and
Censors, and was examined by the Censors de scientia sua in facultate sua
Medicinae administrand' Et quia praed' Thomas Bonham sic examinatus minus apt
and insufficienter in praed' art Medicinae respondebat, and inventus fuit
super examinationem praed' per praed' Praesident' and Censores minus sufficiens
and inexpert' ad artem Medicinae administrand' ac pro eo quod praed' Tho.
Bonham multotiens ante examinatus, and interdictus per ipsum Praesident' and
Censores, de causis praed' ad artem Medicinae administrand' per unum mensem and
amplius post talem interdictionem facultatem illam in Lond' praed' sine
licentia, etc. ideo adtunc and ibid' consideratum fuit per praed' Praesident'
and Censores, quod praed' Tho. Bonham pro inobedientia and contempt' suis
praed' amerciaretur to 5 li. in proximis Comitiis praed' Praesident' and
Collegio persolvend' and deinceps abstineret, etc. quousque inventus fuerit
sufficiens, etc. sub poena conjiciendi in Carcerem si in praemissis
delinqueret: And that the said Tho. Bonham 20 October. 1606. within London did
practice Physic, and the same day he was summoned by the Censors to appear
before the President and them the 22 of October. then next following, at which
day Bonham made default. Ideo consideratum fuit per praed' Censores, That for
his disobedience and contempt he should be amerced to 10 li. and that he should
be arrested and committed to custody. And afterward the 7 November. 1606. the
said Tho. Bonham at their assembly came before the President and Censors, and
they asked him if he would satisfy the College for his disobedience and
contempt, and submit himself to be examined and obey the censure of the
College; who answered, That he had practiced Physic, and would practice
Physic within London, asking no leave of the College, and that he would not
submit himself to the President and Censors, and affirmed that the President
and Censors had not any authority over those who were Doctors of the
University; For which cause the said 4 Censors, sc. Dr. Turner, Dr. Moundforde,
Dr. Argent, and Dr. Dun, then being Censors or Governors, pro offensis and
inobedientia praed' adtunc and ibid' ordinaverunt and decreverunt, quod praed'
Tho. Bonham in Carcerem mandaretur ibid' remansur' quousque abinde per
Praesident' and Censores seu gubernatores Collegii praed' pro tempore existen'
deliberaretur, And there then by their warrant in writing under their common
Seal did commit the Plaintiff to the prison of the Counter in London, etc.
without Bail or mainprize at the costs and charges of the said Thomas Bonham,
until the said Thomas Bonham by the Warrant of the President and Censors of
the said College, or their Successors was delivered. And Dr. Atkins then
President, and the Censors, and Bowden and Tailor as their servants, and by the
commandment of the said President and Censors, did carry the Plaintiff with the
Warrant to the Gaol, etc. which is the same imprisonment. The Plaintiff replied
and said, That by the said Act of 14 H. 8. it was further enacted, And where
that in the Dioceses of England, out of London, it is not like to find always
men able sufficiently to examine (after the Statute) such as shall be admitted
to exercise Physic in them, that it may be enacted in this present Parliament,
That no person from henceforth be suffered to exercise or practice Physic
through England until such time that he be examined at London by the said
President and three of the said Elects, and to have from them Letters
Testimonial of their approving and examination, Exeept he be a Graduate of
Oxford or Cambridge, which have accomplished all things for his form without
grace: And that the Plaintiff in the year of our Lord 1595. was a Graduate, sc.
a Doctor in the University of Cambridge, and had accomplished all things
concerning his degree for his form without grace, by force whereof he had
exercised and practiced Physic within the City of London, until the Defendants
had imprisoned him, etc. upon which the Defendants did demur in Law. And this
case was often argued by the Sexjeants at Bar in diverse several Terms; And now
this Term the case was argued by the Justices, and the effect of their
arguments who argued against the Plaintiff (which was divided into three parts)
shall be first reported. The first was, whether a Doctor of Physic of the one
University or the other, be by the Letters Patents and by the body of the Act
of 14 H. 8. restrained to practice Physic within the City of London, etc. The
second was, If the exception in the said Act of 14 H. 8. has excepted him or
not. The third was, That his imprisonment was lawful for his said
disobedience. And as to the first, they did rely upon the Letter of the (...),
ratified by the said Act of 14 H. 8. which is in the negative, sc. Nemo in
dicta Civitate, etc. exercea^ dictam facultatem nisi ad hoc per praedict
Praesidentem and communitatem, etc. admissus sit, etc. And this proposition is
a general negative, and Generale dictum est generaliter intelligendum, and nemo
excludes all; and therefore a Doctor of the one University or the other is
prohibited within this negative word Nemo. And many cases were put, where
negative Statutes shall be taken stricte and exclusive, which I do not think
here necessary to recite. Also they said, that the Statute of 3 H. 8. cap. 11.
which in effect is repealed by this Act of 14 H. 8. has a special Proviso for
the University of Cambridge and Oxford, which being here left out, does declare
the intention of the makers of the Act, that they did intend to include them
within this general Prohibition, Nemo in dicta Civitate, etc. As to the Second
point they strongly held, that the said latter clause, And where that in the
Dioceses of England out of London, etc. this clause according to the words does
extend only to places out of London, and so much the rather, because that they
purview for London before, Nemo in dicta Civitate, etc. Also the makers of the
Act put a distinction betwixt those who shall be licensed to practice Physic
within London, etc. for they ought to have the admittance and allowance of the
President and College in writing under their Common Seal; but he who shall be
allowed to practice Physic throughout England out of London ought to be
examined and admitted by the President and 3 of the Elects, and so they said,
that it was lately adjudged in the Kings Bench, in an Information exhibited
against the said Doctor Bonham for practicing of Physic within London for
diverse months. As to the Third point they said, That for his contempt and
disobedience before them in their College they might commit him to Prison, for
they have authority by the Letters Patents and Act of Parliament, And therefore
for his contempt and misdemeanor before them they may commit him. Also the Act
of 1 Mariae has given them power to commit them for every offense or
disobedience contrary to any Article or Clause contained in the said Grant or
Act. But there is an express Negative Article in the said Grant, and ratified
by the Act of 14 H. 8. Quod nemo in dicta Civitate, etc. exerceat, etc. And the
Defendants have pleaded that the Plaintiff has practiced Physic within London
by the space of one month, etc. And therefore the Act of 1 Mariae has
authorized them for to imprison him in this case; for which cause they did
conclude for the Defendants against the Plaintiff. But it was argued by Coke
Chief Justice, Warburton and Daniel Justices of the Common Pleas, to the
contrary. And Daniel conceived that a Doctor of Physic of the one University
or the other, etc. was not within the body of the Act, and if he was within the
body of the Act, that he was excepted by the said latter clause: But Warburton
argued against him for both the points: and the Chief Justice did not speak to
these 2 points, because that he and Warburton and Daniel did agree that this
action was clearly maintainable for two other points. But to the 2 other points
he and the said 2 other Justices Warburton and Daniel did speak, scil. 1.
Whether the Censors have power for the Causes alleged in their Bar, to fine
and imprison the Plaintiff. 2. Admitting that they have power to do it, if
they have pursued their power. But the chief Justice before he argued the
points in Law, because that much was said in the commendations of the Doctors
of Physic of the said College within London, and somewhat (as he conceived) in
derogation of the dignity of the Doctors of the Universities, he first
attributed much to the Doctors of the said College within London, and did
confess that nothing was spoken, which was not due to their merits; but yet
that no comparison was to be made between that private College, and any of the
Universities of Cambridge and Oxford, no more than between the Father and his
Children, or between the Fountain and the small Rivers which descend from
thence: The University is Alma matter, from whose breasts those of that private
College have sucked all their science and knowledge (which I acknowledge to be
great and profound) but the Law says, Erubescit lex Filios castigare Parents:
The University is the fountain, and that and the like private Colleges are
tanquam rivuli, which flow from the fountain, and melius est petere fontes quam
sectari rivulos. Briefly, Academiae Cantabrigiae and Oxoniae sunt Athenae
nostrae nobilissimae, regni soles, oculi and animae regni, unde Religio,
humanitas and doctrina in omnes regni parts uberrime diffunduntur. But it is
true, Nunquam sufficient copia laudatoris, quia nunquam deficiet materia laudis;
and therefore these Universities exceed and excel all private Colleges,
tanquam inter viburna cupressus. And it was observed that King Henry the 8. his
said Letters Patents, and the King and the Parliament in the Act of 14 H. 8. in
making of a Law concerning Physicians, for the more safety and health of men,
therein have followed the order of a good Physician (Rex enim omnes arts
censetur habere in scrinio pectoris sui) For, Medicina est duplex, removens and
promovens; removens morbum, and promovens ad salutem. And therefore 5 manner of
persons (who more hurt the body of men than the disease it self) are to be
removed. 1. Improbi: 2. Avari, qui medicinam magis avaritiae suae causa quam
ullius bonae conscientiae fiducia profitentur: 3. Malitiosi: 4. Temerarii: 5.
Inscii; and of the other part, 5 manner of persons were to be promoted, as
appears by the said Act, scil. those that were, 1. profound, 2. sad, 3.
discreet, 4. groundedly learned, 5. profoundly studied. And it was well
ordained, That the professors of Physic should be profound, sad, discreet,
etc. and not youths who have no gravity and experience; for as one says, In
Juvene Theologo conscientiae detrimentum, in juvene Legista bursae decrementum,
in juvene Medico coemeterii incrementum. And it ought to be presumed, every
Doctor of any of the Universities to be within the Statute, sc. to be profound,
sad, discreet, groundedly learned, and profoundly studied, for none can there
be Master of Arts (who is a Doctor of Philosophy) under the study of 7 years,
and cannot be Doctor of Physic under 7 years more in the study of Physic: and
that is the cause that the Plaintiff is named in the Declaration, Doctor of
Philosophy, and Doctor of Physic, quia oportet Medicum esse Philosophum; ubi
enim Philosophus desinit, incipit Medicus. As to the 2 points upon which the
Chief Justice, Warburton and Daniel gave judgment: 1. It was resolved by them,
That the said Censors have not the power to commit the plaintiff for any of the
causes mentioned in the Bar, and the cause and reason thereof shortly was,
That the said clause which gives power to the said Censors to fine and
imprison, does not extend to the said clause, sc. Quod nemo in dicta Civitate,
etc. exerceat dictam facultatem, etc. Which prohibiteth every one to practice
Physic within London, etc. without license of the President and College; but
extends only to punish those who practice Physic within London, pro
delictis suis in non been exequendo, faciendo and utendo facultate medicinae,
by fine and imprisonment: So that the Censors have not power by the Letters
Patents and the Act to fine and imprison any for practicing of Physic within
London, but only pro delictis suis in non been exequendo, etc. for ill and not
good use and practice of Physic. And that was made manifest by 5 Reasons
called vividae rations, because they had their vigor and life from the
Letters Patents and the Act it self. And the best Expositor of all Letters
Patents, and Acts of Parliament, are the Letters Patents and the Acts
themselves, by construction and conferring all the parts together, Optima
Statuti interpretatrix est (omnibus particulis ejusdem inspectis) ipsum
Statutum; And injustum est nisi tota lege inspecta, de una aliqua ejus
particula judicare vel respondere. The first reason was, that these two were
two absolute, perfect and distinct Clauses, and as Parallels, and therefore the
one did not extend to the other; for the second begins Praeterea voluit and
concessit, etc. and the branch concerning fine and imprisonment, is parcel of
the second Clause. 2. The first Clause prohibiting the practicing of Physic,
etc. does comprehend 4 certainties; 1. Certainty of the thing prohibited, sc.
practice of Physic; 2. Certainty of the time, sc. practice for one month; 3.
Certainty of Penalty, sc. 5 li. 4. Certainty of distribution, sc. one Moiety to
the King, and the other Moiety to the College; and this penalty he who
practices Physic in London does incur, although he practice and use Physic
well, and profitably for the body of man; and upon this branch the Information
was exhibited in the Kings Bench. But the Clause to punish delicta in non been
exequendo, etc. upon which branch the Case at Bar stands, is altogether
uncertain, for the hurt which may come thereby may be little or great, leve vel
grave, excessive or small, etc. And therefore the King and the makers of the
Act, cannot for so uncertain offense impose a certainty of fine, or time of
imprisonment, but leave it to the Censors to punish such offenses, secundum
quantitatem delicti, which is included in these words, per fines, amerciamenta,
imprisonamenta corporum suorum, and per alias vias rationabiles and congruas.
2. The harm which accrueth by non been exequendo, etc. does concern the body of
man; and therefore it is reasonable that the offender should be punished in his
body, sc. by imprisonment; but he who practices Physic in London in a good
manner, although he does it without leave, yet it is not any prejudice to the
body of man. But the clause of Non been exequendo, etc. does not prescribe any
time certain, but at what time soever he ministers Physic non been, etc. he
shall be punished by the said 2 branch. And the Law has great reason in the
making of this distinction, for diverse Nobles, Gentlemen, and others come upon
diverse occasions to London; and when they are here, they become subject to
diseases, and thereupon they send for their Physicians into the Country, who
know their bodies and the causes of the diseases; now it was never the meaning
of the Act to bar any one of his own Physician; and when he is here he may
practice and minister Physic to another by 2 or 3 weeks, etc. without any
forfeiture; for any one who wactiseth Physic well in London (although he has
not taken any degree in any of the Universities) shall forfeit nothing, if not
that he practice it by the space of a month; and that was the cause, that the
time of a month was put in the Act. 4. The Censors cannot be Judges, Ministers
and Parties; Judges to give sentence or Judgment: Ministers, to make summons;
and Parties to have the moiety of the forfeiture, quia aliquis non debet esse
Judex in propria causa, imo iniquum est aliquem suae rei esse Judicem: and one
cannot be Judge and Attorney for any of the parties: Dyer. 3 Ed. 6. 65. 38 E.
3. 15. 8 H. 6. 19, 20. 21 E 4. 47. etc. And it appears in our books that in
many Cases the Common Law does control Acts of Parliament, and sometimes shall
adjudge them to be void: for when an Act of Parliament is against Common right
and reason, or repugnant or impossible to be performed, the Common Law shall
control it, and adjudge such Act to be void; and therefore in 8 E. 3. 30.
Thomas Tregors Case upon the Statute of West. 2. Cap. 38. and Articuli super
Chartas Cap. 9. Herle says, Some Statutes are made against Common Law and
right, which those who made them would not put in execution: The Statute of
West. 2. Cap. 21. gives a Writ of Cessavit haeredi petenti super haeredem
tenent and super eos quibus alienatum fuerit hujusmodi tenementum: and yet it
is adjudged in 33 E. 3. Cessavit 42. where the Case was, Two Coparceners Lords
and Tenant by Fealty and certain Rent, One Coparcener had issue and dies; the
Aunt and the Niece shall not join in a Cessavit, because that the heir shall
not have a Cessavit, for the cesser in the time of his ancestor. F.N.B. 209. F.
And therewith agrees Plow. Com. 110. and the reason is, because in a Cessavit
the Tenant before Judgment may render the Arrearages and damages, and hold his
land again, and that he cannot do when the heir brings a Cessavit for the
cesser in the time of his Auncestor, for the arrearages incurred in the life of
the Auncestor do not belong to the heir: and because that it shall be against
right and reason, the Common Law shall adjudge the said Act of Parliament as to
that point void. The Statute of Carlisle made 35 E. 1. enacteth That the Order
of the Cistertians and Augustines who have a Covent and Common Seal, that the
Common Seal shall be in the keeping of the Prior, who is under the Abbot, and 4
others of the most grave of the house: and that any deed sealed with the Common
Seal, which is not so in keeping, shall be void: and the opinion of the Court
(Anno 27 H. 6. Annuity 41.) was, that this Statute was void, for it is
impertinent to be observed, for the Seal being in their keeping, the Abbot
cannot seal any thing with it, and when it is in the Abbots hands it is out of
their keeping ipso facto; and if the Statute should be observed, every Common
Seal shall be defeated upon a simple surmise, which cannot be tried. Note
Reader, the words of the said Statute of Carlisle which was made 35 E. 1. which
is called Statutum Religiosorum, are, Et insuper ordinavit dominus Rex and
statuit, quod Abbates Cicestr' and Premonstraten' ordin' religiosorum, etc. de
caetero habeant Sigillum Commune, and illud in custodia Prioris Monasterii sui
domus, and quatuor de dignioribus and discretioribus ejusdem loci conventus sub
privato Sigillo Abbatis ipsius loci custod' depon' etc. Et si forsan aliqua
scripta obligationum, donationum, emptionum, venditionum, alienationum, seu
aliorum quorumcunque contractuum alio sigillo quam tali sigillo communi, sicut
praemit' custodit', inveniant' a modo sigillata, pro nullo penitus habeantur,
omnique careant firmitate. So the Statute of 1 E. 6. cap. 14. gives
Chauntries, etc. to the King saving to the donor, etc. all such rents,
services, etc. and the Common Law does control it, and adjudge the same void
as to services, and the donor shall have the Rent as a Rentseck distr. of
Common right, for it should be against Common right and reason that the King
should hold of any, or do service to any of his Subjects, 14 Eliz. Dyer 313.
And so was it adjudged Mich. 16 and 17 Eliz. in the Common Pleas in Stroud's
Case. So if any Act of Parliament gives to any to hold, or to have Conusans of
Pleas of all manner of Pleas arising before him within his Manor of D. yet he
shall hold no Plea, to which himself is party; for, as has been said, iniquum
est aliquem suae rei esse judicem. 5. If he shall forfeit 5 li. for one month
by the first clause, and shall be punished for practicing at any time by the
second clause, two absurdities would follow; 1. That one should be punished not
only twice, but many times for one and the same offense; And the Divine says,
Quod Deus non agit bis in idipsum; and the Law says, Nemo debet bis puniri pro
uno delicto. 2. It should be absurd, by the first clause to punish practicing
for one month, and not for lesser time, and by the 2. to punish practicing not
only for a day, but at any time; so he shall be punished by the first branch
for one month by the forfeiture of 5 li. and by the 2. by fine and
imprisonment, without any limitation for every time of the month in which any
one does practice Physic. And all these reasons were proved by 2 grounds or
Maxims of Law. 1. Generalis Clausula non porrigitur ad ea quae specialiter sunt
comprehensa. And the Case between Carter and Ringstead, Hill. 34 Eliz. rot.
120. in the Common Pleas, was cited to this purpose, where the Case in effect
was, That A. seized of the Manor of Staple in Odiham in the County of
Southampton in Fee, and also of other lands in Odiham aforesaid in Fee,
suffered a common Recovery of all, and declared the use by Indenture, That the
Recoverer should stand seized of all the lands and tenements in Odiham to the
use of A. and his wife, and to the heirs of his body begotten; and further,
that the Recoverer should stand seized to the use of him, and to the heirs of
his body, and died; and the wife survived, and entered into the said Manor by
force of the said general words. But it was adjudged, That they did not extend
to the said Manor which was specially named; and if it be so indeed a
fortiori, it shall be so in an Act of Parliament, which (as a Will) is to be
expounded according to the intention of the makers. 2. Verba posteriora propter
certitudinem addita, ad priora quae certitudine indigent, sunt referenda. 6 E.
3. 12. Sir Adam de Clydrow Knight brought a Praecipe quod reddat against I. de
Clydrow, and the writ was, Quod just, etc. reddat Manerium de Wicombe and duas
carucatas terrae cum pert. in Clydrow, in that case the Town of Clydrow did not
relate to the Manor, quia non indiget, for a Manor may be demanded without
mentioning that it lies in any Town; but cum pertinentiis, although that it
comes after the Town* shall relate to the Manor, quia indiget. Vide 3 E. 4.
10. the like case. But it was objected, That where by the second clause it was
granted, that the Censors should have supervisum and scrutinium, correctionem
and gubernationem omnium and singulorum Medicorum, etc. they had power to fine
and imprison. To that it was answered, 1. That the same is but part of the
sentence, for by the entire sentence it appears in what manner they shall
have power to punish, for the words are, ac punitionem eorum pro delictis suis
in non been exequendo, saciendo seu utendo illa facultate: so that without
question all their power to correct and punish the Physicians by this clause
i^s only limited to 3 cases, scil. in non been exequendo, faciendo, vel
utendo, etc. Also this word punitionem, is limited and restrained by these
words, Ita quod punitio eorundem Medicorum, etc. sic in praemissis
delinquentium, etc. which words, sic in praemissis delinquentium, limit the
first words in the first part of this sentence, ac punitionem eorum pro
delictis in non been exequendo. 2. It shall be absurd, That in one and the same
sentence the makers of the Act shall give them a general power to punish
without limitation; and a special manner how they shall punish in one and the
same sentence. 3 Hill. 38 Eliz. in a Quo Warranto against the Mayor and
Commonalty of London, it was holden, That where a Grant is made to the Mayor
and Commonalty, that the Mayor for the time being should have plenum and
integrum scrutinium, gubernationem and correctionem omnium and singulorum
Mysteriorum, etc. without granting to them any Court, in which should be legal
proceedings, that the same is good for search, by which discovery may be made
of offenses and defects, which may be punished by the Law in any Court; but it
does not give, nor can give them any irregular or absolute power to correct or
punish any of the Subjects of the Kingdom at their pleasures. 2. It was
objected, That it is incident to every Court created by Letters Patents, or Act
of Parliament, or other Courts of Record, to punish any misdemeanors done in
Court, in disturbance or contempt of the Court, by imprisonment. To which it
was answered, That neither the Letters Patents nor the Act of Parliament has
granted to them any Court, but only an authority, which they ought to pursue,
as it shall be afterward said. 2. If any Court had been granted to them, they
could not by any incident authority implicit granted unto them for any
misdemeanor done in Court, commit him to prison without bail or mainprise,
until he shall be by the commandment of the President and Censors, or their
Successors, delivered, as the Censors have done in this case. 3. There was not
any such misdemeanor for which the Court might imprison him, for he only
showed his case to them, which he was advised by his Council he may justify,
which is not any offense worthy of imprisonment.

The second point. Admitting that the Censors had power by the Act, if they
have pursued their authority or not? And it was resolved by the chief Justice,
Warburton, and Daniel, that they have not pursued it for 6 causes. 1. By the
Act the Censors only have power to impose a fine or amercement; and the
President and Censors do impose the amercement of 5 li. upon the Plaintiff. 2.
The Plaintiff was summoned to appear before the President and Censors, etc. and
did not appear; and therefore he was fined 10 li. whereas the President has
not any authority in that case. 3. The fines and amercements to be imposed by
them by force of the Act, do not belong to them but to the King, for the King
has not granted the fines and amercements to them, and yet the fine is
appointed to be paid to them in proximis Comitiis, and they have imprisoned the
Plaintiff for non-payment thereof. 4. They ought to have committed the
Plaintiff presently by construction of Law, although that no time be limited in
the Act, as in the Stat. of West. cap. 12. De Servientibus, Ballivis, etc. qui
ad compotum reddend' tenentur, etc. cum Dom' hujusmodi servientium dederit eis
auditores compoti, and contingat ipsum in arreragiis super compotum suum
omnibus allocatis and allocandis, arrestentur corpora eorum, and per
testimonium auditorum ejusdem compoti mittantur and liberentur proximae gaolae
Domini Regis in partibus illis, etc. in that case, although that no time be
limited when the Accomptant shall be imprisoned, yet it ought to be presently,
as it is holden in 27 H. 6. 8. and the reason thereof is given in Fogossa's
Case Plow. Com. 17. that the generality of time shall be restrained to the
present time for the benefit of him upon whom the pain shall be inflicted, and
therewith agrees Plow. Com. 206. b. in Stradling's Case. And a Justice of
Peace upon view of the force, ought to commit the offender presently. 5. For as
much as the Censors had their authority by the Letters Patents and Act of
Parliament, which are high matters of Record, their proceedings ought not to be
by word, and so much the rather, because they claimed authority to fine and
imprison. And therefore if Judgment be given against one in the Common Pleas in
a Writ of Recaption, he shall be fined and imprisoned; but if the Writ be
Vicontiel in the County, there he shall not be fined or imprisoned, because
that the Court is not of Record, F. N. B. in bre. de Recaptione, so in 47 F. N.
B. a Plea of Trespass vi and armis does not lie in the County Court, hundred
Court, etc. for they cannot make Record of fine and imprisonment; and regularly
those who cannot make a Record, cannot fine and imprison. And therewith agrees
27 H. 8. Book of Entries: The Auditors make a Record when they commit the
Defendant to prison; A Justice of Peace upon view of the force may commit, but
he ought to make a Record of it. 6. Because the Act of 14 H. 8. has given
power to imprison until he shall be delivered by the President and the
Censors, and their Successors, reason requires that the same be taken
strictly, for the liberty of the Subject (as they pretend) is at their
pleasure: And the same is proved by a Judgment in Parliament in this Case; For
when this Act of 14 H. 8. had given power to the Censors to imprison, yet it
was taken so literally, that the Jailer was not bound to receive them which
they committed to him, and the reason thereof was, because they had authority
to do it without any Court: And thereupon the Statute of 1 Mar. cap. 9. was
made, that the Jailer should receive them upon a pain, and none can be
committed to any prison, if the Jailer cannot receive him: but the first Act
for the cause aforesaid was taken so literally, that no necessary incident was
employed. And where it was objected that this very Act of 1 Mariae has enlarged
the power of the Censors, and that upon the word of the Act; It was clearly
resolved that the said Act of 1 Mariae did not enlarge the power of the Censors
to fine or imprison any person for any cause for which he ought not to be fined
and imprisoned by the said Act of 14 H. 8. For the words of the Act of Q. Mary
are according to the tenor and meaning of the said Act: Also shall send or
commit any Offender or Offenders for his or their offense or disobedience,
contrary to any Article or clause contained in the said Grant or Act, to any
Ward, Gaol, etc. But in this Case Bonham has not done any thing which
appears within this Record, contrary to any Article or clause contained
within the Grant or Act of 14 H. 8. Also the Jailer who refuses shall forfeit
the double value of the fines and amerciaments that any offender or disobedient
shall be assessed to pay; which proves that none shall be received by any
Jailer by force of the Act of 14 H. 8. but he who may be lawfully fined or
amerced by the Act of 14 H. 8. and for that was not Bonham, as by the reasons
and causes aforesaid it appears. And admit that the replication be not
material, and the Defendants have demurred upon it; yet forasmuch as the
Defendants have confessed in the Bar, that they have imprisoned the Plaintiff
without cause, the Plaintiff shall have Judgment. And the difference is, when
the Plaintiff does reply, and by his replication it appears that he has no
cause of action, there he shall never have judgment: But when the Bar is
insufficient in matter, or amounts (as this Case is) to a confession of the
point of the action, and the Plaintiff replyeth and shows the truth of the
matter to enforce his Case, and in Judgment of Law it is not material; yet the
Plaintiff shall have Judgment; for it is true that sometimes the Count shall be
made good by the Bar, and sometimes the Bar by the Replication, and sometimes
the Replication by the Rejoinder, etc. But the difference is when the Count
wantethtime, place or other circumstance, it may be made good by the Bar, so of
the Bar, Replication, etc. as appears in 18 E. 4. 16. b. But when the Count
wants substance, no Bar can make it good; so of the Bar, Replication, etc.
and therewith agree 6 E. 4. 2. a good case, and mark there the words of Choke,
vid. 18 E. 3. 34. b. 44 E. 3. 7. a. 12 E. 4. 6. 6 H. 7. 10. 7 H. 7. 3. 11 H. 4.
24. etc. But when the Plaintiff makes a Replication, Sur-rejoynder, etc. and
thereby it appears, that upon the whole matter and Record the Plaintiff has
no cause of action, he shall never have Judgment, although that the Bar or
remainder be insufficient in matter, for the Court ought to judge upon the
whole Record, and every one shall be intended to make the best of his own case.
Vid. Rigeways case in the 3. part of my Reports 52. And so these differences
were resolved and adjudged between Kendall and Heyer, Mich. 25 and 26 Eliz. in
the Kings Bench. And Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. in the same Court between Gallys and
Burbry. And Coke Chief Justice in the conclusion of his argument did observe 7
things for the better direction of the President and Commonalty of the said
College in time to come. 1. That none can be punished for practicing of
Physic in London, but by forfeiture of 5 li. by the month, which is to be
recovered by the Law. 2. If any practice Physic there for a less time than a
month, that he shall forfeit nothing. 3. If any person prohibited by the
Statute offend in non been exequendo, etc. they may punish him according to the
Statute within the month. 4. Those who may commit to prison by the Statute,
ought to commit presently. 5. The fines which they set, according to the
Statute, belong to the King. 6. They cannot impose a fine or imprison without a
Record of it. 7. The cause for which they impose fine and imprisonment ought to
becertain, for the same is traversable; For although they have the Letters
Patents and an Act of Parliament; yet because the party grieved has not other
remedy, neither by Writ of Error or otherwise, and they are not made Judges,
nor a Court given to them, but have an authority only so to do, the cause of
their commitment is traversable in an action of false imprisonment brought
against them; as upon the Statute of Bankrupts, their Warrant is under the
great Seal, and by Act of Parliament; yet because the party grieved has no
other remedy, if the Commissioners do not pursue the Act and their Commission,
he shall traverse, That he was not a Bankrupt, although the Commissioners
affirm him to be one; as this Term it was resolved in this Court in Trespass
between Cut and Delabarre, where the issue was, Whether William Piercy was
bankrupt or not, who was found by the Commissioners to be a bankrupt: a
fortiori, in the Case at Bar, the cause of the imprisonment is traversable; for
otherwise the party grieved may be perpetually without just cause imprisoned by
them: But the Record of a force made by one Justice of Peace is not
traversable, because he does the same as Judge, by the Statutes of 15 R. 2. and
8 H. 6. and so there is a difference when one makes a Record as a Judge, and
when he does a thing by a special authority, as they did in the Case at Bar,
and not as a Judge. And afterward for the said two last points Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff, nullo contradicente. And I acquainted Sir Thomas
Fleming Chief Justice of the Kings Bench with this Judgment, and with the
reasons and causes thereof, who approved of the Judgment which we had given:
And the same is the first judgment upon the said Branch concerning fine and
imprisonment which has been given since the making of the said Charter and
Acts of Parliament, and therefore I thought it worthy to be reported and
published.

Dr. Bonham's Case as reported by Brownlow and Goldesborough, Trinity 7 Jac.
1609. in the Common Bench.
THomas Bonham brought an Action of false imprisonment against Dr. Atkins, and
diverse Action of false imprisonment.
other Doctors of Physic: The Defendants justified, that King H. 8. Anno
Decimo of his Reign, founded a College of Physicians, and pleaded the Letters
Patents of the Corporation: And that they have authority by that to choose a
President, etc. as by the Letters Patents, etc. and then plead the Statute of
32 H. 8. Cap. 40. And that the said Doctor Atkins was chosen President
according to the said Act and Letters Patents. And by the said Act and Letters
Patents it is provided, That none shall Practice in the City of London or the
Suburbs of it, or within seven miles of the said City, or exercise the faculty
of Physic, if he be not thereto admitted by the Letters of the President and
College sealed with their Common Seal, under the penalty of a hundred shillings
for every month that he (not being admitted) shall exercise the said faculty.
Further we will and grant for us and our Successors, to the President and
College of the Society for the time being, and their Successors for ever, that
they may choose four every year, that shall have the overseeing and searching,
corecting and governing of all in the said City, being Physicians, using the
faculty of Medicine in the said City, and of other Physicians abroad
whatsoever, the faculty of Physicking by any means frequenting and using within
the said City or Suburbs thereof, or within seven miles in compass of the said
City, and of punishing them for their offenses, in not well executing, making
and using it: And that the punishing of those Physicians using the said
faculty, so in the Premises offending, by fines, amerciaments, imprisonments
of their bodies, and by other reasonable and fitting ways shall be executed.
Note, the Preamble of these Letters Patents is, Quod cum regii officii nostri
munus arbitremur, ditionis nostrae hominum foelicitati omni ratione consulere,
Id autem vel imprimis fore, si improborum conaminibus tempestive occurramus,
apprime necessarium fore duximus, improborum quoque hominum, qui medicinam
magis avaritiae suae causa, quam ullius bonae conscientiae fiducia
profitebuntur, unde rudi and credulae plebi plurima incommoda oriuntur,
audaciam compescere. And that the Plaintiff practiced in London, without
admission of the College; and being summoned to appear at the College, and
examined if he would give satisfaction to the College according to the said
Letters Patents and Statute, he answered, that he had received his Degree to be
Doctor of Physic by the University of Cambridge, and was allowed by the
University to practice, and confessed that he had practiced within the said City,
and as he conceived it was lawful for him to practice there; That upon that
the said President and Commonalty fined him to a hundred shillings, and for not
paying of that, and his other contempt, committed him to Prison. To which the
Plaintiff replied as aforesaid, and upon this demurrer was joined. And Harris
for Serj. Harris the younger.
the Defendants says, That this has been at another time adjudged in the
King's bench, where the said College imposed a fine of five pound upon a Doctor
of Physic which practiced in London without their admission, and for the
non-payment of it, brought an action of debt, and adjudged that it lay well;
and that the Statute of 32 H. 8. extends as well to Graduates as to others, for
it is general, and Graduates are not excepted in the Statute, nor in the
Letters Patents, and all the mischiefs intended to be redressed by this, are
not expressed in that; and the Statute shall not be intended to punish
Impostors only, but all other which practice without examination and
admittance. For two things are necessary to Physicians, that is, learning and
experience; and upon that there is a Proverb, Experto creed Roberto. And the
Statute intends, that none shall practice here but those which are most
learned, and expert more than ordinary. And for that the Statute provides, that
none shall practice here without allowance and examination by the Bishop of
London and the Dean of Paul's and four learned Doctors; But in other places the
examination is referred only to the Bishop of the Diocese; The reason of the
difference is, for that London is the heart of the Kingdom, And here the King
and his Court, the Magistrates and Judges of the Law, and other Magistrates are
resident. And with this agrees the Government of other well-governed Cities in
Italy and other Nations, as it appears by the preamble of the said Letters
Patents. And it appears by the Statute, that this was not intended to extend to
Impostors only, for that the word Impostor is not mentioned in the Statute:
And the Statute provides, that they shall be punished as well for doing and
using, as for ill using: And also it is provided by the Statute of 1. Mary 1
Parliament Chap. 9. That the Gardians, Gaolers, or Keepers of the Wards, Gaols
and Prisons within the City and Precinct of it, shall receive into their
Prisons all such person and persons so offending, which are sent or committed
to them, and those safely shall keep without Bail, till the party so committed
shall be discharged by the said President, or other person by the said College
to that authorized; By which it appears, that the Gaolers and Keepers of
Prisons have power to retain such which are committed: That then the President
shall have power to commit; for things implied are as strong as things
expressed; as it appears by the Com. Stradling and Morgans Case: And also in
the Earl of Leicester's Case, where it is agreed, that Ioynture before
Coverture cannot be waved; and this is implied within the Statute of 27 H. 8.
And so the Statute of 2 E. 6. provides that after seven years Tithes shall be
paid, by which it is collected by Implication, that during seven years Tithes
shall not be paid; And so he prayed Judgment for the Defendants.

Dodridge, Sergeant of the King, for the Plaintiff said, That the Statute of 24
H. 8. Chap. 5. and the Letters Patents give power to four Censors to punish for
ill executing, doing and using the faculty of a Physician; and the Plaintiff
was not charged for ill executing of it, doing or using: But it is averred,
Where revera the Plaintiff was nothing sufficient to exercise the said Art, and
being examined, less apt to answer, thereupon they forbad him, and being sent
for and not appearing, he was amerced five pound, and order that he should be
arrested; and being arrested, upon his appearance being examined if he would
submit himself to the said College, he answered and confessed that he had
practiced within the said City, being a Doctor of Physic as aforesaid, as well
to him it was lawful, and that he would practice here again, for which he was
committed to Prison: so that he was amerced for his contempt in the using of
the said Art, and committed to Prison for his answer upon his examination: And
he conceived that there are two questions considerable.

First, if the College may restrain a Doctor of Physic of his Practice in
London.

Secondly, admitting that they may, then if these are the causes for which they
may commit by their Letters Patents. The first reason is drawn from the Letters
Patents, and the said Statutes, in which he said, that the intent of the King
was the end of his work: And this intent shall be expounded for three Reasons
apparent in the words contained in the Grant.

First, Tempestive improborum Conatibus occurrere.

Secondly, Improborum hominum, qui Medicinam magis avaritiae suae causa, quam
ullius bonae conscientiae fiducia profitebuntur, audaciam compescere.

Thirdly, which would invite learned men to practice here, Collegium perpetuum
doctorum and gravium virorum qui Medicinam in Urbe nostra Londino and Suburbiis
infra septem millia passuum ab urbe quaquaversus, public exerceant, institui
volumus and imperamus. And further he says, that there are three sorts of men
which meddle with the body of a man.

The First is the Learned man, which reads all books extant, and his knowledge
is speculative, and by that he knew the nature of all Simples.

The second is Practick, the knowledge of which is only his experience; he may
give probatum est; but is ignorant of the cause of the disease, and the nature
of the things which he applies for the cure of it.

And the third is an Impostor, which takes upon him the knowledge which he has
not. And every of these the College may punish for Male utendo, faciendo, vel
exequendo, by which way they will. And this was not the first care which was
had; for in the 9 H. 5. was a private Act made for Physicians, by which there
is great regard to them which are learned and educated in the University; And
for that the Act provides that they shall not be prejudicial to any of the
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge (and with this agrees 3 H. 8. 11.) and the
privilege of them. And the Docti and graves homines, mentioned in the Letters
Patents, are the learned men mentioned in the Act; for the Statute provides,
that they shall punish according to these Statutes, and late Edicts. And by the
former Laws, the Universities and their privileges were excepted, and by their
former Statutes the Letters Patents ought to be directed, for it is referred to
them. Also the Statutes of this Realm have always had great respect to the
Graduates of the Universities, and it is not without cause, for sudavit and
alsit, and has no other reward but this Degree, which is Doctor. And for that
the Statute of 21 H. 8. prefers Graduates, and provides that Doctors of
Divinity, or Batchelors shall be capable of two Benefices with Cure without
dispensation: And so 13 Eliz. provides that none shall be presented to a
Benefice above the value of thirty pound per annum, if he be not a Doctor or
Bachelor of Divinity. And to the objection that none shall practice in London
or seven miles circuit of it without license, that this clause shall be
expounded according to the matter, and to that he agreed; for the other
branches of the Statute are made to cherish grave and learned men, and
therefore it shall not be intended, that this branch was made for the
punishment of those, but of others which the Statute intended to punish.

And to the second Objection, that every Doctor is not the learned and grave
man intended within the Statute, for the knowledge of many of them is only
speculative without practice; to that he answered, That all their study is
practice, and that if they have no practice of themselves, then they attend
upon others which practice, and apply themselves to know the nature of Simples.

And to the third Objection, that in London ought to be choice men, for the
Statute appoints that they shall be examined by the Bishop and Dean, and four
others at least; and for that there is a more strict course for them, than in
other places; to that it is agreed. But he said, that in the University there
is a more strict course than this; for here he ought to be publicly approved
by many after he has been examined, and answered in the Schools to diverse
questions, and allowed by the Congregation house: And 35 H. 6. 55. Doctor is no
addition, but a Degree, (quia gradatim and progressione Doctrinae provenit) to
that, and that Doctor is Teacher, and that he was first taught by others as a
Scholar, and afterward he is Master; and Doctor dicitur a docendo, quia docere
permittitur, and they are called Masters of their faculty; and that the
original of Doctor came of the Synagogue of Jews, where there were Doctors of
Law; and it appears that they had their Ceremonies in the time of H. 1. And
when a man brings with him the Ensign of doctrine, there is no reason that he
should be examined again, for then if they will not allow of him, he shall not
be allowed, though he be a learned and grave man; and it was not the intent of
the King to make a Monopoly of this practice.

And to the second point that he propounded, it seems that the justification is
not good; which is, Quia non comparuit upon summons, he was amereed, and
ordered that he should be arrested; and being arrested, and examined if he
would submit himself to the College, he answered that he was a Doctor, and had
practiced and would practice within the said City, as he conceived he might
lawfully do; and for that showing of this Case he was committed to prison. And
he conceived two things upon the Charter.

First, that it does not inhibit a Doctor to practice, but punishes him for
ill using, exercising, and making; and secondly, that it impowers to imprison
the Empirick and Impostor; And so prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff.

And after in Hilary Term in the same year this Case was argued by all the
Justices of the Common Bench two several days. The first day it was argued by
Foster, Daniel and Warburton Justices, at whose arguments I was not present,
but Foster argued against the Plaintiff, and Daniel and Warburton with him,
that the action of false imprisonment was well maintainable. And the second day
the same Case was argued again by Walmesley Justice, and Coke Chief Justice;
and Walmesley argued as follows; that is, That the Statute of 3 H. 8. was in
the negative, that no person within the City of London or seven miles thereof,
take upon him to exercise or occupy as Physician or Surgeon, etc. And he
does not know in any Case where the words of the Statute are negative, that
they admit any interpretation against that, but one only, and that is the
Statute of Marlebridge Chap. 4. which provides that no Lord shall distrain in
one County, and the beast distrained drive into another County. In which case
though the words are negative, yet if the Lord distrain in one County, he may
drive the beasts to his Manor in another County, of which the lands, in which
the distress was taken, were held. But it is equity and reason in this Case,
that the Statute should admit such exception; for it is not of Malice, but that
the beasts may remain within his fee. But in the principal Case there is not
the like reason nor equity. And also the King H. 8. in his Letters Patents
recites as follows, that is, Cum regii officii nostri munus arbitremur,
ditionis nostrae hominum felicitati omni ratione consulere, id autem vel
imprimis fore, si improborum conatibus tempestive occurramus, apprime
necessarium duximus improborum quoque hominum, qui Medicinam magis avaritiae
suae causa quam ullius bonae conscientiae fiducia profitebuntur, etc. By which
it appears, that it is the office of a King to survey his Subjects, and he is
as a Physician to cure their maladies, and to remove Leprosies amongst them,
and also to remove all fumes and smells, which may offend or be prejudicial to
their health, as it appears by the several Writs in these several Cases
provided. And so if a man be not right in his Wits, the King is to have the
protection and Government of him, lest he being infirm, waste or consume his
Lands or Goods. And it is not sufficient for him that his Subjects live, but
that they should live happily, and he discharges not his office, if his
Subjects live a life, but if they live and flourish; and he has cure as well
of their bodies as of their lands and goods; for health for the body is as
necessary as virtue to the mind. And the King H. 8. to express his
extraordinary care of his Subjects made the said Act in the third year of his
Reign, which was the beginning of his Essence, to that purpose. And by the
Common Law, any Physician which was allowed by the University, might practice
and exercise the said faculty within any place within England, without any
dispensation, examination, or approbation of any: but after the making of the
said Act made in the third year of King H. 8. none may practice, exercise or
occupy as Physician or Surgeon within the City of London and seven miles
thereof, if he be not first examined, approved and admitted by the Bishop of
London and the Dean of Paul's for the time being, calling to them four Doctors
of Physic or Surgeons, etc. And that no practiser may occupy or exercise
the said faculty out of the said Precincts, if he be not first examined,
approved and admitted by the Bishop of the Diocese, or in his absence, by his
Vicar General, every of them calling unto him such expert persons in the said
faculty, as their discretions think convenient. And the reason of this
difference, as he conceived was for that in this City and the said Precincts,
the King and all his Council, and all the Judges and Sages of the Law, and
diverse other men of quality and condition live and continue, and also the place
is more subject to infection, and the air more pestiferous; and therefore there
is more necessity, that greater care, diligence, and examination be made of
those which practiced here in London and the Precincts aforesaid, than of those
that practice in other places of the Realm; for in other places the people have
better air, and use more exercise, and are not so subject to infection; and
therefore there is no cause that such care should be used for them, for they
are not in such danger. And in the Statute there is not any exception of the
Universities nor of those which are Graduates there, and therefore they shall
be tried by the said Act; and the Statute of 14 H. 8. Chap. 5. only excepts
those which are Graduats of Oxford or Cambridge which have accomplished all
things for their form without any Grace; and if this exception shall be
intended to extend to others, then all the Universities shall be excepted by
it, and such exception was too general. And over he said, that the Plaintiff
gave absurd and contemptuous answer, when he being cited before them said, that
he would not be ruled nor directed by them (being such grave and learned men)
And for that he has practiced against the Statute, he was worthily punished
and committed; for it should be a vain Law, if it did not provide punishment
for them that offend against it. And Bracton says, Nihil est habere Leges, si
non sit unus qui potest Leges tueri; and for this here are four grave and
discreet men to defend and maintain the Law, and to punish all Offenders
against it, according to the Statute, by imprisonment of their bodies and other
reasonable ways; and the said four men have the search as well of those men, as
of other Medicines. And the Statute of 1 Mary provides that the Keepers of
Prisons shall receive all which are committed by the said four learned and
grave men. And though there be great care committed to them by the said
Statute, and the said Letters Patents, yet there is a greater trust reposed in
them than this; for we commit to them our lives, when we receive Physic of
them; and that not without cause, for they are men of gravity, learning and
discretion; and for that they have power to make Laws, which is the office of
the Parliament; for those which are so learned may be trusted with any thing;
and for the better making of these they have power to assemble all the Commons
of their Corporation, and the King allows of that by his Letters Patents, for
it is made by a congregation of wise, learned and discreet men; and the Statute
of 1 Mary inflicts punishment upon contempts, and not for any other offenses;
And they hold a Court, and so may commit, as every other Court may, for a
contempt of Common Right, without Act of Parliament or Information, or other
legal form of Proceeding thereupon; as it appears by 7 H. 6. for a contempt
committed in a Leet, the Steward committed the offender to Prison, and it was
absurd to conceive that the Statute will allow of Commitment without cause. And
it is a mavelous thing that when good Laws shall be made for our health and
wealth also, yet we will so pinch upon them, that we will not be tried by men
of experience, practice and learning, but by the University, where a man may
have his Degree by grace without merit. And so for these reasons he concluded
that this action is not maintainable.

Coke Chief Justice said, That the Cause which was pleaded why the Plaintiff
was committed, was, for that he had exercised Physic within the City of London
by the space of a month, and did not very fitly answer, for which it was
ordained by the Censors that he should pay a hundred shillings, and that he
should forbear his practice, and that he did not forbear; and then being warned
of that, and upon that being summoned to appear, did not appear; and for that
it was ordained that he should be arrested; and that after he was summoned
again, and then he appeared, and denied to pay the hundred shillings, and said,
that he would practice, for he was a Doctor of Cambridge; and upon that it was
ordained that he should be committed, till he should be delivered by the
Doctors of the College; and upon this was the Demurrer joined. And in pleading
the Plaintiff said, that he was a Doctor of Philosophy and Physic; upon which
the Lord Chief Justice took occasion to remember a saying of Galen, that is,
Ubi Philosophia desinit, ibi Medicina incipit, and he said the only question
of this Case depends not upon the payment of the said hundred shillings, but
upon the words of the Letters Patents of the King, and the said two Statutes,
the words of which are, Concessimus eidem Praesidenti, etc. Quod nemo in dicta
Civitate, aut per septem milliaria in circuitu ejusdem exerceat dictam
facultatem, nisi ad hoc per dictum Praesidentem and communitatem seu
Successores eorum qui pro tempore fuerint admissus sit, per ejusdem
Praesidentis and Collegii literas sigillo suo communi sigillatas, sub poena
centum solidorum pro quolibet mense, quo, non admissus, eandem facultatem
exercuerit, dimidium inde nobis, and haeredibus nostris, and dimidium dicto
Praesidenti and Collegio applicandum. Et praeterea volumus and concedimus pro
nobis, etc. Quod per Praesidentem and Collegii communitatem pro tempore
existentes, and eorum Successores in perpetuum, quatuor singulis annis per
ipsos eligantur, qui habeant supervisum, scrutinium, and correctionem and
gubernationem omnium and singulorum dictae Civitatis Medicorum utentium
facultate Medicinae in eadem Civitate, ac aliorum Medicorum forinsecorum
quorumcunque facultatem illam Medicinae aliquo modo frequentantium and utentium
infra eandem Civitatem and Suburbia ejusdem sive septem milliaria in circuitu
ejusdem Civitatis, ac punitionem eorundem pro delictis suis in non been
exequendo, faciendo and utendo illa; nec non supervisum and scrutinium omnium
medicinarum and earum receptionum, per praedictos Medicos sive aliquem eorum
hujusmodi ligeis nostris pro eorum infirmitatibus curandis and sanandis, dand',
imponend', and utend', quoties and quando opus fuerit, pro commodo and
utilitate eorundem ligeorum nostrorum; Ita quod punitio hujusmodi medicorum
utentium dicta facultate medicinae sic in praemissis delinquentium, per Fines,
Amerciamenta, Imprisonamenta corporum suorum and per alias vias rationabiles
and congruas exequatur, as it appears in Rastal, Physicians 8018. 392. So that
there are two distinct Clauses.

The first, if any exercise the said faculty by the space of a month without
admission by the President, etc. he shall forfeit a hundred shillings for every
month; be that good or ill, it is not material, the time is here only
material; for if he exercise it for such a time, he shall forfeit as aforesaid.

The second Clause is, that the President, etc. shall have Scrutinium
Medicorum, etc. and punitionem eorum pro delictis suis in non been faciendo,
utendo and exequendo, etc. And for that the President and the College may
commit any delinquent to Prison: And this he concluded upon the words of the
Statute; and he agreed with Walmesly, that the King has had extraordinary care
of the health of his Subjects; Et Rex censetur habere omnes Arts in scrinio
Pectoris, and he has here pursued the course of the best Physicians, that is,
Removens and promovens, removens improbos illos qui nullius bonae conscientiae
fiducia profitebuntur, and audaces, and promovens ad sanitatem* And for that
the Physician ought to be profound, grave, discreet, grounded in learning, and
soundly studied, and from him comes the Medicine which is removens and
promovens.

And it is an old Rule, that a man ought to take care, that he do not commit
his Soul to a young Divine, his body to a young Physician, and his goods or
other estate to a young Lawyer, for In Juvene Theologo est Conscientiae
detrimentum, in Juvene Legislatore bursi decrementum, and in Juvene Medico
Coemeterii incrementum; for in these cannot be the privity, discretion, and
profound learning which is in the aged: And he denied that the College of
Physicians is to be compared to the University, for it is subordinate to that,
Cantabrigia est Academia nostra nobilissima, totius Regni oculus and sol, ubi
humanitas and doctrina simul sluunt: But he said, when he names Cambridge, he
does not exclude Oxford, but places them in equal rank: But he would always
name Cambridge first, for that was his mother: And he says, that there is not
any time, pro non been faciendo, utendo and exequendo, for this non suscipit
magis and minus. for so a man may grievously offend in one day, and therefore
in such a Case, his punishment shall be by Fines, Amerciaments, Imprisonments
of their Bodies and other ways, etc. But if they practice well, though it be an
offense against the Letters Patents and the Statute, yet the punishment shall
be but pecuniary, and he shall not be imprisoned; for if he offend the body of
a man, it is reason that his body shall be punished, for Eodem modo quo quis
delinquit, eodem punietur; but if a grave and learned Doctor or other, come and
practice well in London by the space of three weeks and then departs, he is not
punishable by the said College, though it be without admission, for
peradventure such a one is better acquainted with the nature and disposition of
my body, and for that more fit to cure any Malady in that than another which is
admitted by the College; and he said, that it was absurd to punish such a one,
for he may practice in such manner in despite of the College; for all the Lords
and Nobles of the Realm, which have their private Physicians, which have
acquaintance with their bodies, repair to this City, and to exclude those of
using their advice, were a hard and absurd exposition, for the old verse is,
Corporis auxilium Medico commit sodali: And also he said, that the said
President and College cannot commit any Physician which exercises the said
faculty without admission for the space of a Month, nor bring their Action
before themselves, nor levy that by any other way or means; But ought to have
their action, or exhibit an Information upon the Statute, as it appears by the
Book of Entries; for they ought to pursue their power which is given to them by
the Statute; for otherwise the penalty being given, the one Moiety to them, and
the other to the King, they shall be Judges in propria causa, and shall be
Summoners, Sheriffs, Judges and parties also; which is absurd. For if the King
grant to one by his Letters Patents under the great Seal, that he may hold
Plea, although he be a party, and if the King does not appoint another Judge
than the Grantee which is Party, the Grant is void, though it be confirmed by
Parliament, as it appears by 8 H. 6. 44 Ed. 3. The Abbot of Reading's Case; for
it is said by Herle in 8 Ed. 3. 30. Tregor's Case, that if any Statutes are
made against Law and Right, they are null; and so are these, which make any man
Judge in his own Cause; and so in 27 H. 6. Fitz. Annuity 41. that the Statute
of Carlisle will, that the Order of Cistertians and Augustines, which have
Covent and Common Seal, that the Common Seal shall be in keeping of the Prior,
which is under the Abbot, and four others which are the most Sages of the
house, and that any Deed sealed with the Common Seal which is not so in keeping
shall be void; and the opinion of the Court was, that this is a void Statute,
for it is impertinent to be observed, seeing when the Seal is in their keeping,
the Abbot cannot Seal any thing with it, and when it is in the hands of the
Abbot, it is out of their keeping, ipso facto: And if the Statute shall be
observed, every Common seal shall be defeated by one simple surmise, which
cannot be tried: and for that, the Statute was adjudged void and repugnant. And
so the Statute of Gloucester which gives Cessavit after the Cesser by two years
to be brought by the Lessor himself, was a good and equitable Statute: But the
Statute of Westminster 2. Chap. 3. which gives Cessavit to the Heir for Cesser
in time of his Ancestor, was judged an unreasonable Statute in 33 Ed. 3. for
that the Heir cannot have the Arrearages due in the time of his father,
according to the Statute of Gloucester, and for that it shall be void. And also
the Physicians of the College could not punish any by Fine, and also by
Imprisonment; for no man ought to be twice punished for one offense. And the
Statute of 1 Mariae does not give any power to them to commit for any offense
which was no offense within the first Statutes, and therefore he ought not to
be committed by the said Statute of 1 Mariae: But admitting that they may
commit, yet they have mistaken it; for they demand the whole hundred shillings,
and one half of that belongs to the King: And also they ought to commit him
forthwith, as well as Auditors which have authority by Parliament, to commit
him that is found in Arrearages: But if they do not commit him forthwith, they
cannot commit him afterward, as it appears by 27 H. 6. 9. So two Justices of
the Peace may view a force and make a Record of it, and commit the offenders to
Prison, but this ought to be in flagranti Orient: And if he do not commit
those immediately upon the View, he cannot commit them afterward. And the
Physicians have no Court, but if they have, yet they ought to make a Record of
their commitment, for so was every Court of Justice to do: But they have not
made any Record of it. And Auditors and Justices of Peace ought to make
Records, as it appears by the Book of Entries. So that admitting that they may
commit, yet they ought to do it forthwith; But in this case they cannot commit
till the party shall be delivered by them, for this is against Law and Justice;
and no Subject may do it, but till he be delivered by due course of Law; for
the Commitment is not absolute, but the cause of it is traversable, and for
that ought to Justify for special cause. For if the Bishop returns, that he
refuses a Clerk for that he is Schismaticus inveteratus, this is not good, but
he ought to return the particular matter, so that the Court may adjudge of
that: Though it be a matter of Divinity, and out of their science, yet they by
conference may be informed of it; and so of Physic. And they cannot make any
new Laws, but such only which are for the better government of the old. And
also he said plainly, that it appears by the Statute of 1 Mariae, That the
former Statutes shall not be taken by Equity, for by these the President and
Commons have power to commit a delinquent to Prison; and this shall be
intended, if they shall be taken by Equity, that every Jailer ought to receive
him which is so committed: But when it is provided by 1 Mariae, specially, that
every Jailer shall receive such Offenders; by this it appears, That the former
Statute shall not be taken in Equity: And so he concluded, that Judgment shall
be entered for the Plaintiff, which was done accordingly.

College of Physicians versus Butler. Sir William Jones's Reports, p. 261.
THe President of the College and Comminalty of the faculty of Physic London
brought debt against one George Butler: The Writ was, quod reddat Domino Regi
and Praesidenti Collegii ac Comminal' facultat' Medicor' London, Qui tam pro
Domino Rege quam pro seipso sequitur 60. li. quas eis debet. And the
Declaration was in the name of the said President by the said name, qui tam pro
Domino Rege quam pro seipso sequitur, etc. which contained the Charter of H. 8.
made Anno Regni sui 10. and confirmed by Act of Parliament Anno Regni sui 14.
as it is contained in the Statute of 14 H. 8. and that the said Defendant
minime ponderans the said Statute or the Penalty thereof, exercised the faculty
of Physic in London (although he was not admitted so to do by the President
and the College or Comminalty of the faculty of Physic London) by the space of
12 months before the said Action brought, per quod actio accrevit eidem Domino
Regi and dicto Praesidenti qui tam pro dicto Domino Rege quam pro seipso
sequitur, etc. ad exigend' and habend' of the said Defendant pro dicto Domino
Rege and eodem Praesidente and Colleg' praedict' 60 li. videlicet 5 li. pro
quolibet mense praedict' 12 Mensium praedict'. Tamen Desendens praedicto Domino
Regi and Praesidenti non reddidit; unde the said President said, that he was
damnified to the value of 100 li.

The Defendant pleaded the Statute of 34 H. 8. whereby liberty is given to
every one of the Kings Subjects that has knowledge and experience of the
nature of Herbs, Roots, Waters, or the operation of them by speculation or
practice, to exercise, apply and administer to any external ulcer, wound,
apostumation, outward tumor sive morbo alicui alio any Herb, Ointment, Bath,
Pultess or Plaster according to the experience and science of the said diseases
or other Maladies eisdem consimil. or Potion pro calculo, Strangury, vel febr.
without any impediment, any Statute or other thing to the contrary. And says,
that he was a Subject, and having experience and science by speculation and
practice in the nature of Herbs, Roots and Waters, applied and ministered to
diverse of the Kings subjects Herbs, Ointment, Bath, Pultess, Plasters and
Potion to Ulcers, Diseases, Maladies, Strangury and Ague, and talibus aliis
morbis illis consimilibus, prout ei been licuit. And to the residue pleaded Not
guilty. The Plaintiff replied to the first Plea and pleaded the Statute of 1
Mariae whereby the said Charter and the said Act of 14 H. 8. was confirmed in
the whole. Whereupon the Defendant demurred and showed for cause of Demurrer,
that the Replication was a departure from the Declaration. And upon Argument in
the Common Pleas Judgment was given by the opinion of all the Judges for the
Plaintiff: and thereupon Error was brought in the Kings Bench. Two Errors were
assigned; the one was the departure, the second was, because that the Writ was
in the name of the King and the President, and the Declaration was in the name
of the Informer also. And after argument at the Bar by Council on both sides,
the Judges delivered their opinions. The Chief Justice began, and then Jones,
Whitlock and Crook. They all said, that Judgment ought to be affirmed. First,
they agreed, that the Writ and Declaration were good: and although some
Precedents be, that upon a penal Law the Writ be to answer the Informer qui tam
pro seipso quam pro Domino Rege sequitur; Yet they thought that the most proper
and better way of a Writ was to answer the King and Informer; for the debt was
given to them by moieties; therefore it is not so proper to demand all for the
Informer, and yet to have a several judgment for the King and the Informer for
the moieties: and so is Partridge and Crokers case in the Comment. But when it
is by information, there it shall be that the Informer informs for the King and
himself. Another exception was taken to the Writ, because it is in the name of
the President and not of the College also; And also it was contrary in the end
of the Declaration, where it is said unde actio accrevit to the said King and
President for to have 60 li. of the Defendant: For the King one Moiety, and for
the President and College the other Moiety. But it was adjudged by the Court,
that notwithstanding it was good; for First, although the Incorporation was by
the name of President and College, notwithstanding the suite is by the Charter
given to the President, and there may be a Corporation by one name, to purchase
lands and otherwise, yet it shall sue by another name. 11 E. 1. a Corporation
was by the name of Master, Wardens, Brothers and Sisters of Rouncevill, and by
the said Patent it is said they should sue by the name of Master and Wardens of
Rouncevill. 2. Although that the Action is given by way of suite to the
President only, yet the Recovery and money recovered shall be to the President
and College; therefore the Conclusion for to have the money to the President
and College was held good. The 3. point was resolved, that the Plea in Bar was
not good; for the liberty given is disjunctive for outward medicines to use
Plasters, Ointment, Bathes, etc. and for 3 diseases (to wit) the Stone,
Strangury and Agues only; yet they jumble all together, that he ministered the
Ointments and Potions to all the said Maladies, which cannot be, for he may not
administer a Potion unless to the said 3 diseases and no other. 4. It was
resolved that it was not any departure, but that the Replication was subsequent
and pursuant to the Declaration. But for the main matter they said nothing (to
wit) whether the Statute of 1 Mariae took away the force of the Statute of 34
H. 8. for they gave their Judgment upon the Bar by reason it was naught; Only
Crook spoke to this point, and it seemed to him that the Statute of 34 H. 8. is
not repealed or avoided by 1 Mariae.

Butler versus the President of the College of Physicians, Pasch. 7 Car. 1.
Rot. 519. Crooke's Reports 3 part, p. 256.
ERror of a Judgment upon a Demurrer in the Common Bench. The first Error
assigned was, Because Term. Trin. ann. 8 Car. 1. in B. R.
the Record was Ad respondendum Domino Regi and Praesidenti Collegii, etc. Qui
tam pro Domino Rege, quam pro seipso sequitur, quod reddat eis Sexaginta
libras; unde idem Praesidens qui tam, etc. dicit* etc. Whereas the Action ought
to have been brought by the President only qui tam, etc. and not by the King
and President, etc. Sed non allocatur; For being an Original Writ, the Writ is
most often so, and sometimes the other way. And they conceived it good both
ways. But Informations are always, that the party qui tam for the King quam pro
seipso sequitur, etc. Vide Plowd. 77. New book of Entries 160. Old Book of
Entries, 143. 373. The second Error was, that the Replication was a departure
from the Count; for the Count sets forth, That King Henry the Eighth anno
decimo regni sui incorporavit (and per le Statut. of decimo quarto Henrici
octavi confirmavit) the College of Physicians by the name of the President,
etc. that no man should practice Physic in London, or within seven miles,
without license under the Seal of the College, upon the Penalty of 5 li. for
every month that he so practiced, the one moiety unto the King, the other unto
the President of the College, to the use of the said College. And for that the
Defendant not being allowed, etc. had practiced Physic for twelve months in
London, the said Action was brought, etc. The Defendant pleads the Statute of
trices^mo quarto Henrici Octavi, cap. 8. That every one who has science and
experience of the nature of Herbs, Roots and Waters, or of the operation of the
same by speculation or practice, may minister or apply in and to any outward
Sore, Vncome, Wound, Aposthumations, outward swelling or disease, any Herb,
Ointments, Baths, Pultess, or Emplasters, according to their cunning,
experience and knowledge, etc. or drink for the Stone and Strangury, or Agues,
in any part of the Realm, without suite, vexation, etc. any Act or Statute to
the contrary notwithstanding. And that he having skill in the nature of Herbs,
Roots, and Waters by speculation and practice, applied to persons requiring his
skill, Herbs, Ointments, Baths, Drinks, etc. to their Sores, Vncomes, Wounds,
and for the Stone and Strangury or Agues, and to all other diseases in the said
Statute mentioned, prout ei been licuit. Et quoad aliquam aliam practisationem
seu facultatem medicinae aliter vel alio modo, quod non est culpabilis. Et de
hoc ponit, etc. And makes his averment, Et hoc paratus est verificare. The
Plaintiff replies and shows the Statute of primo Mariae capite nono, which
confirms the Charter of Decimo Henrici octavi, and the Statute of Decimo quarto
Henrici octavi, and appoints, that it shall be in force notwithstanding any
Statute or Ordinance to the contrary. And upon this it was demurred, because it
is a departure; for it intitles him by another Act, viz. the Statute of primo
Mariae, which is not mentioned in the Count: and therefore 'twas assigned for
Error. But all the Court here conceived, That it is no departure, because it
fortifies the Count, and is as to revive the Statute of decimo quarto Henrici
octavi, if it were repealed in this particular by the Statute of tricesimo
quarto Henrici octavi: And for that the Case of Woodhead was shown to the
Court, Mich. 42 and 43 Eliz. rot. 397. where the President of the College of
All Souls brings an action upon the Case for taking Toll in --, and shows a
Charter of vicesimo sexto Henrici sexti to be discharged of Toll; The Defendant
pleaded the Act of Resumption of Liberties granted by Henry the sixth, made --,
and so the liberty gone. The Plaintiff pleaded a reviver of them by the Statute
of quarto Henrici septimi: And it was held to be no departure, but as it were a
confession and avoiding. The third and principal Error assigned was, if the
Statute of tricesimo quarto Henrici octavi be not repealed by the Statute of
primo Mariae; and if not, Whether the Defendant has made a sufficient
Justification? And Quoad that, whether the said Statute be repealed, the Court
was not resolved. But Richardson Chief Justice conceived it was repealed by
primo Mariae, by the general words, any Act or Statute to the contrary of the
Act of decimo quarto Henrici octavi, notwithstanding. But I conceived, that the
Act of tricesimo quarto Henrici octavi, not mentioning the Statute of decimo
quarto Henrici octavi, was for Physicians; but the part of the Act of tricesimo
quarto Henrici octavi was concerning Surgeons and their applying outward
Medicines to outward Sores and Diseases; And drinks only for the Stone,
Strangullion, and Ague; That Statute was never intended to be taken away by the
Act of primo Mariae. But to this point Jones and Whitlock would not deliver
their opinions. But admitting, the Statute of tricesimo quarto Henrici octavi
be in force, yet they all resolved, the Defendants Plea was naught, and not
warranted by the Statute; For he pleads, That he applied and ministered
Medicines, Plasters, Drinks, Ulceribus, Morbis, and Maladiis, Calculo,
Strangurio, Febribus, and aliis in Statuto mentionatis; so he leaves out the
principal word in the Statute (Externis) and does not refer and show, That he
ministered Potions for the Stone, Strangullion, or Ague, as the Statute
appoints, to these three Diseases only, and to no other. And by his Plea his
Potions may be ministered to any other sickness: Wherefore they all held his
Plea was naught for this cause, and that Judgment was well given against him;
Whereupon Judgment was affirmed.

The President and College of Physicians against John Butler, Entered Pasch. 4.
Caroli cum Brownlow.
THe President and College of Physicians for themselves and for the King
Complain against Littleton's reports p. 168. Mich. 4 Car.
John Butler by Information, and demand 60 li. and declare that H. 8. 34
September in the 14 year of his Reign, incorporated them by the name of
President and College and Comminalty of the faculty of Physicians in London,
and granted to them several privileges, etc. and recite their Patent and
confirmation thereof by 14 H. 8. cap. 5. because the Defendant without license
did practice 11 Months contrary to the Statute.

The Defendant pleaded in Bar, and recited the Statute of 34 H. 8. cap. 8.
which enacts, that any person having knowledge and experience of the nature of
Herbs, Roots and Waters, or of the operation of the same by speculation or
practice, etc. may practice, use and administer in and to any outward Sore,
etc. any Herb, Ointment, Bath, etc. according to their cunning in any of the
Diseases, Sores and Maladies aforesaid, and all other like the same, and drinks
for the Stone, Strangury, or Agues. And that he for the space of 30 years had
experience of the nature of Herbs, etc. and so according to the Statute. And as
to any practice aliter vel alio modo, Non Culpabilis. Upon which Issue was
taken. But to the institution upon the Statute, the Plaintiff replies, that it
was enacted 1 Mariae cap. 9. that the Statute of 14 H. 8. with every Article
and Clause therein shall stand and continue still in full strength, force and
virtue, Any Act, Statute, etc. made to the contrary notwithstanding. And upon
this the Defendant demurred, and assigned for Cause, that the Replication was a
departure.

Henden for the Defendant, and he argued 3 points. First, that the Statute of
34 H. 8. stands good notwithstanding the Statute of 1 Mariae, and is not taken
away thereby, but is still in as good force as if the Statute 1 Mariae had
never been made. By the Letter of 1 Mariae it is plain, that it was but a
Confirmation of the 14 H. 8. for it approves and ratifies the same, and then
the 34 is not touched thereby. And he cited the Countess of Leicester's Case in
Plow. Com. A man is attainted of Treason, which is confirmed by Parliament;
this Confirmation does not repeal any thing done after the Attainder. 2. This
Statute of 14 H. 8. does not extend to the practice Stat. 14 H. 8. cap. 5.
Stat. 34 H. 8. cap. 8. Stat. 3 H. 8. cap. 11. 1 Mariae c. 9.
of Physic limited by the 34 H. 8. But this is left at large out of 14 H. 8.
which he proves first upon the reason and ground upon which the 34 H. 8. was
made, and this was not to meddle with the 14 H. 8. cap. 5. but to repeal 3 H.
8. cap. 11. which Statute provides generally for the practice of Physic and
Surgery; for any part of Surgery may attend upon Physic; and that none may
practice there without allowance of the Bishop of London calling to him 4
Doctors. Now the Statute of 14 H. 8. repeals this in three main points as to
the practice of Physic, but does not meddle with Surgery or external
applications. Then follows the Statute of 34 H. 8. and prescribes a form to
them, to which the 14 does not extend, to wit, by outward applications. 2.
Because that the Statute of 34 recites the Stat. of 3 H. 8. whereby power was
given as aforesaid, and repeals it; Stat. 34 H. 8. Stat. 3 H. 8.
then if the Statute 34 intended that this was within 14, it might have
repealed this as well as the Statute 3. But because that Surgery was clearly
out of the Statute of 14. it repeals the 3 H. 8. and allows 14. 3. The mischief
repealed by the 34. for what end was it made? It repeals no misdemeanors of
Physic, but of Surgeons which out of Covetoufness restrain all persons which
may apply outward Medicines, and so abuse the privilege given to them: so that
34. says, that every person may apply outward Medicines, such as require not
an Apothecary, as for the Stone, Strangury, etc. so that the 14 extends to
Physic made by Apothecaries. 4. If this were within the 14. there is a branch
within 34 that repeals 14. to this purpose, Any other Act to the contrary
notwithstanding. But he conceived the 14. does not extend to the Statute of 3.
because it repeals this expressly, Stat. 3 H. 8.
and for suretiship sake all others.

Secundo, Admit the Statute of 1 Mariae take away Pleading. Departure.
the practice of Physic given by 34 H. 8. then the replication is a departure.
14 H. 8. gives pain and forfeiture against every one who, etc. 34. enlarges
the liberty of practicing of Physic in certain cases; 1 Mariae takes away 34.
and maintains 14 H. 8. But 1 Mariae ought to have been contained within the
Declaration upon these reasons.

1. The Letters Patents to the College without Patents. Free Trade.
the Aid and Confirmation of the Act of Parliament had been void; and he cited
11 Rep. Tailor of Ipswich Case, Every grant that restrains free trade or
exercise of a faculty is void. And Mich. 3 Jac. rot. 438. B. R. Langton's Case
was adjudged accordingly, that the Letters Patents without the Act of
Parliament shall be void. If the 14 H. 8. then had been repealed, and 1 Mariae
had revived it, the Information ought to be exhibited upon 1 Mariae, because
that it is a new Law, or it shall be a departure.

2. Whatsoever is alleged in the Replication by the Plaintiff which is new
matter, and has not been alleged in the declaration, is a departure: and the
same reason of the Bar and Rejoinder. But the Statute of 1 Mariae, if it
extends to reviving, is new matter. Dyer 167. Debt upon obligation, and the
Defendant pleads a Release, etc. see the Case, Ass. pl. 86. Trespass for
Battery alleged to be done 17 E. 3. The Defendant pleads a Release; the
Plaintiff replies, it was by Dures, this is a Departure: which is our Case in
effect, for here is new matter. And Fulmerston's and Steward's Case Pl. Com.
105. b. in Trespass, the Defendant pleaded a release by the Abbot for 50 years,
the Plaintiff replied and showed the Stat. of 31 H. 8. which enacts, that all
such Lands shall be in the same condition as they then were before the other
part of the Statute which makes Releases good for 21 years, and so relies upon
that; this is a departure, 6 H. 7. 8. If the Replication enforce the
declaration, it is not a departure; but if it contain new matter, it is a
departure.

3. The body of the Information is likewise insufficient, and cannot lie in
this Court; for the Letters Penal Statute. Information. Courts.
Patents give the forfeiture of 5 li. for a Month for practicing without
license, and do not limit where the action shall be brought to recover it, nor
the Court where the suit shall be; and therefore one may sue in any Court, 6
Eliz. Dyer 36. cited in the 6 Rep. Gregorie's Case, If it be in any Court of
Record, it shall be intended of the Courts at Westminster; but if it be left at
large, then they may sue in any Court. And the same diversity is taken in
Kelloway, 3 H. 8. as it is there Cited: If one may sue in another Court, then
as before Justices of Oyer and Terminer or Justices of Assize. The Stat. 21
Jac. cap. 4. which limits and confines all Actions and Informations upon Penal
Statutes, which before 21 Jac. might have been before Quarter Sess. 21 Jac. c.
4. Informations
Justices of Assize, of Oyer and Terminer, etc. shall afterward be brought
only within the proper County. And although diverse Informations have been
brought by the College of Physicians upon this Statute, yet they were before
the Statute of 21 Jac. But I do not deny, if the offense had been done in
Middlesex, that then the Information might be here, notwithstanding the Statute
21 Jac. as in 5 Jac. Bean and Dedges Case; or by the 21 Eliz. cap. 5. it is
enacted, that any Action to be sued upon the Stat. 5 Eliz. cap. 4. for using
any Art or Mystery in which the party has not been brought up, etc. shall be
sued and prosecuted in the General Sessions or Assize of the same County where
the offense shall be committed; If such offense be committed in Middlesex, the
suite may be in the Courts at Westminster, for the intent was only to limit
the County, and not such Courts. And so he prayed Judgment for the Defendant.

Bramston contra, for the Plaintiff. And as to the Information. Forfeiture to
the Royal Court.
last exception, that the Information does not lie in this Court, he answered,
that it cannot be before Justices of Oyer and Terminer, nor ever was so. For
although the words do not limit this at Westminster, yet there is another thing
in the case that limits this. And this ground is also in Gregory's Case, and
that is, that the King ought to have Moiety of the forfeiture, and therefore it
ought to be where the King's Attorney may better attend. 2. This is not an
Action popular, but given only to the College, Action popular. Information.
Stat. 14 H. 8. c. 5.
and it is a debt to them for which they may sue by Original. And it was never
the meaning of the Statute to put them to sue before Justices of Oyer and
Terminer or of Assize; and so revera the Statute speaks only of popular
Actions upon penal Laws, and such which Informers may have. But before he came
to matter in Law, he took exceptions to the Bar; for if it was insufficient
and no Bar to the Declaration, then if it were admitted that the Replication
is bad, yet the declaration being good, the Plaintiff shall have Judgment
thereupon. Butler pleaded 34 H. 8. to enable him to practice, but when he
declares what manner of practice he used, he has exceeded the license of this
Statute by his own Confession, and shows such practice as is within the 14 H.
8. The words of the 34 be, That he may minister to any outward Sore or Swelling
or any the like, etc. and that he may give drinks for the Stone, Strangury and
Agues. Butler showed that he had experience in Herbs, and that he gave
Ointments, Plasters, Poultesses and Potions to Sores, Maladies, the Surgery.
Stat. 34 H. 8. c. 8. Potions.
Stone, Strangury, Fevers, and such like. Potions by the 34 be restrained to 3
Cases. But he confesses that he gave them not only in those 3 Cases, but in
others, and the party was afflicted with outward Sores. Stone, Strangury and
Agues were common known diseases; But others, as outward Sores, may be with
inward distempers more dangerous, wherewith he ought not to meddle. And he
ought to have pleaded in another manner also, for he says, Diseases, Fevers,
and such like, and the words such like ought to refer to outward Sores, not to
other diseases. And he shows that he gave Potions, and this ought to have
been with an Anglice drinks; as with Carduus Benedictus, Century Possett. But
the Statute does not allow Potions. Also the word is Agues, and he says
Fevers, and there is a great difference between Agues and Fevers; Agues have
intermission, Fevers none: and a Fever may so infeeble a man, that it is not
fit that such as Butler give him Physic: But he ought to have said Febribus
Anglice Agues. And then if the Plaintiff has made a good declaration and the
Defendant an insufficient bar, if the Plaintiff upon his replication destroy
his declaration, he shall not have Judgment. But if the bar be insufficient
and the replication only vain and idle, he shall have Judgment upon his
declaration. 8 Rep. Dr. Bonham's Case, the main point adjudged: And 6 Rep.
Francis Case, the difference is taken, where the replication was not well, and
made bad as to matter in Law. It was said 34 H. 8. does not meddle with the 14
H. 8. And it is plain, that the 34 H. 8. did not intend to meddle but with
Surgeons; for it recites the mischief of their covetousness; and therefore it
appears that it was not the meaning of the Statute to take any thing from the
Physicians. But the purview of the Statute 34. meddles with the 14 H. 8. that
was a cause of 1 Mariae; for if credit may be given to Mr. Butler, it gives
liberty to every one that has skill in Herbs to minister Potions. Outward
applications appertain to Surgeons, but the giving of Potions appertain to
Physicians; for Potions plainly be Physic; and then 34. takes therefrom that
which was given to the College by the 14 H. 8. and if it be permitted that they
may give Potions for the Stone, etc. all the abuses before remedied shall be
restored. This being in the purview of 34 H. 8. 1 Mariae was made, and repeals
all that the 34 H. 8. has taken away from 14 H. 8. And I do agree, if two
Statutes be made in the affirmative, and the Stat. repeal.
latter control the former, such construction shall be made that both may
stand. But if the last be Negative, either in words or intention, the former
shall be repealed. And here be such words that it is not possible that the
other should stand. 1 Mariae the words be, that it confirms 14 H. 8. so that it
Stat. 34 H. 8. cap. 8. Stat. 1 Mariae.
shall be in force in every Clause. And it is all one as if the words of 14 H.
8. had been contained within this Stat. 1 Mariae. And then how can the 14. and
34. stand together? Also the very purpose of this Stat. 1 Mariae is to repeal
34 H. 8. For the rule, Dyer 347. is, that when 2 Statutes be, and one seems to
cross the other in substance, and no Clause de non obstante in the latter,
exposition shall be made so as both may stand together if it may be. But here
is such a Clause, notwithstanding any Statute, etc. and the purpose is apparent
to repeal the 34 H. 8. in that part which gives liberty to unskilful ignorant
persons to practice Physic. And 1 Mariae does stand upon 2 parts: 1. It is a
confirmation of 14 H. 8. 2. It gives the College further privilege; And this
part of the Statute were vain and idle, if 34 H. 8. as to Physic were not
repealed; and some such thing was in the minds of the makers of 1 Mariae when
they say, any Statute to the contrary notwithstanding; and there is not any
Stat. after the 14. that impeaches this, but the Stat. of 34.

2. It cannot be any departure here. And I agree the reasons before; But the
replication here maintains Pleading. Replication. Departure. Novel matter.
the title in the declaration, and is no new matter; and if it were, yet it is
raised by the bar, and then it ought to be allowed in the replication. For the
Statute of 14 H. 8. being good until 34. then the Stat. 1 Mariae restores and
maintains 14 H. 8. 21 H. 7. 18. A Feoffment was pleaded in bar, the Plaintiff
shows that he that made the Feoffment was within Age; the Defendant rejoyns,
that there was a custom that Infants of such an age there, might make
Feoffments; and no departure. And so it is in our case.

3. In all Cases if the matter be new, if it enforce and pursue the
declaration, it may be in the replication, and so we should have showed the
Stat. 1 Mariae in our Declaration, and by the same reason we should have showed
the Stat. 34 H. 8. but the Action is for practicing of Physic generally; and
when the other justifies a special practice and traverses the general practice,
then was the proper and fit time to show the Statute of 1 Mariae which repeals
the Stat. 34 H. 8. upon which the justification is made. And Trin. 6 Jac. B. R.
which was Commenced Mich. 3 Jac. rot. 458. Langton and Gardiner's Case, this
very point of the departure was debated by the Justices, and resolved no
departure; for there the case was the same as ours. But it was not showed for
cause of Demurrer, etc. the departure, for it is not necessary, inasmuch as the
Stat. of 37 Eliz. Cap. 5. excepts popular Stat. 37 Eliz. cap. 5.
actions, and all suites upon penal Statutes. Et adjorn'.

THe same Term it was afterward argued by Hedley for the Defendant, That all
these 3 Statutes may well stand together by reasonable Lit. rep. 212.
Construction. Leges posteriores priores contrarias abrogant. But the averment
ought to be there upon contrarias. But otherwise if upon reasonable
construction they may stand, they ought; and this contrariety ought to be in
matter, not in special words; general words cannot repeal particular. For
general and particular cannot be contrary. Statutes ought to be expounded by
the meaning which ought to be found out partly by the words, partly by the
mischief they intend to remedy. First where the Stat. 14. by these words
facultates medicinae includes Surgery: Exposition of the word Medicina.
Stat. 14 H. 8.
and it seems that this word Medicina includes external medicines as well as
internal. 3 H. 8. cap. 11. this was made for Physic and for Surgery, to remedy
all abuses in them, and the examination Stat. 3 H. 8. cap. 11.
of them that shall be permitted to practice, was done by the Bishop who was
Physician for the Soul; And they conceived that he would have more care of the
body. Afterward came the Statute of 14 H. 8. which does not repeal this
Statute in express words, but yet in meaning is contrary; But they may stand
together by Construction: For the first is, that he shall not practice without
license of the Bishop; the second that he cannot practice without license of
the College; and therefore ought to have license of both. But this was never
the meaning of 34 H. 8. there it is taken that Surgery was not within the
Stat. 14 H. 8. but there it is outward Medicines, which prove Medicina to
include Surgery. In this Statute they perceived that those persons licensed did
much hurt, for licentia sumus deteriores, and that they were as Butchers in
Lent which be licensed, that sell the worst and dearest meat; and for this
intent for such diseases where the cause was well known, they might practice to
do more than contemplation; this Stat. gives license for such diseases. After
comes the Stat. 1 M. which never intended to repeal 34 H. 8. and restore
licenses; But the Statute was made to give the College more privilege than they
had by the Stat. 14. seil. that they might commit without Bail or Mainprize.
But it recites 14. and confirms the same; but they never intended to repeal 14.
And they confirmed their liberties, such as were in force, and the 34. is but
an exposition of 14. And although 1 Mariae confirm 14. and all Articles,
Clauses, etc. yet it ought to be intended all Clauses in force. The Statute of
maintenance recites that all former Statutes now in force shall be put in
execution: And if those words now in force were not there, yet shall it be so
expounded. 4 E. 3. 3 and 4. there were diverse Statutes concerning imposition
upon Wine, and there the Judges agreed that they ought so to expound them that
they may stand, no non obstante being. But it is objected that there is a non
obstante. I confess there is a general non obstante, any Law whatsoever, etc.
But it ought to be a special non obstante to repeal. The Stat. 1 Eliz. was made
for the Leases of Bishops; after the 13 Eliz. does not take away 1 Eliz. and
yet there is a general non obstante, and the Bishop is included amongst
Ecclesiastical persons. The Marquess of Winchester's Case, A man Attainted by
Parliament, and that he shall forfeit all his Lands, notwithstanding all
Statutes to the contrary; yet the force of the Statute de donis is not taken
away by the non obstante. But after the Statute 26 H. 8. that all inheritances
shall be forfeited notwithstanding any Law, etc. yet the force of the Common
Law is not taken away, for a right of action is not by this forfeited. Co. 6.
Gregorie's Case, This general Law does not repeal a particular Law for Weavers,
which is a stronger Case than this of ours. 21 Jac. Stat. made for Bankrupts,
recites that all Statutes concerning Bankrupts shall be put in execution; it
ought to be intended, all Statutes that were then in force, and not those which
be repealed; and the confirmation of a thing which is void, is void. And
therefore such part of 14. which was made void by 34. cannot be confirmed.

As to the exception to the Bar, the Bar in substance is good, although he
might have pleaded Not Guilty, yet he may plead the special matter, and it
concludes absque hoc that he is guilty aliter vel alio modo; he has not
justified more than the Statute warrants; for thereby he administered drinks,
and in Latin it cannot be otherwise translated than by the word Potiones.

2. The word in the Statute is Agues, and he justifies Febribus: and although
that Febris comprehend both, etc. yet there is no other particular word, that
signifies Ague, wherefore it is well.

As for the departure, admit 34. is repealed, then 1 Mariae ought to be
mentioned in the declaration. As if a Statute be made for 7 years, and after by
another Act it is made perpetual, the declaration ought to be upon the last
Statute; And this is not properly a departure, for a departure is to be a bar,
but this is no Cause of Action in the declaration; and it is not like to the
Case 21 H. 7. 18.

3. For the lying of the Information, it is within the letter and the meaning
of 21 Jac.

It was objected that the words in the Statute be all actions which a Common
Informer may have; Although the words seem to import so, yet there be words
after, which make this plain, by any person whatsoever; then it is within the
meaning; for it was made for the ease of the subject; and all the Physicians in
England ought to be examined and approved by the College at London.

Finch Recorder. 1 Mariae has altered 34 H. 8. in part; for we labor only for
part; so that 14. is in force as it was at first in every branch thereof,
notwithstanding 34 H. 8. for 1 Mariae restored this, and that which the 14.
gives is Medicines, not as it is generally to be intended, and so to include
Surgery, but all that was proper to Physicians. 34 H. 8. although it allow
men to give Medicines, yet it is at their perils; for if a man die under their
hands, it is as it was at Common Law. By the Statute of 34. to repeal all of
14. which was contrary to 34. which does not in the least name the 14. yet it
is repealed for so much as concerns Agues, etc. The Statute of 33 H. 8. for
trial of Treason is repealed. And after by 1 Mariae our Case is a far stronger
Case, that every Clause shall be in force, notwithstanding any Statute, etc.
these words ought not to be void if by construction they may be made to stand,
and no Statute withstands this Statute but 34 H. 8. and therefore all which
this Statute takes away ought to be restored. He confessed the case put of
Confirmation of 32 H. 8. Statute of Wills, that this does not take away the
Stat. of 34. for it is but an explanation, and one being confirmed the other is
confirmed. And it is plain that the 13 Eliz, does not take away 1 Eliz. for it
was in the affirmative, and commenced after, and therefore it is expounded not
to extend to the Bishop; As the Statute of contra formam collationis does not
include the Bishop as it was there adjudged. And he cited Langton's Case, where
this point which is the point of departure, was adjudged; and 10 and 11 Eliz.
rot. 248. B. R. action by the College versus Eliheus Cornelius, and upon these
very points Judgment was given for the College.

Also the Bar is ill. Allow the Statute of 34. were in force, yet the
Justification is ultra that which the Statute gives; and took the same
exception as before.

2. There is a departure, which was so ruled in Langton's Case, and is so in
reason. Also this is a proper departure, when a man relinquishes the title upon
which he grounds himself, and betakes himself to another; And we have not made
a departure, our title is 14 H. 8. which makes good the Letters Patents; then
if you repeal the Letters Patents, we ought to repeal the 14 H. 8. and it would
be absurd for us to commence with 1 Mariae, for then we ought to have recited
all the Statutes. 37 H. 6. 5. 21 H. 7. 25. and 18. If a man avow for rent
granted by I. S. the other says, that I. S. had nothing in the Land at the
time of the Grant; the other shows that he was seifed to his use, this is a
departure, for his title to the first was by the Common Law; and therefore
seeing the Statute was his title, it ought to have been showed. But in our Case
the Statute 1 Mariae is not our title to the action, but only removes the
impediment. 6 H. 7. 8. A condition is pleaded in destruction of a Feoffment,
and a release pleaded to destroy the condition, and no departure; but the
Feoffment stands with a good title. So in our Case Hill. 4 Jac. intrat. H. 3.
Jac. Bagshaw versus Gower, Trespass for chasing his Cattle 14 Maii 1 Jac. The
Defendant Iustifies as an Estray, and that 16 Maii 1 Jac. he delivered them.
The Plaintiff replies, that 15 Maii he labored and worked them; upon which the
Defendant demurres: This was no departure, but the working maintained the
Trespass done 14. and made him Trespasser ab initio. Mich. 23 and 24 Eliz. C.
B. rot. 2297. Pledal and Clark, Trespass for chasing his Cattle in Barkshire,
the Defendant justifies damage fezant; the Plaintiff replies, that afterward
he drove them into another County scil. Oxford, etc. and sold them; the
Defendant demurred, and the declaration was in Barkshire, yet the sale made him
a wrong doer ab initio. Where the Replication maintains the title, and only
removes the impediment, it is good. Pasch. Jac. B. R. Action upon the Case,
Wood and Hankford, for disturbing him of Toll, and intitles himself by Letters
Patents of H. 6. The Defendant pleads 28 H. 6. which restores all Franchises;
The Plaintiff replies 4 H. 7. which revives the first Statute; and adjudged no
departure: for if he pleads the resumption and the reviver, if there were 20,
he ought to plead all. Then in our case all is gone, and we know not whether he
ought to justify one kind or other.

3. For the Jurisdiction. This Court is most proper for the Informer; and he
cited Gregory's Case, and said, If the King might elect to sue in what Court he
pleased, the Informer might also. But however it is out of the Statute of 21
Jac. The title is, for the ease of the Subject. The preamble, etc. 18 Eliz.
cap. 5. there it appears that the common Informer ought to inform in proper
person; the College was never so, nor cannot; and in common Information there
ought to be the day of the Information, etc. and there is not any day here. 25
Eliz. 12. Knevet informed against Butcher, and afterward was nonsuited, for
which the Defendant prayed to have Costs, etc. and there the Plaintiff alleged
that he was not a common Informer, insomuch that this was the first Information
that he ever exhibited, yet ruled against him; insomuch that it was upon a
penal law where every one may have the action. But in our case it is not so,
because this is no such Information or Informer within the Statute. 40 Eliz.
Agar informs against Cavendish and others upon the Statute of 8 E. 4. for
Liveries, which appoints the Information Information. Stat. 8 E. 4.
in C. B. B. Reg. and that they may sue as many as they will, and the Exchequer
is not named there, but inferior Courts be, and Judgment was given for the
Informer. But after in a Writ of Error brought it was adjudged, that the
Information does not lie in the Exchequer; but they resolved that the King
might have sued there, and therefore the Judgment shall be good to entitle the
King to the entire sum forfeited. Richardson said, that it was a hard case to
prove the King may sue in any Court; and he cited 14 E. 3. Countess of Kent's
case, 40 Ass. 35. the King may sue for Spiritual matters in the Temporal Court,
as a Legacy, etc. Hill. 36 Eliz. rot. 135. Hammond Informant upon a penal
Statute and died, and upon motion by the Attorney General Judgment was given
for one Moiety for the King notwithstanding. And the difference betwixt this
and Agar's Case, that in this case the Informer was well entitled to a Moiety,
but there not. Statutes which take away Jurisdictions of the Courts at
Westminster, ought to be taken strictly. Mich. 44 and 45 Eliz. Buck informs in
the Exchequer for transporting of raw hides in Middlesex, which was found to be
in another County. And the Statute of 31 Eliz. cap. 5. is, that 31 Eliz. c. 5.
in an Information upon a Penal Statute the offense shall not be laid to be
done in any other County than where it was done, and that the Defendant may
traverse and allege that the offense was committed in another County. And
because the Defendant did not plead that the offense in this case was done in
another County, it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, and afterward affirmed in
Error, and difference taken where in the pleading it appears it was done in
another County, and where not. Hill 16 Jac. C. B. rot. 850. Grimston versus
Molineux for Recusancy of his wife, and the Question was in the Information
there, because the 31 Eliz. Enacts, that the offense given shall be laid in the
proper County; and it was ruled that this was out of the Statute, for it is not
an offense in doing, but in not doing, in omitting, and not committing; and the
information lies there for Recusancy, notwithstanding the conceit in Co. cap.
de Recusancy. And Mich. 16 Jac. rot. 658. B. R. Presses Case was so resolved,
and that the Statute extends only to Indictment; and so he concluded for the
Plaintiff.

PAsch. 5 Car. primi this Case was argued again. Lit. rep. p. 246.
Athow for the Defendant. And before his argument he would show what was
Surgery, and what a Surgeon might do. It appears by 32 H. 8. that license of
Physic comprehends all Physic; upon which I collect that 14 H. 8. and the
Letters Patents of the College do not extend to Surgery. By those Letters
Patents and Statute, all the Physicians be a body politic, and if this extends
to Surgery, then all the Surgeons in London be of the Corporation of the
Physicians, which they be not, but a distinct Company, and out of their
Jurisdiction and government. And Surgeons for their practice shall not be
punished, although they practice without license. But the said Statute and
Patent extend to the learned part of Physic; for the knowledge of Physic is a
learned art; and therefore the Statute was made to restrain unlearned men; and
there is more learning in judging rightly of the disease than in curing
thereof; for sometimes 2 or 3 diseases be in the body at the same time, and
that which cures the one, may increase the other; wherefore there the learning
of Physic appears in applying such remedy as may cure both together. But for
the exercise of Surgery, knowledge of the Nature of Herbs, etc. is sufficient.
It has been said, that for outward diseases they are allowed; But I answer,
that for the Stone and Strangury and Ague there needs no great skill to
discover them, and then the cure of them is more by experience and practice
than learning. And I have heard of a Physician, that went 100 miles to know a
Medicine for those diseases of an old Woman, who had long time experience
thereof. And drinks for Agues, Strangury, etc. is Surgery and not Physic
properly. And this appears by the Statute of 3 H. 8. and 34 H. 8. In 3 H. 8.
Physic and Surgery be both joined together, but in the allowance of them, the
Bishop ought to call Physicians to allow Physicians, but Surgeons to allow
Surgeons. Now 34 H. 8. proves, that all that the Defendant has done is
Surgery. There is the recital of the Statute of 3 H. 8. and then it is said
that the Company of Surgeons, etc. have troubled and vexed diverse, etc. who are
endued with the knowledge of ministering to such as be pained with customable
diseases, etc. where there is not one word of Physicians. Then if Surgeons may
do this, the College cannot restrain them, or correct them that do this.
Another part of the Statute of 14 H. 8. is, that no person ought to be suffered
to practice, but he that is professed, sage, discreet, and learned. It may be
said, that under color of ministering of these drinks to Agues, etc. one may
minister them to other diseases. Also I confess that an Ague is attending upon
sundry great diseases; and for these Agues they cannot give drinks; but to
single Agues, that do not accompany other diseases they may: and of these is
our Justification; and if he has ministered to others, there is a fair Issue
tendered, by which it may be tried. Stone, Strangury and Ague were never within
the Stat. 14. H. 8. The exposition of the Statute ought to be according to the
intent, which is to be collected out of the preamble or body, or other words
therein, and sometimes out of the mischief intended to be thereby remedied.
Morgan's case Pl. Com. upon 7 E. 6. is an example above all, where it is
adjudged that this Statute extends only to the Receivers of the King, which is
collected out of the Act, and by other words in the Statute, insomuch that the
receivers of common persons cannot take any money for receipt, etc. And the
mischief was, that no poor men shall have pensions of the King upon the Statute
of dissolution of Monasteries. And it would be a great mischief, if they upon
non-payment always should complain to the King, which mischief cannot be in
case of a common person, because they may distrain for non-payment. So the
Statute 34 H. 8. the preamble, body and all the words in the Statute be against
Surgeons. But the exposition 2 E. 4. 18. upon the Statute of Prerogative,
and so Statutes of Wills, gives power to devise lands in soccage of any
inheritance, and this does not extend to Lands in Tail, although the Act of
explanation had not been made; but the Judges would have made the same
exposition, because that Lands in Tail cannot be demisable at the Common Law:
But they would have expounded, that Lands in Tail ought a third part of them be
allotted to descend upon the heirs, because that they may descend. And so if it
should be doubtful whether 14 H. 8. extend to Agues and Strangury, the Statute
34 H. 8. expounds it, that it will not be denied but that Surgeons may cut for
the Stone, and if Ague or, etc. break in Ulcers, etc. they may without question
cure them; by the same reason they may cure these Diseases inwardly if they can.

1. 14 H. 8. is a particular Statute, and particular Statutes General.
Particular.
Statutes shall not extend much beyond their words; but general Statutes which
be for the good of the Commonwealth, shall be construed largely and by equity.
12 E. 4. 20. 1 H. 6. 5. upon the Statute 1 H. 7. there the Statutes construed
by equity be general, for the good of the Commonwealth. But this Statute of 14
H. 8. is made for the good of Physicians, that none shall practice but
themselves, and it is a particular Statute, and therefore construed strictly,
as appears by Dr. Bonham's case. Those drinks for the Stone and Agues, etc.
be but stilled Waters, or Beer mingled with Herbs, which every one may use in
his house, according to receipts; and therefore be not within the Statute 14 H.
8. And if a Gentleman had such receipts, and made use of them for those
diseases, shall he be within this Statute?

2. Admit that these diseases be within 14 H. 8. yet 34 H. 8. takes them out of
14 H. 8. clearly, and for other things the Statute is only in force, as upon
the Statute of 32 H. 8. in Knight's Case, there the Stat. of Marlebridge is
taken away, although it be not named, and although the words of 32 H. 8. be in
the Affirmative.

3. Upon the pleading of the Statute 1 Mariae that recites 14 H. 8. it is said,
that in this Statute the words of pleading were and continuaret, the word
staret being omitted, that which continued in force ought to be in force at the
same time, which is but a confirmation of the Statute as it was at the time of
the making of 1 Mariae, and the Stat. 14 H. 8. is only recited, and some new
privileges may be added to this confirmation, but cannot be but of a thing
which was in esse before. 27 H. 8. 2. An Infant grants an Advowson and at full
age confirms it; the confirmation is void, because the grant was void. 21 H 7.
1. 12 E. 4. 59. And the Countess of Leicesters case in the Commentaries. The
reason of the recital of 14 H. 8. was for the addition of some new privileges,
scil. that Gaolers should not permit prisoners to escape committed by the --
which they might do unpunished before: and that all Keepers of Prisons in
London, except the Lieutenant of the Tower, ought to receive them that shall be
committed, which they might have refused before.

2. Being but a confirmation for the greater part, it shall not be a reviver
for the lesser part. As if Tenant for life of 20 Acres, grant his estate in one
Acre to I. S. and he in Reversion confirm the estate of tenant for life in all
the 20 Acres to the Lessee and his heirs, this is a confirmation but of the 19
Acres; and although I. S. attorn, yet his Acre does not pass by way of Grant of
the Reversion, because that he -- this confirmation for the greater part. 18 E.
3. 8. Husband tenant for life, and the estate of the husband is confirmed to
him and his wife and to their heirs, the wife takes nothing, and yet the
husband is the man that ought to attorn, if it would amount to a grant of the
Reversion.

3. This Statute of 1 Mariae does not extend to repeal 34 H. 8. in any part,
because that 34 H. 8. is a general act, and the Judges ought to take notice
thereof: but 1 Mariae is a particular Statute, and therefore does not repeal
the other which is general, without express words. Vide Holland's case.

For the point of special demurrer, the replication Pleading. Confess and
avoid. Traverse.
wants form. In all replications you ought to confess and avoid or traverse the
bar; here is implied an avoidance but no confession thereof. 34 H. 8. 22. 7 H.
6. 2. where there is an avoidance but no confession, therefore ill.

Lastly, here is a departure. Stat. de 14 H. 8. remains Corporation. Name.
in force for all diseases but the Stone, Strangury and Agues, and for them
their action lies upon the Stat. 1 Mariae and not upon 14 H. 8. therefore they
ought to have named this Statute at the beginning. 2 Ass. 6. 37 H. 6. 5. 21 H.
7. 18. And for answer to the Judgment cited in B. R. there the Judgment was
general, and 1 Mariae was there pleaded with these words staret and
continuaret, but here it is and continuaret, which is nonsense. And I have
credibly heard, the case there was not defended omnino, but only argued for
the Plaintiff. Wherefore upon the whole matter he prayed judgment for the
Defendant.

Davenport e contra. Exception has been taken to the person that brought the
action, that the action was not brought according to the name of the College,
scil. by the President and College, but by the President only, 8 Report Dr.
Bonham's case; and although the words of the Statute be, that the Action shall
be brought by the President and College, yet all Suites shall be in the name of
the President. And so be the Precedents, Mich. 5 Jac. rot. 299. and Mich. 5
Jac. rot. 438. 11 H. 7. 12. 18. where a Charter of Corporation may be granted
that they shall not be sued by any other name than their Corporation.

For the matter in law he said, that he would observe the course in 3 Rep. 7.
Haydon's case.

1. What the Common Law was before the Statutes. 2. The mischief to be
remedied. 3. What remedy is appointed by Parliament. 4. The true reason of this
remedy.
The common law before 3 H 8. was, that every one might exercise any lawful
trade; But there is a different consideration between the practice of Physic
and other Mechanic Trades. In Mechanic Trades if any one undertake a thing,
and does not do it duly, an Action upon the case lies: But in the practice of
Physic it is otherwise; for the mischief that falls upon the party, takes away
the remedy, scil. the death of the Patient by the unskilfulness of the
Physician. And for this inconvenience was 3 H. 8. cap. 11. made, which Statute
did not redress the mischief sufficiently, because that the allowance or
disallowance of Physicians was not referred to Competent Judges; for the
fitness of every person should be tried by them which be experienced in the
same kind, as 8 H. 7. the Ordinary tries whether a Parson sit idoneus ad
Ecclesiam; but here the Bishop is to be Judge of the skilfulness of Physicians.

Another imperfection in this Statute is, that the penalty is given and to be
recovered by every one that will sue, and therefore the care was in no person;
and also there was not sufficient care for practisers in London: There was care
that none should practice, etc. in the negative, but what care was there in the
affirmative? Sir George Farmars case, 8 rep. 126. Then came the Statute of 10
and the Statute of 14 H. 8. which do not extend to every one that gives
Physic, but to him that professes the practice thereof. It has been said
that 14 H. 8. does not extend to restrain the practice of those diseases; but
they confess that they be within the letter of the Statute, but not within the
meaning; but by the Common Law they be taken to be within Physic. The Common
Law takes notice of a Physician and Surgeon, but for an Empirick, he is not
known to the Law. See the Entries fol. 187. A Physician may have debt for his
fees, so may a Surgeon without doubt; but where is there any precedent for an
Empirick, or Herbalist to have action? An Assumpsit he may have, but not debt.
Knowledge of Herbs pertains to Physicians, and so of Waters; for who can judge
of Baths but Physicians, and those that belong to the practice of Physic? See
Entries fol. 463. Pl. 3. Action was brought against one for practicing of
Medicines; and for that cause it was necessary to show, what practice this was,
scil. tam per visus, etc. quam interiores potiones. And there is another action
there, where one that practiced as Surgeon, practiced ut Medicus; that where
the Plaintiff suit aegrotus of the Colic, the Defendant ut medicus sed
indoctus, and cupidus lucri, says to the Plaintiff that he was troubled with
three Imposthumations, and administered to him medicinam insalubrem and
intoxicatam, whereby the Plaintiff was in danger of his life. And in the same
book fol. 463. Pl. 1. it is shown what a Surgeon ought to do. Entries fol. 127.
and an appeal of Mayhem 46. Pl. 5. Register trespass fol. 139. The Statute 32
H. 8. was apparent, that the Judgment of the Parliament was, that Surgery was a
member of Physic. And he said there were 2 kinds of Surgeons, Barber-Surgeons
who were incorporated 1 E. 4. and Surgeons only. He agreed that the Statute
against the words may be construed by equity, as Stradling and Morgan's case,
but to whom shall this equity extend? Posito that it extends to Surgeons, yet
it never extended to Empiricks. Equity against the letter ought to be grounded
upon the intention, 30 E. 3. 6. 1 H. 6. 3. The Statute of Marlebridge, there
are negative words as here, that no person shall drive a distress out of the
County, etc. vide the Case: But posito that a stranger shall distrain, etc. the
equity shall not extend to him. So in our Case, although a Surgeon be
tolerated, yet a Stranger shall not invade the liberty of Physicians.

2. The Statute of 34 H. 8. does not restrain that which is within 14 H. 8. but
meddles with the mischief mentioned in 32 H. 8. And it appears that the
intention of 34 H. 8. was not to raise a new profession, but to tolerate the
old. For the Statute is where many give Medicines without money, scil. for
Charity and neighborhood. And the purview is general, that such, etc. But the
difference is, if any will within his own house or to his friend give
Medicines, it is not within the Statute: But if he make profession and set up a
Bill, that he can cure such and such diseases, it is otherwise. Pl. Com. 463.
And if the question had been put to the makers of the Statute, whether they
would raise a new profession, it would have been denied to be their intention.
8 Rep. fol. 129. Exercise of brewing is not every brewing for his own house
alone, etc. but profession thereof. And 11 Rep. fol. 23. So here. But posito
that every one may exercise within 34 H. 8. yet it is not a Repeal of 14 H. 8.
but as it were a license or dispensation therewith, etc. And if it were, yet 1
Mariae repeals all 34 H. 8. that any way impeaches 14 H. 8. If it was made to
such purpose at first, this Act 1 Mariae takes notice of 14 H. 8. and provides
that staret and continuaret, etc. Any Act, Statute, etc. to the contrary. And
what Statute can be to the contrary but the Statute 34 H. 8?

As to the Objection, that there wants staret, and is only continuaret,
insomuch that [and] cannot be of any force, it shall be as if it were absent:
and then continuaret is not only a confirmation, but is to remove the
impediment, which is the Statute 34 H. 8. as it was before. And although that
this Statute of 1 Mariae is a private Statute, yet the substance being pleaded
is sufficient. But the plea in bar is ill; this is Justification by virtue of
a Statute Law, the Statute gives the Justification in this manner, that he,
etc. justify generally. The application of Plasters and giving of Potions to
Sores, Agues, Stone, Strangury, etc. and talibus morbis, and does not say
secundum formam Statuti; and therefore shall not be construed pro reddendo
singula singulis. 15 H. 7. 10. where the construction is made reddendo singula
singulis, etc. This form of pleading is also a new form, quoad those, etc. he
justifies, and he does not say this is the same practice whereof the Plaintiff
declares. And so to force the Plaintiff to a replication when the thing is
entire, as here, that he had exercised facultatem medicinae, he cannot sever
his plea and justify these, Et quoad alia, etc. plead Not guilty: But he ought
to plead as it is said before, or traverse absque hoc, etc.

2. The Plea in Bar consists of 2 points, one is a Justification, the other is
a Travers: Et he shall not have the Justification, si hoc parat. est
verificare, 22 H. 6. 6. There without Travers it is good, according to Dyer
167. But when the justification tends to all, it is not so, 27 H. 6. 10. and it
cannot be amended, nor no repleader now after demurrer. Then let the
Replication be as it will, when the Bar is ill, and the declaration good, this
should not be answered. Vide Dr. Bonham's Case, Francis Case and Turner's Case,
etc.

Mich. 6 Caroli primi Communi Banco.
The Judges in this case gave their Resolution.

RIchardson Chief Justice for himself and for the Lit. rep* p. 349.
other Judges said, That he would recite the principal points of the Case which
be; The Plaintiffs declare that the Charter made to the College did inhibit,
That none shall practice Physic, etc. without license, etc. and that the
Defendant contrary thereto had practiced by the space of 12 months, for which
he had forfeited 5 li. for every month, which amounts to 60 li. The Defendant
pleads the Statute 34 H. 8. that made it lawful for any skillful, etc. to
administer outward Plasters, etc. or Potions, etc. and as to any other practice
he pleaded Non culpabilis. The Plaintiffs reply, and show the Statute of 1
Mariae which confirms their first Charter. Any Act to the contrary
notwithstanding. Upon which the Defendant demurred in Law; and our Joint
Resolution is, that the Plaintiffs shall recover.

It has been objected against the Jurisdiction of this Court, that by the
Statute of 21 Jac. this action ought not to be brought here. But it is clear
that it cannot be brought in any other place than in the Kings Courts of Record
at Westminster. For the Statute does not mention in what Court it shall be
brought, and the Statute 21 Jac. which gives power to Justices, does not give
any other thing to them, but that whereof they have Power and Jurisdiction
before; and before this they had not any Jurisdiction of this Cause, Ergo.

Another Objection has been made, that the Action has not been well brought,
because it ought to be brought in the name of the President only. To which I
answer, that the Charter it self is, that they may plead, and be impleaded by
the name of President only; and the Action shall be brought by that name, by
which the King enables them to bring their Action, and to plead and to be
impleaded, as 11 H. 7. 27, 28. is; so that here is a good action and well
grounded and by a good name. And as to the Plea in Bar it is insufficient,
because he has not pleaded according to the Statute. For his plea ought to
have been applied to the Statute, for by the Statute the power there given is
to administer to outward Sores or Diseases, any Ointments, Plasters, etc. and
other like, and this ought to be according to the skill and knowledge. And here
the Defendant says, that he had knowledge in the nature of Herbs, Roots, and
Waters, etc. and did apply Ointments, Potions, etc. for the Stone, etc. and
such other diseases, and he ought to have said, according to his knowledge in
those diseases, and not in other like, etc. 2. The Administration ought to have
been to outward Tumors, etc. and here outward is omitted, and he has pleaded
generally, whereby his plea goes to the whole, and so mistaken. 3. Where
potions may be applied to the Stone, Strangury, and Agues, the Defendant has
pleaded Potions pro ulceribus, morbis, etc. and talibus consimilibus, which is
a more large Authority than the Statute limits; And for these the plea is ill.
It is a rule, that a plea ought to be issuable; but this is not, as it is
pleaded; for the Defendant here ought to have distinguished his plea, and have
justified in part, as in applying outward Plasters, etc. to outward Diseases,
and Potions to Stone, Strangury and Ague.

As to the Replication, it has been objected that it is a departure. To which
I say, that if any new matter be pleaded, it is a departure; but here is none.
For the Replication which supports and inforces the Declaration is by the
Statute 1 Mariae, and this could not have been alleged in the Declaration: and
there was no reason to show the Statute 1 Mariae until the Statute of 34 H. 8.
was pleaded by the Defendant.

And as to the matter in law, that is, how far the Statute of 34 H. 8. gave
liberty against the Statute 14 H. 8. to what persons, and for what things, is
the Question. And upon consideration of all the law of 34 H. 8. we be of
opinion that this Statute does not reach, neither in Words, nor in Intent and
meaning, to give liberty to any person that practices or exercises for lucre
and profit; and it is apparent by the preamble, and the Statute also, that this
was made principally against Surgeons which were covetous, etc. And
therefore the Statute has limited who should practice, and for what diseases,
and the parties licensed thereby were those which were good honest people, as
old Women, and such as would give neighbourly Physic for charity and piety,
and not such as look for gain thereby, as Empiricks, that do not do any thing
for piety and charity. So that this Statute excludes all those that take any
money or gain. And this Statute which was intended against Surgeons, in truth
helps them; for it gives to them liberty to give Pills and Potions as well as
to apply outward Medicines to outward diseases, and such construction shall be
made. And Surgery is only that which is to be done with the hand, etc. And
moreover we be of opinion that if this Statute of 34 H. 8. had abridged the
Statute 14 H. 8. yet that the Statute of 1 Mariae has settled all on foot again
of 14 H. 8. in as large manner as it ever was before; for it concludes any Act
to the contrary notwithstanding. And it was made to suppress unskilful men.
But this Statute of 34 H. 8. and Dr. Langton's case, Mich. 3 Jac. B. R. rot.
438. versus Gardener is express in this point; yet there the plea was better
than this is. And yet after it had depended 3 years, judgment was given against
the Defendant. With this he concluded, and commanded Judgment to be entered for
the Plaintiff against the Defendant.

College of Physicians against Bugge. In magno Rotulo de Anno xxiii. Regis
Caroli in Item Adhuc Item Item Res. London.
PRaesidens Colleg' and Communitas Medicor' Lond' London.
deb' 27 li. 10 s. de medietate 55 li. versus Johannem Bugge de Parochia
Ecclesiae Christi London recuperat' per Judicium Cur' quia exercuit facultatem
Medicin' ibidem per spatium xi men's. integr' non existen' admiss. ad exercend'
and occupand' dict' facultat' medicin' per Praesident' Collegium seu
Communitat' facultat' Medicin' London literis sigillo suo communi sigillat'
contra formam Statuti in hujusmodi casu edit' and provis. super ipsos onerat'
virtute Ordinis hujus Scacc' Dat' tertio Julii Anno 15 Regis Caroli.

But the said sum of 27 li. 10 s. is allowed to the President and College of
the faculty of Physic within the City of London by Letters Patents under the
Great Seal of England bearing date the eighth day of October in the fifteenth
year of the late King James of England, and of Scotland the Fifty first, and by
Judgment of the Barons of this Court of Public Exchequer entered amongst the
Records of Easter Term in the Seventh year of the Reign of the late King
Charles in the Custody of the first Remembrancer there, Roll the xxiiii.

And they are quitt.

Ex. by He. Croke Clerk of the Pipe.

D. Termino Sancti Michaelis anno regni Domini Caroli secundi nunc Regis
Angliae, etc. xxvii. rot. 530.
MEmorand' quod die Sabbati prox' posttres septimanas Sancti Michaelis isto
Land. ss.
eodem Termino coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' Praesidens Collegium seu
Communitas facultat' Medicinae London qui tam pro domino Rege quam pro seipsis
sequuntur per Franc' Scot Attorn' suum and protuler' hic in Cur' dicti domini
Regis tunc ibidem quandam billam suam versus Adrianum Huybert alias Hybert in
custod' Marr' etc. de placito debiti. Et sunt pleg' de prosequend' scilicet
Johannes Do and Ricardus Roe. Quae quidem billa sequitur in haec verba. ss.
London ss. Presidens Collegium seu Communitas facultat' medicinae London qui
tam pro domino Rege quam pro seipsis sequuntur queruntur de Adriano Huybert
alias Hybert in custod' Marr' Maresc' domini Regis coram ipso Rege existen' de
placito quod reddat eidem domino Regi ac praefat' Praesident' Collegio seu
Communitati qui tam, etc. centum libras legalis Monet' Angl' quas eis debet and
injuste detinet, pro eo videlicet, quod cum Henricus Octavus nuper Rex Angliae
per literas suas Patent' magno Sigillo suo Angliae sigillat' Curiaeque domini
Regis nunc hic prolat' geren' dat' apud Westm' in Com. Midd' vicesimo tertio
die Septembr' Anno regni sui decimo pro publico bono hujus regni in debito
exercitio facultat' Medicinae and bona administratione medicinar' habend'
incorporasset and fecisset de Johanne Chamber, Thoma Linacre and Ferdinando de
Victoria adtunc Medicis ejusdem nuper Regis, and Nichol' Halswell, Johanne
Francisco and Roberto Yaxley and omnibus aliis viris ejusdem facultat' tunc de
and infra Civitat' London unum Corpus and perpetuam Communitatem sive
Societatem facultatis medicinae, Et praefat' Doctoribus Johanni Chamber, Thomae
Linacre, Ferdinando de Victoria medicis ejusdem nuper Regis, Nichol' Halswell,
Johanni Francisco and Roberto Yaxley Medicis concessit quod ipsi omnesque
homines ejusdem facultat' de and in Civitat praedicta essent in re and nomine
unum Corpus and Communitas perpetua sive Collegium perpetuum, and quod eadem
Communitas sive Collegium singulis annis in perpetuum eligere potuissent and
facere de communitate illa aliquem providum virum and in facultate Medicinae
expertum in Praesident' ejusdem Collegii sive Communitatis ad supervidend'
recognoscend' and gubernand' pro illo anno Collegium sive Communitat' praedict'
and omnes homines ejusdem facultat' and negotia eorundem; Et quod iidem
Praesidens and Collegium sive Communitas haberent successionem perpetuam and
commune sigillum negotiis dictae Communitatis and Praesidentis imperpetuum
servitur.' Et quod ipsi and successores sui imperpetuum forent personae habiles
and capaces ad perquirend' and possidend' in feodo and perpetuitate terras and
tenementa, reddit' and alias possession' quascunque. Concessit etiam idem nuper
Rex eis and successoribus suis pro eodem nuper Rege and hered' suis, quod ipsi
and successores sui potuissent perquirere sibi and successoribus suis tam in
dicta Urbe quam extra terras and tenementa quaecunque Annuum valorem duodecim
librar' non exceden' Statuto de alienatione ad manum mortuam non obstante. Et
quod ipsi per nomina Praesidentis Collegii seu Communitatis facultat' Medicinae
London placitare and implacitari potuissent coram quibuscunque Judicibus in
Curiis and Action' quibuscunque. Et quod praedict' Praesidens and Collegium
sive Communitas and eor' successores congregationes licitas and honestas de
seipsis ac Statuta and ordinationes pro salubri gubernatione, supervisu and
correctione Collegii sive Communitatis praedict' and omnium hominum eandem
facultat' in dicta Civitate seu per septem milliaria in circuitu ejusdem
Civitat' exercen' secundum necessitat' exigentiam quoties and quando opus
foret, facere valiant licite and impune sine impedimento dicti nuper Regis
haered' vel successor' fuor', Justiciarior', Escaetor', Vicecomitum and al'
Ballivor' vel Ministror' ipsius nuper Regis haered' vel successor' suor'
quorumcunque. Concessit etiam idem nuper Rex eisdem Praesidenti and Collegio
sive Communitati and successoribus suis quod nemo in dicta Civitate aut per
septem milliaria in circuitu ejusdem exerceret dictam facultat' nisi ad hoc per
dictum Praesidentem and Communitatem seu successores eorum qui pro tempore
forent admissus esset per ejusdem Praesidentis and Collegii literas sigillo suo
communi sigillat' sub poena centum solidor' pro quolibet mense quo non admiss.
eandem facultatem exerceret, dimidium inde dicto nuper Regi and haered' suis
and dimidium dicto Praesidenti and Collegio applicand' prout in eisdem literis
Patent' hic in Cur' prolat' before continetur. Cumque etiam in Statuto in
Parliament' dicti nuper Regis Henrici Octavi tent' apud London decimo quinto
die Aprilis Anno regni sui quarto decimo and abinde prorogat' usque Westm' in
Com' Midd' ult' die Julii Anno regni dicti nuper Regis quinto decimo and tunc
and ibidem tent' inactitat' fuit, quod praedicta Corporatio praedictae
Communitat' and Societat' facultat' Medicinae praed' and omnia and singula
concessa, articles, and al' res content' and specificat' in praedictis literis
Patent' forent approbat' concess. ratificat' and confirmat' and clare
authorizat' and admiss. bona legitima and valida Anglice available praefat.
corpori incorporat' and eorum successoribus imperpetuum in tam amplo and largo
modo quam capi, aestimari and construi potuisset pro eadem, prout in eodem
Statuto int' alia before continetur. Praedictus tamen Adrianus qui ad dictam
facultatem exercend' per Praesidentem and Communitatem facultatis Medicinae
London praed' per aliquas literas Praesidentis and Communitatis praed' sigillo
suo communi sigillat' non admissus est nec unquam antehac admissus fuit,
Statut' praed' minime ponderans nec poenam in praedictis literis Patent'
content' verens dictam facultatem Medicinae per spacium viginti mensium jam
ult' elaps. and prox' praeceden' ante diem exhibition' hujus billae scil'
vicesimo tertio die Octobris Anno regni domini Caroli secundi nunc Regis
Angliae vicesimo septimo in Civitate London praedicta videlicet in Parochia
beatae Mariae de Arcubus in Warda de Cheap London exercuit and adhuc exercet
contra formam literar' Paten' praedictar' and Statuti praedicti, per quod actio
accrevit tam dicto domino Regi nunc quam eisdem Praesidenti Collegio feu
Communitat' ad exigend' and habend' de praefat' Adriano praed' Centum libras
videlicet pro quolibet mense praedictor' viginti mensium centum solid.
Praedictus tamen Adrianus licet saepius requisit' etc. praed. centum libras
praefat' domino Regi and eisdem Praesidenti Collegio seu Communitati praed' seu
eor' alteri nondum solvit sed ill' eis hucusque solvere omnino contradixit and
adhuc contradic' ad dampnum ipsorum Praesident' Collegii seu Communitat' praed'
qui tam, etc. quadragint' librar'. Et inde tam pro eodem domino Rege quam pro
seipsis producunt sectam, etc.

Et praedictus Adrianus per Hugonem Gamlyn Attorn' suum ven' and defend' vim
and injur' quando, etc. Et dicit quod praedict' Praesidens Collegium seu
Communit' qui tam, etc. action' suam praed' inde versus eum habere seu
manutenere non debent quia dicit quod non habetur aliquod tale recordum
alicujus talis Statut' Parliamenti praed' Henrici Octavi nuper Regis Angliae
edit' qual' per praed' Praesiden' Collegium seu Communitat' qui tam, etc. in
Narration' praed' superius inde recitat' and spec'. Et hoc parat' est
verificare unde pet' Judicium si praed. Praesiden' Collegium seu Communitas qui
tam, etc. action' suam praed' inde versus eum habere seu manutenere debeant,
etc.

Et praedicti Praesiden' Collegium seu Communitas facultat' Medicinae London
qui tam, etc. dic. quod ipsi per aliqua per praed. Adrianum superius placitando
allegat' ab action sua praedicta tam pro dicto domino Rege quam pro seipsis
inde versus ipsum Adrianum habend' praecludi non debent. Quia dic' quod habetur
tale record' praedicti Actus Parliamenti quale ipsi iidem Praesidens Collegium
seu Communitas facultat' Medicinae London qui tam, etc. superius inde narra^^^
allegaver' prout per record' inde in cur' Cancellar' dicti domini Regis nunc
apud Westm' in com' Midd' de recordo residen' before constat de recordo. Et
hoc parati sunt verificare per record' inde prout cur' hic cons. etc. Et
superinde dictum est per Cur' hic praefat' Praesiden' Collegio seu Communitat'
facultat' Medicinae London qui tam, etc. quod habeant record' praed' Actus
Parliamenti coram domino Rege apud Westm' die prox' post -- periculo suo
incumbend'. Idem dies dat' est praedicto Adriano ibidem, etc. Ad quem diem
coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' parts praed. per Attorn' suos praed'. Et
praed. Praesiden' Collegium seu Communitas facultat' Medicinae London qui tam,
etc. deliberavit hic in Cur' dicti domini Regis record' praed. Actus
Parliamenti superius allegat. huc missum e Cur' Cancellar' dicti domini Regis
nunc virtute cujusdam brevis ex praed Cur' Cancellar' dicti domini Regis nunc
emanen' ac Justic' domini Regis ad placita coram ipso Rege in Cur' hic tenend'
assign' direct' Quod quidem Record' reman' hic int' Record' hujus Termini fine
die affilat', etc. super quo Record' praed' lecto and audit' and per Cur' dicti
domini Regis nunc hic diligent' examinat' manifest' apparet Cur' domini Regis
hic quod habetur tale Record' Actus Parliament' praed' qual' per praed'
Praesiden' Collegium seu Communitat' facultat' Medicinae London qui tam, etc.
superius allegat' existit. Ideo cons. est quod dictus dominus Rex nunc and
praed' Praesidens Collegium seu Communitas facultat' Medicinae London qui tam,
etc. recuperent versus praefat' Adrianum debitum praed' Centum librar' praed'
per ipsum Adrianum forisfact' tam domino Regi quam praefat' Praesidenti
Collegio seu Communitat' facultat' Medicinae London qui tam, etc. occasion
exercitii sui facultat' M^^icinae in Civit' London praed' contra formam
literar. Paten' praed' and Statuti praed' Unde una medietas sit dicto domino
Regi nunc, altera vero medietas inde praefat' Praesiden' Collegio seu
Communitat' facultat' Medicinae London qui tam, etc. Et praedictus Adrianus in
Misericordia, etc.

De Termino Sancti Hilarii Anno 27 and 28 Car. 2. and 1675. in Banco Regis.
THe President and College of Physicians Plaintiffs against Huybert, Defendant.

The Plaintiffs sued the Defendant upon their Letters Patents of H. 8. and the
Statute of 14 H. 8. cap. 5. which confirms the same Letters Patents, for
practicing of Physic in London for several months mentioned in the Declaration
without any license or leave of the College of Physicians, whereby he forfeits
five pounds for every month.

The Defendant pleaded null tiel Record, videlicet, that there is no Record of
any such Statute as the Plaintiffs have supposed in the Declaration. And the
Plaintiffs having joined issue thereupon in Michaelmass Term last, had then
aday given to bring forth the Record thereof until this present Hilary Term:
And now the Tenor of the Record of the said Statute was by way of Mittimus sent
out of the Court of Chancery into the Court of Kings Bench to prove the issue
for the Plaintiffs, by which it appeared to the Court of Kings Bench that there
is such an Act of Parliament as the Plaintiffs did declare upon.

Thereupon the Counsel at the Bar for the Defendant made two objections.

First, that search had been made by the Defendant among the Records of
Parliament, and it does not appear there that the Royal assent was to this Act
of Parliament mentioned in the Plaintiffs declaration and therefore there is
not in truth or in Law any such Act of Parliament. For when Statutes are
enrolled, the Royal assent ought to be entered upon the Roll also.

Hales the Lord Chief Justice answered, that this objection if it should be
allowed to be a good one, would endanger not only this Act but many Acts of
Parliament which have never yet been questioned. For there are many Acts of
Parliament, upon the Rolls whereof, the Royal Assent does not appear,
especially if they be ancient Acts; And yet they have been ever received as
good Acts of Parliament. For the method of proceeding in the making of Acts of
Parliament was anciently different from that which is now used: For formerly a
Bill in the nature of a Petition was delivered to the Commons and by the
Commons to the Lords, and then was entered upon the Lords Rolls, and there the
Royal Assent was entered also. And upon this as a groundwork the Judges used at
the end of the Parliament to draw up the Act of the Parliament into the Form of
a Statute, which afterward was entered upon the Rolls called the Statute Rolls,
which were different Rolls from those called the Lords Rolls or the Rolls of
Parliament. Upon which Statute Rolls neither the Bill or Petition from the
Commons, nor the Answer of the Lords, nor the Royal Assent was entered, but
only the Statute as it was drawn up and penned by the Judges. And this was the
method till about H. 5 's time; and in his time 'twas desired that the Acts of
Parliament might be drawn up and penned by the Judges before the end of the
Parliament: And this was by reason of a complaint then made that the Statutes
were not fairly and equally drawn up and worded after the Parliament was
dissolved or prorogued.

In H. 6 's time the former method was altered, and then Bills continentes
formam Actus Parliamenti were first used to be brought into the House. The
Bills were (before they were brought into the House) ready drawn in the Form of
an Act of Parliament, and not in the Form of a Petition as before; Upon which
Bills 'twas written by the Commons Soit bail al Seigneurs, and by the Lords
Soit bail al Roy, and by the King Le Roy le voet. All this was written upon
the Bill, and the Bill thus endorsed was to remain with the Clerk of the
Parliament, and he was to enter the Bill thus drawn at first in the Form of an
Act of Parliament or Statute upon the Statute Rolls, without entering of the
Answer of the King, Lords and Commons upon the Statute Roll. And then issued
out Writs to the Sheriffs with transcripts of the Statute Rolls, viz. of the
Bill drawn at first in the Form of a Statute, and without the answer of the
King, Lords and Commons to the Bill, to proclaim the Statutes.

Now this Record which is before us in Court upon the Mittimus is not a
transcript of the Bill upon which the answer of the King, Lords and Commons was
written, but it is a transcript of the Entry which was made upon the Statute
Roll, upon which Roll it is not necessary that the Royal Assent must be entered.
And though oftentimes the Royal Assent has been entered by the Clerk upon the
Statute Rolls, yet it is not necessary that it should be there to make a good
Statute, it having been before upon the Bill. There be many Statutes which have
not the Royal Assent to them entered upon the Statute Rolls. This objection
would destroy half the Acts of Parliament that be. If in the body of the
Statute it self the consent of the King, Lords and Commons does not appear,
it is a void Statute, it is felo de se; As in the case of 4 H. 7. fol. 18. (which
case is cited in Hobarts reports fol. 111. in the case there between the King
and the Lord Hunsdon and the Countess Dowager of Arundel and the Lord William
Howard) upon an Act of Attainder of a particular person, the consent of the
Commons did not appear in it, and therefore says the book, all the Judges held
clearly that it was no Act, and therefore he was restored. And yet it does not
hold true generally, that in the body of the Act the three Assents must
particularly appear, especially in cases of Ancient Statutes: The reason is,
because the Forms of drawing up and wording ancient Statutes were very various,
as 8 Cook Prince's Case, King Edw. 3. authoritate Parliamenti grants by an
instrument in Form of a Charter, yet it is there held that it was a Statute.

And this very Act here in question of 14 H. 8. has always been taken to be a
good Act, as in Dr. Bonham's case in the 8 report, and in the 4 Inst. and in
Dr. Butler's case in Cro. Car. and in Jones's report.

But further Hales said, that in this case here the Court is bound up to give
Judgment upon the Record that is certified unto the Court: And by the Record
certified it appears to the Court, that it is a good Act of Parliament; for in
the Certificate made to the Court the three Assents of the King, Lords and
Commons are contained in the body of the Act. There be other Satutes of the
same Sessions of Parliament, viz. in 14 H. 8. which be as our Statute is, viz.
without the Royal assent upon the Roll of the Statute, as the Act about the
marrying of the Six Clerks, cap. 8. and the Act of the Port of Southampton,
cap. 13. and other Statutes of the same Sessions; and yet they have not been
ever questioned: and in truth the Royal Assent was at the end of the Bills of
that Sessions.

If the Defendant thinks that the certificate here is false, it being of an Act
of Parliament, whenas he thinks there is no such Act; The party grieved by such
false Certificate is to take his remedy by way of Action upon the Case against
the Person that made such false Certificate, as the Clerk of the Parliament or
the Clerk in Chancery; but the Defendant cannot be admitted here in this Court
to averr contrary to the Record certified, and so to relieve himself this way;
for we have no power over those Records; we cannot cause the Parliament Rolls
themselves to be brought into this Court, we take them to be as they are
certified unto us.

Then the Counsel for the Defendant made a second objection, viz. The issue
here is whether there be such a Record or no, and this issue is to be tried by
the Record it self: For all Records are of that high nature, that they can be
tried only by themselves. Now here the Tenor of the Record only, is certified
and not the Record it self, and therefore the issue here is not sufficiently
proved by the Plaintiffs in Law. And Pages case in the 5 rep. was cited, where
it is resolved that the Tenor of a Record is not pleadable at Common Law; that
it is not sufficient at Common Law to show forth to the Court the Tenor of
Letters Patents, but that the Letters Patents themselves must be produced to
the Court. It Is the Record it self only that is pleadable, and not the Tenor
thereof; and by consequence it is the Record it self that must be certified here
to prove this issue of null tiel Record, and a Certificate of the Tenor only,
is not sufficient.

Hales the Lord Chief Justice answered, that though the Tenor of a Record be
not pleadable, yet upon the issue of null tiel Record the Tenor of the Record is
sufficient to prove that issue, the Tenor thereof being sent by way of Mittimus
into the Court where the issue is depending, upon that particular purpose only.

Null tiel Record may well be pleaded to a private Act of Parliament, but it
cannot be pleaded to a public Act of Parliament: the reason of the difference
is, for that the Court is bound to take notice of public Acts of Parliament,
but not of private ones.

When execution may be awarded upon the Record certified, there a Certificate
of the Tenor is not sufficient, because no execution can be granted upon a
Tenor only: the reason thereof is this, if execution might be upon the Tenor,
then two executions might be, viz. one upon the Tenor in one Court, the other
upon the Record it self in the other Court, and 'twould be against reason, that
two executions should be for the same thing. But where the Writ which commands
the Court below to certify a Record, does also tie up the hands of that Court
from awarding any execution, there a Certificate of the Tenor only is
sufficient, as in some cases of Writs of Error upon Judgment given in other
Courts.

The like of Certiorari's to remove presentiments, upon which process may be
awarded in this Court.

The Reason why it is not sufficient to plead the Tenor of Letters Patents or to
show or produce to the Court the Tenor of Letters Patents, as in Pages case is
resolved, is, because the Letters Patents are the private conveyance of a
particular person, and therefore he must plead and show forth and produce to
the Court the Letters Patents themselves, and the Tenor thereof was not
sufficient at the Common Law.

But upon null tiel Record pleaded, a Certificate of the Tenor only and not of
the Record it self has always been held a sufficient proof of that issue, and
the Tenor certified is to be filed in this Court and to remain here always to
this purpose only, viz. as a proof of this issue; but the Record it self
remains where it was before, to be made use of for any purposes that may happen
hereafter.

The rest of the Judges were of the same opinion, and so Judgment was given for
the Plaintiff.

De Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 28 Car. secundi, 1676. Banco Regis.
The King, and the President and College of Physicians Plaintiffs, against
Marchamont Needham Defendant.
THe President and the College qui tam, etc. brought an action of debt upon the
Statute of 14 H. 8. cap. 5. for so much money against the Defendant for
practicing Physic for so many months without license of the College, whereby
he was to forfeit 5 li. per month, one moiety thereof to the King, and the
other moiety to the President and College.

The Defendant pleaded as to part of the money in the Declaration mentioned null
tiel Record as the said Act of Parliament; and as to the Residue of the money,
the Defendant pleaded nil debet.

The Plaintiffs demurred to the Bar.

The cause of the demurrer was, for that the Defendant's plea was double, viz.
it contained two matters, one whereof alone would go in answer to the whole
money in the Declaration mentioned, and would of it self be a good and full
Bar to the Plaintiffs Action in case the said matter be true as the Defendant
alleges, and that is the matter of null tiel Record; and therefore the
pleading of null tiel Record to part only, and the pleading of other matter,
viz. nil debet to the residue, makes the Defendant's plea in Bar to be
vicious, and to be an ill plea in Law.

The Council for the Defendant did then object, that the Plaintiffs Declaration
is naught; it is an action of debt brought by the President and College qui tam,
etc. upon the Statute, and an action of debt does not lie: the Plaintiffs
should have brought an information upon the Statute and not an Action of debt
upon the Statute, for the Statute does not give an action of debt, and
therefore an action of debt does not lie.

Twisden Justice answered, that an action of debt does lie by equity and
construction of the Statute.

Jones Justice said, that in the Statute of Tithes in 3 Ed. 6. no action of
debt is mentioned, and yet an action of debt lies upon that Statute, and so
here.

Thereupon Rule was given by the Court that Judgment should be entered for the
Plaintiffs.

In Mich. Term. Anno Car. secundi xxvi.
THe College brought their Action against John Bourne, to which he pleaded nil
debet, and upon trial of the Cause at Guild Hall before Judge Twisden the
Plaintiffs recovered 40 li.

Trin. xxxv. Car. secundi.
THe President and College, etc. brought an Action of Debt upon the Statute of
the 14 of H. 8. against Frederick Harder for practicing Physic, and thereupon
had a Verdict against him at Westminster. for 25 li. which he paid, and the Costs
that were taxed.

The same Term they had a Verdict against Nathaniel Merry for 40 li. and
against Richard Stone for 45 li.

College Questions resolved by the Lord Chancellor and Judges, in the fifth of
King James his Reign, An. Dom. 1607.
THe King's most Excellent Majesty having directed his Letters to the Right
honorable Thomas Lord Ellesmere, Lord Chancellor of England, and to Sir John
Popham, Knight, Lord Chief Justice of England and one of his Highness's most
honorable Privy Council, They the said Lord Chancellor and Lord Chief Justice
by virtue of the same Letters called unto them Sr. Thomas Fleminge, Knight,
then Lord Chief Baron of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, Sir Thomas
Walmesley and Sr. Peter Warburton, Knights, two of his Majesty's Justices of
the Court of Common Pleas, and Sir David Williams and Sir Laurence Tanfield,
Knights, two of his Majesty's Justices of the King's Bench, and after due
consideration had both of the Charter of King H. 8. made unto the said
President and College of Physicians in the tenth year of his Reign, and several
Acts of Parliament thereof made, one in the 14 year of the same King, and the
other in the first year of Q. Mary, for the ordering and governing of the said
College and of all the Practisers in London and 7 Miles compass, did on the
first of May 1607. at the house of the said Lord Chancellor, called York house,
resolve the several questions hereafter mentioned, as is expressed under every
Question.

Tho. Harries.

These Questions were resolved as is expressed under every question by the
right honorable the Lord Chancellor of England, Lord Chief Justice of England,
the Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Justice Walmesley, Justice Warburton,
Justice Williams and Justice Tanfield, being assembled by the King's Majesty's
appointment to examine, view and consider of the Charters, Statutes and Laws
made for the government of the College of Physicians in London and the
Practisers of Physic there the first day of May, 1607. at the house of the
Lord Chancellor.

Quest. 1. Whether Graduates of Oxford and Cambridge may practice in London or
7 miles compass of the same without license under the said College Seal, by
virtue of the clause in the end of the Statute of 14 H. 8. and whether that
clause has not relation to the Statute of 3 H. 8. only, or how far it does
extend?

Resp. All resolved, that no Graduate that is not admitted and licensed by the
President and College of Physicians under their Common Seal, could practice in
London or within 7 miles compass of the same.

Quest. 2. Whether, by Graduates, Graduates in Physic only are to be
understood.

Resp. They resolved, That the exception in the Statute of 14 H. 8. cap. of
Graduates in the two Universities, is to be understood only of Graduates of
Physic and of no others. And all resolved, That by that exception those
Graduates may practice in all other places of England out of London and 7 miles
of the same without examination; But not in London nor within the said Circuit
of 7 miles.

Quest. 3. If Graduates not admitted to practice in London practice there,
whether, for evil practice or misdemeanour therein, they be not subject to the
Correction and government of the College?

Resp. They all agreed, That they are subject to the government and correction
of the College by an express clause of the said Charter enacted, which gives
to the President and College Supervisionem, Scrutinium, Correctionem and
Gubernationem as well of all persons using the practice of Medicine within the
City, etc.

Quest. 4. If they may not practice without admission of the College (as their
Letters Patents plainly import) Then whether such Graduates are not subject to
the examination, without which there were never any admitted; and without which
the admission cannot be approved; because every Graduate is not absolutely good
ipso facto?

Resp. It was resolved by all, That all that practiced or should practice
Physic either in London or within the compass of 7 miles of the same, must
submit themselves to the examination of the President and College if they be
required thereunto by their authority, notwithstanding any license, allowance
or privilege given them in Oxford or Cambridge either by their degree or
otherwise.

Concerning Punishment and Correction against Offenders.
Quest. 1. Whether the President and four Censors together, or the Censors
alone may not commit to Prison without bail or mainprize all Offenders in the
practice of Physic according to the Statute of primo Mariae, and how long,
whether till he have paid such Fine as shall be assessed upon him, or have
submitted himself to their Order, and in what manner?

Resp. They all resolved, That for not well doing, using or practicing the
faculty or Art of Physic, or for disobedience or contempts done and committed
against any Ordinance made by the College, by virtue and according to the power
and authority to them granted, they may commit the Offenders without bail or
mainprize, as the words of the Statute are. Which they all resolved, could not
be altered or interpreted otherwise than the express words of the Statute are.

Quest. 2. Whether they may not commit to prison for disobedience and contempt
of the private Statutes and Ordinances of the College made for the better
government thereof, and for not payment of such reasonable Fines as shall be
imposed by the President and Censors for maintenance of the said College, among
the Members of the same College?

Resp. They all resolved, That the President and College might commit to prison
for offenses and disobedience done or committed against any lawful ordinance
made by the said College, and might impose reasonable Fines for the breach
thereof, and detain the parties committed till these Fines were satisfied.

Quest. 3. Whether they may not justly take upon every admission a reasonable
sum of money for the better maintenance and defraying of necessary expenses, as
in other Corporations?

Resp. They all held, That they might take such reasonable sums.

Quest. 4. Whether those only are to be committed that are offenders in Non
been exequendo, faciendo and utendo facultate Medicinae, as in the Letters
Patents; and such as are sufficient and not admitted, are to be sued for 5 li.
a month and not be committed?

Resp. They all held, That by the Charter and Acts of Parliament they might
commit Offenders and Practisers that offended in Non been exequendo, faciendo
and utendo facultate: But for the committing to prison of such as practice (not
being admitted by the College) they held it doubtful, for that the Charter and
Statute do in that case inflict a punishment of 5 li. a month against such
practiser without admittance by the College. But they all resolved, That if the
President and College made an Ordinance to prohibit the practicing of all
without admittance under the Common Seal of the said College, That for breach
and contempt of this Ordinance, the President and College might both impose a
reasonable Fine upon the Offender and commit him without bail or mainprise.

Quest. 5. Whether refusal to come to be examined upon warning given be not a
sufficient cause of Commitment?

Resp. They all resolved, That if the College do make an Ordinance, That if any
practiser of Physic in London or within 7 miles of the same shall obstinately
or wilfully refuse to be examined by the Censors of the College in non been
exequendo, faciendo and utendo the art of Physic or his Medicines or Receipts,
that the said President and Censors may commit him to prison, there to remain
without bail or mainprise, until he be delivered by the President and Censors,
and to forfeit and pay to the said College some reasonable sum of money, That
the same Ordinance will be good and lawful. And if any after shall offend
contrary to the said Ordinance, the President and Censors may lawfully commit
such Offender to prison, there to remain without bail or mainprise until he
shall be delivered by the said President and Censors.

It pleased the Lord Chancellor to move these questions to the Judges as
material for the execution of the Statutes.

1. Quest. Whether the party committed for unskilful or temerarious practice
may have an Action of false imprisonment against them, and thereby draw in
question or issue the goodness or badness of the Physic?

Resp. All resolved, That the party so committed was concluded by the sentence
and Judgment of the 4 Censors of the College of Physicians.

2. Quest. Whether if any not admitted do practice Physic within London or 7
Miles of the same, but once, twice or thrice in one month, be an offender
against the Charter and Statutes of the College?

Resp. All resolved he was, if he be a professed Physician.

These I conceive to be the resolutions of their Lordships and the Judges upon
the Questions; which I humbly refer to themselves to affirm or disaffirm.

John Crook. Tho. Foster. Tho. Harries.


A brief account of the College of Physicians Case drawn up in relation to
their finding of Arms, keeping of Watch and Ward, or bearing any Parish offices.
IN the roth year of King H. 8. the Physicians of London and within 7 miles of
the same, upon many important reasons mentioned in their Royal Patent, were
made a Body Corporate, and endowed with many privileges, which in the 14th and
15th of his Reign were confirmed by Act of Parliament.

In the 32th of the same King's Reign several additional privileges were
granted them by a second Act of Parliament, by which they were discharged from
keeping any Watch and Ward, or being chosen to any Office in London or the
Suburbs thereof, and were thereby enabled to practice Surgery as well as
Physic in the said City, etc. By which clause, they were entitled to the
privilege granted the Surgeons of being discharged from bearing Arms, etc. by
the 5 H. 8. 6.

In the 1 Q. M. 9. their Charter was a second time confirmed by Act of
Parliament and additional Privileges granted to them: Which privileges, with a
freedom from finding Arms, were continued to them without interruption till
1588, and it being then a time of most imminent and public danger, the Lord
Mayor of London and Court of Aldermen charged the College with Arms, whereupon
they applied themselves to Queen Elizabeth and her Council, upon which
Secretary Walsingham wrote a Letter to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London,
that they should no more trouble the College, but permit them to live quietly
and free from that charge. After this, they met with no farther trouble or
molestation till the Reign of K. James, at which time the College being charged
with Arms, Sir William Paddy pleaded their Privilege before Sir Thomas
Middleton Lord Mayor and a full Court of Aldermen, and Sir Henry Mountague
Recorder, an account of which is at large Printed in this Book.

But the issue thereof was (in short) the following, viz. That the Recorder
then perusing every branch of the Statutes recited by Sir William Paddy, with
the reasons by him urged; and opening every part thereof at large, did
conclude, that the Act of Parliament did extend to give the College as much
immunity as in any sort to the Surgeons. Whereupon the Court desired a List
of the Members of the College, which was immediately given them, and an Order
entered for a dispensation to the College from bearing of Arms; and also a
Precept was then awarded by the Mayor and Court to commit all other Physicians
or Surgeons refusing to bear or find Arms, who were not of the College allowed,
or Surgeons licensed according to form.

About 3 years after this debate, King James granted the College his Royal
Charter, wherein he confirms all former Statutes and Patents given them by his
Royal Progenitors, and therein granted To all and every Physician of the
College to be wholly and absolutely free from providing or bearing of any
Armor or other Munition, etc any Act or Statute to the contrary
notwithstanding. After this, the College enjoyed this privilege without
interruption during the Reign of King Charles the First of glorious memory
until the times of the late Rebellion; in which, Rights both Civil and Sacred
were invaded, and our College exposed to public sale by mercenary Villains.
But upon the return of his Sacred Majesty, He was pleased to take this Royal
foundation into his protection, and in the 15th year of his Reign gave them his
Letters Patents, confirming all their former Privileges, and endowing them with
many new ones; amongst which, this of being exempted from bearing and providing
Arms, etc. is contained in the following words. And we will and by these
presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors do give and grant unto the said
President, Fellows and Commonalty of the King's College of Physicians and their
Successors, that all and every Physician and Physicians, that now is or are, or
that hereafter shall be elected and admitted and made a Member of the same
College, shall from time to time be wholly and absolutely freed, exempt and
discharged of and from serving and appearing in any Jury or Iuries for the
trial of any matter or cause, or taking, finding or executing of any Commission
or inquisition whatsoever, and of and from being or chosen to be Churchwarden,
Constable, Scavenger, or any such or the like Officer or Officers; and of and
from the undertaking, execution or exercise of all and every the same and such
like Office and Offices, place and places, and every of them; and also of and
from all Watch and Ward, and of and from bearing and providing Arms within our
Cities of London or Westminster or either of them, or within 7 miles compass
thereof. And in case they or any of them shall at any time hereafter by any
ways or means be designed, appointed, nominated or chosen into, or to undergo,
or bear, or perform any of the said Office or Offices, place or places, Duty or
Duties or any of them within our said Cities or the Suburbs or Liberties
thereof, or limits aforesaid; That all and every such designation, appointment,
nomination, or election shall be utterly void and of none effect, Any Statute,
Act, Ordinance, Constitution, Order, Custom or Law to the contrary thereof in
any wise notwithstanding.

In the Seventeenth of his Majesty's Reign, he was pleased, pursuant to his
Royal Patent, to send the following Letter in behalf of the College by Sir
Alexander Frazier his chief Physician, the Superscription of which was:

To our trusty and well-beloved the Lord Mayor of our City of London for the
time being, and to the Deputy Lieutenants and Commissioners of the Militia of
London and Westminster that now are and hereafter shall be, and to all other
Officers and Ministers whom it may concern.
CHARLES R.

WHereas in conformity to several Grants and Charters made by our Royal
Progenitors Kings of England unto the College of Physicians in our City of
London, We have been pleased of our especial Grace and Favor to confirm all
their ancient Privileges and Immunities (with the addition of some further
Powers and Clauses for the reguiation of that faculty) by our Letters Patent
bearing date the 26th of March in the 15th year of our Reign; Wherein amongst
other things it is exprefly provided and by us granted that every Physician who
is or shall be a Member of the said College be free and exempt and discharged
of and from all Watch and Ward, and of and from bearing and providing Arms
within our Cities of London or Westminster or either of them, or within 7 miles
compass thereof: We have thought fit hereby to acquaint you therewith, and with
our pleasure thereupon; Willing and Requiring you in your several Places and
Stations to give effectual orders from time to time, that the said exemption
from Watch and Ward, and from bearing and providing Arms, be now and hereafter
punctually observed in favor of the Members of the said College within the
limits aforesaid; And that you suffer them not to be any wise molested on that
behalf. And for so doing this shall be your Warrant. Given at our Court at
Whitehall the 28th day of June 1665. in the seventeenth year of our Reign.

By his Majesty's Command, William Morice.
This is a true Copy of His Majesty's Letter,

Will. Morice.




Thus by the especial grace and favor of the Kings and Queens of England the
College of Physicians have been freed from bearing and providing Arms; and
though some particular Member may of late have been summoned upon that account
by the Lieutenancy, yet upon producing his Majesty's Patent and asserting his
Sovereign's Natural right in dispensing with a Corporation of men from bearing
and providing Arms (which was an inherent prerogative in the Crown; and
therefore an Act of Parliament was made in 13 Car. 2. 6. positively declaring,
That the sole and Supreme Power, government, command and disposition of all the
Militia and of all Forces by Sea and Land, etc, is and by the Laws of England
ever was the undoubted right of his Majesty and his Royal Predecessors) They
were freed from any further trouble. An instance of which we lately had in the
case of Dr. Novell then Candidate of the College of Physicians; who Anno 1680.
was summoned to appear before the Lieutenancy of London for not bearing and
providing Arms. Upon which Summons attending with the Patent of 15 Car. Secundi
Regis nunc, The Lieutenancy upon a long debate of this matter, desired him to
leave a Copy of that part of the Patent which exempted the Members of the said
College from bearing and providing of Arms, and they would advise with their
Council thereupon; ordering the Dr. to attend them their next Committee day,
in which they promised to give him their positive resolution. Accordingly he
attended, and they told him that they were satisfied that the words of the
Patent were sufficient to exempt the Members of the College from bearing and
providing Arms, and desired that a List of them might be given in under the
College Seal, which was accordingly done.

The Opinion of Sir Francis Pemberton (late Lord Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas) as to the College's finding Arms, given under his hand, April, 1680.
Quest. Whether the King may not excuse the College from finding Arms by virtue
of his Letters Patent granted after an Act of Parliament, which requires all
persons to find Arms without exception?

Ans. I conceive his Majesty may by his Patent excuse the College from finding
Arms, if he think sit.

The Opinions of Sir Edmund Saunders (late Lord Chief Justice of England) and
Mr. Holt, given under their hands upon the same account, An. Dom. 1682.
Quest. Whether the general clause of Non obstante in the King's Letters Patent
concerning the College of Physicians (expressed in these words, And we will and
by these presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors do give and grant unto the
said President, Fellows and Commonalty of the King's College of Physicians and
their Successors, that all and every Physician and Physicians that now is, or
are, or that hereafter shall be elected, admitted and made a member of the same
College, shall from time to time be wholly and absolutely freed, exempt and
discharged of and from bearing and providing Arms within our Cities of London
or Westminster, or either of them, or any of the Suburbs or Liberties of the
same Cities or either of them, or within 7 miles compass thereof, Any Statute,
Act, Ordinance, Constitution, Order, Custom or Law to the contrary thereof in
any wise notwithstanding) does operate upon the Acts of Parliament of the 13,
14 and 15. years of his now Majesty's Reign for regulating the Militia, and
thereby exempt the Members thereof from bearing or providing Arms according to
the purport of the said Acts, they being not by name mentioned in the said
clause of Non Obstante?

Sir Edmund Saunders his Opinion.
The Patent does discharge the Physicians from bearing or providing of Arms,
notwithstanding the Militia Act.

Mr. Holt his Opinion.
I conceive by the Patent, all the Members of the College are exempted from
being at any charge to wards the Militia.

FINIS.
AN HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE COLLEGE'S Proceedings AGAINST EMPIRICKS AND
Unlicensed Practisers, etc. In every Prince's Reign from their first
Incorporation to the Murder of the Royal Martyr, King Charles the First.

By CHARLES GOODALL Dr. in Physic, and Fellow of the said College of
Physicians.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1684.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Dr. Whistler PRESIDENT, The Censors, and Fellows of
the College of Physicians in London.
It Is now about 165 years since your College was first founded by Royal
Authority. The causes which moved the renowned Princes, King Henry 8. Q. Mary,
Q. Elizabeth, King James and our present Sovereign (whom God long preserve) to
stamp such eminent characters and signal marks of their Royal favor and bounty
upon you; cannot be unknown to those, who have read over the Acts of Parliament
passed in two Princes Reigns; with the Charters granted by others, and Printed
in this Book. In which, you may find it thus expressed; That they out of their
Princely wisdom deeply considering, and by the example of Foreign
well-governed States and Kingdoms truly understanding, how profitable,
beneficial and acceptable it would be unto the whole body of this Kingdom of
England, to restrain and suppress the excessive number of such, as daily
professed themselves learned and profound Practisers in the faculty of Physic;
Whereas in truth, they were men illiterate and unexperienced; rather
propounding unto themselves their private gain with the detriment of this
Kingdom, than to give relief in time of need.

And likewise duly considering, that by the rejecting of those illiterate and
unskilful practisers, those that were learned, grave, and profound practisers
in that faculty, should receive more bountiful reward; and also the
industrious Students of that profession, would be the better encouraged in
their studies and endeavors, etc.

Upon these and many other weighty Motives, causes and considerations (recited
at large in the forementioned Acts and Charters) did our Kings and Queens of
England, erect, found and establish a College, Commonalty, or Incorporation of
Physicians in the City and Suburbs of London, and for 7 miles every way in
distance from the same; to be, remain and have existence for ever. Now, much
honored Colleagues, How far you have answered the great and noble ends of these
Princely favors and Royal Grants, will fully appear in this book; I mean, as
to the primary cause of your Incorporation, viz. The restraining and
suppressing illiterate, unexperienced and unlicensed practisers.

As to the Second, viz. How far you and your predecessors have answered the
Character of learned, grave and profound practisers in the faculty of Physic,
will in some measure appear in this Epistle; wherein I have endeavored to give
a true, though brief account, of several memorable passages relating to the
Lives and Works of some of the eminent Physicians of this College.

This is a work (I must confess) more fit for a large Volume, than an Epistle;
a work, which I hope in due time may be attempted by a more able and elegant
pen, than I can pretend to: and that, because I know there want not good
materials to encourage such an honorable and worthy undertaking, several
Authors having already written somewhat memorable of the Worthies of this our
Royal College; our own Annals acquainting us with much more; and the learned
Dr. Hamey having left behind him (in a Manuscript of his own writing) the lives
of above 50 of them. Some of which were highly valued for their knowledge in
the learned Languages; others for being general Scholars, polite Latinists,
accurate Grecians, eloquent Orators, great Antiquaries, and deep Philosophers.
Others for the improvement of their own faculty in the Theoretick and Practick,
Anatomick and Spagirick parts thereof; that they were and are no less valued
and esteemed in other Countries than in their own; having by their matchless
and most incomparable works, not only merited, but obtained the name of
immortal. Some are admired and read in foreign Universities, as Hippocrates and
Galen were of old; and others so much valued for their late incomparable and
sagacious Medical observations; that the Disciples of foreign Professors are
obliged to a diligent reading and careful practice of them. No wonder
therefore, that Emperors and Princes have courted these Aesculapii of their
several Ages, to attend them in their Courts; and foreign Universities have
been so ambitious of encouraging them to ascend their Chairs; their excellent
learning and parts being of such an illustrious extraction. And that I might
not seem (by this their due character) to impose upon the World, or flatter
them; I will (as I promised) give a short Essay of a future History intended,
of the Memoirs of some of the worthy Members of this honorable Society.

The first of which I shall mention, was the most famous Dr. Thomas Linacer,
who was born at Canterbury, educated under the Learned Sellingus; and from him
sent to Oxford; where after a short stay, he was An. Dom. 1484. chosen Fellow
of All Souls College. In which he made great proficiency in Learning, and then
traveled into Italy, residing chiefly at Rome and Florence, where he highly
improved himself by daily conversation with the Learned men of that Age. No
English man, says Dr. Fuller, in those times had so learned Masters, viz.
Demetrius and Politian at Florence, and Hermolaus Barbarus at Rome; So noble
Patrons, viz. Laurence Medices Duke of Florence; who (whilst he was beyond the
Seas) was intimately familiar with him, admiring him for the greatness of his
Wit and Learning; K. Henry 7. and K. Henry 8. upon his return into England, (to
both which he was chief Physician;) So highborn Scholars, Prince Arthur
(eldest Son to Hen. 7.) with many Lords Sons his contemporaries; So learned
friends, Erasmus, Melancthon, Ludovicus Vives, Grocinus, Latimer, Tonstal, Sir.
Tho. More, etc. who, for his accurate skill in the Greek and Latin Languages,
in other Sciences, and in his own profession, esteemed him the ornament of his
Age; upon which account he gives him this following character, viz. That upon
his return into England he brought Languages along with him, and was the first
restorer of Learning in our Nation. It is a question whether he was a better
Latinist or Grecian, a better Grammarian or Physician, a better Scholar or man
for his moral deportment.

He was created Doctor of Physic in Oxford, and made public Professor of
that faculty; in which University he afterward founded 2 Physic Lectures, and
one in Cambridge. From Oxford he was commanded to Court by K. Hen. 7. to take
the principal care of his own and the Prince's health.

He was highly instrumental with K. Hen. 8. in the tenth year of his Reign, for
obtaining his Letters Patents for the founding of a College of Physicians in
London, etc. In which he was named with great honor as one of those 6 whom the
King first made choice of for constituting this Royal foundation. He was chosen
the first President of the College by the Physicians named in the King's
Patent; and continued in that office by an annual choice of the Electors for 7
years together; he being by them highly valued for his profound Learning, great
prudence, and excellent government. He kept all the College Comitia in his own
house during his life; died President of the College, and at his death gave
them for ever his house in Knight-rider street for a College and Library.

He translated several of Galen 's works (as De inaequali temperamento, de
temperamentis, de naturalibus facultatibus, de sanitate tuenda, de pulsuum usu,
de methodo medendi, etc.) into the Latin tongue, with that admirable elegance
and singular politeness and purity of style, that he not only exceeded all
former Interpreters of the great Galen, but deserved the following character
for his translations, which Erasmus has given in one of his Epistles, Mitto
tibi libros Galeni opera Th. Linacri melius Latin loquentes, quam antea Graece
loquebantur. Erasmus had that value for our famous Linacer, that in other
Epistles he often calls him Meum Linacrum, intimum amicum, praeceptorem,
patronum, etc. He wrote a Latin Grammar called Grammaticae rudimenta, which he
dedicated to the Princess Mary; which Grammar is now of such account in some
Universities in Poland, that all Students are posed in it, before they take
their first degree. He wrote a little before his death (at the earnest and
importunate request of some friends) a most admirable book, de emendata
Structura Latini Sermonis. Many other Books he left behind him extraneous to
his faculty, which for brevity sake I must now omit.

He died at London much lamented the twentieth of October, 1524. and was buried
under a stately Monument erected to his memory by Dr. Caius, in the Cathedral
Church of St. Paul 's; a little above which was a Phoenix placed, with the
following inscription.

Vivit post funera virtus. Dr. Richard Bartlot, was admitted into the College
of Physicians and made President thereof in the Reign of K. Hen. 8. in which he
lived and flourished, as likewise in the Reigns of K. Edw. 6. and Q. Mary. He
died An. Dom. 1557. with the following character given him by the Learned Dr.
Caius in his Annals; This good and venerable old man (very famous for his
Learning, great knowledge and experience in Physic,) died in the 87th year of
his age, at whose funeral the President and College attended; it being the
first time that the Statute book of the College adorned with silver was carried
before the President. He was buried in great St. Bartholomew 's.

Dr. William Butte Fellow of Gonvile-hall in Cambridge, and Physician to K.
Hen. 8. was Anno Dom. 1529. admitted into the College of Physicians. Upon which
he was required to subscribe to the due observation of the Statutes of the
College, and to give his promise to use his best endeavors for advancing the
honor and perpetuity thereof. He is mentioned by Bishop Parkhurst and Fox with
honor; Ascham, in his Epistle Commendatory to Dr. Wend, extolls him highly;
and the learned Dr. Caius has dedicated most of his Books to him. His esteem
was such in the College of Physicians, that he is entered in their Annals with
the following Character; Vir gravis; eximia literarum cognitione, singulari
judicio, summa experientia, and prudenti consilio Dr. He died in the Reign of
King Henry the Eighth, and lies buried in Fulham Church, with this Inscription;
Guil. Buttius Eq. Aur. and Medicus Regis Henr. viij. etc. obiit November. 17.
1545. etc.

Dr. William Freeman was admitted a member of the College, Anno Dom. 1529.
After which, his Learning and eminency were such, that he was made Censor,
Elect and President of that Society. In the time of his Presidentship, viz.
Anno Dom. 1546. he with Dr. Bartlot, Clement and Wotton procured from John
Barker King at Arms, the College Arms; Manum videlicet e nube demissam aegri
brachium complectentem, dimidiatas irides per ambitum, and in imo malum
granatum, ut in ejus literis testimonialibus ad hoc conscriptis, videre licet.

Dr. George Owen, a very learned and great Man, was bred in the University of
Oxford, and after made Physician to King Henry the Eighth, and Queen Mary. He
was admitted into the College An. Dom. 1544. He with Dr. Wend, and Dr. Huys
(by their care and interest in Q. Mary) procured that eminent Statute for the
College, which passed in 1 Q. Mary, Sess. 2. C. 9. printed page 30, etc. of
this Book. He was of that repute in Q. Mary 's Reign, that there falling out an
unhappy difference betwixt the College of Physicians and the University of
Oxford, concerning their giving a degree in Physic to an illiterate person,
rejected by the College; (which not being composed betwixt themselves) the
College made their Appeal by Letter to the Right Reverend Cardinal Pool
Chancellor of Oxford, and then Commissionated by Q. Mary to visit that
University for the Reformation of Religion; who so ordered affairs there, that
Oxford was obliged to consult this Learned Man, and Dr. Thomas Huys (the
Queen's Physicians) de instituendis rationibus, quibus Oxon. Academia in
admittendis Medicis uteretur. Which being agreed betwixt them, Hoc Statutum
Reverendissimus approbavit, and authoritate suae legationis and Cancellariatus,
ut observent, injunxit.

He and the learned Dr. Thomas Huys, and Dr. Robert Huye, with several other
Physicians of note, died of a Malignant, Epidemical, Intermittent Fever; which
reged so severely, An. Dom. 1558. and is so admirably described by Dr. Caius in
his Annals, that I could not omit inserting the History of this Disease, in his
own words.

Tertio die Octobris, An. Dom. 1558. Electio Praesidis erat, quod postridie
Divi Michaelis ex statuto esse nequibat; distractis hinc inde omnibus Collegis
in populi subsidium; Qui febribus tertianis, duplicibus tertianis, and
tertianis continuis ita vexabatur populariter per omnem mensem Augusti, and
Septembr. perque universam insulam Britanniam, perinde ac peste aliqua, ut
nullus locus quieti aut privatis negotiis esse potuit. Ex hoc morbo periere
multi, non in Urbe solum, sed ruri etiam; inter quos Urbanus Huys erat, quod
dolens refero, ex immodica fatigatione per aestus graviores, dum aulicos
curaret, morbo correptus.

Per eos menses vix erant sani, qui aegris ministrarent; vix Messores qui
messem meterent, aut in horreum recolligerent.

Hos morbos exceperunt Quartanae populariter, ut non alias aeque per hominum
memoriam; and aliquot Quintanae and Octonae etiam, sed hae breves and sine
periculo; Illae plurimos de vita sustulerunt, flores videlicet gravitatis,
consilii and aetatis maturae.

Ex his Georgius Owenus erat, Regius Medicus and Dr. Oxon. Qui obiit die 10.
Octobr. and sepultus est apud S. Stephanum in Walbroke Londini, 24. ejusdem
mensis.

Dr. John Caius was born in Norwich, bred in Gonvile-Hall in Cambridge; from
whence he traveled into Italy, and studied there under the learned Joannes
Baptista Montanus; He took his Doctor's degree first at Bononia, where, for
some years, he was Greek Lecturer. At the age of 21 years he began to translate
out of Greek into Latin Nicephorus Callistus 's Treatise of Confession in
Prayer, and another of Chrysostom, de modo orandi: and out of Latin into
English Erasmus 's Paraphrase on Jude, and Epitomis'd his Book de vera
Theologia.

After his return into England, he took his Doctor's degree in Cambridge, and
was so considerable a Benefactour to Gonvile-Hall, as that he obtained Letters
Patents of Philip and Mary, which made him Co-founder; and the Hall had then
this Title given it, viz. Gonvile and Caius College, Founded to the Honor of
the Annunciation of Blessed Mary the Virgin. He built the Court called after
his Name, Caius-Court, of freestone, and gave his Books and Plate to the
College; He likewise Founded 3 Fellowships, and 20 Scholarships; procured the
College a new Coat of Arms, Symbols of the faty of Physic.

He was admitted into the College of Physicians in the Reign of King Edward the
Sixth, An. Dom. 1547. He there passed through all the learned and difficult
Offices thereof, having for several years been chosen Censor, often Register
and Treasurer, (...) seven years or more, President of this Royal Found^^ion.
He was esteemed a man of a happy wit, great ^^^ning, and admirable skill in the
Greek Tongue, as well as in his own Profession; He had the repute of one of the
greatest Physicians of that Age, and was Physician to King Edward the Sixth,
Queen Mary, and for many years to Queen Elizabeth.

He was the first Inventor of those Ensigns of Honor by which the President of
the College is distinguished from the rest of the Fellows, the account of which
he has thus entered in his Register.

Ante hunc annum nulla a Collegio condito reddita ratio fuit acceptorum and
expensorum; nullave solennis ratio instituendi aut honorandi Praesidentem
Pulvinari, Caduceo, Libro and Sigillo, aut excogitata aut usitata; ullave
deponendi munus and officium; primusque hos honores and excogitavit Caius and
usus est. Neque certe inanes sunt honores isti. Nam Caduceus sive virga
argentea, regendum significat mitius and clementius, contra quam solebant olim,
qui virga regebant ferrea; prudenter autem regendum, agendumque docent
serpents, prudentiae Indices; Sustineri autem istis modis Collegium, indicant
insignia Collegii in summo posita. Jam vero cognitione Collegium fulciri
indicio est Liber, cujus etiam summum occupant eadem insignia. Quod autem
pulvinar, honoris honestamentum sit; and sigillum fidei signum and firmamentum,
nemo est qui nescit. Vocentur haec virtutis Insignia.

He has left behind him a Book written with his own hands of the College
Annals, bearing date An. Dom. 1555. and ending An. Dom. 1572. which Book was
the first that ever was wrote of their affairs, and is managed with that
excellent Method, clearness of Style, and fullness of Matter, that all the
memorable Transactions of the College are there to be sound entered in their due
time and order: I cannot therefore but heartily wish, that he may ever continue
an Exemplar to all succeeding Registers of this Royal Foundation.

He was so eminent a Defender of the College Rights and Privileges, that there
happening in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth to arise a difference betwixt the
Physicians and Surgeons; whether the Surgeons might give inward Remedies in the
Sciatica, French Pox, or any kind of Ulcer or Wound, etc. Doctor Caius was
summoned (as President of the College) to appear before the Lord Mayor and
others of the Queen's Delegates; Before whom he so learnedly defended the
College Rights, and the Illegality of the Surgeons practice in the
forementioned cases, against the Bishop of London, Master of the Rolls, etc.
(who brought many Arguments in behalf of the Surgeons) that it was unanimously
agreed by the Queen's Commissioners, that it was unlawful for them to practice
in the forementioned cases.

He was so Religious in observing the Statutes of the College, that though old,
he durst not absent from the College's Comitia without a dispensation; which he
has entered after the following manner in the conclusion of his Annals.

Decimo quinto Novembris, An. Dom. 1572. visum est Praesidenti and caeteris
Electoribus praesentibus omnibus in his Comitiis concedere, ut Joanni Caio
Doctori, propter senium and alia Collegii negotia perfuncta laboriosius per
anteacta tempora, liceat abesse a Comitiis and convocationibus omnibus
praeterquam ordinariis, quae celebrantur in fine trimestris cuiusque spatii, si
in Urbe suerit and per valetudinem liceat, and eis in quibus gravia Collegii
tractantur negotia.

The Learned Treatises which he wrote (besides his Commentaries, Translations,
and Correction of several Authors) are too many to insert in this Epistle, I
shall therefore give an account but of some of them which are the following.

De medendi methodo. De Ephemera Britannica. De Antiquitate Cantabrig. De
canibus Britannicis. De rariorum Animalium atque Stirpium historia. De Thermis
Britannicis. De libris Galeni qui non extant. De antiquis Britanniae urbibus.
De pronunciatione Graecae and Latinae linguae. De Annalibus Collegii Gonvilli
and Caii.
He Translated several of Galen 's Works out of Greek into Latin; of some of
which, the following account is given by the Learned Gesnerus; Galeni libros
duos de motu musculorum, vetustate corruptos, integritati restituit, and
annotationibus illustravit; Galenum de Anatomicis, de sanitate tuenda, de
Comate, de Pharmacis, de substitutis medicamentis, and alia in multis locis
emendavit. For Cornelius Celsus, there is this account given of him; Cornelium
Celsum valde corruptum repurgavit, additis argumentis and scholiis, una cum
librarum ac ponderum Celsi ratione.

He died at Cambridge in his great Climacterick year (which was An. Dom. 1573.)
foretelling his own death: He was buried in the Chapel of his own College, upon
whose Monument, instead of an Epitaph, are inserted the two following words,
Fui Caius.

Dr. Richard Caldwall was born in Staffordshire, educated in Oxford, where he
took his degree of Dr. in Physic. He was a person so highly valued for his
Learning, Gravity and excellent Morals; that he was examined, approved and
admitted into the College, and made Censor thereof in one and the same day; and
within less than six weeks, was chosen one of the Elects of the said College.

He was made a Member of that Society in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth 's
Reign; was President thereof An. Dom. 1570. His affections were such to the
College, that he with the Lord Lumley, in the 24th year of Queen Elizabeth 's
Reign procured Her Majesty's leave, under the Broad-Seal, to Found a
Surgery-Lecture in the College, and to Endow it with 40. l. per annum; which is
laid as a Rentcharge upon the Lands of the Lord Lumley, and Dr. Caldwall, and
their Heirs for ever. The words of the Letters patent run thus, -- Solvend.
eidem Presidenti and Collegio seu Communitati and Successoribus suis annuatim,
ad usum Lectoris Artis seu scientie Chirurgie infra domum sive Collegium
Medicorum London. in perpetuum alend. and manutenend. juxta Ordinationes and
Statuta dicti Johannis Domini Lumley and Richardi Caldwall in Medicina Doctoris
fact. etc.

This generous and noble gift of Dr. Caldwall 's, and the Lord Lumley 's, was
so highly resented by the College, that immediately Letters were drawn up and
presented to both of them, by the President Dr. Gifford; wherein they did not
only acknowledge their great obligations due for this so honorable and
generous a Donation, most thankfully by them accepted; but as a testimony
thereof, did immediately decree, That 100 l. should be forthwith taken out of
their Public Stock to build the College Rooms more ample and spacious for the
better celebration of this most solemn Lecture.

Cambden gives the following short account of this our great and worthy
Benefactour and Colleague. An. Dom. 1585. hoc anno fato functus R. Caldwallus e
Collegio Ae^nei Nasi Oxon. Dr. qui ut de Repub. been mereretur (adscito in
partem honoris Barone Lumleio) lectionem Chirurgicam honesto salario in
Medicorum Collegio Londini a Thom. Linacro fundato, instituit; Juxtaque ad S.
Benedict. inhumatur, monumento laqueis plintheis and charchesiis, scamno
Hippocratis, glosso^^miis and aliis Chirurgicis ex Oribasio and Galeno
machinamentis exornato.

Dr. Robert James was created Doctor in Physic in the University of
Cambridge, and admitted into the College of Physicians in the 27th year of
Queen Elizabeth 's Reign. He was one of Her Majesty's Physicians, and highly in
Her favor; as will appear by the two following Letters written by the Queen in
his behalf, the one to the Emperor of Russia, the other to his Empress, the
Copy of which are the following.

Potentiss. Principi ac Domino Johanni Basileo, Dei gratia Russiae Imperatori,
Magno Duci Moscoviae, etc.
Elizabetha, Dei gratia, Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regina, fidei
defensatrix, etc.
Potentiss. Principi ac Domino Johanni Basileo eadem Dei gratia Russiae
Imperatori, Fratri, Consanguineo and Amico nostro, Salutem.
Potentissime Princeps, Frater and Consanguinee charissime,
TAm per literas tuas, quam per sermones nostrorum, qui Ruthena ad nos
proficiscuntur, accepimus, te non egere solum, sed desiderare etiam, qui
necessitatibus tuis serviat, Medicum. Quod hominum genus, quoniam and
plurimarum rerum cognitionem, and morum probitatem non vulgarem postulat;
Noluimus vel non parum providae esse salutis tuae, vel negligenter honoris
nostri; quin virum tam probitatis laud insignem, quam cognitionis in re
medica, ususque laud commendatissimum, ad te mitteremus; eaque propter e
domesticis, e nostris ex eorum numero, qui corporis salutisque nostrae,
secundum Deumc, ustodes sunt, Robertum Jacob in Medicina Doctorem, virum
literatum, artis suae peritissimum, morum honestate probatissimum, ad te
mittimus; non quia libenter eo careremus, sed quoniam tibi, tanquam nobis,
volumus and cogitamus facere been: Eum ut pari cum gratia a nobis accipias, and
honor merito prosequaris, etiam atque etiam rogamus, etc.


Serenissimae and Potentissimae Principi ac Dominae, Dominae Orinae,
Imperatrici totius Russiae, etc.
Serenissima and Potentissima Princeps, Soror, Consanguinea, and Amica nostra
charissima,
SIngularis, quae de insigni vestra prudentia, virtutibus rarissimis, and
moribus tanta Principe vere dignis, fama circumfertur, crebro etiam sermon
praestantis viri Doctoris Jacobi Medici nostri confirmata, facit ut Serenitatem
vestram vero animi affectu amemus, eique fausta and foelicia omnia ardenter
optemus. Ideoque de valetudine and incolumitate vestra, non solicitae esse non
possumus. Itaque non solum (quod a nobis amanter petiit) Obstetricem expertam
and peritam misimus, quae partus dolores scientia leniat; sed Medicum etiam
nostrum, qui nostram valetudinem curare solebat, praedictum D. Jacobum una
amandamus, hominem vobis antea cognitum, fide plenum, ut Medica art, in qua
excellit, Obstetricis actiones dirigat, and vestrae valetudini fideliter
inserviat, etc.


Dr. Theodore Goulston was born in Northamptonshire, bred in Oxford, made
Fellow of Merton College An. Dom. 1596. and after took his Degree in that
University. In the 8th. year of King James his Reign, he was chosen Candidate
of the College of Phyficians, being well approved by the President, Censors,
and all the Fellows; the year following he was made Fellow of the same, and
after Censor thereof.

His affection to the public good and to the advancement of the faculty of
Physic was such, that by his last Will and Testament he gave 200 l. to
purchase a Rentcharge for the maintenance of an annual Lecture within the
College of Physicians London. Which said Lecture was to be performed from time
to time by one of the four youngest Doctors in Physic of the said College, and
to be upon 2 or 3 or more Diseases, as the Censors should appoint or direct.
And this Pathological Lecture to be read yearly in some most convenient season,
betwixt Michaelmas and Easter, upon some dead Body (if possibly by any means
such a Body could be procured) upon 3 days together, in the Forenoon and
Afternoon of each of the said days. There are several of his Works extant, as
his Paraphrasis and Tabulae in Aristotelis lib. 3. de Art dicendi, 1619. and
the same year, Aristotelis de Rhetor. seu Art dicendi libri tres
Graeco-Latini, etc. Galeni quaedam Graeco-Lat. Graeca recensuit, Latina de novo
fecit, An. 1640. He died in the Parish of St. Martin's within Ludgate, London,
in the late Reign of King Charles the First.

Dr. William Harvey, eldest Son of Thomas Harvey, was born at Folkston in the
County of Kent, bred up to Learning, and sent from School to Caius College in
Cambridge, from whence he traveled into Italy, studied at Padua 5 years, then
took his Degree of Doctor in Physic there, and after in Cambridge; His
eminency and reputation were such, that he was made Chief Physician to King
James and King Charles the First. He was admitted Candidate of the College An.
Dom. 1604. and 3 years after, Fellow. Upon the death of Dr. Davies, Reader of
the Surgery-Lecture, Founded by the Lord Lumley and Dr. Caldwall; the Elects of
the College (the week after) chose Dr. Harvey into that place. Who there Read
those incomparable Lectures, de motu Cordis and Sanguinis in Animalibus; which
he 9 years after published at Frankfort, viz. An. Dom. 1628. and Dedicated to
Dr. Argent (then President of the College) and to the rest of his Colleagues;
who were not only ocular witnesses of the truth of those experiments published
in that Book, but earnestly solicitous to have them printed; as will appear by
the following account taken out of his Epistle. Meam de motu and usu Cordis and
circuitu Sanguinis sententiam, E. D. D. antea saepius in praelectionibus meis
Anatomicis aperui, novam: sed jam per novem and amplius annos, multis
ocularibus demonstrationibus in conspectu vestro confirmatam, and ab
objectionibus doctissimorum and peritissimorum Anatomicorum liberatam, toties
ab omnibus desideratam, a quibusdam efflagitatam, in lucem and conspectum
omnium, hoc libello produximus; Quem nisi vobis transmissum E. D. D. minus
sperarem prodire posse integrum and tutum; cum pene omnium illarum
observationum, ex quibus aut veritatem colligo, aut errores redarguo, e vobis
plurimos and fide dignos appellare possum testes, qui dissectiones meas
vidistis, and ocularibus demonstrationibus eorum, quae hic ad sensum palam
assevero, assistere candide and astipulari consuevistis. Persuasissimum habui,
quod si coram vobis nostroque Collegio tot tantisque viris doctissimis
nobilitato, propositum sustinere potuerim, ab aliis tum demum minus
pertimescendum; and jam illud, quod mihi a vobis, ob amorem veritatis, contigit
unicum solatium; ab omnibus aliis, qui similiter sint Philosophati, non minus
esse sperandum.

This Book was so judiciously wrote, and solidly founded upon experimental
demonstrations, as well as learnedly defended against Riolan, Primrose,
Parisanus, etc. that in a short time the Author was no less styled, than
merited the name of, immortal Harvey. Some few learned men indeed were so
invidious at the great reputation that this our learned Harvey had acquired,
that they endeavored to eclipse his glory, in pretending that Father Paul was
the first Inventor of the Circulation; and Honoratus Faber was so vain, as to
profess himself the Author thereof. The first of these was most solidly and
ingeniously confuted by the learned Doctor Charleton, in his Anatomic Lectures
Read in the College Theater An. 1682/3, and published An. Dom. 1683. And
Honoratus Faber, by the great Jo. Alph. Borellus, in his Historia and
Meteorologia Incendii Aetnei, Anno 1669. wherein he gives this short account
about Faber's pretensions to this great discovery. Cum vero sit omnino
incredibile, and impossible hominem Nobilem, religiosum and pium ea quae vera
non sunt asserere voluisse; nil aliud in ejus excusationem dicendum restat,
nisi quod cum ingenio velocissimo praeditus sit, a celeritate ipsa qua aliena
legit, and propria scribit, multoties decipiatur. Quod alias ei contigisse non
erit supervacaneum ostendere; ut inde pateat solemn ei esse Auctores alicujus
nominis furti insimulare, hac solummodo de causa, quia cursim and oscitanter
eorum opera legit. Si enim patienter and debita attentione dignatus fuisset
legere ea quae spatio 38 annorum edita fuerant, and vulgatissima per Universam
Europam erant, proculdubio non scripsisset Anno 1666. lib. primo de Homine
Prop. 2. se circulationem sanguinis invenisse and docuisse ab Anno 1638.
antequam Gul. Harveii exercitatio anatomica de motu Cordis prodiret; quem
pariter multa Fabri inventa in suis exercitationibus inseruisse affirmat; Omnes
enim sciunt Harveium, Anno Dom. 1628. Francofurti typis Gual. Fitzeri suam
exercitationem primum edidisse; scilicet december annos antequam Cl. Fabri
sanguinis circulationem docuisset.

An. 1627. This great and learned Man was chosen one of the College Elects; and
in the year 1651, a second Book of his was printed, viz. his Exercitations de
generatione Animalium, de partu, de membranis ac humoribus uteri, and de
conceptione. For the publication of which, both the present and future Ages are
highly indebted to that great ornament of our College, Sir George Ent, as may
fully appear in that excellent Epistle which he has dedicated to the President
and College, and published before that incomparable Book. In which, he having
given the Character of Doctor Harvey, with an account of many things relating
to his Life (and that in so elegant and polite a style) I could not omit the
transcribing of it, in his own words. Harveum, magnum virum, Collegiique nostri
summum decus and ornamentum, non procul, eo tempore, ab Urbe commorantem,
naturae rerum perscrutandae intentum reperio, and vultu hilari alacrique animo,
Democriti instar, cuncta investigantem. Tum ego protinus: Satin' salva omnia?
Qui possint, ait, ubi turbarum plena Respublica, egoque adhuc ipsemet in alto
mari? Et profecto (addidit) nisi studiorum solamen, rerumque olim a me
observatarum recordatio animum mihi reficerent; nihil est cur ultra superesse
cupiam, etc. Ego excipiens, hujusce rei hanc causam reddidero, inquam; quod,
dum alii plerique aliorum cerebro sapiunt, and a veteribus tradita (addito
variae dictionis, novaeque methodi mangonio) pro suis venditant; tu semper, de
Naturae arcanis, Naturam ipsam consulere malueris. Ipse enim (memini) aliquando
mihi narrabas, nunquam te Animalis cujuspiam dissectionem instituisse, quin
aliquid in eo inexpectatum repereris, de quo tibi antea nulla cogitatio. Ita
est, inquit; placuit mihi semper ipsorum Animalium inspectio; indeque non modo
levia naturae arcana, sed ipsius Creatoris summi imaginem quandam indipisci nos
posse, sum arbitratus. Et ut multa olim a doctis viris reperta sint, crediderim
tamen long plura abscondi adhuc in impervestigabilis Naturae obscura nocte:
miratusque sum saepenumero, imo risi eos, qui ab Aristotele, Galeno, aut alio
aliquo nomine, omnia consummata adeo atque absoluta crederent, ut ne hilum
quidem superaddi possit. Natura equidem ipsa est arcanorum suorum fidissima
interpres; quae in uno genere, aut pressius aut obscurius exhibet; ea clarius
and potentius in alio explicuit. Nemo sane de partis alicujus usu sive officio
recte determinaverit; qui ejus in pluribus animalibus, fabricam, situm, annexa
vasa, aliaque accidentia non viderit, secumque diligenter pensitaverit, etc.
Viri eruditi plurimi (dixi) quibus indefessum tuum in excolenda Philosophia
studium exploratum est, ulteriora tua experimenta avide expectant. Harveus
subridens, Ergone author sis, ait, ut e portus hujus (in quo dego)
tranquillitate, me them iterum in infidum mare? Nosti, quantum turbarum
pristinae meae lucubrationes concitaverint, etc. Imo vero, respondi, virtuti id
praemium usitatum est, ut been merenti male rependantur gratiae. Ostendit mihi
exercitationes de generatione Animalium, ingenti labor elimatas; and concedo
tibi, inquit, scripta haec mea vel continuo edendi vel imposterum supprimendi
liberam potestatem. Actis eam ob rem plurimis gratiis, valedixi; abiique, ceu
Jason alter, vellere aureo ditatus. Domum autem reversus, dum singula
perlustro, mirabar equidem tam ingentem the saurum tamdiu absconditum latuisse:
and, dum alii apinas, tricasque, and cramben bis (imo centies) coctam magno cum
fastidio exhibent, virum hunc eximias suas observationes tam parvi facere.
Enimvero quotiescunque nova inventa depromit, haud multorum more se gerit;
nempe, tanquam loquatur quercus, aut lactis gallinacei haustulum propterea
mereatur; sed quasi fortuito, aut facili negotio in res illas incidisset; quas
nihilominus data opera, studioque indefatigabili rimatus est. Candoris etiam
eximii hoc argumentum est, quod nullius Autoris nomen lacessat, sed suam ubique
pacate proferat sententiam. Dicere enim solet, indicium esse causae non bonae,
pro eadem rixose acriterque contendere: veritatem autem patrono non indigere.
Cumque facile potuerit integrum hoc opus de suo texere; maluit tamen (evitandae
invidiae ergo) Aristotelis and Aquapendentis ductum sequi, tanquam ipsemet
subtegmen adderet. De eo haud dicam amplius, vobis praesertim, quibus Virtus,
Candor, and Ingenium illius optime perspecta sunt.

These two Books are of that great and admirable use in our Profession, that
without a diligent reading and understanding of them, we must remain
egregiously ignorant in many material points relating to it. As particularly
may appear in his Book de motu Cordis and Sanguinis in Animalibus; In which he
has refuted that error of the Ancients concerning Attraction, and given a
most clear account, how the nourishment is conveyed to all parts of the Body;
how Medicines (although outwardly applied) have often so considerable an effect
upon the body; And how Contagion, either from the biting of a Mad Dog, Serpent,
or otherwise in the Lues Venerea, should vitiate the whole habit of the body,
without hurting the part touched; And how, after the wound is healed should
procure those dreadful symptoms so long after: All which, and many Problemes
more, he has ingeniously solved by this Doctrine of the Circulation of the
Blood, which has conveyed the different particles transmitted into it, through
the whole Body, and thereby produced the symptoms attending the forementioned
Diseases. This Doctrine is of that great use, that without it we can give no
rational account of the causes of many Distempers, nor the operation of
Medicines, etc.

In his Exercitations de generatione animalium, after he has given the Anatomy
of the parts serving for generation in the Hen, he acquaints us with the
formation and growth of the Egg, and afterward with the several parts whereof
it consists; He then proceeds to give an account how the Chick is formed, which
he observed by a daily inspection of the Eggs, during the time of Incubation;
and was the first who discovered that the original of the Chick was from the
Cicatricula: He then gives an account in what order the several parts appear,
and confutes a multitude of errors delivered by former Writers, proving, that
the punctum saliens is the heart, that Blood is not formed by the Liver,
because its Parenchyma is formed after, and of the blood, and grows to the
bloud-Vessels; Nor yet by the Heart, because that is not in being, till some
time after the Blood; He proves, that all the Viscera at their first formation
appear white; that the Veins are the first conspicuous foundation, as it were,
of the whole Body; that the division of the parts into Spermatical and
Sanguineous is ridiculous, since all come from the same original. He delivers
an account of the parts serving for Generation in Deer, and how the Foetus is
formed; He acquaints us that nothing is to be found in utero, for a
considerable time after coition; and how Analogous Conception is to an Egg, and
that it is some time in utero, before it is affixed to it: He takes notice of
several memorable things concerning the generation of other Animals, both
Oviparous and Viviparous. In speaking of the formation of the Humane Foetus, he
delivers several curious observations, made on Abortions of several Ages; as
also instances of Superfoetation, Hermaphrodites, of a Foetus found in Tuba
uteri, etc. When he discourses de partu, he gives very strange and memorable
instances, to show how much the Foetus does conduce to its own birth. Besides
these, there are several remarkable observations scattered through the whole
Book; as de partu difficili, de gravidatione falsa, de ulcere uteri, de uteri
procidentia, etc. As also, de Uteri membranis, humoribus, placenta, de
conceptione, de calido innato, de humido primigenio, etc. Of his Cure of a
Sarcocele of that bigness, that none durst undertake the cure, either by
Cutting or otherwise; which he happily performed by tying the Artery, and
thereby depriving it of nourishment; By which means it was afterward easily
extirpated.

This great and learned Man designed to have made the World (and especially his
own Faculty) happy in several other Learned Treatises. As,

A Practice of Physic conformable to his Thesis of the Circulation of the
Blood.

Tractatus de pulmonum usu and motu, de eventilatione omni, aerisque
necessitate and usu; de variis and differentibus organis hujus causa in
Animalibus factis.

Tractatus de quantitate sanguinis in unoquoque aut singulis pulsationibus
protrusa, and quando plus and quando minus, and qua de causa; itidem de
Circuitus causis, utilitatibus, and sanguinis arcanis.

Observationes, de usu Lienis.

Exercitationes, de respirationis causis, organis and usu.

Observationes, de motivis Organis Animalium and de Musculorum fabrica.

Tractatus de Animalium amore, libidine and coitu.

Observationes Medicinales, de Herniae carnosae curatione, aliisque
curationibus praeter vulgi sententiam and methodum foeliciter peractis.

De nutritionis modo.

Historia multorum Animalium, praesertim Insectorum, ab inconspicuis prae
exiguitate principiis and seminibus (quasi atomis in aere volitantibus) a
ventis huc illuc sparsis ac disseminatis, ortorum.

Anatomia Medica ad Medicinae usum maxim accommodata, ubi ex multis
Dissectionibus corporum aegrotorum gravissimis and miris affectionibus
confectorum; quomodo and qualiter parts interiores in situ, magnitudine,
constitutione, figura, substantia, and reliquis accidentibus sensibilibus a
naturali forma and apparentia permutentur, and quam variis modis and miris
afficiantur, enarrare susciperet.

An. 1654. Dr. Harvey (though absent) was chosen President of the College; who,
coming the next day, owned his great obligation to the Electors, for choosing
him into a Place of the same Honor and Dignity; as if he had been elected to
be Medicorum omnium apud Anglos princeps; but that his Age and Weakness were so
great, that he could not discharge the duty incumbent upon that great Office;
And therefore requested them to choose their former Learned President Dr.
Prujean, who had been highly serviceable to the College, in his former discreet
and prudent government.

About two years after, this Learned and Bountiful old Man came to the
College, and after his making an Elegant Speech, he presented them with public
Instruments in Writing, whereby he gave them his Land of Inheritance to College
uses for ever; and then resigned his Lecturer's Place (which he had for many
years performed with great honor) into the hands of that Learned and
incomparable Anatomist, Sir Charles Scarburgh. About a year after, this our
immortal Harvey died in the 80th year of his Age, at whose Funeral attended all
the Members of the College.

Not long after his death, the following Character of this great Man was drawn
up, and is now to be seen at the College in a Copper-plate, under his Picture.

Gulielmus Harveus
Anglus natu, Galliae, Italiae, Germaniae, hospes,
Ubique amor, and desiderium,
Quem omnis terra expetisset civem,
Medicinae Dr. Coll. Med. Land. Socius and Consiliarius,
Anatomes, Chirurgiaeque Professor,
Regis Jacobi familiae, Caroloque Regi Medicus,
Gestis, omissique honoribus, clarus;
Quorum alios tulit, oblatos renuit alios,
Omnes meruit;
Laudatis priscorum ingeniis par;
Quos honoravit maxim imitando,
Docuitque posteros exemplo,
Nullius lacessivit famam, veritati studens, magis quam gloriae,
Hanc tamen adeptus,
Industria, sagacitate, successu, nobilis
Perpetuos sanguinis aestus circulari gyro,
Fugientis, seque sequentis,
Primus promulgavit mundo;
Nec passus ultra mortales sua ignorare primordia,
Aureum edidit de ovo atque pullo librum,
Albae Gallinae filium:
Sic novis inventis Apollineam ampliavit artem,
Atque nostrum Apollinis Sacrarium Augustius esse
Tandem voluit;
Suasu enim and cura D. D. Dni Franc. Prujeani Praesidis and
Edmundi Smithi Electoris
An. MDCLIII.
Senaculum, and de nomine suo Museum, horto superstruxit,
Quorum alterum plurimis libris, and instrumentis Chirurgicis,
Alterum omnigena supellectile ornavit, ac instruxit,
Medicinae Patronus simul and Alumnus:
Non hic anhela substitit Herois virtus, impatiens vinci,
Accessit porro Munificentiae decus;
Suasu enim and consilio Dni Dris Edv. Alstoni Praesidis,
An MDCLVI.
Rem nostram angustam prius, annuo LVI. l. reditu
Auxit;
Paterni fundi ex ass Haeredem, Collegium dicens,
Quo nihil illi charius, nobisve honestius:
Unde aedificium sartum tectum perennare,
Unde Bibliothecario Honorarium suum, suumque Oratori
Quotannis pendi;
Unde omnibus Sociis Annuum suum Convivium,
Et suum denique (quot menses) Conviviolum Censoribus parari
Jussit:
Ipse etiam pleno theatro gestiens se haereditate exuere,
In manus Praesidis Syngrapham tradidit,
Interfuitque Orationi veterum Benefactorum novorumque Illicio,
Et Philotesio Epulo:
Illius, auspicium and pars maxima;
Hujus Conviva simul and Convivator.
Sic postquam satis sibi, satis nobis, satis gloriae,
(Amicis solum non satis, nec satis patriae) vixerat,
Coelicolum Atria subiit,
Jun. iijo MDCLVII.
Quem pigebat superis reddere, sed pudebat negare:
Ne mireris igitur Lector,
Si, quem marmoreum illic stare vides,
Hic totam implevit tabulam.
Abi and merere alteram.
Doctor Baldwin Hamey, Son of Doctor Baldwin Hamey, was born at London, took
his Degree of Doctor in Physic at Leyden, was admitted Candidate of the
College An. Dom. 1630. and three years after Fellow; After which he was chosen
Censor, Anatomy-Reader, Elector, Register, and Consiliarius; and though often
President, yet he always refused that Office. His affections were such to the
College, that he was not only a liberal and great Benefactour to that Society
himself, but encouraged his Friends to be the same, as particularly Mr. Francis
Tyron Merchant Druggist of London, who gave 250 l. to the College, to be
disposed of to certain uses mentioned in his Deed of Gift: He presented the
College with a most delicate and curious Vnicorn's Horn, which being richly
adorned with Plates of Gold, was Presented by the College to His Sacred
Majesty, upon his happy and glorious Restoration to his Crown and Dignity.
After the dreadful Fire of London (in which the College was reduced to Ashes)
he gave at least 200 l. toward the building of a new one; And what he farther
gave to this his beloved Society (together with his deserved Character) is so
admirably and elegantly described by our learned President Doctor Whistler, in
the College Annals, that I shall give the account thereof in his own words.

Sciant posteri, quod Baldwinus Hamaeus, Baldwini filius, Musarum ac Apollinis,
dum vixerat, deliciae erat. Tam sciens Latinae linguae; non ipsum Latium magis
Latinum fuerat; tam Graecae, non ipsae Athenae magis Atticae. Moribus ac
vivendi regula ad amussim compositus. Olim diuque hujus Collegii Socius, tandem
saepius Censor, denique Registarius. Praesidis munus saepius oblatum, semper
noluit. Equitis aurati a Regia Majestate non semel obtinendum titulum cum
gratiis non voluit; ne Doctoratus excellentiam contaminaret. Acceptis simul ac
repudiatis Honoribus inclytus. Sub Hasta Collegium iniquitate temporum positum,
Pater hic, non sibi, sed Collegio magno impendio redemerat. Postulante
necessitate in omnibus sumptibus faciendis publicae utilitati, cum primis
munificum se ostendebat. Totum Coenaculi nostri intestinum Opus tam ornate, tam
affabre exstructum propriis sumptibus consummavit. Supremis tabulis Collegium
lautissimorum duorum praediorum Haeredem reliquit, ne vita nimium
desideraretur.

The College had that sense of their great obligations to this their noble and
worthy Benefactour, that near 20 years before his death, the following Decree
was made in their public Comitia: Omnibus Collegis Bonum factum visum est, ut,
in gratitudinis testimonium, Tabula marmorea in honorem Doctoris Hamaei (ut
pote insignis Benefactoris) in Bibliotheca Harveana extruatur.

Dr. Francis Glisson was born in Dorsetshire, educated in Caius College in
Cambridge, was made Doctor in Physic in that University, and after, public
Professor; which place he continued in for about 40 years. He was admitted
Candidate of the College Anno Dom. 1634. and Fellow the year following. He was
chosen Anatomy Reader in the College Anno 1639. His Lectures De morbis partium
were so highly valued and tended so much to the honor of the College, that he
was particularly requested to make them public, as appears in his Epistle
printed before his book De Hepate An. Dom. 1654. which was 13 years after his
Reading: the account of which he thus gives. Placuit Amicis praesentibus rei
novitas, and quae inde verisimiliter in rem Medicam profectura esset utilitas;
mihique acriter institerunt, ut quae intra privatos Collegii cancellos
exhibuissem, quamprimum id commode fieri posset, publici juris facerem. In this
book he has given a more exact description of the Liver and its several
vessels than any Anatomist before him: Amongst many other things most worthy of
observation, the discovery of the Capsula communis or vagina portae is owing to
him, who has likewise given us certain rules for the more easy distinguishing
of the Vena Cava, Porta and Vasa fellea in excarnating the Liver. He has given
such an excellent account of sanguification (discharging the Liver from that
office) and proved it by so good arguments and clear experiments, that few have
since doubted the truth thereof. He acquaints us, how by the continual
concoction of the blood, the bilis is necessarily produced, and separated from
the blood, and gives the reasons of its bitter taste. He gives an admirable
account of the Lympheducts, discourses about the Succus nutritious with the
manner of its conveyance, and offers his conjectures about the use of the
Spleen and other Glands, etc.

An. Dom. 1650. He published to the World an account of the Rickets (being
assisted therein by 2 of his Fellow Colleagues, the learned Dr. Bate, and Dr.
Regemorter) In which, we have not only the original, causes, symptoms and
method of curing that disease delivered, but also a most admirable collection
of many Anatomical observations, discovering how the several Viscera of those
that died of this disease, were affected.

In his book De ventriculo and intestinis, (which was dedicated to the
University of Cambridge and to the College of Physicians, as that likewise De
Hepate) printed An. Dom. 1677. He discourses of the Cutis and Cuticula, with
the several colors which are observable in Hair; and there delivers several
ingenious Problemes. He discusseth in that book many considerable questions
concerning Rumination, and why some Animals have more Stomachs than one, as
likewise concerning the structure, tenacity and various uses of fibers: He
acquaints us with his thoughts that the Stomach and Guts are not wholly made up
of Membranes (as most have formerly supposed) but have a considerable quantity
of Parenchyma, which he conjectureth to be glandulous. He examineth the nature
of hunger and thirst, and shows wherein they specifically differ from the
other 5 senses: He proceeds to show the manner of deglutition, concoction,
distribution of the chyle, secretion, etc. concluding with an Appendix
concerning fermentation. Throughout the whole book there are abundance of
ingenious questions discoursed of, some of which relate to diseases; as the
difrences, causes and signs of flatus's, what are the most proper discutients
of them; of Hypochondriack flatus; of the parts affected in a Rheumatism, as
also of febrile and malignant ferments, etc.

He wrote also another excellent book in quarto before this, De vita naturae,
which having no such particular relation to our Faculty, I have at present
pretermitted. He was chosen one of the Elects An. Dom. 1655. was several years
President of the College, and died Anno Dom. 1677.

Sir John Micklethwait was admitted Candidate of the College An. Dom. 1642. the
year after Fellow; and the year following (though absent) chosen Reader of Dr.
Goulston's pathological Lecture. The learned Dr. Clerk long President of the
College, had that esteem and value for those excellent accomplishments of mind
and body, with which he was endowed, that he married him to his eldest
daughter. He was of that repute in the College, that they chose him no less
than 7 or 8 times Censor, employed him in most of their Committee affairs, made
him one of their Elects Anno Dom. 1659. and after that, Treasurer of the
College; and then President, which office he continued for 6 years and died
President. He was Physician for many years to the 2 famous Hospitals of
Christ-church and St. Bartholomew's, and in the time of his Sacred Majesty's
late sickness at Windsor, was sent for by an Order of Council, where he behaved
himself with that gravity, prudence and judgment in his profession, that the
King (as a signal mark of his Royal favor) Knighted him, and was (as I am
informed) much concerned at his death. He was a man of great eminency and
reputation in his profession, especially amongst the Nobility and persons of
the best Quality in Court and City. His Piety toward God, and Charity to the
poor was very exemplary, and therefore no wonder that his death was so
universally lamented. I had the honor and happiness to be so intimately
acquainted with him, that I cannot give him a less character, than what the
learned Dr. Caius has given of Dr. Butte. Vir gravis, eximia literarum
cognitione, singulari judicio, summa experientia, and prudenti consilio Doctor.
He died of an Inflammation and Gangrene in his bladder in the 70th year of his
age, was buried in the Parish Church of St. Botolph's Aldersgate, at whose
Funeral attended Sir George Ent the Praeses natus of the College, with the rest
of the Members in their Formalities. The following inscription is entered upon a
Marble in that Church, to the memory of this grave, wise and learned man.

M. S.
Heic juxta Spe plena resurgendi situm est
Depositum mortale
Joannis Micklethwaite Militis,
Serenissimo Carolo Secundo a Medicina
Qui, cum primis solertissimus, fidissimus, felicissimus,
In Collegio Medicorum Londinensium
Lustrum integrum and quod excurrit,
Praesidis provinciam dignissime ornavit;
Et tandem emenso aetatis tranquillae stadio,
Pietate sincera,
Inconcussa vitae integritate,
Benigna morum suavitate,
Sparsa passim Philanthropia
Spectabilis,
Miserorum Asylum,
Maritus optimus,
Parens indulgens,
Suorum luctus,
Bonorum omnium Amor, and Deliciae,
Septuagenarius senex
Coelo maturus,
Fato, non invitus cessit
iv. Kal. Augusti Anno Salutis MDCLXXXII.
Caetera loquantur
Languentium deploranda suspiria,
Viduarum ac Orphanorum
Propter amotum Patronum profundi gemitus
Pauperumque,
Nudorum jam, atque esurientium
Importuna viscera,
Monumenta, hoc marmore long perenniora.
Moerens posuit pientissima Conjux.
Dr. Thomas Wharton was bred in Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, took his Degree of
Doctor in Physic in the University of Oxford, was admitted Candidate of the
College An. Dom. 1647. and Fellow 1650. After which, he was chosen Censor 5 or
6 years, and in the year 1656. published an excellent book, which he called
Adenographia sive Glandularum totius corporis descriptio, which he dedicated to
the College of Physicians and in particular to Dr. Hamey, Glisson, Bathurst,
and Sir George Ent. In which he has given a more accurate description of the
Glands of the whole body, than was formerly done; and whereas Authors had
ascribed to them very mean uses (as supporting the divisions of Vessels, or
imbibing the superfluous humidities of the body, etc.) He assigned them more
noble and considerable uses, as the preparation and depuration of the Succus
nutritious, with several other uses belonging to different Glands as well for
conservation of the individual, as propagation of the Species. Amongst other
things, we ought particularly to take notice of his being the first who
discovered the Ductus in the Glandulae Maxillares, by which the Saliva is
conveyed into the mouth. He has given also an admirable account of morbid
Glands and their differences, and particularly of Strumae and Scrophulae; how
new Glands are often generated; as likewise of the several diseases of the
Glands of the Mesentery, Pancreas, etc. which opinions of his, he often
illustrates by Anatomical observations. He was a man of eminent esteem and
practice in the City, where he raised a considerable estate, and died much
lamented by his own faculty as well as others.

The Right honorable Henry Lord Marquess of Dorchester, Earl of Kingston upon
Hull, and Viscount Newark, etc. was born at Mansfield in the County of
Nottingham Ann. Dom. 1606. and created Marquess of Dorchester by K. Charles I.
at Oxford, An. 1645. His Father was Robert Pierrepont of Holme Pierrepont
Esquire, the ancient seat of this most ancient family; who was created Viscount
Newark and Earl of Kingston by his late Majesty Anno 1633. His Mother was
Gertrude Talbot, of the noble house of Shrewsbury; and had she been male, had
born her self that title.

From his youth he was very much addicted to books; he spent some time in
Emanuel College in Cambridge, and for many years seldom studied less than 10 or
12 hours every day; insomuch that he had early passed through all manner of
Learning both Divine and Humane, as the Fathers, Schoolmen, Casuists, the Civil
and Canon Law; and was reasonably well versed in the Common Law; So that he did
no small honor to that profession in being admitted a Bencher of Gray's-Inn,
where he performed his exercise of reading in the Hall before his admission,
and then treated the Benchers, Baristers and Students of that Inns of Court,
with a noble and sumptuous dinner.

In the year 1649. He found himself of an ill habit of Body, caused (as he
conceived) by a long sedentary course of life, and trouble of mind for the
barbarous and inhumane murder of his Sovereign, and the deplorable condition
the Nation was in: He was recovered from this Chronical distemper, by the
advice of the learned Dr. Harvey, Sir Francis Prujean, Sir Charles Scarburgh,
and others; who in a short time brought him again to a good state of health.
After which that he might be as careful to preserve it, as he had been to
obtain it, he (at the age of about 43) applied himself to the study of Physic:
And though he fell to this study late, yet no man ever began upon a better
foundation, nor pursued it with greater application; he having then gone
through the whole body of Philosophy, Mathematics and all other Learning.
After he had for some years diligently applied himself to the study of Physic
and Anatomy, His Lordship An. Dom. 1654. presented the College of Physicians
with 100 l. to be laid out in books; which I find thus entered in our College
Annals, Henricus Marchio Dorcestrensis, cujus insignis peritia and indefessa
studia in utroque Juretam Municipali quam Civili, in Mathematicis, in Medicina,
and ad ipsam spectantibus Chymicis Anatomicisque artibus, cum illustribus
titulis de Victoria certant; centum libris in libros emendos erogandis, Museum
Harveanum, primus, magnificeque cohonestavit: An. Dom. 1658. He was admitted
Fellow of the College; a short account of which being entered by the learned Sir
George Ent (then Register thereof) I have here transcribed in his own words,
Die Julii 22 An. Dom. 1658. Illustrissimus Vir, Marchio Dornaviae proponitur
eligendus Socius; omnesque Socii praesentes in illius admissionem laetis animis
suffragantur. Mox Dr. Scarburgh a Praeside ad id muneris designatus, tum illius
virtutes, animumque vere Heroicum; tum honorem hoc facto in Societatem nostram
collatum, eleganti oratione extulit. Ipseque Marchio, Artis Medicinae
praestantiam, decusque ac laudem sibi a Collegio concessam, breviquidem sed
nervosa oratione aperte professus est: Simul Statutis nostris nomen suum
adscripsit; pollicitusque est, se Collegii statum ac dignitatem sartam tectam
pro viribus conservaturum: tandemque bellaria in praesentes omnes liberalissime
effudit. This most illustrious and learned Nobleman, in his Latin Oration made
in the public Hall of the College upon his admission into that Society
expressed a great value for the Art of Physic, which (he said) many Princes
and great men had highly esteemed, and made profession of; And that for his own
part, he took it for the greatest honor (next to that conferred upon him by
his Majesty) to be ranked amongst them; which esteem he continued to that
Learned Society to his last end; He having often been heard to say, that he did
believe them the Learned Society of their profession in the World; and
therefore as a testimony of his value for them, he left them the best Library
for Physic, Mathematics, Civil Law and Philology, in any private hand in this
Nation, for a choice collection of books, to the value of above 4000 l. Which
Library after the Marquess's death, was presented to the College by his
daughter the Right honorable the Lady Grace Pierrepont; Her Honor knowing it
to be her Father's intention, in his life time.

In short, this Noble and great Lord was a man of that exemplary Loyalty to his
Prince, and of those great seize and proficiency in Learning, that he
merits a just volume to set forth his deserved praises. He died upon the 8th of
December An. Dom. 1680. in the 74th year of his age, of a Gangrene and
mortification in his left Leg; which proceeded from an inflammation procured by
the rubbing off a little skin on that heel. He was carried some time after he
had lain in state at his house in Charter House yard, to his ancient seat of
Holme Pierrepont near Nottingham, where he lies interred amongst his Ancestors.

Dr. Thomas Willis was bred in Christ-church in Oxford, and in the time of the
late Rebellion was one of those Scholars who voluntarily listed himself (in the
Academick Regiment) to serve his Sovereign; in which service he continued for
many years, till that Garrison was surrendered. After which, he applied himself
to the study of Physic; retaining still that affection to the Government of
the Church of England, that when our Liturgy was thrust out of our Churches,
and it was rendered criminal to attend its Worship; he dedicated part of his
house to those holy uses, that so the public Prayers and Offices of the Church
might be there performed; where he constantly attended twice a day, and had
several friends with him thrice a week; there being likewise a Sermon preached
and a Sacrament constantly administered the first Sunday in the month.

He during those unhappy times improved very highly not only in the knowledge,
but likewise in the practice of Physic, being more admired and sought to than
any of his Contemporaries in that University, but still resolved that he would
not take his Degree under the then pretended Government. He wrote during his
Majesty's exile those most incomparable Tracts De fermentatione, de Febribus,
and de Urinis; which he published An. Dom. 1659. In which book, he has showed
himself to have been no less versed in Chemistry than in other parts of Natural
Philosophy, having ingeniously asserted and rationally proved, that the
generation, perfection and corruption of Natural as well as Artificial Bodies,
do depend upon fermentations according to the different proportion and motion
of their constituent principles, viz. Spirit, Sulphur, Salt, Water and Earth.
According to these principles he has given us the Analysis of the blood, with
a new Hypothesis of Fevers and excellent observations concerning them. In his
Epistle before his Tract De Febribus, he gives this account, for instituting a
new doctrine of Fevers: In re medica (idque jure merito) non ea nostris, quae
prioris aevi hominibus placuere: quippe veteres, supposito circa motum
sanguinis falso, innixi; velut per lubricum and loca paludosa procedentes,
saepius foede, nec minus periculose lapsi sunt. Quare ex quo insignissimus
Harvaeus noster circulationem sanguinis tanquam novum in Medicina fundamentum
posuit, nihil mirum si instaurandam penitus (...), and fulcimentis veteribus
collapsis, aedificium ab ipso solo (quod aiunt) reficiendum curaverint posteri.
Olim inter antiquos, prout humoris nutritii, sanguinis, and succi nervosi
distributio and motus naturales, ita eorundem praeternaturales, and
effervescentiae febriles omnino in abstruso and tenebris latuerunt: Nunc vero
cum nova affulserunt lumina, and prius abditas rerum causas novisse datum est;
minime decet viros prudentes, and Philosophiam professos, usque clausos tenere
oculos, atque in luce ipsa etiamnum caecutire: praesertim vero circa morbum, a
quo tertia pars mortalium usque hodie cadit, malle cum antiquis errare, quam
cum Neotericis verum sentire, aut verisimiliter opinari, animum insignis
pervicaciae reum arguit. Cum itaque prioris Medicinae (...), basin instabilem
and minus firmam habere; atque huic plurima erronea and plane falsa superstrui
facile sit ostendere, quid obstat quin nos principia certiora nacti, circa
Febres scientiam meliorem eruere conemur, etc. He has likewise in this book
given us the Chemical Analysis of Urine, as also an account of the quantity,
color, consistence and contents of the Vrines of healthful and sick people,
with several methods of examining them by distillation, evaporation,
precipitation, etc. and also discovered the great uncertainty of Vromancy in
several diseases.

About a year after his publication of this book, his Sacred Majesty was
restored to his Crown and People; after which, he took his degree of Doctor in
Physic and was chosen Professor of Natural Philosophy; Upon which,
notwithstanding the multiplicity of his practice, he seldom failed for a
considerable time of Reading once a week (in Term time) such Lectures as
invited more than an ordinary number of the most ingenious young Students and
others of the University to be his constant Auditors. Whilst he continued at
Oxford he published 2 other excellent books, One his Cerebri Anatome printed
An. Dom. 1664. the other, De morbis convulsivis printed An. 1667. In the first
of which, he has given us a far more accurate Anatomy of the Brain than any
before extant, and his ingenious conjectures about the uses of its several
parts, particularly the oblique ascension of the Carotid Artery, and the cavity
formed by the Sinus laterales before they enter the Jugular Veins. His
distinction of the Nerves is worth remark, viz. that some of them arise from
the Brain, which are serviceable to voluntary motion; Others from the
Cerebellum, which furnish spirits for involuntary: He has also traced the
Nerves, which are inserted into all the Viscera, and by laying open their
different originations, plexus's and ramifications has given us a much clearer
account of the sympathies of the several parts of the body either in their
natural or preternatural State, than any we had before. He has likewise in
this book, given a most ingenious account how the Animal spirits are generated
and instilled into the Brain, how their faculties are performed, how nutrition
is caused and distributed, with many things more relating to sense and motion
and the explication of several abstruse diseases, highly ingenious and
probable. He has carried on his Hypothesis about the Nerves, and given a very
rational account of the affections of the Head, with their several causes and
cures; and particularly in his Treatise De morbis Convulsivis, he has shown
us, how much former Authors have been mistaken in their notions concerning
Hysterical and Hypochondriacal affections; and that the most rational account
that can be given of the symptoms attending those distempers, is by attributing
them to convulsive motions: He likewise conjectures, that the Colic,
Tympanites and some sorts of Asthma's are in great part nervous distempers, and
then finisheth that book with a most ingenious and excellent discourse of the
Scurvy, as to its causes, differences, Diagnosticks, Prognostics,
Symptomatical diseases, deriving their Original from it; with the different
methods of cure.

An. Dom. 1667. He left Oxford and came to London, where he immediately fell
into a very large and full practice; notwithstanding which, he found time to
write several excellent and useful books; as one against Dr. Highmore in
defense of his Hypothesis De Hysterica affectione and Melancholia
Hypochondriaca; with 2 other Tracts De sanguinis accensione and motu musculari;
After that, he wrote a most Learned book De Anima Brutorum and morbis Capitis;
then his 2 last, viz. his Pharmaceutices Rationalis pars prior and posterior;
In which he has given us a most accurate account of the Anatomy of the Stomach
and Intestines with their several coats; as also a description of the several
Membranes that compose the Veins and Arteries; likewise an excellent Anatomy of
the Lungs; To which he has added a rational account of the operation of
Medicines, whether Emetick, Cathartick, Diaphoretick, Cardiack, Thoracick,
Epatick, or Opiate; and endeavored to render them intelligible by Mechanical
principles. He has also (in those books) discoursed of the diseases of the
Breast, Liver and Spleen; as likewise concerning Phlebotomy, Haemorrhagies,
Issues, Vesicatories and Cutaneous diseases, illustrating the whole with many
curious observations. The first of these books which he published An. Dom.
1674. he dedicated to the College of Physicians. Upon which dedication the
College passed the following Vote, Placuit omnibus, nemine refragante, ut
summae gratiae habeantur Doctori Willis ob Pharmaceuticem Rationalem Collegio
datam.

I shall finish my present History of this pious, learned and great man with
part of that excellent and deserved Character given him by the Learned and
Reverend Prelate the present Bishop of Oxford, in a Postscript to the Preface
before the Doctor's second part of his Pharmaceutice rationalis. Dum haec prelo
subduntur, tristissimus affertur nuncius, Autorem immortalitate dignissimum,
pleuritidis ineluctabili impetu oppressum, e vivis excessisse, nec profuisse
Domino arts, quae aliis omnibus profuerant: Dabit veniam Lector, si memoriae
tam sacrae aliquantisper parentemus; nec supervacuum ducet paucis audire,
qualis ille vir fuerat, qui talia scripserat: porro intelligere gestiet, quam
bonus erat ille, qui tam doctus; quam etiam in pietatis praxi exercitatus, qui
in praxi Medica versatissimus --

Pientissimae animae divini numinis cultus eadem usque cura insederat, and
quandoquidem horis Canonicis in Ecclesia Parochiali Aedibus suis vicinae
precibus publicis per negotia interesse non liceret; ut officia sacra primo
mane and sero vespere ibidem celebrarentur, procuravit; iisque, negotiis
quibuscunque frustra reclamantibus, semper fere vacavit. Insuper cum videret
institutum illud utile admodum fuisse pluribus, qui in vicinia pariter toto die
in mercatura aliisque artibus exercendis distringebantur, Sacerdotem id munus
per futura secula obiturum idoneo salario dotavit.

Sed leve hoc documentum egregii in pietatem animi. Quanquam ipso nemo magis
frugalis and ad rem attentus, nemo magis munificus; omnia scilicet sibi, nihil
autem pauperibus and miseris negaverat. Praeter illa quae propria manu
elargitus est, Eleemosynarios and dispensatores in Urbe, Rure and Academio
sparsos habuit. Rem multis experimentis mihi compertissimam loquor; facilius
quis ab ipso centum Aureos, idoneo pietatis opere proposito acceperit, quam a
plerisque aliis extorserit totidem Asses. Et quanquam diutinae diligentiae and
perpetuae frugalitati amplas quas collegerat opes jure merito quis potuerit
imputare, ego imprimis effusissimae quam dixi largitioni, and benedictioni
insuper divinae acceptum referendum censeo. A prima ejus adolescentia ad
ultimum vitae diem, nullam pecuniarum quam acceperat summam pro suo habuit,
donec Deo and pauperibus partem non contemnendam sacram fecisset: cumque ante
paucos dies, quodque mihi semper dolendum, ultimo una colloqueremur, de
rationibus istis dispungendis (tanquam venturi fati fuisset praescius, and de
pauperibus magis quam prole sua solicitus) consilia diligentissime agitabat.

Mitto dicere, quam in adversa fortuna infractus, in affluente fuerat
temperans; quam in summa eruditionis fama modestus, cum indigne lacesseretur,
quam ad injurias condonandas facilis, quam Principi ultima passo fidus,
Ecclesiae oppressae obsequens, in Artis professione candidus and apertus, in
studiis indefessus, sermon parcus, in toto vitae statu Christianus. Quae omnia
pro merito exequi, non unius horae, paginaeve res esset. Breviter dicendum,
quod perpetuis precibus, studiis, laboribus, eleemosynis, vigiliis exercitus,
tandem annos fere 57. natus sub praesentis Novembris initium, Tussi (nunc
temporis epidemia) laborare visus est, quae (cum ceu leve quiddam spreta esset)
in Pleuritin and Peripneumoniam illico transiit. Cumque Vir consultissimus
sanguine saepius misso, and remediis diligenter adhibitis non relevaretur
(Amicis meliora ominantibus) vitae exitum advenisse statim animadvertit; and
post triduum, constituta re familiari, sumpto S. Eucharistiae viatico, and pace
Ecclesiae accepta, integris ad extremum spiritum sensibus, piam animam Deo
commendavit, vitamque laudatissimam pari exitu clausit.

I shall now conclude this Epistle with a brief and short account of some of
the works and some few late discoveries and useful improvements of the eminent
Members now living and flourishing in this Royal foundation; as particularly,
the present learned President Dr. Whistler, who published his disputation
concerning the Rickets An. Dom. 1645. 5 years before Dr. Glisson put forth his
book; though it was by a different name, which he called
Paedosplanchnosteocace, from the parts principally affected in that disease.
Then he delivers the diagnostick signs, as also what is to be found
Preternatural in the viscera of such as died thereof. The causa continens he
proves to be obstructions of the viscera from too thick and viscid nutriment,
part of which being retained in the viscera they grow bigger; and the more
serous and aqueous parts being conveyed to the Muscles of the arms and legs,
renders them weak and flaccid. Amongst the Causae procatarcticae, he reckons
the too early giving flesh to Infants. He affirms the viscera to be affected
before the Bones. He then proceeds to the Prognostics, Indications, Method
of cure and Medicines proper to answer that end. He shows that the
sacrification of the Concha of the ear seems to be established by the Authority
of Hippocrates, and was the first that founded a practice upon the doctrine of
the circulation of the blood.

Sir George Ent (the Ornament of his Age) in his Apology for the Circulation of
the Blood, has learnedly defended Dr. Harvey against Parisanus, rendered a very
rational account concerning the Operation of Purging Medicines, and given
several Reasons for rejecting the common opinion about their Elective
Operation; as also exploded those several Faculties which made so much noise in
the Schools, etc. The same learned Author, in another Book, wrote against Dr.
Thruston, has proposed several Opinions, and defended them with great wit and
learning, As, that the finer part of the Alimentary Juice is conveyed from the
Stomach and Guts to the several parts for their nourishment, by the mediation
of small concave fibers; That the same Alimentary Juice is that, which in the
use of Vomits and Purges, is discharged by these passages into the Stomach and
Guts, and not by the lacteal Veins or Arteries; That the Febrifick matter in
Intermittents is not lodged originally in the Blood; That in the Small Pox the
purulent matter is not derived out of the blood, but out of the aforesaid
Nutritious Juice, which likewise in Abscesses, etc. is that which suppurates;
That the Membranes and Nerves suck in their nourishment from the Glands of the
Mouth and Throat, whilst we chew our Meat; That the blood serves not to nourish
the Body, but to keep it warm; That Urine is not conveyed to the Kidneys by the
Emulgent Arteries (which only bring the blood thither to cherish and keep them
warm) but by the Nerves; That the only use of the Diaphragm is to facilitate
Respiration by guarding the Heart and Lungs, that the lower Viscera do not
throng in to them; That Respiration is not needful to the motion or
Circulation of the blood; That Animal Motions are not made by the influence of
the Animal Spirits; but that in each part is seated a private sense, which is
under the command of the Soul. And that therefore there are no Animal Spirits,
but those in the blood, called by the Name of Calor nativus, etc.

Sir Charles Scarburgh (Principal Physician to his sacred Majesty and his Royal
Highness the Duke of York) was the first who introduced Geometrical and
Mechanical Speculations into Anatomy, and applied them as well in all his
learned conversation, as more particularly in his famous Lectures upon the
Muscles of Humane Bodies for 16 or 17 years together in the public Theater at
Surgeons-Hall; which were Read by him with infinite applause and admiration of
all sorts of learned persons about the Town, who resorted in great numbers to
those Readings. His Syllabus of the Muscles is, and ever will be used there, It
having a prospect of two excellent ends especially; One to show all the
Muscles, as they naturally rise in dissection, the other to place every one of
them by his proper Antagonist.

Dr. Charlton's very learned and laborious Works (as his Diatriba de Lithiasi;
His Oeconomia Animalis; His Exercitationes Pathologicae; His Inquisitiones
Anatomico-Physicae; His Book de Scorbuto; His Anatomical Prelections in the
College Theater, with many other ingenious Treatises,) have given him a very
high and deserved Reputation in our own as well as foreign Universities. The
following Character I find given of him in Antiq. Oxon. Academicis studiis
maturus, in Aulam B. Mariae Magdalenae admissus, ubi sub Tutore seu Praeceptore
Wilkinsio in studiis Philosophiae profecit; nec minus postea in Medicina: ad
cujus facultatis Doctoratum evectus est ann. 1642. aetat. 22. tum Caroli primi
favore, tum gratia Academiae Oxon. nec multo post Regi praedicto Med.
Ordinarius: Vir proculdubio doctus, and in sua facultate clarus. And it is very
well known how highly he has been courted to accept of the Professors Chair at
Padua.

Dr. Croune has made most ingenious and excellent Observations de ovo, long
before Malpighius's Book upon that Subject was extant, Which are published at
large by Mr. Oldenburgh, in his Philosophical Transactions; as likewise a most
curious Theory of Muscular Motion, published in Mr. Hook's Philosophical
Collections.

In Dr. Lower's Book de Cord, and Dr. Nedham's de formato foetu, are to be
found so many excellent Observations relating to the advancement of Physic (As
the swift motion of the blood through the heart, the commixture of the air with
the blood, the difference betwixt Arterial and Venal blood, the separation of
the Chyle, with its sole passage through the ductus Thoracicus, and its
different degrees and ways of conversion into blood; the vulgar opinion about
defluxions distilling from the brain confuted, by unanswerable Experiments; The
passages by which the succus nutritious is carried to the Uterus, and from
thence to the Foetus, the manner of separating the nutritious juice from the
blood; the examination of the several humors found in the different Membranes
subservient to generation, by concretion on the fire, distillation, and
coagulation; the nature of the Saliva and other juices conveyed into the mouth,
with their passages, etc.) that the Authors are highly admired and quoted by
all the learned Men of the Faculty throughout Europe.

Dr. Sydenham (whom I can never name, without owning my great obligations for
the many happy advantages which I have received from his most ingenious
learned, and free conversation) has highly obliged the World, and all
ingenuous Men of our Profession, with many incomparable Treatises, lately
published; which are drawn (as it were by another Hippocrates) from his most
exact and nice observation of Diseases, and their symptoms; to which are added
most judicious, Natural Hypotheses, and Curative Indications, deduced from
them; He has given such an exact History of all acute Diseases from the
beginning of 1661, to 1680. that there is scarcely a Sentence to be found
therein, which is not of moment. Several weighty observations are likewise
taken notice of by this sagacious Physician, which other Authors have omitted,
as particularly the several constitutions of the Air specifically different,
which depend not upon the manifest qualities thereof, but upon some
inexplicable causes; and produce Diseases as specifically different; which
Constitutions, after some time, give place one to another; and are accompanied
with a peculiar and specifically different Fever both as to its symptoms and
cure; These Fevers he calls Stationary, distinguishing them from the
Sporadique, or Intercurrent Fevers depending upon the manifest qualities or
alterations of the Air; The Ptyalisme that attends adult persons, and the
Diarrhoea which usually accompanies Children in the Flox-Pox; The day when the
Ptyalisme ordinarily cease, with the danger ensuing thereupon; The great
tendency to symptomatical sweats, in the distinct Pox; Convulsions in Children
before the eruption of the Small Pox, which he observes to be the usual
prognostic of a mild distemper; The Mania or Frenzy following Agues, with the
different Cure it requires; The Jaundise observable at the going off of the
Colica Hysterica; The limpid Urine, which he asserts to be the most universal
and pathognomonick sign of Hysterical and Hypochondriacal affections; which
diseases do frequently assume the shape of Nephritick and Colical distempers,
yet are really different both in their original and cure; with many of the like
kind, dispersed throughout this Book, and his Epistolary Dissertations de
Variolis confluentibus; Affectione Hysterica; Lue Venerea; Podagra and Hydrope;
which I am now forced to omit, as also the Lives and Works of several great and
learned Men heretofore Members of the College, such as Dr. Gilbert Wotton,
Muffet, Gwynne, Turner, Paddy, Atkins, Mayerne, Prujean, Bates, etc. and many
now living, who have not only merited a remarque in this Epistle, but very
highly of the Public. But I hope this present omission will be pardoned, this
Epistolary Discourse being only by way of Specimen, to a more full and
complete History intended.

In short; I cannot question, but to see this learned Society flourish (maugre
all its adversaries) which was contrived by Royal wisdom, and Founded in Royal
bounty; which has enjoyed such great and learned Men in every Age; which is
now happy in so wise and prudent Governors, and blessed with such Learned,
Grave, and Profound Practisers in the Faculty of Physic; that there seems to
be a Transmigration of the Soul of the immortal Harvey, and other Great Men,
into many of the Members now flourishing; Which, that it may ever continue so;
is, and ever shall be, Most Honored Colleagues, the earnest and hearty desire of

Your most Affectionate Colleague and devoted Humble Servant, Charles Goodall.

PROCEEDINGS Against Empiricks, etc.
In K. Henry 8 's Reign.
IN the 33 year of this King's Reign, John Wisdam and John Lister were sued by
the College in the Court of Exchequer for practicing Physic against the
Statutes of the Kingdom; Judgment was given against Wisdam for 10 li. and
against Lister for 30 li.

About the same time one Hammon compounded with the College, and engaged not to
practice Physic for the future.

Several corrupted Druggs and Medicines were burnt in this King's Reign by the
order and in the presence of the Censors of the College.

PROCEEDINGS Against Empiricks, etc.
In K. Edward 6's Reign.
IN this King's Reign several Practisers of Physic were examined by the
College, and found so unfit for the practice of that Art, that they were
rejected; Others were punished according to public Statutes, and others Fined.

In the fourth year of this King's Reign, in the month of September, one Grig,
a Poulterer of Surrey, (taken among the people for a Prophet, in curing of
diverse diseases by words and prayers, and saying he would take no money, etc.)
was by command of the Earl of Warwick and others of the Council set on a
Scaffold in the town of Croidon in Surrey with a Paper on his breast, wherein
was written his deceitful and hypocritical dealings: And after that, on the
Eight of September, set on a Pillory in Southwark, being then our Lady Fair
there kept, and the Mayor of London with his Brethren the Aldermen riding
through the Fair, the said Grig asked them and all the Citizens forgiveness.

Of the like counterfeit Physician (says Stow) have I noted (in the Summary of
my Chronicles Anno 1382.) to be set on Horseback, his face to the Horse-tail,
the same tail in his hand as a bridle, a Collar of Jordans about his neck, a
Whetstone on his breast, and so led through the City of London, with ringing of
basins, and banished.

Whereunto I had added (says the forementioned Author) as follows; Such
deceivers no doubt are many, who being never trained up in Reading or Practice
of Physic and Surgery, do boast to do great Cures; especially upon Women,
as to make them straight that before were crooked, corbed or crumped in any
part of their bodies, etc. But the contrary is true, for some have received
Gold, when they have better deserved the Whetstone.

PROCEEDINGS Against Empiricks, etc.
In Q. Mary 's Reign.
IN the second year of this Queen's Reign, a great number of Empirical
Impostors were prosecuted and punished by the Censors of the College; amongst
whom was one Charles Cornet, a Flemming, (an impudent and ignorant Buffoon) who
would not be restrained from his ill practices with the bills of his
condemnation affixed at the corners of streets, nor yet with imprisonment it
self; being patronized by Hugh Weston, Dean of Westminster, and Roger Chamley;
The College nevertheless by virtue of the Laws and favor of the Lord
Chancellor, several of the Nobility and the King's Physicians, (Dr. Roper and
Dr. Vaughan) prosecuted him with all vigor and care; whereby he was forced not
only to flee the Town in spite of Weston and Chamley, but likewise out of
those privileged places where he had sheltered himself (first in St. Martins in
London, and after in Westminster) They being also imprisoned, who in St.
Martins had afforded him a retreat. The Censors did likewise cause his
unwholesome and sophisticated remedies, to be burnt in the open Markets at
Westminster.

After the College had thus diligently prosecuted some of these Empiricks and
forced others to flee the City and Suburbs, they conceived it would highly
conduce to the welfare and safety of the Kingdom, if they extended their
Authority to other parts thereof: Upon which account, they drew up the
following Letter, pursuant to the Acts of Parliament and Judgment of the most
learned Rastal and Walpole, Sergeants at Law, and Sir Robort Brook, Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas.

To all Justices, Mayors, Sherifes, Bailifes, Constables, and other Ministers
and Officers, and to all other to whom it apperteyneth, the Praesident and
College of Physicions in London sends gretyng.
WHere it has pleased our late Sovereign Lord and King of famous memory Henry
the Eight, with the consent of his Parliament holden at Westminster, in the 14
and 15 of his gratiose reign, And our Sovereign Lady Queen Mary, with the
consent of her Parliament holden at Oxford in the first year of his Reign, to
give authority unto us the Praesident and College of Physicions in London, for
the health and safety of their Subjectes, to survey, oversee, examyn, judge,
correct and govern al Physicions foren and others, together with their
Medicines, which practice within the City of London, the Suburbs of the same,
seven miles compass, and the rest of England, with authorite to commit al
offenders against the said Acts for their offenses or disobediences, to all
their Prisons: And commandment to you all, upon request to you made by us, to
help, aid, and assiste us, and all persons by us from time to time
authorized, for the due execution of the said Acts and Statutes, upon pain
for not gevyng such aid and assistence, to run in contempt of the Queen's
Majeste, her heirs and successors: We desire you all, and by virtue of the
Laws abovementioned do require you, and every one of you, as you tender the
good meaning and due execution of the said Acts and Laws and also your own
healthes, lyves and sanitie of your Cuntres, that you aid and assiste our
welbelovyd N. by us authorized, in all such things as he shall require your
aid and help, for the due execution of the said Acts and Laws, for that we
understand by complayntes made unto us that many lewd, undiscreete, and
unlearned persons, as well strangers as of our own nation, be resident in your
Cities, Towns and Countries, and others wandryng about in the same with
chaungeable names and false medicines, to your great abuse, deceyte of the
Kings people, and loss of goods, and lyves of the same. Yeven at our College
in London under our commune Seal, the xxth day of Septembre in the year of our
Lord God 1556. And in the third and forth year of the Reign of Philip and
Mary by the grace of God King and Queen of England, Spain, France, both
Sicilies, Jerusalem and Irelande, Defendors of the Faith, Archdukes of Austrie,
Dukes of Millane, Burgundy and Brabant, Counties of Haspurge, Flaunders and
Tyrolle.


According to the purport of the forementioned Letter, the College constituted
seeral Visitors, to whom they granted authority in their name, that they should
not suffer any to practice Physic throughout England, unless such as had taken
their degrees in Cambridge or Oxford without grace; or were licensed by them or
the College under their public Seals. All others were obliged to enter into
recognisance, that they would not practice, till they had been examined and
approved by the President and Elects of the College under their Hands and
Seals. Such as did refuse to give obedience to these Laws, were by the
Justices, Mayors and other Officers committed to Prison till they submitted to
the due execution of them.

In the third year of the Queen's Reign, the Surgeons and Apothecaries were
prohibited the practicing of Physic; and the latter required, that they should
not divulge the names of Medicines, nor deliver Physicians Bills to the
Patients, they often proving of dangerous consequence to them. Several
Empiricks were likewise prosecuted and punished, and others forced to flee the
Town.

In the 4th year of the Queen's Reign, the College summoned before them the
Wardens of the Grocers and all the Apothecaries of London and the Suburbs
thereof; and enjoined them, that when they made a dispensation of Medicines,
they should expose their several Ingredients (of which they were compounded) to
open view in their shops for 6 or 8 days; that so the Physicians, passing by,
might judge of the goodness of them and prevent their buying or selling any
corrupt or decayed Medicines; the Wardens as well as the Apothecaries were
willing to submit to the judgment of the Censors in this affair.

After this, the following Letter from the Queen was read to the Wardens and
Apothecaries.

To our trustye and welbelovyd the President and College of Physicians within
our City of London.
Trusty and welbeloved, we great you well. And where our derest Father King
Henry the Eight by his Act of Parliament in the xxxii. year of his Reign did
give full Authorite and power unto the President for the time being of the
College of Physicions in London and the Commones and Fellows of the same, and
their Successors, that they yearly at such time as they should think mete,
might search, view and examyne al such Poticary wares and drugs as the said
Poticaries have or at any time after should have, and thereof all such druggs as
they should find unholsome and corrupted to burn and destroy according to the
meaning and purporte of the said Act confirmed and enlarged by us the said
Queen in our Parliament in the first year of our Reign. We considering how
necessary it is that the said Act should be executed for diverse
considerations towching health and saulftye of our liege people, and for the
avoiding of the like danger and great inconveniences that may herafter chance,
and were like to have chanced lately to one of our Nobilite by ignorance of
the Byar and negligence of the Seller of certain wares, Do streightlye will
and command you not only from henseforthe to put the said Act in dew
execution, but also by these presents do give you like charge and therewith
full power and authorite to call and convent before you the Wardens of the
Grocers and all the Apothecaries within the limitts and precincts of your
liberties and privileges to you granted by us and our Progenitors and the
Parlaments above specified, and them straightly to charge and command by
authorite hereof that from time to time hensforthe nether they nor any of them
do entreprice to sell or retayle any such wares, drugge or druggs as has in
them any spice of venom or suspicion of poison or such other as by the
receivyng of them at the hands of any unlerned or of any malitiouse or evyll
disposed person may by any means greviously hurt or put in perille or
danger of lief any of our Subjectes of what estate or degree soever he or they
be, Unless the seller of any of the said druggs be well assured of the
honesty, true dealyng and good intent and skille of the byar; And first examyn
the same for what intent or purpose he buyth the same, and therewithal to note
the name of the buyer and time of the buying; Or else that the said Grocer or
Apothecarie have with him remainyng the handwriting of some discrete, well
learned and authorized Physician for his discharge. Willing and straightly
commandyng the said Grocers and Apothecaries and every of them not to fail
hereof, as they tender our pleasure, the health and securitye of our loving
Subjects, and as they shall answer for doing the contrary before you to their
such losses, damages and penalties as be prescribed in our Laws and Statutes
above mentioned, as well concerning Physicians as also Grocers and Apothecaries.
Yeven under our Signet at our Manor of St. James the xxiiii. day of June in
the fourth and fivethe years of our Reigns.


PROCEEDINGS Against Empiricks, etc.
In Queen Elizabeth 's Reign.
IN the first year of this Queen's Reign Thomas Glamfelde was committed to
prison for practicing Physic, and Stalworth and Gylmyn (Norwich Empiricks)
fined upon the same account.

In the second year of her Reign a Commission was given by the College to
Walter Hawgh a Norwich Physician, and to Hugh Glynne a Chester Physician to
Prosecute all Empiricks of their own and neighbor Counties.

Several others were summoned before the College, and severely rebuked for
exposing Pills to sale without their approbation; Others were punished for the
ill preparation of Medicines; Amongst whom, one Edward Stephens, a sweet Grocer
(that he might be released from his imprisonment for obstinately refusing to
appear upon the President's summons) of his own accord fell down upon his knees
before the President, and humbly begged pardon of the Queen's Majesty for his
disobedience to the President of her College, the Lord Cobham and several
others being present.

In the 6th year, several Empiricks were prosecuted, others were imprisoned for
practicing Physic.

In the 12th year, the Wife of one Bomelins an Empirick having procured the
Lord Treasurer's Letter to the College, petitioned, that her husband might be
discharged from prison, he having given satisfaction to the Queen's Majesty for
his violation of the Statutes, in practicing unlearnedly and by Magical Arts.
To this Letter the College answered, that her husband must first pay 20 l. for
his practice and 15 l. for expenses in the suit, and likewise give security
that he would not practice Physic for the future. After this, the President of
the College and Dr. Caius were appointed to wait upon Sir William Cecil
(Secretary of State) he having wrote a Letter to the College in favor of
Bomelins; upon whose application, the Secretary was pleased to express great
respect to the College and all the members of it, assuring them that he should
be well pleased to have Bomelins banished the Kingdom. Some time after Bomelins
was released from prison by consent of the College, having given Bond of 100 l.
that he would not for the future practice Physic in London nor in any other
parts of England.

It was ordered by the College, that the President should enter an Action
against Dr. Jews (Judge of the Admiralty) for suffering William Rich an
Empirick committed to his care in the Marshalsea to practice Physic against
the Laws of the Kingdom, his own trust, in contempt of the College, and to the
great prejudice of the Queen's Subjects.

A foreign Physician who had taken his Degree at Lovain in Brabant, was
summoned before the President and Censors, and examined by what authority he
practiced Physic in England without license: He pleaded his ignorance of the
Laws, and was dismissed upon promise of not practicing in London nor any other
parts of England; being likewise ordered to return into his own Country in a
few days.

Dr. Walker was summoned to appear before the College to answer several things
objected against him by Dr. Corimbec, he having examined and admitted some
Physicians in Norwich and Norfolk and extorted above 100 Marks from several
Empiricks in those parts, whom he had licensed to practice: He was Fined for
not appearing, and Letters were wrote by the College to Dr. Corimbec to
authorize him to cite those Empiricks to appear before the College in order to
their due punishment.

One Sylva an Italian was charged before the President and Censors for evil
practice, in that he undertook to cure an old woman by suffumigation, with
which she died; and prescribed Stibium to another person troubled with an
affection of his Lungs to his great prejudice. He was afterward examined and
rejected by the whole College by reason of his egregious ignorance in
Philosophy and Physic, and was fined 20 l. for having practiced Physic for
half a year to the apparent hurt of the Queen's subjects; and the year
following was committed to prison, in that he had practiced without College
license.

Thomas Pennye was summoned for practicing Physic, but pleading that he had
taken his Doctors degree, he was dismissed, and ordered that he should bring
his Letters testimonial to the Censors, which accordingly he did; but upon
examination was found so ignorant in the first principles of Philosophy and
Physic, that he was thought unfit for that employment, and prohibited the
practice thereof, and afterward imprisoned for contemning the Judgment of the
College and adventuring to practice without their license.

In the 13th year of this Queen a Surgeon was Fined 20 l. for practicing
Physic, but upon the intercession of some persons of Quality the College
forgave him 20 Marks of that Fine, upon condition that he bound himself in a
bond of 100 l. that he would not practice for the future; which refusing, he
was forced to pay the forementioned 20 l.

Richard Reynold was examined and rejected as being very ignorant and
unlearned; But voluntarily confessing that he had practiced Physic for 2
years, the College ordered that he should be imprisoned until he had paid 20 l.

In the 14th year, One Emme Baxter an impudent and ignorant woman was committed
to prison for practicing Physic the 7th of February; Upon the 11th she was
brought before the College, where her husband William Baxter and Nicholas
Staples (a Citizen) entering into bond to the College and their Successors, that
she should not practice for the future in London nor any other parts of
England, she was dismissed, paying all Fees due to the Officers of the Prison,
etc.

In the same year it was argued in the Lord Mayor's Court before Sir William
Allen then Lord Mayor, Whether the Surgeons might give inward medicines in the
Sciatica, French Pox, or any kind of Ulcer or Wound; Many arguments were used
by the Bishop of London, Master of the Rolls etc. for their practice in this
manner: Dr. Caius the President of the College being summoned by the Lord
Mayor, in his own and the Queen's Delegates names did defend the illegality of
their practice upon the forementioned accounts; After which it was agreed by
all present, that they ought not to practice.

In the 23th year of the Queen's Reign, one Baptista an Empirick was fined by
the President and Censors 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. which he paid to the President. He
afterward paid 5 l. to the College ob rem male gest am in praxi, gave bond to
pay 5 l. more at our Lady day, and at Midsummer was required to pay 10 l. or
else to be punished ex Collegii arbitrio.

One Moses was punished 20 l. for illegal practicing of Physic, and gave bond
to the College to pay that sum within a twelvemonth.

A Letter was sent from the Right honorable Sir Francis Walsingham Secretary
of State to the President and College of Physicians in favor of one Margaret
Kennix an outlandish, ignorant, sorry woman; the Copy of which follows.

To my very loving friends Mr. Dr. Giffarde President of the College of
Physicians in London, and to the rest of his Associates or Fellow Assistants
belonging to the same and every of them.
AFter my very hearty commendacions unto you, Whereas heretofore by her
Majesty's commandment upon the pityfull complaint of Margaret Kennix I wrote
unto Dr. Symondes then President of your Cellege and fellowship of Physicians
within the City, signifying how that it was her Highness pleasure that the
poor wooman shoold be permitted by you quietly to practice and mynister to the
curing of diseases and wounds, by the means of certain Simples, in the
applieing whereof it seems God has geven her an especial knowledge, to the
benefit of the poorer sort, and chiefly for the better maintenance of her
impotent husband, and charge of Family, who wholly depend of the exercise of her
skill: Forasmuch as now I am informed, she is restrained either by you, or some
other of your College, contrary to her Majesty's pleasure, to practice any
longer her said manner of mynistring of Simples, as she has done, Whereby her
undooing is like to ensue, unles she may be permitted to continue the use of
her knowledge in that behalf. I shall therefore desire you forthwith to take
order amongst your selves for the readmitting of her into the quiet exercise of
her small Talent, least by the renewing of her complaint to her Majesty
thorough your hard dealing toward her, you procure further inconvenience
thereby to your self, then perhaps you woold be willing shoold fall out.
Whereas contrariwise it will be well taken, that you afford her the like
favor she has found at the hands of your Predecessor. And so not doubting but
that you will therefore accordingly consider to leave the poor wooman satisfied
in this behalf, I bid you heartily farewell. From the Coorte the viiith of
December, 1581.

Your loving friend Fra. Walsingham.


To this Letter the President and College returned the following answer.

To the Right honorable Sir Fra. Walsingham, Knight, Secretary to her Majesty,
and one of her Highness most honorable Privy Council.
RIght honorable, having received your Honor's Letters in the behalf of one
Margaret Kennix for her quiet practice and mynistring of Physic, and willing
us in the same as well in respect of her special knowledge in Simples, as also
for avoiding such inconvenience as may otherwise ensue, that she may be
readmitted to the practice of her Talent: May it please your Honor, for that
all, and every one of us, are for our parts, most desirous in all duetifull
sort, to have your Honor satisfied herein, and therewithal truly to be
advertised of the matter, what report soever has hitherto been delivered for
her knowledge and ability, in that thing, wherein in very deed, her weakness and
insufficiency is such, as is rather to be pitied of all, then either envied of
us, or maintained of others: We therefore have sent some of our company to
attend upon your Honor, and to deliver our most humble and duetifull answer to
the same; most humbly beseeching you to afford them your good accustomed and
favorable hearing. And for that we are fully persuaded, there is no one thing
more allowable in your Honor's eyes, then the preservation of wholesome Laws,
and the maintenance of good and laudable orders, being not only the cheifest
stay, but also the greatest ornament and beawty of a Commonwealth: We are of
opinion that the diligent care which we have, and are bound to have, over the
health and lief of her Majesty's Subjects; the dutiful regard we bear to the
maintenance of our privilege, granted espetially for that respect, by her
Majesty's most noble Predecessors; and the straight band of our Oath and
Conscience, which we esteem of greater weight then (...) we can release our
selves thereof at our pleasure; will pro^ure your Honor to enter into a more
favorable consideration of our doings herein, then to think us any whit
culpable, for not suffering either her, or any other whatsoever (being not
qualified accordingly) to intrude themselves into so great and dangerous a
Vocation, not only against good order, privilege and conscience; but also to
the evident danger of the lief and health of such her Majesty's most loving
subjects, as shall be abused by their notorious and wilful ignorance. And
therefore being in good hope that your Honor will nothing mislike, for seeking
lawful and direct means to resist such dangerous disorders, as by other means
we cannot redress; And professing our selves to be most willing and content to
abide any inconvenience whatsoever may ensue, rather then to be brought to
allow of so disorderly an attempt, either in her, or any other her like: and
therewithal most humbly beseeching your Honor, that as most excellent Virtues
and Learning has made your famous to the World and posterity, so it might
please you to be a favorable Patron to such as have been trained and brought
up therein: We most duetifully take our leave and wish you increase of all
honor and prosperity.

From our College the 22 of December, 1581. Your Honor's to command The
Presidente and Society of the Physicians of London.


Thomas Thumwood with his Wife were summoned to appear before the President and
Censors for her practicing of Physic, where he promised to enter into a penal
bond of 20 l. to the College that his wife should not practice for the future,
and in the same month did seal a Bond obligatory upon the same account.

Robert Jones being security for one Dean an Empirick, that he should not
practice Physic in London, etc. Dean leaving the town, Jones humbly petitioned
the College that he might be discharged his bond, which was granted accordingly.

In the 24th John Gyle a Surgeon appeared before the College, being charged for
practicing Physic contrary to Law; which was proved partly by witness, and
partly by his own confession; wherefore he was fined 20 l. and sent to the
Counter. About 2 months after, he was sent for out of prison by the order of
the College, and then behaved himself so insolently and answered so ignorantly,
that he was forthwith returned back to the same prison, Propter malam in re
medica praxin.

In the 25th John Booffeat appearing before the College propter malam and
audacem praxin in re medica, was committed to prison; but upon the intercession
of a Person of Quality he was freed from thence, upon condition that if ever he
practiced Physic again, he should submit to any penalty the College should
assign.

One Leager a Surgeon was ordered to enter Bond to the College propter malam
and illicitam praxin, which if he refused, he was to continue in prison, until
his Fine was paid.

John Not an Empirick of the County of Kent, appeared before the College
propter audacem suam and illicitam in medicina praxin; He was ordered to give
bond with sufficient security, that he would not for the future practice
Physic; which refusing, he was committed to prison. After this, he procured
the following Letter in his behalf from Secretary Walsingham.

AFter my very hearty commendacions: Whereas I understand that you have caused
one Not, a practisioner in physic, to be committed to prison in the Coumpter
in Woodstreet, where he presently remains; Forasmuch as both my self have
heretofore used him, and diverse other Gentlemen have also received good by him:
These are heartily to pray you, that you will not deteine him any longer in
prison, to his great hinderance and utter undooing, but rather, at this my
request, to suffer him to go at liberty, without putting him to farther
trooble, unless there be some great cause to the contrary, wherein I will
think my self beholding unto you: and so do bid you heartily farewell.

From Westminster the 28th of September, 1586. Your very loving friend, Fra.
Walsingham.


To this Letter the College returned the following answer.

To the Right honorable Sir Francis Walsingham, Knight, Secretary to her
Majesty, and one of her Highness most honorable Privy Council.
WHereas it has pleased your Honor to direct your Letters unto us in the
behalf of one Not, to the end that we woold no longer deteine him in prison,
unless there be some great cause to the contrary: May it please you to be
advertized, that we and every one of us, being most desirous to show our ready
and dutiful good minds to your Honor, immediately sent for the party to our
College, mynding in respect of your Honor's motion, to have dealt with him by
all manner of curtesy. And albeit we know him to be utterly ignorant in that
profession, and such one as has been often heertofore convented before us, and
found subject to great punishments, and yet released from all extremity upon
his own caution put in amongst us, and earnest promise that he woold never
after that deal with the practice of Physic. All which notwithstanding, he
now more stubbernly then heretofore (upon what encouragement we know not) of
purpose infringeth our privileges, and the wholesome Laws of this Realm, which
we by solemn Oath are bound to maintain: and therewithal protests openly,
(and that most infamously as we think, and offensively to the credit and good
name of such as admit him to their persons) that he deals with none but only
for the Pocks. Yet seeing it has pleased your Honor to deal for him so
earnestly, (whose good opinion we are and ever will be most willing to satisfy
in what we may) we were fully resolved, freely to remit all offenses, and to
set him at liberty, only upon his own small bond, for the not abusing of
himself hereafter in Physic within this City of London, according to the
Statutes of the Realm provided for the same, and our particular Oaths taken in
that behalf: Which most reasonable demand for that he so wilfully denies to
accomplish, We have therefore sent the bearer hereof, an officer of our
College, as well to make report of the truth, as also seeing the party himself
has refused this favor, most humbly to entreat your Honor, to accept of our
good meaning minds; and so most humbly take our leave.

Your Honor's most dutifully The President and Society of the Physicians of
London.
London 2 October. 1586.

After this, Not entered into bond that for the future he would not practice
Physic, which being forfeited, the College put it in suit, whereby he was
forced to flee into foreign parts. But returning again in K. James's Reign, He
was complained of by Dr. Gulston and a Gentleman who had taken Physic of him,
whereby he fell into a great Vomiting and Looseness, Hiccough and great pains
complicated with a paralytical disposition; And though this Gentleman sent for
him when he was in great extremity, yet he would by no means come: About a
month after, he was summoned and brought by an officer to the College, where
before the President and Censors he confessed that he was no Graduate, that he
understood not Latin or Physic, unless it were the Stone which he could so
dissolve in the bladder, that it might be discharged by gravel; and Fevers,
which he could cure by external applications. He denied what had been proved
against him by the forementioned Gentleman and others. However the whole
business being examined, the President and Censors fined him 14 l. and
committed him to prison. About 5 years after, a poor woman complained that
being ill of a stopping about her throat and breast she went to him, who would
and did see her Urine, and thereon said, she had an Imposthume there and would
soon die if not cured before Spring, her Spleen being come up into her Lungs.
For which he was summoned to appear at the College, where he said that an
Imposthume about the throat and breast might hold 3 months without growing
worse; that the Spleen was in the radical parts. Being told of some of his
professed tricks in Alchymy, and examined therein, his answers were all
impertinent and ignorant. For which and his ill practice he was fined 5 l. to
be paid presently or committed to prison, and he interdicted all practice for
the future. But his Son paying this fine, and becoming Surety for him, he was
released.

In the 28th, David Ward an Empirick was committed to prison propter suam in
Medicina praxin illicitam, and fined 20 l. He was afterward discharged and
prosecuted at Common Law.

In the 29th, Henry Ieffry confessed his practicing of Physic in London for 6
years; being examined in the rudiments of that Art, he was found very ignorant
not only in that, but all other learning; Wherefore he was prohibited practice
and a small fine laid upon him to be paid to the College.

Godfrey Mosan was fined 20 l. at one time, and 10 l. at another, for his evil
and illegal practice in Physic, and for his egregious ignorance. He gave bond
to pay the forementioned sums upon several days limited therein.

Peter Piers was brought before the College and committed to prison for giving
Pills of Antimony, Turbith and Mercury Sublimate, by which he had killed
several persons.

One Bright being also summoned, and not appearing, a Warrant was issued out
for seizing him and committing him to the Fleet; Others were imprisoned for
practicing Physic, and others had their Bonds put in suit against them upon
the same account.

In the 30th year of the Queen (being in the year 1588, a time of most public
and eminent danger) the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen sent their Precept to
the College of Physicians, requiring them to find Arms. This being looked upon
as an infringement of College privileges, they deputed some of their Members to
wait upon the Right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham Secretary of State,
humbly to beg the favor of him to write his Letter to the Lord Mayor and Court
of Aldermen to require them that they should give the College no farther
trouble, but suffer them to live free and undisturbed; they being freed from
finding Arms by virtue of Royal Charters given to them by the Royal bounty of
their Princes and Acts of Parliament made in their favor: Which the Honorable
Secretary was pleased to do, and the College thereupon discharged from farther
charge or trouble.

Paul Fairfax a foreign Empirick gave out Bills stuffed with arrogance and
ostentation of the admirable virtues of a Water which he called his Aqua
Coelestis, with which he cheated the People: He confessed that he had practiced
Physic in London for 4 months, and pretended that he had done several Cures
with his water and other remedies, for which he was fined 5 l. and required to
give bond that he should not practice for the future, which if he refused, he
was to be committed to prison. Upon this he procured a Letter from the Lord
Chamberlain directed to the President and College, which he delivered with
Letters testimonial of having taken his Degree at Frankfort; which seeming to
be fictitious, they were kept by the College and he forbidden to practice
Physic. However the following Letter was presented by the President and
College in answer to the Lord Chamberlain's.

To the Right Honorable our very good Lord, the Lord Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain,
one of the Lords of her Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.
RIght Honorable and our very good Lord; Having received a Letter from your
Lordship in the behalf of one Paul Fairfax, for the liberty of his practice in
Physic here in London, and understanding by the Contents of the same, that
your Honor has been misinformed, as well of the quality of the man, as also of
our dealings toward him: We most humbly beseech your good Lordship to accept
of our answer which we here present in most dutiful wise. Touching the Man,
albeit by some travel he seems to have gotten some kind of Language, and
therewithal has boldly put himself into some Empirical practice, more
dangerous in truth to the Patient then anywise commendable to the
Practitioner: Yet upon just examination we find the man very weak in the
substance of all kind of good learning; and rather to be pitied for his
fantastical conceits, and well weening of his own ignorance, then any wise to
deserve toleration in so dangerous a function. A man never trained up in any
good School of Learning, ignorant in the very principles of the Art: and for
lack of other good matter, furnished with certain ridiculous terms and
childish phrases, invented only to entertain the simple hearer, and to delude
the unlearned multitude withal. And whereas he lays some challenge to a
Doctorship: He has in deed showed unto us the Letters Testimonial for the
same: Yet we being better acquainted with the coorse of Universities then he,
have a better opinion of Frankfort, then to think that wittinglie and
willingly they would commit so foul an error, as to admit either him, or the
like. And having made good survey of the Letters, find by evident proofs, that
they are vehemently to be suspected, to have been rather by some sinister means
devised, than by any ordinary course obtained.

Touching us and our hard using of him, as he terms it to your Lordship, as
well by imprisoning his body, as by exacting the payment of money to his great
impoverishing: May it please your good Lordship to understand, that as yet he
has paid no one penny; but stands bound indeed, and that for a very small
sum, considering the quality of the offense, and the straightness of our
Laws in that behalf: and yet for the payment thereof has as long a day as
himself requested.

And as for his imprisonment, it was rather procured by his own undiscreet
frowardness, then meant by us at all, if he had showed any conformity in time.
For being a Gentleman as himself says, and having so good acquaintance as he
protested, being offered to be set at liberty if he would have put in but any
one sufficient surety (a matter of great ease for him to do, if the rest of his
talk had been to be credited) He as one rather contemning us, and our friendly
dealing, then not able to satisfy our reasonable request, more upon stomach
then discretion, made choice of imprisonment. Thus have we delivered unto your
good Lordship a truth: beseeching your Honor so to interpret of our dealing
toward him, and all other in the like degree, as of men altogether abhorring
from all extremity, but enforced to do that little which we do, even by the
very duty that we owe to our Laws and good orders, and by the consideration
of our strict solemn Oath, and conscience in that behalf. And so praying for
your Lordships most prosperous estate, we most humbly take our leave.

At our College this last of January, 1588. Your Lordship's most humble The
President and Society of the College of Physicians in London.


John Halsey, appearing before the College, confessed that he had practiced
Physic in London for several years, wherefore the College ordered that he
should pay 20 l. for his former practice, and take a license for the future, if
found fit; or else, give bond of 100 l. that he should not practice hereafter
in London: which if refused, then to be committed to prison. He desired time to
consider, and then promised forthwith to enter into bond as required by the
College.

Tomazine Scarlet, a Woman so egregiously ignorant that (she confessed) she
understood nothing in Physic, neither could read or write; yet had hundreds
under her cure, to whom she gave purging Medicines, Stibium, etc. For which she
was required to give a bond with good security that she would not practice for
the future, which accordingly she did. But after some years, practicing again
and refusing to give bond as before, she was committed to prison, but then
procured Letters from Court to the President of the College, that she might be
released; but by Order of the College, she was continued. And after some short
time being sent for, she refused to desist from practice, or to give bond for
her due observance of the Laws as before demanded, wherefore she was for this
contumacy of hers, remanded back to prison. About 3 years after, she was again
committed to prison and fined 10 l. for practicing Physic, and using dangerous
Medicines, as Stibium, Antimony, Mercurial Unguents, etc. all which she
confessed. Five years after, she was a third time sent to prison and fined 5 l.
upon the same account.

In the 31 th of the Queen, Paul Buck a very impudent and ignorant Empirick
appeared before the President and Censors, and then confessed he never had any
liberal education, yet had practiced Physic in London for 6 years, and
pretended himself able to cure all diseases: Being examined by the President,
he was found unable to give any reasonable account to any question asked him,
wherefore he was committed to prison and fined 10 l. for his illegal and ill
practicing of Physic. About a month after, he was sent for out of prison, and
required by the President and Censors to forbear the practice of Physic for
the future, and for his so doing to give bond with security, he being wholly
ignorant of that Art, and unlearned in all other; to which he replied, that he
would not give any bond upon that account, but was resolved to practice as he
had opportunity. Upon this insolent and saucy answer, he was remanded back to
the Counter in Woodstreet, there to continue till he gave bond to the College
for his good behavior. After 6 months imprisonment, he was ordered by the
Beadle to appear a third time before the President and Censors, but refused to
come. The month after he procured the following Letter from Secretary
Walsingham.

To our very loving friends the President and Censors of the College of
Physicians.
AFter our very hearty commendations; Whereas I understand that you have of
late committed to prison, one Paul Buck a practitioner in Physic and
Surgerie, for exercising the same, without a dispensation from you: for as much
as I am credibly enfourmed, that the man has done much good in his said
profession, and is otherwise of a very good and honest disposition; I am
therefore moved, very earnestly to pray you, that you will be content, the
rather for my sake, to yield to his enlargement, and not further hereafter to
molest him upon this occasion. For the which you shall make me beholding unto
you; and find me ready to requite it toward you. And so I commit you to God.

From the Coort at Greenwich this 10th of February, 1589. Your very loving
friend, Fra. Walsingham.


To which the College returned the following answer.

To the Right Honorable Sir Fra. Walsingham, Knight, Principal Secretary to her
Majesty.
RIght Honorable, Whereas it has pleased you to write unto us in the behalf of
one Paul Buck an ignorant and audacious Practitioner in Physic, perceaving
that your Honor has been misenformed as well of the man, as of the manner of
our dealing with him: We have therefore sent our President, and some of our
Society with him to attend your Honor's leisure, and to deliver the true report
thereof. Most humbly beseeching you, That for so much as we are by Oath and
Conscience tied to do that which we do; and for that the inconveniences are
intolerable which daily fall out by the suffering and supporting such vagrant
and loose persons, altogether unskilful in that wherein they make a coolorable
Profession; It might stand with your Honor's pleasure and good likeing, to
leave it to our discretion and liberty, as much as in us lies, by all good
orderly means possible to refourme the same. Protesting unto your Honor, That
as we take small delight in punishing the ignorant, so to all such as be honest
and learned we will always be most ready and willing to show what courtesy
shall lie in our small power. And so, etc.


The President and Dr. James waited upon Secretary Walsingham with the
forementioned Letter, which he most readily read over and accepted very kindly
from the College, assuring them that he would never act any thing against the
benefit or dignity of their Society; And if at any time by the importunity of
friends, he did write upon such an occasion, he notwithstanding left them to
act what they thought most prudent. Upon this Buck was sent for by the Beadle
out of prison, but he refused to come; Wherefore order was given to acquaint
the Secretary with this his obstinate and contumacious behavior, and to
continue him still in prison. About 2 months after, the Keeper of the Counter
set him at liberty without the consent or knowledge of the College; wherefore
the Treasurer was forthwith ordered to advise with the Recorder of the City and
Counselor Daniel for prosecuting the Keeper of the Prison for this his
illegal releasing of Buck. About 2 or 3 years after he was again brought before
the College, confessed practice, and was then ordered to appear at the next
Court, that he might understand the College pleasure. In the interim he
procured the following Letter from the Lord High Admiral.

To my lovinge friend Mr. Dr. Baronsdale geave these.
AFter my hearty commendations: Whereas this bearer my servant Pawle Buck a
practitioner in Physic is much sought after, and well liked of by many, and
has as I am informed done many great cures to the good of many, and the hurt
of none, I am to pray you being Governor of your fellowship, to grant him a
license to practice Physic hereafter unto such as shall at his hands come to
require the same. And in token of a dewtie to your house, and that he will be
from time to time governed therebie, he will present the same with 20 l. fine,
and will pale an yearlie Rent of 20 s. per an. unto the Treasury of your said
house: And besides that ye shall pleasure a great many that desire his
freedom, you shall make me ready to requite the same to you in any good I can
do you, or your house. And so fare ye well.

From the Court at Nonesuch the 29 of May 1593. Your loving friend, C. Howard.


Upon reading this Letter the College returned the following answer.

RIght Honorable and our very good Lord, Whereas it has pleased your Lordship
to write your Letters to Dr. Baronsdale our President (who has imparted the
same to the whole Society) in the behalf of one Paul Buck your Lordship's
servant: That in respect he is such a practitioner in Physic, as is well liked
of many, and has done many and good cures therein, he might therefore have a
license granted from us, to exercise his practice in Physic to so many as
hereafter shall come at his hands to require the same. May it please your good
Lordship to be advertised, That for so much as we know the man to be utterly
ignorant in all the parts of Physic, and to have in him not so much as any
taste of any good learning at all, but to be one only trained up in
mechanical matters, and by profession and whole course of his lief, nothing
else but a mere Goldsmith, and not only to have committed many gross and
dangerous errors, to the great hurt of diverse that have been deluded by him,
and his cunning shifts; but also do find him to be a man of very hard report,
for some suspicious and loose behavior under pretense of the show and color
of Physic: We are therefore most humbly to beseech your Honor, that it may
not be offensive to your good Lordship for us to use the liberty of our
conscience, in refusing to admit such a person to the practice of so weighty a
profession, who has nothing more in him to grace and commend himself
thereunto, but only such untrue informations as have been delivered to your
Lordship to the great abuse of your Honor in that behalf. And so beseeching
your good Lordship to think well of us, and to vouchesalf us an honorable and
mild construction of these our doings, who are otherwise most willing in all
things else, that are in our power, to be at your Honor's commandment, We most
humbly take our leave.

From our College this 2 of July, 1593.

After this, he procured Letters to be wrote in favor of him by the Earl of
Essex, and another noble Peer of the Kingdom; but notwithstanding it was
resovled by the whole Society, that he should not be licensed to practice
Physic. He was therefore again cited to appear before the College and fined 5
l. for practicing Physic, which sum he promised to pay the Treasurer of the
College within one month. After this, he was punished 3 l. upon the same
account, and afterward 10 l. in that he had practiced without license from the
College, as likewise without Art or Judgment; for which sum he was to be
committed to prison until he had made due payment thereof.

John Noe a Tallow-chandler, appearing before the College and confessing that
he had practiced Physic for 3 years, he was committed to prison and fined 10 l.

Robert Tanner appeared before the College and brought along with him the
Archbishop of Canterbury's license in justification of his practice; but being
found by the President and Censors a very ignorant and illiterate person, he
was interdicted practice for the future.

John Lumkin, a Surgeon, being summoned before the College he confessed his
practicing of Physic in Dropsies, Gout, Rheumatisms and other diseases, and
his prescribing of purging remedies, diet-drinks, etc. He was afterward
charged for mala praxis upon several Patients (as his dropping of Oil of
Sulphur into a Patient's eyes, from whence an inflammation ensued, and other
ill accidents, which endangered a total blindness; His prescribing Stupefactive
Pills to a Citizen troubled with an Ischury, by which he fell into a total
suppression of Urine, and made not one drop of water for ten days, but died
most miserably on the 11th) which being proved before the President and
Censors, he was forthwith committed to prison propter malam praxin and
immodestos mores, and fined 20 l. About a twelvemonth after, he was committed a
second time to prison for offenses of the like nature, but then procured a
Letter from the Archbishop of Canterbury (by the interest of the Dean of
Rochester his great friend and Patron) for the procuring his freedom; But when
the Archbishop understood by the President and Censors how insolently he had
behaved himself and slighted the College's authority, he would intercede no
further for him. About 5 days after, a fresh application was made to the
College in his behalf, upon which they consented to his enlargement
conditionally that he gave a bond of 40 l. that he would not practice for the
future.

Edward Owen a Surgeon and bold practiser in Physic was complained of by Joan
Apseley, in that he had undertaken her cure for 40 s. of which he had received
10 s. in hand, and had given her a diet-drink, purging medicines with Mercury
(by which her gums were ulcerated) and other medicines without any advantage.
He was punished by the Censors 40 s. After this, he was summoned a second time
for practicing Physic, and offered that he should either give a bond of 40 l.
that he would not practice for the future; or else pay presently 40 s. to the
College; and if after he practiced, it should be at his peril: If he refused
what the Censors now profer'd, he was forthwith to be committed to prison. But
to prevent that, he promised the payment of the Fine imposed, to the President,
within a few days. Not long after one Sharp a servant to the Queen made great
complaint to the College against Owen, and desired their Letters testimonial of
his illegal and illiterate practice, which were granted in the following form.
Be it known to all men by these presents, that one Edward Owen of Surrey, a
kind of Surgeon, as himself affirms, has oftentimes been convented in our
College of Physicians of London, for his bad and unlawful practice in Physic;
and whereas we have found him not only utterly ignorant in the same, but
moreover we do certainly know the great dangers that many of her Majesty's
Subjects have been brought unto thorough his ignorance, and lewd dealing
therein, as well by the just probation of others, as also by his own
confession, as appears in our College Books of Records, and yearly
examynations: and for that it appertains unto us of the said College, by
virtue of our privileges granted by her Majesty's Predecessors, and Act of
Parliament, not only to have a care to seek out, but also to punish such lewd
Impostors, and abusers of her Majesty's good and true Subjects: In regard
therefore of our duties therein, we have not only from time to time (as we
coold come by the said Owen) punished him partly by imprisonment, partly
otherwise for his offenses in that behalf: but also have utterly forbidden him
to deal in the practice and exercise of Physic, as he will answer it at his
peril, according to the true intent and meaning of the Laws of the Realm
provided in that behalf, for all such Intruders and Malefactors.

Notwithstanding, several fresh complaints were made against him ob malam
praxin, as his prescribing purging Physic, which occasioned superpurgation and
the Patient's death; a Mercurial fume which procured lameness in a second
Patient, and death in a third. For which evil and illegal practice he was
committed to prison and fined 10 l. which sum he paid to the College and
readily discharged both Sergeants and Beadles fees.

One Harman a foreigner, was complained of to the Censors for practicing of
Physic and taking money beforehand in promise of cure; upon appearance, he was
interdicted practice and ordered to return half the money received.

In the 33th of the Queen's Reign, One Salthowse an Apothecary, having
prescribed Physic to one Robert Cade, he fell into a superpurgation and died
within 7 days; wherefore he was adjudged by the Censors to be forthwith
committed to prison and fined 10 l.

Roger Powel, a very eminent and famous Impostor, was cited to appear before
the College for that he had hanged up a table in several parts of the town,
wherein he boasted of his great cures and long experience: being examined, he
confessed himself illiterate, but withal affirmed that he had great and
eminent experience in Physic, that he had cured very many of dangerous
diseases and had long practiced in London. He had Letters from the Queen, which
gave an account of his poverty, and fortunate success in Physic. The College
notwithstanding passed the following sentence upon him, that he should be
committed to prison and fined 20 l. But out of respect to the Earl of Derby (to
whom he had some relation) they were willing he should be released from prison,
upon condition that he gave bond to the College with sufficient security that
he never after would practice Physic in London or within 7 miles. Some years
after, there were several fresh informations and complaints exhibited against
him; upon which he was condemned by the Censors for his ignorance in Physic,
fined 4 l. and committed to prison until he could give better satisfaction of
his skill in that Art; or at least, until he entered bond that he would never
practice for the future. After this he was again accused for undertaking the
cure of a woman ill of a Tympany, who died under his hands. He confessed that
he had been punished 20 years past for practicing Physic, but having paid his
fine, he thought he might lawfully practice: He confessed that he had given
medicines and used external applications for an Anasarca: But being asked what
a Tympany or an Anasarca was, he could not tell. Wherefore he was fined 5 l.
pro mala praxi, to be paid the next Censors day, and ordered to restore the
money received in the forementioned case.

In the 34th, Robert Walmesly was punished by the Censors 4 l. for illegal
practice; Afterward being examined by them, he was found unable to give the
definition of a disease, or any tolerable account of any question proposed to
him in Physic; wherefore he was required to give bond of 40 l. that he would
not practice for the future.

William Forrester, Master of Arts and Clergyman, was summoned before the
President and Censors, where he confessed that he had practiced Physic in
London for three years; being examined, he answered ridicule and inepte: He
said, that he was ignorant of the Laws and Customs of the College, and
therefore requested that he might be pardoned for what was past. He was
interdicted practice for the future, and told that if he were found guilty he
should be punished for what was past. After this, Forrester was complained of
by some Patients, of whom he had received considerable sums of money without
any advantage; By others, in that he had bargained with them for their Cures,
taking part in hand and reserving the other part till the Cure was performed.
Wherefore he was admonished to appear before the Censors, which he promised;
but neglecting, a Warrant was issued out for his imprisonment, and a Fine of 10
l. inflicted for his illegal and ill practice and not giving obedience to
College summons. About 3 years after, fresh complaints were brought against
him, for prescribing a Vomit and Purge upon the same day to a woman with child
(and one who not long before was troubled with spitting of blood) by the
violence of which she miscarried, and died within 3 days. One Margaret Peacock
likewise made complaint of Forrester's killing her husband by a Vomit,
prescribed him at 5 in the afternoon one day, which gave him an hundred stools,
and wrought so violently by Vomit, that he died next evening at 9 a clock,
wallowing in his own blood and humors discharged by the violent operation of
the forementioned medicine. Others charged him with agreeing for 20 l. for a
cure, of which he had received 10 l. yet by his negligence or ignorance the
Patient was dead. Of others he had received 5 l. upon the same account without
any advantage to the Patient. Upon these and the like complaints, he was again
summoned to appear at the College, but having obtained a License for practice
from the University, he sent that to the College, and refused to come:
Wherefore Orders were given for a speedy prosecution of him according to Law,
for his evil and illegal practice. Upon which, he makes friends to the Attorney
General, who requested the College to be favorable to him, Forrester being
willing to pay 10 l. that the Suit depending might fall, or he be admitted of
the College, which was denied upon his impudent and insolent behavior.

In the 35th of the Queen the following letter was wrote by the Lord Treasurer
Burleigh to the President of the College in the behalf of Dr. Butler of
Cambridge, that he might be allowed liberty of practicing Physic in London,
when he came thither upon private business or was sent for by any Patient.

To my very loving friend Mr. Dr. Baronsdale.
AFter my hearty commendations. I understand by Mr. Butler a Professor of
Physic in the University of Cambridge, and a man (as I doubt not but you know)
for his experience and learning very well reputed of, having occasion sometimes
to repair to London either about his private business, or at the request of
such as are desirous to have his advice; And understanding that he may not
practice without breach of a Statute of the Realm and order of the College,
except he have allowance and license so to do from you; And being very loath to
give offense any manner of way, is very desirous to have your good favor
toward him in that behalf. Whose request for the good opinion I have of his
learning and honesty, I cannot but recommend to your good furtherance, that at
some one of your Assemblies you will propound his request and procure allowance
thereof. For the which I will think my self beholden unto you, and be ready to
requite with any favor I may both toward your self and the College. And so I
bid you heartily farewell.

From my house at Westminster the 14th of February, 1592. Your loving friend W.
Burghley.


To this Letter the College returned this answer, That a free liberty of
practice should be allowed Dr. Butler when he came to London; provided that if
he came to live in Town, he would submit to the customary examinations of the
College and pay the usual Fees due upon that account.

Dr. Raphael Thorey, who had taken his degree at Leyden, was summoned to appear
at the College for practicing of Physic: He confessed that he had practiced
for 3 years, but only amongst the French and Foreigners. He was complained of
by one Mr. Edwards for prescribing a Vomit to his Wife being a Phthisical
woman, with which she died suffocated in a few hours. The College proposed 3
things to his choice; either to pay 5 l. to the College for his illegal
practice; or be obliged in a Bond, that he would not practice Physic for the
future in London or within 7 miles; or else to be imprisoned and prosecuted
according to Law. He readily accepted of the first condition of paying a sum of
money to the College, and promised for the future to submit himself to their
pleasure. He afterward was examined and had a License given him.

Simon Forman, a pretended Astrologer and great Impostor, appearing before the
President and Censors confessed that he had practiced Physic in England 16
years, and 2 years in London. He pretended that he had cured many Hectical and
tabid people by the use of Elect. e Suc. Ros. in Wormwood water. He boasted
that he made use of no other help for the discovery of distempers but his
Ephemerides, and that by the heavenly Signs, Aspects and Constellations of the
Planets, he could presently know every disease. Being examined in the
principles of Astronomy as well as in the Elements of Physic, he answered so
absurdly and ridiculously, that it caused great mirth and sport amongst the
Auditors. He was interdicted practice and punished propter malam and illicitam
praxin 5 l. which he readily and faithfully promised to pay. About 2 or 3 years
after he was examined a second time, and found very ignorant. He confessed that
he had never read any Author in Physic but one Cockis an obscure English
writer, and of no reputation. He then acknowledged (as before) that he only
practiced Physic by his skill in Astrology, in which Art being again examined,
he was found not to understand the common principles of it. Wherefore he was
committed to Prison and fined 10 l. to be paid to College uses, propter
illicitam praxin and insignem audaciam. After a month or 6 weeks imprisonment,
he was released by an Order from the Lord Keeper; upon which, the College
ordered that the 4 Censors with Dr. Smith should wait upon his Lordship to
acquaint him with the cause for which they had committed so notorious an
Impostor to Prison, and to Petition his Honor that he might be again
recommitted by virtue of the former Warrant signed by the Censors of the
College. Nine months after, this bold and impudent Impostor appearing before
the College, confessed that he had prescribed a compound water to a Gentleman
in a burning Fever, upon the taking of which he immediately died. Being asked
upon what grounds he practiced Physic or durst adventure to give medicines to
the sick; he answered that he understood the nature of diseases and proper
remedies only by Astrology. Being then examined a third time in that Art by
the Queen's Physician, he was again found a mere Impostor and ignorant in that
as well as in Physic. Wherefore he was by a Warrant from the Censors committed
again to Prison. This so humbled Forman that after he got out of Prison, he
fled to Lambeth as a place of protection from the College Officers; Wherefore
the College presented the following Letter to the Most Reverend the Archbishop
of Canterbury against him.

To the most Reverend, our singular good Lord, the Archbishop of Canterbury 's
Grace.
MOst Reverend and our singular good Lord; May it please your Grace to be
advertised, That one Simon Forman an intruder into the profession of Physic,
has of long time in this City, as well to the great prejudice of our
privileges as also to the intolerable abuse of her Majesty's Subjects, been a
great Practitioner in the same, making a deceitful show and color to the
ignorant people, that his skill is more than ordinary, depending upon the
speculation and insight of Nativities, and Astrology; thereby miserably
deceaving the innocence of such simple minded people, as resort unto him for
Counsel; For redress whereof we have heertofore convented him in our College
assemblees, and having made good and sufficient trial of his skill, as well in
the one as the other, have found him exceeding weak and ignorant in the very
Principles of them both, as appears by his most absurd answers, yet extant in
our College book of ordinary examynations: And thereupon according to the
Statutes of the Realm, we have heertofore utterly forbidden him to deal any
further in practice of that science wherein he has so little skill. All which
notwithstanding, the said Forman, as we are informed, has now placed himself
in Lambheath, being a Town under your Grace's Jurisdiction, mynding thereby as
yt shoold appear, to abuse your honorable protection touching the premises. In
consideration whereof, we humbly beseech your Grace, that as well in regard of
the insufficiency of the man, as also for the better maintenance of our
ancient privileges, he may be frustrate of his expectation in that behalf: and
that by your Grace's favor we may be aided and permitted, without any let or
impediment, to use such lawful and ordinary coorse, as both holsom Laws and
our Privileges have provided for the suppressing of him and the like offenders:
and we shall be bound to pray for your Grace's long lief and honorable
prosperytie. And so we most humbly take our leave. 28 Iunii, 1601.


To this Letter the Archbishop returned the following answer.

AFter my very hearty commendacions: Forman nether is nor shall be countenanced
by me: nether does he deserve it any way at my hands. I have heard very little
of him: insomuch, as I had a meaning to call him by virtue of the commission
Ecclesiastical for diverse misdemeanors, if any man woold have taken upon him
the prosecution of the cause against him. In which mind I remain still: And
therefore use your authorytie in the name of God. My Officers shall geve you
assistance, or else they shall be no Officers of mine. And so I commit you to
the tuition of the Almighty God.

From my house at Croyden the 4th of July, 1601. Your loving friend Jo. Cantuar.


After this, Mr. Pelham, a Physician, and another person acquainted the College
with the notorious cheats that Forman made use of for deceiving the people, as
his enquiring the Patient's name and place of habitation; then erecting a
figure; after that, passing a judgment of the disease and event thereof; then
prescribing remedies, etc. Upon which the Censors ordered a Citation for his
appearing before them; But he refusing to appear unless he might have their
promise for his safe return, he was prosecuted at Law according to direction of
Council, de mala praxi and illicita.

IN the 37th, William Chetley, an Apothecary in Bishopsgatestreet, having given
a lenitive Clyster, Bolus and Pills without the advice of a Physician, was
fined by the Censors, and had likewise been committed to prison for his illegal
practice, but that some of the Fellows interceded for him.

John Grove, a Surgeon, being examined and confessing the prescribing of a most
dangerous purging Medicine, he was fined 5 l. and committed to prison propter
istam insignem audaciam, periculosam inscientiam, and illicitam praxin.

In this year of the Queen's Reign the College ordered the following Letter to
be sent to the Surgeons of London, that they might wholly abstain from the
practice of Physic.

To our very loving friends the Master, the Wardens, the Assistants and the
residue of the Company of the Chirurgions in London.
AFter our very hearty commendacions. Among many other laudable Ordinances and
Statues, confirmed by her Majesty's Royal assent, and authority of the High
Parliament, It is not unknowen to you, upon what substantial and grave advice,
by the authority aforesaid, Our Society of this her Majesty's City of London
is invested with a Privilege, touching the practicing of Physic within this
said City and certain circuits thereunto adjoining, expressly named and
limited by the said Statutes concerning the same: and that none whosoever are
to meddle therein without our express consent and allowance. And for that we
are bound by Oath, and otherwise charged in duty and conscience, to see the
said Statutes duly from point to point observed, so much as shall lie in our
power so to do; and for that intent and purpose have ordained among our selves
certain solemn meetings and assemblies (which are in the year 16 times at
the least) only for the sufficient inquiry of the Premises: These be to
signify unto you, That as we oftentimes find many offenders in that behalf,
by intruding themselves into our liberties, and that to the great danger of
her Majesty's Subjects, and manifest infringing of her Laws; So among that
number so offending it falls out that no few of your Company are culpable in
the same, whom we for the most part have hitherto forborne either to punish or
molest; and that only for the good will that we have always born to you and
your Society. But for that we now see by daily experience, that upon our
lenity and sufferance, this inconvenience more and more increases, insomuch
that both in credit and otherwise, it seems to touch us more near then well
can be endured; We have therefore thought it good to put you in mind thereof,
and therewithal earnestly and friendly to request you, that among your selves
some such discreet Order may be taken heerin, that the like offense hereafter
may not be committed by them, or any of theirs. Wherein if we shall perceave
you as ready to fulfill our honest request, as we are willing to maintain good
amytie and concord with you and your Company, we will be very glad thereof, and
geve you thanks therefore: If not, then as we are fully minded to defend our
privileges, and to deal with the particular Offenders therein, as order of Law
and our Ordinances in that behalf requires; So we trust the body of your
Society will not be offended therewith.

And so we bid you most hartelie farewell, this 12 of November, 1595.

In the 38th, 1596. Roger Ienkins and Simon Read, were both charged for illegal
practice: The first (being a Surgeon by profession) denied his being guilty
thereof, which notwithstanding was proved by his giving judgment upon Urines,
undertaking cures, etc. Wherefore he was enjoined to pay a fine to the College,
give bond not to practice, and interdicted that profession. He submitted to the
censure of the College, and promised to give bond of 40 l. that he would not
practice in Physic. But that being afterward proved against him, the Censors
committed him to prison with Read and others, by the authority of the College
signed with their Common Seal.

As for Read, he being examined by the Censors in Latin according to the
Custom of the College, refused to answer in that language; being then
permitted to answer in English, he likewise refused it; Being then allowed to
answer in writing what account he could give of any disease which he would make
choice of, he chose a Diarrhoea, and being examined what that was, he told them
it was a flux of the Womb proceeding from gross humors in the Stomach. He was
judged illiterate and altogether unskilful in Physic. At the same time he was
complained of by one Cuckston for undertaking the cure of his wife laboring
under Melancholy, whom he had bled, purged, and hanged a paper charm about her
neck. The Censors fined him 5 l. and committed him to Prison.

About a month or 5 weeks after, Read procures a Letter to the College from a
person of Honor in his behalf, upon whose account the College agreed to deal
favorably with him upon the following conditions. 1. That he should release a
poor man out of Prison, which he laid in Gaol under the knavish pretense of a
debt of (...) when in truth he owed him nothing, the whole prof^n being
vexatious. 2. That he should release another poor man from Prison and further
prosecution, and restore him 40 ^. unjustly taken from him under the pretense
of curing his wife. 3. That he should be obliged to the College (with good
Sureties) in a bond, that he would not practice Physic in London nor within 7
miles of the same. Which conditions being performed, the Censors ordered his
release from Prison and forgave him his fine. After this he was summoned a
second time before the Censors, and charged for illegal practice; he confessed
it and declared that he could live by no other employment; wherefore he was
again committed to prison and fined 20 l. propter illicitam suam praxin. About
2 months after, Ienkins and Read procured a Habeas Corpus from Sir John Popham
Lord Chief Justice of England for their appearance before him; the full account
of which is thus entered in our Register.

April 8. 1602. There was an assembly of the President, Censors and Fellows of
the College convened in order to hear and consider what Ienkins and Read (whom
they had lately committed to prison) could say for themselves, why they should
be discharged; they having falsely made complaints of the severity and
injustice of the College, by which means they had procured a Writ, called
Corpus cum causa, from Sir John Popham Lord Chief Justice of England, in order
to a full hearing of this cause before him: Wherefore the College deputed the
Censors to wait upon the Chief Justice to acquaint him with the truth and
Justice of their proceedings, and to expect his Lordships judgment therein.

Accordingly they met Ienkins and Read at the Chief Justice's house, highly
complaining of the wrong done them by the President and Censors of the College,
by whose authority they were committed to prison for illegal practice, and
continued there for some weeks. One Mr. Harris a Counselor at Law appeared in
behalf of Ienkins and Read. The Chief Justice having diligently read over the
Statutes of the Kingdom relating to Physic; demanded of Ienkins how he durst
practice that Art without a License from the College. Upon which he first
denied practice, then answered ambiguously and with hesitation. At length
fearing lest the Chief Justice should give him his Oath, he confessed that he
had sometimes practiced, but as he thought not illegally. What, says the
Judge, did you ever procure the College Seal to justify your practice? No says
Ienkins, but I practiced as a Surgeon, and in that art the use of inward
Remedies is often necessary. To which the Chief Justice answered, That in such
cases a Physician was to be called, it being upon no such account lawful for
the Surgeon to invade the Physician's Province. The Counsel for these Empiricks
objected, that the President and Censors had no authority to commit to Prison,
but only to leave their causes to be determined by other Judges. The Chief
Justice reproved their Counsel, and declared that the Authority of the College
in committing to prison was very legal and valid. Ienkins then complained very
much, quod ob raram praxin, and that by the prescription of others he should
have so severe a fine inflicted; upon which the College Register was searched,
and there it appeared that before this Fine he had been 6 times accused for
practice, and several times had been fined in small mulcts. Upon which account,
the Chief Justice declared, that he thought it most reasonable that after he
had been treated with so great clemency (and yet rendered himself incorrigible)
he should have a severe Fine inflicted upon him. And by reason that Physicians
bills were often pleaded to justify illegal practice, he thought it most
advisable that all Physicians for the future should write upon all their bills
their Patients names and day of the month and year, by which means the Cheats
of Empiricks and other Impostors might more easily be detected. Thus the Chief
Justice having heard this cause, and well approved of the censure of the
College, ordered that Ienkins should be forthwith returned back to Prison,
until he had given satisfaction to the President and Censors. Some friends of
Ienkins moving that he might give security for his appearance and not be
reimprisoned; the Chief Justice answered, that it was not in his power to grant
their request, for the Laws of the Kingdom had determined that, as a Privilege
belonging to the President and Censors. It was then objected, that by the Law
no Citizen of London could be imprisoned per forinsecum aliquem. The Chief
Justice reading the words of the Statute and observing that they would bear no
such sense; replied, that by such interpretations they might likewise infringe
his authority.

As to Read, he complained that the College had fined him more than the Statute
would allow; upon which complaint the Chief Justice diligently looked over the
words of the Statute, and declared, that the College might inflict what penalty
they pleased, but the Keeper of the Prison was not obliged to detain his
prisoner, if they exceeded the fine of 20 l. He then justified his practice by
a Statute made in the 34, 35 H. 8. C. 8. By which it was lawful for any person
having the knowledge of herbs, etc. to practice at least in some diseases; to
which the Chief Justice answered, that this he ought not to do, because he was
not admitted by the College.

In short, the sum of the Chief Justice's opinion in hearing and deciding this
cause was the following.

1. There is no sufficient License without the College Seal. 2. No Surgeon, as
a Surgeon, may practice Physic, no, not for any disease, though it be the
great Pox. 3. That the authority of the College is strong and sufficient to
commit to prison. 4. That the censure of the College rising from lesser mulcts
to greater, was equal and reasonable. 5. That it were fit to set to Physicians
bills the day of the month and the Patient's name. 6. That the Lord Chief
Justice cannot bail, or deliver the College prisoner: but is obliged by Law to
deliver him up to the College censure. 7. That a Freeman of London may lawfully
be imprisoned by the College. 8. That no man, though never so learned a
Physician or Doctor, may practice in London, or within seven miles, without
the College License.
Upon this the President and College presented the following Letter to the Lord
Chief Justice.

To the Right Honorable Sir John Popham Knight, Lord Chief Justice of England,
and one of her Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.
RIght honorable, Albeit we acknowledge our selves to be most infinitely bound
already to your good Lordship for many your most honorable favors extended to
us and our Society heretofore, for the which we render your Lordship most
humble thanks; Yet such is your Lordship's great care, and continual good
inclination to the maintenance of learning, good orders, and virtue, That not
only we and our Society, that now is, are now again more deeply obliged to
your honor, but also all our posterity in time to come shall have just cause to
pray for your Lordship's long lief and prosperity; whose unspottable Integrytie
has been so well known to all England these many years (and many more shall be,
as we hope, to the great good of our Country, and to your Lordship's
everlasting praise and Memory) and whose tender particular favors have been so
honorably and so willingly performed to us of late, in defense of our
privileges against one Ienkins and Read, two ignorant intruders into the
profession of Physic, and two dangerous infringers, and abusers of her
Majesty's Laws and Leege people: as while the memory of the Society and
College of Physicians of London shall remain, so long shall your Lordship's
honorable most worthy name be celebrated and recorded, among all such as either
love or profess the title of Learning. And here, for our parts, we protest we
are right sorry, that our weakness is such, as we are not any otherwise able,
moore then only by bare words and speeches, to make manifest our inward
affections, and dutiful good meaning to your honor: But yet all that little,
whatever it is, that lies in our poor power to perform, we here offer and
present unto your Lordship with most humble devoted mynds, to do your good
Lordship any service that we can. And so desiring to rest in your honor's good
conceyt and opinion, we most humbly take our leave, and pray for your
Lordship's long lief and prosperytie.

This 10th of April, 1602. Your Lordship's most humble The President and
Society of the College of Physicians in London.


After this, upon the submission of Ienkins, and request of the Chief Justice,
a third part of the fine (of 20 l. imposed upon Ienkins by the Censors) was
remitted, and he discharged from Prison. Read likewise by the interest of the
Bishop of London procured his discharge.

About 2 years and 4 months after, Ienkins was again charged for practicing of
Physic, which he denied, but several instances of it being given, he confessed
that to some few Patients of Fevers, etc. he had prescribed purging physic,
etc. Being then charged with selling of one sort of drink to all that came for
it, he confessed that he had sold such a Medicine, but for the future would
never do it, and if in this manner or any other hereafter he should act
contrary to the privileges of the College he would readily submit to the
severest punishment. Upon this modest confession of his and promise of not
offending for the future, but more especially out of respect to the Lord
Chancellor, in whose service he was, the Censors inflicted no punishment upon
him, but only interdicted him practice; and then order was given by the
College that 2 of their Members should wait upon the Chancellor to acquaint
him how ill Ienkins had behaved himself toward the College, and how heartily
they had dealt with him upon his Honor's account. This was taken very kindly
by the Lord Chancellor, who returned the College thanks for their kindness to
Ienkins, and promised that for the future Ienkins should behave himself
inoffensively to the College; otherwise he was willing that he should be
punished, as they should see reason for it. After this, fresh informations were
brought against him, all which he denied a great while; But at last desired to
have all that was past remitted, and on that condition faithfully promised that
for the future he would give no advice upon the sight of Urines nor any inward
Physic; and if therein he was found faulty he willingly offered to pay 5 l.
for every time so doing; Upon which promise, and submission he was again
dismissed.

Bartholomew Chapel appeared before the College and was fined for practicing
Physic without License. About 3 months after he procured Letters to the
College in his behalf from the Lord Treasurer, Lord Shandois, etc. Upon which
account the College deferred any further prosecution of him till Michaelmas
Term; at which time being examined, he was found unfit for practice, and
afterward interdicted and bound in a bond of 40 l. not to practice for the
future.

Patrich Brownegold was cited before the President and Censors, and charged for
prescribing Physic, which he stoutly denied, but being proved by 2 or 3
witnesses present, it was ordered that he should give a bond of 10 l. for his
appearance the next month, and in the mean time should desist from practice; He
appeared at the time prefixed and gave a bond of 40 l. that he would not
practice for the future.

Mr. Rawlins, Master of Arts in Oxford, appeared upon summons before the
College and confessed that he had practiced Physic, having cured a woman (as
he said) of an immodicus mensium fluxus by attenuating remedies; which flux
proceeded (according to his opinion) from an imbecility of the Muscles and
infirmity of the Stomach: He was bound in a bond of 40 l. to abstain from the
practice of Physic. Two months after, he was examined by the President and
Censors, but giving no satisfaction in his answers, he was advised to greater
diligence in his Studies. Near a twelvemonth after he was a second time charged
for practicing Physic, which he denied; but confessed that he had given a
medicinal drink for stopping a Dysentery, which he would not allow to be
practicing, although he declared that he gave this drink because he found the
Patient to have a weak and languid pulse, from whence it plainly appeared that
he had practiced Physic, and had forfeited his bond. But because he behaved
himself submissively and confessed his fault, the Censors were kind to him and
dismissed him without punishment, only interdicting him practice and
admonishing him not to be guilty of the like fault for the future. About 2
years after he was again summoned for practicing Physic (although he had taken
his Doctors degree in Cambridge.) He desired that he might be examined in
order to his admission, which was done, and he notwithstanding fined propter
praxin praeteritam.

Joseph Smart a Surgeon, was charged for practicing Physic, which he did not
much deny, but modestly defended the lawfulness of it. He was punished 5 l.
propter malam and illicitam praxin, if for the future he should be found guilty
of practice within the College liberties.

Edmund Messenger, a Surgeon, was complained of to the President and Censors
for his practicing of Physic. He was summoned and appeared: confessed that he
had given several purging potions to a Patient, but this he had done in a case
relating to Surgery. He acknowledged that he had bled a man very weak, and
reduced to an extreme low condition with a looseness. He owned likewise that he
had given him several cooling and medicinal Potions. He was interdicted
practice, and for this his illegal and ill practice committed to prison with a
fine of 5 l.

In the 39th, John Carter, Master of Arts of 20 years standing in Cambridge,
was fined propter praxin praeteritam 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. to be paid within a quarter
of a year. Being afterward summoned to appear before the President and
Censors, and not coming; It was ordered by the Censors, that for this his
contempt he should be imprisoned as soon as he could be found. About 2 years
after, he appeared before the Censors, and promised that he would forthwith
leave the City and never return to practice in it any more. He was ordered to
give bond that for the future he would not practice Physic within London or 7
miles, which he readily promised to do.

In the 40th, An. 1598. Katherine Clark was cited and appeared before the
Censors; she was accused of practicing Physic, and convicted by the testimony
of others and likewise by her own confession: She was enjoined to appear before
the President and Censors at their next convention, and to bring along with her
her husband, or any other honest man approved on by the College for her
security that she should not practice hereafter. Being afterward charged by
Mr. Bredwell for giving purging Physic to one Morgan, etc. she was fined 5 l.
and committed to prison ob hoc suum factum and illicitam praxin.

Cecilie Pople, being accused by Mr. Wood, Mr. Hynd and Mr. Cole Surgeons, for
using very ill and absurd practice upon one Dorothy Gatensby, whose cure she
had undertaken by fumigation, the Patient dying within 12 days; which ill
practice she had likewise used upon 2 others; She was obliged to bring her
husband along with her the next Censors day, that they might both enter into
bond, that for the future she should not practice Physic.

Richard Powel, a Dyer, appeared before the President and Censors, and
confessed that he had given purging Physic to a man and his wife; wherefore he
was fined 40 s. and committed to prison.

Thomas Watson a Surgeon, being accused by a Patient, that he had undertaken
the cure of an Ulcer in his Throat for a sum of money; Watson confessed that he
had given him a purging potion for a week, but pretended that it was done by
the advice of Dr. Bredwell, who testifying that he had given no such advice,
Watson was committed to prison and fined 40 S. propter malam and illicitam
praxin.

In the 42th, Francis Anthony, Master of Arts in Cambridge 26 years, and
afterward Doctor of Physic in our own Universities, appeared before the
President and Censors; confessed, that he had practiced Physic in London for 6
months, and had cured 20 or more of diverse diseases, to whom he had given
purging and vomiting Physic; to others, a diaphoretick medicine prepared from
Gold and Mercury, as the cases required: But withal acknowledged that he had
no License to practice. He was examined in the several parts of Physic, and
found very weak and ignorant: Wherefore he was interdicted practice. About a
month after, he was committed to the Counter prison and fined 5 l. propter
illicitam praxin, in that he prescribed Physic against the Statutes and
privileges of the College; But within a fortnight or 3 weeks he was by a
Warrant from the Lord Chief Justice taken out of Prison and restored to his
liberty. Wherefore it was ordered, that the President and one of the Censors
should wait upon the Chief Justice with a Petition from the College to request
his favor in defending and preserving the College privileges; upon which
Anthony submits himself to the College's censure, and begs their favor.
Wherefore it was ordered that he should forthwith pay to the Treasurer of the
College the 5 l. due sor his fine, which he ^ed to do, and was likewise
interdicted practice. Not long after he was again accused of practicing
Physic, which he confessed, wherefore he was punished 5 l. for practicing
against the Statutes of the College and his own promise; But he resusing to pay
it, was committed to prison and fined 20 l. About 8 months after, order was
given by the Censors for prosecuting him at Law, he having confessed 3 years
practice within the City, and his prescribing medicines lately to one that died
and to another in great danger. After this Anthony's wife petitioned the
College, that they would deal mercifully with her husband and restore him to
his liberty. This Petition was rejected, it being now out of the College's
power to set him at liberty, the suit depending being commenced in the Queen's
name as well as the College's. Wherefore about 2 months after, Mrs. Anthony
delivered a second Petition to the College with so great importunity and tears,
that partly upon that account, and partly upon the account of Anthony's
poverty, etc. they granted the following Warrant to the Keeper of the Prison.

Whereas Francis Anthony at the Suite of the President of the College or
Comminaltie of the Physicians of the City of London, lies in execution after
Judgment, for a certain sum of money, whereof 30 l. are due unto her
Majesty, and the rest to the said President for the time being and the
Comminaltie: We the said President and Comminaltie aforesaid are contented for
our parts so much as concerns us to discharge the abovenamed Francis Anthony,
so that it be no ways prejudicial to her Majesty's part, due upon the said
execution. Given under the College Seal this 6th of August 1602. Regnique
Reginae Elizabethae quadragesimo quarto.

Two years after Anthony's release from prison, Dr. Tailor with 2 Physicians
more of the College and some other persons complained against him for
prescribing Physic to several Patients, amongst which one died upon the use of
his remedies; another lost all his teeth, a third fell into such violent
vomitings and looseness that the day after he died, and charged his death upon
Anthony, who had said that when all other remedies failed him, he used this as
his last and extreme one, which in the nature of it would either kill or cure.
The President and Censors gave order for his prosecution according to Law.
After which order several fresh complaints were brought against him, as his
prescribing his Aurum potabile to a Reverend Divine, who upon his deathbed
complained that this medicine had killed him, he falling upon the use of it
into an incurable inflammation of his Throat, etc.

In the 43th, Richard Edwards, a servant of an Apothecary lately dead, was
charged for practicing Physic. He confessed that he had given Clysters and
other medicines to some sick persons, but not of his own invention, but such as
he had taken from bills on the file: he likewise confessed that he had given
various remedies to a woman troubled with the Scurvey, etc. Wherefore he was
sent to prison and fined 5 l. A second time practice being proved against him
he was fined 40 s. ob illicitam praxin.

In the 44th, John Clark being summoned by the Beadle to appear before the
President and Censors to answer what should be charged against him for
practicing Physic without License, wrote a Letter to excuse his absence; which
he said was not occasioned from from any contempt of College authority, but
from fear of being arrested by some Creditors. About 6 months after he
appeared, and denied that he had practiced from the time he was interdicted by
the College; but confessed that he had exposed to sale some choice waters; the
composition of which he was required to declare to the Censors upon a certain
day appointed for that purpose upon the penalty of a contempt. A month after
appearing before the Censors, he was required to give an account why he sold a
Pint of Cinnamon water for 5 l. He answered that the College had no power to
examine him; that he made use of an extraordinary purging remedy, and was
master of another for Fevers made out of Mummy, communicated to him by Hugo
Plat; that the book entitled Tuba Apollinis was wrote by him, etc. He was
thrice admonished to think of a better course of life; but notwithstanding
obstinately persisting to violate the Laws of the Land and privileges of the
College, was fined 20 l. and ordered commitment to Prison: but making his
escape out of the custody of the College Officer, he procured a Protection from
the Lord Chamberlain; upon which account the College directed the following
Letter to be drawn up and presented by some of their Members to the Right
honorable the Lord Chamberlain.

RIght Honorable and our very good Lord: Understanding by the report of Mr. Dr.
Forster our President, that your Lordship is somewhat hardly conceated toward
us and our College, about the dealing with one Clark, presupposed to be your
Lordship's man: We are humbly to crave your Lordship's patience and favorable
heering, till we have made plain our true and innocent meaning therein. May it
please you therefore to understand. That as we are bound by the Laws and orders
of the Realm, and by a solemn Oath taken of every one of us particulerly for
the strict observation of the said Orders: So also we have had of late her
Majesty's Princely express commandment, that we should have a diligent care
and circumspection for the punishment and weeding out of all such ignorant
persons, as under pretense of practicing of Physic, do mightily abuse her
Majesty's Subjects in that behalf, as well to the great endaungering of their
lives, as also to the manifest exhausting of their goods. And for that the
number of those ill disposed abusers are more in number then we can well find
out, and more subtle in their crafty devices, then we can well express: we have
therefore of late obtained my Lord Chief Justice's most honorable Warrant for
our better assistance in that behalf. And now whereas one Clark among others
has been greatly complained of unto us by diverse, as a notorious offender and
malefactor among the rest; and finding his dealing therein to be very
offensive, and to deserve just blame and correction; and the man himself to be
very weak and ignorant in the true principles of Physic: beside the manifest
contempt and breach of our privileges, whereunto we are so precisely sworn; We
could do no less in discharge of our duty then to inflict some condign
punishment upon him for the same. But now understanding that your Lordship is
well affected to the man, and that it pleases you in some respects to use his
necessary service, and attendance upon your honorable person: We for our parts
shall be very glad and willing to see him to do any such good office, as shall be
pleasing to your Honor, and answerable to your good Lordship's expectation. But
if under pretense and color of that his service, he shall further intrude
himself to do any act in Physic, to the abuse of her Majesty's Subjects, and
infringing of our Privileges; Then we beseech your good Lordship to pardon us
if we persist to maintain that which by her sacred Majesty and her Princely
predecessors, has so long time been most graciously granted: and by all her
Majesty's most honorable Lords of her Privy Council (of which number your
Lordship is one at this present, and that you may so long be, to your
Lordship's good liking and contentment, we pray with all our hearts) has
hitherto from time to time been most honorably allowed and protected. And so
most earnestly praying for your Lordship's perfect and speedy recovery, we most
humbly take our leave.

At our College the viiith of March, 1602. Your Lordship's most humble The
President and Socyetie of the College of Physicians in London.


Edward Coker, an Apothecary, was accused by several persons of giving and
prescribing Physic; which he denied, but being convicted by their testimony
and matter of fact, he was committed to prison and fined 20 l. After which he
gave bond to the College that he would not practice for the future. Yet
afterward he was accused by one Gregory Carry for an Impostor and illegal
practiser, he having agreed with him for a certain sum of money for the cure of
his distemper, and given him several Vomits and Purges to no purpose; yet had
sued him for his bargain; Wherefore the Censors resolved forthwith to commit
him to prison; but upon his great importunity and submission they remitted that
punishment upon condition, that he paid a moderate fine to the College the next
Court. About 9 months after he with several other Empiricks were cited to
appear before the Censors; but refusing to come, the Beadle was commanded to
give them all summons to appear at the next Censors Court upon the penalty of
20 l.

Richard Briggs appeared upon summons, and confessed that he had practiced
Physic in London 7 years, and affirmed that he had cured several Patients sick
of dangerous distempers, and had wrote bills to several Apothecaries whom he
named. Wherefore he was forthwith sent to Woodstreet Compter, but was within 3
days released, because he ingenuously acknowledged his fault, promised that for
the future he would offend no more, and engaged several friends to wait upon
the Censors to implore their favor.

Mrs. Woodhouse, a famous Empirick living at Kingsland, appeared before the
President and Censors, She was examined of the virtues of Medicines, and asked
first her opinion of Pepper, she said it was cold: Violets and Strawberries,
cold and dry. The purging Medicines she used to give were Diaprun. and Hamech,
as likewise Stibium in infusion or substance to 25 grains. She declared that
she knew whether any woman was with child by her Urine, and she was so certain
in this, that she seldom was deceived in four of an hundred: She prescribed to
a young man sick of a burning Fever half a spoonful of Mithridate in 6
spoonfulls of Aq. Coelestis, with which he swet 48 hours, and had he not then
taken some cooling waters to have tempered the violent heat, he must have
perished. She likewise professed that she had cured several bewitched and
Planet-struck. She was ordered a fortnight after to appear upon the forfeiture
of a bond of 20 l. which she had given for her appearance. About five or 6
years after, some members of the College were appointed to wait upon the Lord
Treasurer to request his favor and leave for the prosecution of her, she
having procured a protection from his Lordship. The Lord Treasurer returned
this answer, that the College had their free liberty to prosecute her as they
saw reason; and that not only in this, but in all other concerns he would
express all the favor and kindness he could to their Society.

James Henley, a Surgeon, was complained of by the Wife of one Williams, for
that he had given her husband Pills of a yellowish color, with which he had
many Vomits and Stools, and was now in great danger of his life. Henley
confessed that he had agreed with her husband to cure him for 20 s. and that he
had given him pills of Turbith, which he had given to 500 Patients without any
danger, and that in this he had done no more than what was practiced by all
other Surgeons. His cause being heard, he was by the Censors committed to
Newgate.

John Actor, a Surgeon, was charged for practicing Physic; which he confessed,
and thought he lawfully might, as a Surgeon; upon which account he had
prescribed purging Physic and other remedies to Patients; and brought along
with him one to attest several cures performed by him. He was fined 5 Marks and
committed to Prison. Being afterward convicted ob illicitam and imperitam
praxin, he was again fined and imprisoned. And some years after being
complained of upon the same account, he was brought from Windsor by a Warrant
under the hand of Secretary Windebank directed to John Penyal the College
Officer.

In the last year of Q. Elizabeth's Reign, John Baldwin being formerly
interdicted practice, was now again charged with the same; of which he was
convicted by the testimony of others as well as his own confession. Wherefore
he was fined 6 l. and committed to Prison.

Edmund Gardener, in the same year of the Queen, was committed to Prison for
practicing Physic. Whilst he was there, Letters were sent to the College in
his behalf from one of the Queen's Court; upon which account it was agreed by
the Censors that he should be restored to his liberty upon the payment of 5
Marks to the College. In the 6th year of King James his Reign Gardiner's wife
appeared before the President and Censors, and paid to the College 6 l. 13 s. 4
d. and brought along with her two Sureties, who gave bond with her husband for
the yearly payment of 3 l. until the full sum of 30 l. was paid, which was
recovered of him by a Suit at Law, and duly paid at the times prefixed to the
Treasurer of the College.

PROCEEDINGS Against Empiricks, etc.
In King James 's Reign.
ANne Dickson appeared before the President and Censors being charged by Mr.
Goldstone and 2 or 3 more for practicing Physic, with which she had killed a
Gentleman of his acquaintance, having given him a Medicine which had wrought so
violently by Vomit and Stool that he died in the operation. She confessed that
she had given him Physic, but said it was innocent; but the matter of fact was
so notorious, and the event so fatal, that she was forthwith committed to
Prison and fined 5 l.

Dr. Saul, being made one of the Queen's Physicians, and yet an illiterate and
ignorant person in his profession: the College ordered the following Letter to
be presented to the Right Honorable the Lord Sidney.

RIght Honorable and our very good Lord: The great care that your good Lordship
has for the preservation of her Majesty's health, as it is right well known
to others, so has it been fully signified unto us, by the speech of Dr. Brown
Physician to his most excellent Majesty. In regard whereof we perceive by him,
it is your pleasure that your Lordship might be rightly and thoroughly
enfourmed of the true sufficiency of one Saul, who is entertained into her
Majesty's service; a matter of noe small moment touching her Majesty's health
and safety. Wherein we are thus much to say, in respect of our bounden duty,
and upon our credits: That this said Saul in the year 1591. made his appearance
at our College upon one of our solemn meeting days, there to be examined for
his skill and sufficiency in Physic, and there being orderly opposed in the
Latin tongue according to our custom and as we are bound to do, stood mute
and answered not one word, either for that he woold not or coold not understand
us. Then being demanded in English, what part of Galen, or other good Authors
he had read; He answered that he had read Galen all over. Then being required
to name some one book or other of the said Author that he said he had read, to
the end he might have been examined with all favor in that book which he was
best acquainted with, He coold not so much as name any one book of his. And for
that he then showed us certain Letters testimonial of his Doctorship at the
University of Leyden, (gotten by what corrupt and indirect means we know not)
we requested him to impart those questions unto us, wherein he answered when he
proceeded Doctor. But herein also he refused to name any one of them unto us.
Whereupon his ignorance so manifestly appeared unto us, as we coold do no
less upon our Oaths then to forbid him from practice at that time: and
thereupon immediately wrote our Letters to one Heurnius Doctor of the Chair
there, sharply reprehending him for committing such an error, and for suffering
such gross abuses to the great discredit of themselves and their University:
who promised the like fault should never be committed again. And from that time
till now of late, we never heard more of this Saul: and do not a little
marveile, how he comes by this credit in Physic, unless either by infusion,
learning has been powered into him; or else by some extraordinary means, he
has of late obtained a special gift of healing. And thus having most
faithfully discharged our duty to your good Lordship, not with any malicious
mind to the party, but in regard of our loyal fidelity to her Majesty; we
most humbly take our leave.


About the Second year of King James his Reign a Copy of the Surgeons Letters
Patents (which they had procured from the King's Majesty for enlarging their
Privileges) was read to the College, which being found long and full of Law
subtilties; It was ordered that some of the Fellows should examine and compare
their Old Charter with their New; which being done and reported to the College,
the President with two of the Elects waited upon the Lord Cranbourne to
acquaint him what great inconveniences and mischiefs would ensue, not only as
to the privileges of the College of Physicians, but likewise as to the public
good of the whole kingdom, in case their Letters Patents were passed.
Notwithstanding, the Surgeons presented a Petition in Parliament to procure an
authority for prescribing inward as well as outward medicines in Wounds,
Ulcers, and French Pox, a Copy of which is the following.

To the Honorable Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons in
his Majesty's high Court of Parliament assembled.
The humble Petition of the Masters or Governors of the Mystery and Commonalty
of Barbers and Surgeons of London.
Most humbly showing,

THat whereas it has pleased his Majesty to grant unto the College of
Physicians of London a Patent under his Majesty's great Seal of England, and
thereby has given them not only many large privileges and other grants but
also power to call and convent before them in London and 7 miles compass, and
to examine upon Oath the servant or attendant upon any person or persons that
shall either give or take Physic, and in fine to imprison at their pleasure
all such persons as do or shall administer any internal remedy whatsoever; By
reason whereof they do not only take unto themselves the Arts of the
Physician, Surgeon and Apothecary, but do likewise go about to restrain
your Petitioners from using unto their grieved and wounded Patients such
wound-drinks, Potions and other inward remedies as they by their long practice,
study and tried experience have found most necessary for the recovery of their
diseased Patients as well in the City of London, as in all his Majesty's
services both by Sea and Land, in preserving both their lives and limbs, and
without which many times they cannot perform their Cures nor give such speedy
ease and remedy to the grieved Patients, as otherwise they may and can do;
which Patent is very prejudicial not only to your Petitioners, but to all his
Majesty's subjects who shall have occasion to use their help, and will prove a
great and heavy burden to the Commonwealth in general, when for every hurt
apperteyning to the Chirurgions cure the Patient must be forced to entertain a
Surgeon, a Physician and an Apothecary.

The humble Suite of your Petitioners is, that this honorable House will be
pleased to take the same Patent into your grave considerations, and the
unlawful privileges and hurtful power to them given to set Fines, to take
Recognizances, inflict Imprisonments, and other authorities grievous to his
Majesty's subjects, and to them given by the same Patent, being by your
wisdoms weighed and examined, and the Petitioners with their Council heard,
that this honorable House upon hearing thereof, being truly informed of the
said general wrong, such course may be therein taken through your Justice and
grave Wisdoms, as may tend to the relief of your Petitioners and the good of
the Commonwealth. And they as in duty bound, shall daily pray to God for your
ever during prosperities, etc.

Your Petitioners preferring their Petition to his Highness touching the
Premises, his Majesty was thereby graciously pleased to leave the Petitioners
free to seek any lawful remedy for their grievances either in Parliament or
otherwise.

Rich. Cooper.
Tho. Allen.
Rich. Mapes.
E. Ingolsbye.
Will. Clowes.
John Woodall.
Tho. Bonham.
Christoph. Frederick.
C. Primrois.
Joseph Fenton.
Rich. Wateson.
James Mullins.

This Petition was rejected by the Parliament and thrown out, to their no small
disappointment and regret. After this ill usage of the College, the Surgeons
desired a conference to take away all occasion of future offense and to
maintain mutual friendship, being informed how highly the College resented this
ill action of theirs. They protested that there was nothing attempted by them
to infringe College privileges, yet confessed that their Bill was very unjust
and unreasonable; which (they said) was not theirs but their Councels fault;
who designing to express great cunning and subtilty in drawing of it, perverted
the true sense, intended by them. The President replied, that it had been more
prudently and fairly acted, if they had consulted the College and taken their
advice, before they attempted the passing of a Bill of this nature, for it was
now apparent that they endeavored clancularly and by mean tricks to have
procured an Act of Parliament to the great prejudice of Physicians and the very
subversion of the College. They endeavored to excuse themselves by declaring
that they never intended any such thing. But the case was so plain, that there
was no denial of it. However the President told them, that if they had any
thing to offer to the College, they should bring it in writing; which if
thought just and reasonable, they might expect the Colleges encouragement and
assistance; provided they brought not along with them any member who had
behaved himself rudely and insolently toward the College; whereof one of them
having been guilty, and afterward ingenuously confessing his fault, was
pardoned and received again into favor.

About this time it was ordered by the College, that Mr. Nicholas the Keeper of
Woodstreet Compter should be prosecuted at law, for releasing an Empirick (sent
to his Prison by the Censors Warrant) without their consent.

Dr. Jacob Domingo, being accused of practice and behaving himself insolently
and rudely toward the College, was by the Censors committed to prison; but
afterward acknowledging his fault and declaring that what he said, was in
passion and precipitantly, for which he was heartily sorry and begged pardon,
he was discharged from prison without a fine, upon condition of his payment of
the Fees due to the Keeper of the Prison, and abstaining from practice for the
future. After this, he was cited and appeared, and being asked by what
authority he practiced Physic, he told them that he had a License to practice;
which being demanded, it was found that he had a License to practice in the
Country but not in London nor within 7 miles of the same. It was therefore
ordered by the College, that he should be committed to prison propter
contemptum. Not long after being cited again, he appeared before the Censors
and passed his examination for Licentiate intra urbem, which was granted him,
he being found worthy thereof, and obliged to pay the usual Fees due from
Licentiates.

Dr. Bonham, being examined by the President and Censors, was dismissed quia
minus apterespondit; About 7 months after he was examined a second time, but
giving no satisfaction, he was required to follow his Studies more diligently,
and to appear at the next general Court. A twelvemonth after he was examined a
third time, but because he gave little satisfaction to the Censors, he was
fined 5 l. for practice, to be paid the next Comitia; or else to be committed
to Prison. About 6 months after, it was ordered by the Censors, that seeing Dr.
Bonham had been often cited and not appeared, he should be arrested by the
authority of the Censors, and committed to Prison with a fine of 20 l. About a
month after, he appeared before the President and Censors, and behaved himself
very insolently, declaring that he had and would practice Physic in despite
of the College, neither would he give any obedience to the President or
Censors, they having no authority over those who had taken their degrees in
Physic in our own Universities. And to prove this, he brought his Council
along with him, who endeavored to distort the Statutes to that sense. But the
President and Censors considering the whole cause with its circumstances,
committed the Doctor forthwith to Prison. In the same month Dr. Bonham's Case
was heard before the Judges of the King's Bench, by whose authority he was
released out of prison: But upon new practice proved against him, he was again
committed; after which, he procured Letters in his behalf from the Archbishop
of Canterbury; but upon the application of the President, Censors and Register
to his Grace, acquainting him with the whole matter of fact, their proceedings
at Law, the opinion of the Judges, their success in their trial, their
readiness to pardon him upon his submission and acknowledgment of his error,
and revocation of that Suit commenced against the College; He declared himself
fully satisfied with the Justice and equity of the College in their
proceedings, and professed that in case he did not submit upon the terms
proposed, he was unworthy their favor, neither should he for the future
intercede for him.

William Foster, a Surgeon in Fanchurch street, was complained of for hanging
out a table at his door, in which he exposed to sale a powder for the
Green Sickness. Being charged with this, he pretended that it was his Wife's
doing without his consent. Some of the Fellows declaring that they had heard
the powder was dangerous and had prejudiced several persons; he replied, that
his Wife had injured none by the use of it, but relieved many, naming 2
persons. Upon this, it was ordered that he and his Wife should appear next
Court, and bring along with them the receipt of this powder; which if he
neglected, the College would proceed to a more severe censure against him.
Accordingly he and his wife appeared at the time appointed, and endeavored to
excuse this crime by the example of others, who were guilty of the same; to
which was answered, that they likewise in due time should be cited and
punished. They acknowledged their fault and begged the College's pardon, which
was granted them upon condition that for the future they meddled not with the
affairs of Physic.

Arthur Dee was summoned before the Censors for much the same crime; he having
hanged out a table, in which he exposed to sale several Medicines, by which
many diseases were said to be certainly cured. This crime was esteemed such an
intolerable cheat and imposture, that the Censors ordered him to appear with
his remedies in order to the inflicting a due penalty upon him.

Alphonsus de Sancto Victore was brought before the Censors for practicing
Physic without License. Being examined, he was found a very ignorant man,
educated in the Camp not in the Schools. He was charged for killing a London
Merchant sick of a Dropsy, whom he bled under the tongue and took above 3
pints of blood from him: likewise for undertaking the cure of another person
for 20 l. of which he had 5 l. in hand, and left him in a much worse condition
than he found him: He was therefore interdicted practice.

Mr. Hutton, an Apothecary, being often summoned by the Beadle to appear before
the Censors, and yet refusing, the Censors gave order that he should forthwith
be committed to prison for this his contempt. But he coming to the College and
humbly begging their pardon, and promising for the future that he would solely
apply himself to his trade, the Censors pardoned him his former faults upon
condition of performing his present engagements.

William Turner, Bachelor of Physic in Oxford, having lived 2 years in London
and practiced Physic therein, was cited to appear before the Censors; by whom
being asked by what authority he practiced in London, he first pleaded his
privilege as having taken a Degree in Physic in one of our Universities, then
as being a Citizen of London; But when it was shown him, that neither of these
could bear him out in the breach of those privileges granted to the College of
Physicians by Act of Parliament, he submitted to the Censors judgment and was
ordered next Comitia to pass his examination, as a testimony of his ability,
and was in the interval forbidden practice. He afterward was examined,
approved and admitted of the College.

Robert Swain was complained of by 2 sufficient witnesses, that he had given a
medicine to one Mary Walker a Woman with Child, with which she miscarried the
day after; And he being summoned and not appearing, It was ordered by the
President and Censors that he should be fined 5 l. and committed to Prison (if
he could be taken) which was accordingly done the same month. It appearing
afterward from his own confession and the accusation of others that he did not
desist from practice (though he had twice obliged himself to the College de non
practicando) he was committed to prison with a fine of 5 l.

Rose Griff^ was complained of by Helen Piers for mala praxis, in that she had
given to her and several other Women big with Child such remedies as put them
into violent vomiting and stools with great danger of their lives: She
confessed that she had given Lozenges of Antimony, pulvis sanctus, purging
potions of Sarsa-paril. Senna, Hermodactyls, etc. For which she was arrested in
the name of the College and sent to Prison.

Thomas Woodhouse, a Surgeon, was cited to appear before the President and
Censors for practicing Physic, but no witness appearing against him, he was
dismissed. He was afterward summoned upon the same account, when upon
examination he confessed that he had given a certain Pill, which he called
Pantalagogon, and a Cathartick diet. He was required by the Censors to bring
along with him 5 l. the next Comitia as a mulct for this offense, or else he
should be committed to Prison.

Henoch Clapham appeared before the President and Censors, being charged for
setting up Bills on several posts in the City, wherein there were large
promises made of the cure of several diseases. This he confessed, but withal
he said, that he was ignorant of the College Privileges, neither had he
committed any thing willingly against the Laws. Wherefore he was forbidden
practice, which he promised not to be guilty of for the future.

Dr. Tenant was accused by Mrs. Randol, who came before the President and
Censors in the beginning of October, and witnessed that Dr. Tenant had visited
a servant of hers about a month before, and had given him purging pills 4 days
together, and likewise powders 4 days more, with which he had been purged so
much beyond his strength, that she despaired of his life. She farther testified
that the Dr. had undertaken his cure for 6 l. (of which he had received 40 s.)
Which cure he was so far from performing, that whereas he had a tolerable
stomach before, since the Doctor's undertaking him he had not tasted any thing,
but pined away and now was dead of a Marasmus. Not long after, an Apothecary
complained against the Dr. for his prescribing to a servant 2 pills for which
he had 12 s. and at night a little Syrup for which he had 20 s. and after that
some other Syrup for which he received 12 s. which were no advantage to the
Patient, he dying in a few days of a flux of blood. One Mr. S^gar King at Arms,
with his wise, complained to the College against him, in that he had undertaken
the cure of an Hydropical Gentlewoman, and had received of her 30 l. partly for
his pains and partly for his Medicines (whose price he had advanced beyond all
reason and conscience) yet left her without a cure. He was so impudent and
unconscionable in the rating of his medicines, that he charged one Pill at 6 l.
and an Apozeme at the same price. After this, one Mrs. Whitney and Mr. Fulres
came to the President and Censors, and charged Dr. Tenant with mala praxis, in
that he had given to her husband (not very ill, but only complaining of a
gentle preternatural heat) one Pill of the bigness of a pease, for which he had
6 s. the operation of which was such, that it never ceased from Vomiting and
Purging him from Friday morning till Sunday, at which time it had given him 40
Vomits and 30 Stools, with so great violence, that he shortly after died. He
was arrested by order of the President and Censors for evil practice and
contempt, etc. fined 20 l. and committed to Prison. Afterward, an order was
given for prosecuting him at Law, upon which he engaged a person of Quality to
be his Advocate to the College that they might not proceed in their Suit
against him; which was granted upon the payment of 20 l. fine, and 10 l. for
practice and Costs of Suit. He was interdicted practice; yet it was proved
again upon him in a short time, having taken of one 27 l. for the cure of a
Quartan Ague which still remained: Of another 20 l. for the cure of the Stone
without advantage; of another 6 l. for the cure of a Lientery. Upon his sight
of the Urine of one of his Majesty's Guards, he declared that the night
following he should have a grievous Fit, and the same day se'night should die.
The man yet lives and is like to recover. Upon these and the like complaints
the College commenced a fresh Suit against him.

Thomas Dowsing and his Wife complained to the President and Censors against
one Air, who had given to their daughter a Medicine in the form of a Lozenge,
which wrought so violently with her, that she never ceased Vomiting first
humor, then blood (though various sorts of remedies were used) until she died.

Peter Chamberleyne a Surgeon, was charged by Dr. Ridley for prescribing an
Electuary to Mr. Lile's son; and Pills to a Girl, which procured a continual
purging for 3 days. The President reproving him for practicing Physic against
the Laws, told him, that if he did not desist from practice, he must expect to
be dealt with more severely. About 3 months after, Dr. Rawlins accused him of
illegal and evil practice, in that he had undertaken the cure of a person
complaining of an Arthritick disease, by Unction, Sweating Potions, Purging
Physic, etc. for which he was fined 5 Marks, and obliged to give bond for the
payment. He paid 3 l. 4 months after, and upon his submission was remitted the
rest. He was again charged by Mr. Patinson for practicing Physic upon one Mrs.
Blosse, which at first he would have excused; but then ingenuously confessed
it, and was only fined 4 Marks. Some time after a fine of 40 s. was imposed
upon him de praxi medica illicita and mala. He notwithstanding persisted in
practice, confessing that he gave a drink to a Gentlewoman for 3 days to dry up
a moisture that (he supposed) came from her back, for which he was fined and
committed to prison: and though application was made to the College by the Lord
Mayor, yet the President and Censors would not consent to his release, because
he was committed pro mala praxi. A Petition not long after was presented to the
College against him for undertaking a cure for 10 l. (of which he had received
half:) and left the Patient worse than he found her. He was likewise complained
of for mala praxis in Childbed women, etc. upon which the Censors interdicted
him all practice.

Mr. Doughton, a Surgeon, was complained of by Mr. Flud an Attorney, for that
he had undertaken the cure of his Wife, ill of a Maniack distemper, for 20 l.
and had done her little or no good; for after a month or two she relapsed into
as bad a condition as formerly. But he confessing his fault, and having been
never before convicted of the like, the President and Censors inflicted only a
fine of 40 s. upon him, with an admonition that for the future he should not
intrude himself into a profession that he understood not. After this, he was
charged with a very inhumane and unskilful practice upon a woman in labor, by
which both Mother and Infant perished, which was proved against him by the
Midwife: Wherefore the President and Censors ordered his repayment of 5 l.
which he received by agreement, and required a bond of 200 l. that he should
never profess or practice Midwifery for the future.

Edward Putman, an old German Impostor, brought a Letter from the Earl of
Exceter in favor of himself; Wherefore he was examined leniter tentandi causa
by the President and Censors; But found so egregiously ignorant that he knew
not the definition of a disease nor the several species thereof. Wherefore it
was agreed by the Censors, that out of respect to the Right honorable the Earl
of Exceter, he should be pardoned for his former Practice, but interdicted for
the future; and that a Letter should be sent to the Earl to acquaint him with
the proceedings of the College in this affair.

Mrs. Sadler, being charged of illegal practicing Physic, she appeared with 3
or 4 of her Neighbors, and confessed that she had given some Compositions,
which by chance might purge twice or thrice; but she gave no Medicines. This
vain excuse of hers deserved a greater punishment; but at that time the Censors
only ordered, that her Neighbors which she brought along with her should
engage on her behalf, that she should not practice for the future; which they
did, by subscribing their names to a Paper drawn up for that purpose.

Philippus Bernardinus, an Italian, was charged for selling a purging Medicine,
which he pretended was not brought into England by him, but vended for a
Merchant, to whom he was to give an account; but withal confessed, that he had
given one dose of it to a person sick of a Fever. Wherefore he was obliged in a
bond of 40 l. to appear at the next Comitia; which he did, and was by the
Censors fined 20 l. and ordered to be imprisoned until that sum was paid.

Mrs. Pain, a bold and impudent woman, was complained of by a Gentlewoman for
practicing Physic and undertaking the cure of several persons; amongst whom,
was a Son of hers of 13 years old, to whom she gave (as she said) gentle Pills,
which wrought the same day 40 times, and the day after near as many: She then
anointed the Child's body, head, and all parts (the Stomach only excepted) for
3 days, and for 9 days after sweat him with hot tyles, never suffering him to
go out of his bed; Notwithstanding a salivation appeared not, but his Jaws and
glands swelled so violently, that they despaired of the Child's life. After
this, a servant of one Mr. Crowder appeared before the President and Censors,
testifying that he was sent to Mrs Pain, and that she alone (without any other
advice) had undertaken the cure of his Master, and had received of him 5 l.
which she thought too mean a reward, having neglected more valuable Patients at
the same time. At her first coming to him he was so well, that he could walk
about his Garden; but having taken from her a Vomit and preparatory Medicine,
and after that been anointed thrice on his head, back, breast, arms and thighs
with a Mercurial Ointment, he died under her cure. She being hereupon summoned
to appear before the President and Censors, pretended that all she had done was
by the order and authority of Dr. Bonham. But being a second time cited to
appear before them upon a penalty of 40 s. and yet neglecting to come, she was
fined 10 l. and order given for her commitment to prison, with a total
prohibition of practice.

In the 7th year of this King's Reign, the following Warrant was sent from the
King's Council to the Magistrates of the City of London for the attachment of
Empiricks.

To all Justices, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, Headboroughs, and all
other his Majesty's Officers and Ministers to whom this shall or may appertain
within the City of London, Suburbs and Liberties thereof, and the limitts
within mentioned, and to every and either of them.
WHereas by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, power is given to the
President of the College or Commonaltie of the faculty of Physic within the
City of London and Suburbs thereof and seven miles compass of the same for
the time being, or to such as the same President and College for the time
being, shall according to the Statute in that behalf made, authorize, to have
the fine, search, correction and government of all persons using the faculty of
Physic within the limits aforesaid, and to punish all such as shall unlawfully
use or practice the said faculty within the same Precincts, contrary to the
true intent and meaning of the Statute in that case made, with this further
authority, that all Justices, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables and other
Ministers and Officers within the City of London and Precinct aforesaid, upon
request to them made, should help, aid and assist the President of the said
College and all persons by the said President and Commonalty from time to time
authorized for the due execution of the Acts and Statutes in that behalf made,
upon pain for not giving such aid, help and assistance, to run in contempt of
the King's Majesty, his Heirs and Successors. Now forasmuch as we have been
informed by the President of the College, that there are sundry unskilful
persons within the precincts and limitts aforesaid, who do use and practice
the said faculty contrary to the same Statutes of this Realm in that case
provided, and to the great peril and danger of the lives of many of his
Majesty's subjects; These are to will and require you and in his Majesty's
name straightly to charge and command you, that henceforth at all time and
times you according to the tenor of the said Act be aiding and assisting to
the said President and to those that shall be lawfully authorized by the said
President and College, for the apprehending of all such persons as shall
unlawfully use and practice the said faculty within the limits aforesaid
contrary to the intent and meaning of the Statutes aforesaid, when they or any
of them shall give you notice of and require, and thereupon to bring them
before the said President or those authorized as aforesaid to their College,
there to be examined and proceeded against as to the Law in that case shall
appertain. Whereof fail you not, as you and every of you will answer the
contempt in that behalf made. Yeven under our hands at Whitehall the xxiiiith.
day of July An. Dom. 1609. and in the seventh year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord James by the grace of God King of England, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. and of Scotland the two and fortieth.

R. Cant.
T. Ellesmer Canc.
R. Salisbury,
H. Northampton,
T. Suffolk,
W. Knollys,
J. Stanhope,
Jul. Caesar,
Tho. Parry,
Tho. Fleming.
Jo. Corbet.


About 13 years after, the King was pleased to send a Letter to the President
and Censors of the College, requiring them to summon all illegal and ignorant
practitioners, in order to examine their sufficiency, and to punish the
insufficient according to the Laws in that case provided. The Contents of which
are as follow.

To our trusty and welbeloved the President and Censors of the College of
Physicians within our City of London.
JAMES R.

TRusty and welbeloved, We greet you well. Whereas the Art of Physic by many
unlearned men (making gain by the profession thereof to the great hurt and
prejudice of many of our loving subjects) is much abused in many places in this
our Realm, but especially in our City of London, and the Suburbs thereof, the
government whereof (as touching the practice of the said Art and the
practitioners thereof) being by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, committed
unto you the President and Censors of our College of Physicians, and you having
also from us by our Letters Patents more ample authority for the suppression
and correction of such Delinquents; We therefore minding, so far as in us
lies, the speedy reformation of all such abuses and inconveniences, do by
these presents, as heretofore, yet more strictly, charge and command you the
President and Censors aforesaid to call before you all such irregular and
ignorant Practitioners, as contrary to our Laws and authority do abuse that
Art, and to examine their sufficiency; and such as you shall find not
sufficient, to punish for their said practice, according to our Laws in that
case provided. And whereas we are credibly given to understand that many having
been punished and warned by you to desist from any further practice, do yet
obstinately notwithstanding persist in the former contempt of our Laws and
commandments, We will and command you that you proceed against such Delinquents
with all severity according to the tenor of our said Letters Patents and the
due course of our Laws by fine and imprisonment, or by causing them to enter
into Recognisances with condition restraining them to offend any more, or
otherwise as the case shall require and is agreeable to Justice. And our will
and pleasure is, that such offenders as shall be so imprisoned shall there
remain without being enlarged, unless it be upon their conformity and
submission to you the said President and Censors, or other due course of Law.
Wherein we require all our Judges and Justices, that they be very careful and
circumspect not to do any thing that may give encouragement to such offenders,
by enlarging any such too easily without due examination of the causes of their
Commitment, first calling thereto the President and Censors or some of them, to
declare the true reasons and causes thereof. And whereas we are given to
understand that oftentimes upon the solicitation of some or other friend or
person of Quality, suitor to you for the sad Delinquents after their
conviction, you have been moved to wink at their faults and neglect their
punishment, to the great prejudice of the health of many of our poor subjects,
Our will and pleasure is, and we do hereby straightly charge and command you,
that henceforth neither for favor, friendship, or respect of any you forbear
the just censure and punishment due by our Laws to such Delinquents, as you
shall answer us on the contrary at your peril; and that you require the aid
and assistance of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of our City of London (whom by
our Letters we have so required to do) for your better expedition in the
execution of this our Royal will and commandment, not doubting but that you
with more care will seek to suppress such intolerable abuses, and satisfy our
trust in this case committed to you. Given under our signet at our Palace of
Westminster the second day of July in the twentieth year of our reign of
England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland, the five and fiftieth.


At the same time another Letter was sent from the King to the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and Justices of London, the Copy of which is the following.

WHereas in the time of our Predecessors of famous memory, by several Acts of
Parliament, as also by our late Charter, there has been sufficient provision
and power given and granted to the College of Physicians in London to reform
and suppress all and singular unlawful and unlearned practitioners in
Physic, and hearing nevertheless that diverse unskilful and unlearned men and
women do rashly adventure to enter into the practice of Physic to the great
danger and hurt of our subjects; We therefore now finding that neither Acts of
Parliament, nor our Charter heretofore granted, have for want of execution
wrought such good effects as we wish always for the good of our subjects, do
by these presents charge you the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Justices of peace
within our City of London and the precincts, that with all readynesse you do
aid and assist the President and Censors for the time being of our College of
Physicians in London, or such Officers as the President and the said College
shall appoint, in the doing of all such things as by the said Acts of
Parliament or Charter ought to be done for suppressing of all and every such
person or persons, as contrary to the Laws of our Realm, or Charter or Acts of
Parliament aforesaid shall dare to adventure in the practice of Physic upon
any our subjects in the City of London, the Suburbs and precincts of the same,
or within seven miles thereof. And to the intent that this our purpose tending
to the safety of our subjects, and the suppression of irregular practitioners,
may with more diligence and authority be effected, We do will and command you
the Lord Mayor of the City of London, that at your next Sessions these our
Letters may be so read and published, that all Justices of peace as well within
our said City, as also the Suburbs and precincts of the same, may take
knowledge of this our pleasure and command.


Mrs. Briars, and old woman, was convicted of mala praxis, fined 5 l. and
ordered to be imprisoned. After this, having given security that she would not
practice for the future; yet prescribing Unctions, Sudorificks, Ointments,
Plasters, Potions, etc. to several persons; Her bond was put in suit against
her Security, and a new mulct laid upon her.

Nicholas Rowland, a Surgeon, being accused for practicing Physic and that
proved against him by witness, was fined 10 l. de praxi pessima, and order
given for his imprisonment.

Mr. Holland, an Apothecary, was charged for practicing Physic upon several
persons; which being proved, he was fined 5 l. and ordered to be forthwith
imprisoned without present satisfaction given to the College. But he continuing
contumacious, all the members of the College were prohibited writing of Bills
to his shop, or making use thereof, until he had cleared himself de non
exercenda medicina. After this, he appeared before the President and Censors,
and declared his readiness to acknowledge the College authority; but giving no
other testimony thereof, but only desiring his fine might be remitted, he was
heard no further, but dismissed. A few months after He attended the President
and Censors a second time, and being asked whether he would pay his fine and
acknowledge his offense; He then begged the Colleges pardon, paid his fine, and
promised that for the future he would behave himself respectfully to them; upon
which account, his censure was remitted, and he received into favor. But being
afterward complained of by Dr. Wineston, that he did support Mr. Buggs, who
stood in opposition to the College; he denied any combination with him, yet
confessed that he had made Physic for Mr. Bland and other illegal practisers;
which was likewise plainly proved by his file of Bills that were sent for.
After some time the President sent the 4 Censors to visit his shop, where
besides diverse bills found upon the file written by Empiricks and ignorant
Mountebanks (of which they brought some away) they also found false
compositions of Medicines, not made according to the rule of the London
Dispensatory, which he was bound to observe; Wherefore the Censors ordered that
those medicines should be forthwith destroyed, which was accordingly done.

Dr. Air was cited before the College for practicing physic in London without
License. Upon his appearance he gave no satisfaction to the President and
Censors, wherefore they ordered his prosecution at Law, and had a Verdict
against him de praxi illegitima; upon which he applied himself to the College,
begged their friendship, and promised submission. Then he was examined by the
President and Censors; but not giving satisfaction of his ability for practice,
He was rejected; and about 2 years after summoned to give an account by what
authority he practiced Physic in London; He replied that he practiced in the
Country not in the City, but thought he might, as being born here. But
practice being proved against him, the Censors told him that they would sue him
de praxi illegitima pro ann. But he paying 20 l. de praxi praeterita to the
Treasurer of the College, the Censors let fall their suit. But he being after
guilty of ill practice (which was proved against him) the Censors unanimously
fined him 10 l. and ordered his imprisonment, which latter was dispensed with
upon condition that he would at the next public Comitia own his obligations to
the President, Censors and College for this their favor, which he readily
promised and performed both in person and writing, paying likewise the fine
imposed upon him. After this he was examined in order to his admission into the
College; which examination having passed, He was required to take great care
and caution in his practice, and in difficult cases to call to his assistance
some of his Colleagues.

Dr. Burgess having been in Orders and now practicing Physic in London, was
summoned before the President and Censors to give an account by what authority
he practiced in this City contrary to the Statute Law of this Kingdom. He
ingenuously consessed; Not by any authority, but by the indulgence of the
College; and told them he had formerly offered himself to examination, though
he had not yet been examined. The President replied, that by a Statute of the
College (which was read by the Register) they could not examine, admit, or
permit any to the practice of Physic, who had been in Holy Orders. Besides, if
the Statutes of the College would allow it, He told him, that an admission to a
person that had been so qualified, was repugnant to the Statute Laws of the
Kingdom and Canons Ecclesiastical. He replied with great temper and candor,
that he would not contradict either the one or the other, but lay down practice
in London. After this, he was convened a second time before the President and
Censors and interdicted the practice of Physic within the College Liberties,
to which he submitted, and promised that he would speedily betake himself to
the Country. Some of the Fellows of the College were complained of for
consulting with him.

About the 10th. year of this King's Reign, the following Letter was sent to
the College of Physicians (upon the death of the Countess of Rutland) by the
Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Lisle, to summon before them one Mr. Talbot,
a Fellow of Merton College in Oxford, to enquire into the Medicines prescribed
by him in this noble Ladies Case, that so they might find whether either by
presumption or unskilfulness her Honor's end was procured or hastened; the
Contents of which Letter are the following.

To the Right Worshipful the President and College of Physicians in London.
AFter my very hearty commendations, I have thought it fit to give you
knowledge that on Friday last being the 31th. of Julie, the Countess of
Rutland my worthy and dear Niece did depart this life. Among other that did
minister Physic unto her during her sickness here in London, was one Mr.
Talbott, a Fellow of Merton College in Oxford, whose proceedings with her, and
the Medicines he gave her (for during the time he was with her no body but he
did prescribe any thing unto her) are greatly suspected, if not to have
procured, yet to have much hastened her end. Of this no man can better speak
than three of your own College Dr. Gifford, Dr. Fox and Dr. Poe, who came unto
her when she left the other, and took great pains with her: Likewise at her
death, and some days before Mr. Abraham Allen the King's Surgeon did attend
her. My request is, that you will hear what they will say, and accordingly
call the said Mr. Talbott before you; and if you do find that either by
presumption in him or unskilfulnesse (for from any malice I do absolutely
discharge him) that noble Lady's end were procured or hastened, you will take
such course in censuring and punishing of him, that the respect due unto a
person of her estate departed as she is, may be observed, and that his example
may be a warning to others to proceed with conscience and discretion, when they
take the charge of the life of any upon them. I have lost a most beloved and
kind Kinswoman in the flower of her age; and therefore do greatly desire a true
account of the reason of her death. And so I commit you to the protection of
the Almighty.

At Baynard's Castle, the 2d. of August, 1612. Your very loving friend, R.
Lisle.


In the 12th. year of King James his Reign, some of the Members of the College
being required to find Arms, the College appointed two of their Fellows, viz.
Sir William Paddy and Dr. Lister to solicit their cause (with the Recorder of
London, the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen) in the behalf of the Fellows,
Candidates and Licentiates for immunity from the charge of service for Men or
Armor: Whereupon Sir William Paddy, accompanied with Dr. Lister, before Sir
Tho. Middleton, Knight, then Lord Mayor, and a full Court of Aldermen, upon the
fourth of October, 1614. after a short preamble made (that is to say, that the
Fellows of the College of Physicians of London became Suitors unto the Lord
Mayor and that honorable Court, that it would please them to take into their
considerations the privileges granted unto the College by Acts of Parliament,
whereby they were, as heretofore they have been, exempted from the charge of
service) proceeded to the Reasons following.

First, applying his speech to Sir Henry Montague, Recorder for the City, he
desired him that he would indifferently peruse the words in the preamble of the
Act of Parliament recited thus, In consideration, etc.

Herein may it please this honorable Court, not only all Articles, Graunts
and other things contained in the Letters Patents, but also for enlargement of
further Articles for the said College, are to be interpreted available to the
said College, in as large and ample manner as may be taken, thought and
construed by the same 14 Hen. 8.

Then may it please you to observe, that in the 32d. of H. 8. they and every of
them of the said Body Corporate or Fellowship and their Successors shall at
all time and times after the making of the said Act be discharged to keep any
Watch or Ward in the said City of London or the suburbs of the same. And here
the said Sir William requested them to note the word [any] which in true weight
of construction was to be extended, as if that Clause had been in more words
expressed.

Then he farther urged that for the Surgeons, where in the first entrance of
the Act, it was thought expedient by the wisdom of the Land to provide for men
expert in the Science of Physic and Surgery.

And therefore when it follows, that in this Act of Parliament the
Surgeons by express word are exempt from the bearing of Armor, it may truly
infer, that Physicians are exempted (as before) from any Watch or Ward; as
also Physicians here recited in the preamble, should receive a greater or at
least the same immunity; especially since Physicians are by their Science
Surgeons without further examination and approbation to be had from the
Bishop of London, whereunto mere Surgeons are subject.

Then a grave and reverend Knight, an Alderman of the Bench, replied, That he
took, the words in the Act of Parliament for the Surgeons (viz. bearing of
Arms) were to free their persons, and not to exempt them from the charge of the
service.

Whereunto Sir William Paddy answered, under his favor and the Judgment of the
Bench and Mr. Recorder, that the difference between bearing and wearing of
Armor was such, that the very Etymon of the word bearing, as in many other
cases, comprehended both, and therefore should give immunity from both.

And therewithal Sir William Paddy added this Reason, that by the wisdom of
the Land it must needs be intended Physicians of the College should be exempted
from this and other like services for that in the time of all outward War or
domestic, they or some of them do attend the Armies in person; whereof he
there exhibited a Catalogue of diverse he had from the Register. And now may it
please you my Lord Mayor and this honorable Court, we address our selves only
to you, under whose government we are seated, and with love we seek from you
favorable construction for just relief; which as in your worth you have always
afforded to all, so do we assure our selves you will dispense unto us, who live
best by your love, and will ever be ready to do you service.

Then Mr. Recorder perusing every branch of the Statutes recited, and the
reasons urged, and opening every part thereof at large, did gravely and
judicially conclude, that the Acts of Parliament did surely intend to give to
the College as much immunity as in any sort to the Surgeons.

Whereupon the Court desired to have a true Catalogue of the Fellows,
Candidates and Licentiates of the College in number then forty and one, which
Sir William Paddy and Dr. Lister from the Register did immediately deliver up
unto them; Which Catalogue the Court then (upon this reason) required, lest
others not of the College should delude them, and so claim privilege.

Hereupon was ordered a dispensation for the College from bearing of Arms, and
immediately after a Precept was awarded by the Lord Mayor and Court to commit
all other Physicians or Surgeons refusing to bear or find Arms, who were not
by the College allowed, or Surgeons licensed according to form.

In the 13th. the following Letter was sent to the President of the College
concerning the death of the Lady Arabella.

To my very loving Friend the President of the College of Physicians in the
City of London.
AFter my hearty commendations: Whereas the Lady A^^bella is lately deceased
in the Tower, and that it is his Majesty's pleasure, according to former
custom, upon like occasions, when persons of great quality do dye in that
place, her body should be viewed by persons of skill and trust, and thereupon
Certificate to be made of what disease she dyed, as to their Judgment it shall
appear: These are therefore to will and require you to appoint some three
Physicians of your Society, of good reputation as well for their learning as
otherwise, who together with the Physicians of the said Lady Arabella, shall
presently repair unto the Tower, and there view and search the Corpse of the
said Lady, and to return jointly their opinion unto me of the nature of the
disease whereof she dyed, that we may acquaint his Majesty therewithal. And
so I bid you heartily farewell.

From the Court at Whitehall this 27th. of Sept. 1615. Your loving friend
Ralphe Winwood.


According to the King's command, some Physicians of the College met at the
Tower, and, upon a diligent inspection of the body of the Lady Arabella, were
of an opinion, that the cause of this noble Lady's death was a long chronical
sickness; that the species of her disease was a Cachexie, which daily
increasing (partly by her own neglect and partly by her aversation to medicine)
did at length bring her into a confirmed indisposition of her Liver and extreme
leanness, from which causes death must needs ensue. This testimony was signed
by the President, Register, and four Fellows of the College.

John Bartley, a practiser in Physic, was accused by an Apothecary for ill
practice; after which upon a Censors day a Reverend Divine with his Wife made
complaint, that this Bartley having through ignorance and unskilfulness
prescribed a very violent Medicine to their daughter, had thereby hastened her
death; An exact relation of all the particulars, with the names of the persons
present, (drawn up in writing and signed with both their hands) they offered to
the Censors, earnestly desiring that the Officers of the College would take
cognizance thereof, and by their censure give them all the assistance they
could, they intending to prosecute Bartley and bring him to trial for the death
of their daughter. The sum of their Narrative was this, That the said Bartley
being by certain Women recommended to them, and having bargained for the cure,
and received part of the money in hand, he gave their daughter amongst other
Medicines a remedy which both vomited and purged her (notwithstanding she had
long labored under an old Cough) from which time she began visibly to sink and
died in a few days after. The Censors considering on the one hand the prayers
and tears of the Parents, and on the other hand Bartley's not being present to
answer for himself, thought they should do what became them, if they condemned
the fact for mala praxis, as it stood reported in the Narrative.

In the 11th. of this King's Reign, the following Warrant was sent to the
Apothecaries from the King's Council, requiring them to deliver to the
President and Censors the Bills of all illegal Practisers.

To all the Apothecaries within the City of London and the Suburbs thereof.
THese shall be in his Majesty's name straightly to command you, that upon the
coming of the President and Censors of the College of Physic in London to your
shops or houses, you deliver unto them without any delay or excuse, all such
Bills and Receipts as you have of any Practitioners not licensed by the
College; Whereunto though you be bound by the Laws of the Land, yet we have
thought fit upon some causes known unto us now, by these our Letters to command
you to do the same.

April 22. 1613. G. Cant. Pembroke. Ellesmere, Canc. To. Rochester. Jul.
Caesar. Gilb. Shrewsbury. E. Wotton. Th. Parry.



Dr. Brouuart, a Leyden Physician, was charged for practicing Physic in
London, etc. contrary to Law; He replied, that it was necessity that obliged
him to practice, and that he was ignorant of the College authority. The
President told him, that practicing without license, was entering upon the
lawful possession of others, against all right and reason; But because he had
behaved himself modestly, he was respectfully dismissed. He requested a
connivence from the College if he might not have their admission. The President
told him, that neither the one or the other was to be granted without
examination. About two months after, he applied himself to the President and
Censors, and desired that they would permit him to enjoy the privileges granted
him by the University; and therefore He would put on the hat of honor (as he
called it) which the University had put on him, and not stand bare. The
President told him, that it was their custom, and a good one too, that men
should be examined uncovered, and that this honor was not so much paid to the
President and Censors, as to the College in which they (under the King's
Majesty) bore the Character of Magistrates. He therefore, pulling off his hat,
told them that he had been a Doctor four years, and professed Physic in his
own Country and in France. The President demanded how that appeared, and
whether he had any Patent or Letters Testimonial; which he not then being able
to produce (having left them, as he said, in his own Country) the President
told him, that he could neither practice nor proceed any further toward the
procuring a License till he brought his Patent, and then afterward must be
examined, which he refused. But when he understood that it was unavoidable, He
took out of his pocket the King's Letter wrote to the President and College in
his favor. After which he was again summoned to appear before the President
and Censors, and being by them examined, he was permitted to practice.

One Brown, a Surgeon, was complained of for giving internal Medicines in
affections of the Eyes, which was proved against him and he fined 50 s. which
if not paid in fourteen days, he was to be imprisoned: but this he prevented by
paying his fine to the Treasurer of the College at the time appointed.

William Blanke, Chandler, confessed his practicing of Physic, yet owned he
understood no Latin, but thought he had learning for it: He was interdicted
practice, and threatened fine and imprisonment, if found guilty for the future.
Not long after, he was accused, and confessed his giving of Medicines to one,
who (he said) had a convulsion of the Stomach, with infection of the Liver, and
raised his Lungs into his Throat; which he brought down by applying a Tench to
his back. He said, that he may, must and will purge as others did. Wherefore
for his ill and unlawful practice the Censors committed him to the Compter
with a Mulct of 40 s. which he paid and was released within three days. He was
again convented, and declared, that he practiced but in trifles; as Fevers. He
prescribed to one man a Medicine compounded of Cordials, Purgatives and
Opiates. Being charged with giving a Vomit, he said that all accusations
against him were as the witnesses against Christ, that in three days he would
destroy the Temple and build it again; and to answer before the President and
Censors, was but as to Herod and the rest that would harden their hearts. For
erecting of Figures, he confessed he used it. As for Surgery, being asked if he
had his Letters of admittance, had been examined, or were of the Lecture Bill,
he knew not what it meant; Only for his money he had been translated from the
Chandlers to the Barber Surgeons, etc. For his evil and illegal practice, he
was censured imprisonment and fined 5 li. which paying before his commitment,
the President told him, that if hereafter he were found guilty of the like, he
should be more severely treated. Notwithstanding practice was again proved
against him, and two very unlearned Bills of his writing presented by the
President, upon which he being examined, could answer nothing but with
ignorance and insolence, not knowing what or whence or to what use the
Diascordium was, for which he wrote; but said the President and Censors would
use him as they did Christ, taking that for the Temple which he meant his body,
and such like. The Censors unanimously fined him 10 l. and ordered his
commitment to the Compter. After which he appeared with several of his Patrons,
to whom the President gave an account of their fair and just procedure toward
him. He told them, that he was no better than his Master, who was God the
Savior of us all. He was charged, that for pains in the Back he caused hairs
to be cut; and being asked why, he answered because the vapors spread: But he
said that those pains were a Sciatica, a moisture falling from the Head into
the Whirlebone. Being asked what a Dropsy was, he said it came first from an
indisposition of the Liver, sometime too hot and sometime too cold, about the
Navel or about the whole Body. He was remanded back to prison with his former
fine. But the Sheriff taking him home, he went abroad, braved and practiced
unlawfully, as was proved by his Bills, which he said were to draw water
between skin and flesh by Urine. Being asked amongst other things whether
Mugwort had that virtue; he replied, Ay by Dodonaeus. Upon this, the Censors
made a new Warrant for his commitment, and increased his fine to 15 l. Some
short time after, he appeared again, denied several rude and insolent words
proved against him, saying, that the great ones words in this World were as
Gospel, but the little ones as Apocrypha. He behaving himself rudely and
begging no pardon, was again remanded to prison; But within a few days a
petition was sent by his Wife and Children to beg of the College, that he might
be freed from Prison and his fine remitted; upon which the President and
Censors, commiserating the miserable condition of his family, remitted part of
the fine, and took his promise for not practicing for the future within the
College Liberties. About 3 years after, practice was proved against him, for
which he was ordered to pay 5 l. to the College for a fine, and give bond of 20
l. to practice no more. Within a twelvemonth, he procured the following Letter
from the Bishop of Lincoln then Lord Keeper.

To my very loving friends Dr. Moundford President of the College of
Physicians, the four Censors, and the rest of that Company, London.
AFter my very hearty commendations. Having heretofore recommended Mr. Blanke a
Physician unto you, whereupon you were then pleased to favor him (for which I
do give you many thanks) I do now again upon new and just occasions redouble
my suite in his behalf, very heartily praying you to do him what favor you
may in his profession and practice. And so not doubting but for my sake and his
own merits you will respect him herein, I commit you to God.

Your loving friend Jo. Lincoln. C. S.


To this Letter the College returned the following answer by six of their
Members.

Right Reverend Father in God, and most noble Lord,
It Is long since we have been fully satisfied what reverence and respect, that
favor your Honor is pleased to show to men of Letters, requires of us. And we
humbly desire you to believe, that we shall never sail of being careful to pay
it to your Lordship all manner of ways. For we account it no small advantage to
us, if the meanness of our condition will permit us to do any thing that may
be acceptable to your Lordship; And we are troubled that your Lordship should
make an experiment of your power over us in the affair of a man whom the Laws
of the Kingdom, the Obligation of our Oaths, and the most strict commands of
his Majesty forbid us to have any regard to. We have sent your Lordship by
some of our Body the King's Letter, wherein he forbids it; and we are certain
that the commendation your Lordship has given of this illiterate fellow did
not proceed from your own opinion of him, but the suggestion of others. But if
it should prove that we are so mistaken in this matter, that your Lordship
should have any good opinion of the least ingenuity or learning that your
Lordship knows he has, We engage our selves not to put any longer stop to his
Petition. But if on the other side it shall appear, that contrary to right and
without any merit of his own, but by the application of those he has made
complaint to, he has obtained the recommendation of so great a person, We
beseech your Lordship to take upon you the defense of the public concernment
of health, the interest of the Universities, and the necessity we are under,
and not to think that what we have here done has been from an affectation of
denying what your wisdom will easily perceive by the foresaid Letter we had no
power to grant. God preserve your Honor long in safety for the good of Church
and State.


After this he was complained of for prescribing a suffumigation in an acute
disease, upon which the Patient was in danger of being choked; and being
examined in that and the like diseases, he desired to be excused from
answering; upon which the President advised to put his bond in Suit. Not long
after, an Apothecary charged him for prescribing a Powder to a Gentlewoman, who
complained of being highly inflamed and burnt up upon the use of it. Being
required to give an account by what authority he practiced Physic, he produced
Letters from the Bishop of Lincoln giving him liberty to practice within the
liberties of Westminster. As to the witness which appeared against him, he
said, He which died upon the Cross, died by false witness. He was by the
Censors proceeded against, and an Action entered. He was likewise accused for
practicing Physic unlawfully and unadvisedly upon the person of one Mr.
Bonner: Blank appearing upon summons, confessed that he had practiced Physic
in London 13 years, that he did it by License according to the Statutes of the
Kingdom, having my Lord of Canterbury's License fortified by the great Seal of
England. But notwithstanding this plea, (for his bad practice upon Mr. Bonner,)
he was sentenced by the 4 Censors to pay 20 l. and to lie in Newgate till he
paid it. About 4 days after, he brought Letters Patent granted him from the
Archbishop of Canterbury and confirmed by the King: However he was committed
to Newgate, ob pessimam praxin, Mr. Fitz-Williams attesting that Mr. Bonner was
killed by sleeping Pills of his Prescription. A week after, Mr. President
proposed that the cause of Blank's imprisonment by the Censors (being by Blank
questioned in the King's Bench) should be exemplified and registered, viz. How
he was by sentence of that Court remanded unto his Prison from whence he came
by virtue of a Writ of Habeas Corpus. After this, Mr. Emmery a Scrivener came
to the College to pay the fine imposed upon Blank, viz. 20 l. which was then
received and a Warrant signed for his enlargement. About a month after he again
appeared upon summons, where he was admonished upon pain of the severest
punishment by the Laws to be inflicted upon such Delinquents as he was, that he
should not adventure any more to practice Physic, it being an employment by
him so little understood. Yet 3 years after, he was brought again before the
President and Censors* by the Messenger, and being admonished to cease from
practice, having neither learning nor license so to do, he justified his
practice by the Statute made in the 34 H. 8. c. 8. and appealed to the Law for
his defense; Wherefore it was resolved to put him in suit, which accordingly
was done.

George Butler, being cited to appear before the President and Censors,
returned this answer, That he was the King's servant and must attend his
Majesty. About 3 years after, upon a fresh summons he appeared, and confessed
the giving of Physic, to cleanse the body, being such as made way for Surgery.
He showed a License from his Grace of Canterbury, which gave him liberty to
practice Surgery, and Physic so far as was necessary and convenient to that
Art; which License was confirmed under the great Seal. About Easter following,
he gave 3 Pills to Mrs. Style for a sore Leg and stopping at the Stomach; by
which she died that night she took them. To another woman he gave Pills under
the pretense of a sore Leg between 7 and 9 of the Clock in the morning, with
which she grew sick and vomited with great extremity and died about 5 of the
Clock in the evening, being very well before, and going up and down. He left
his Patent with the President and Censors, they never requiring or desiring
him; upon which, application was made to his Grace the Lord Archbishop, to the
Right Honorable the Lord Chancellor, the Master of the Rolls and Attorney
General, that Butler's Letters Patents might be recalled; which they consented
to. About 2 months after, Butler appearing before the Censors, was asked if he
would stand to his former License for practice; he answered he would ask his
Council. Being then required to give over the practice of Physic; he
answered, I mean so to do. He knew not that his License was called in by the
Lord Chancellor, nor that a Vacat was set on it. Mr. President charged him that
he employed one to sell his Medicines, which he denied; but for a sore Leg or
the like he confessed he gave somewhat inward: But now understanding that it
was unlawful, he promised to do so no more. He said he was never told of my
Lord of Canterbury's displeasure at his License. In short, he was interdicted
all practice in Physic. But not long after, Butler came to the President and
Censors, being recommended to them by the Lord Chief Justice, upon which the
President asked him if he did profess Physic; He said, No. Being then asked,
do you give Physic? he said, No. Being charged with several proofs against
him, he denied them. He confessed he was no Graduate nor of any University, but
said that he understood Latin, and that he practiced as a Surgeon. Being then
examined in Latin, he denied to answer; which was told him, should be related
to the Lord Chief Justice that sent him to the College. He replied, that he
cared not three pence for their Information. He confessed that he had caused
Medicines to be made, and that the Apothecaries took of him 100 l. per ann. In
his Surgery cures, he owned that he gave Physic to kill the cause inwardly.
Being asked what the Pox was, he answered an infection taken in nature before
action. Upon this examination, etc. the President and Censors drew up the
following Letter, which they forthwith presented to the Lord Chief Justice.

MAy it please your Lordship to be informed, That whereas according to your
Lordship's command George Butler appeared to be examined of his sufficiency and
knowledge in Physic and his practice therein, before us the President and
Censors of the College of Physicians, First he acknowledged himself not to be
learned, Graduate, or of any University, neither indeed do we find him to have
any learning, by such speeches which he let fall from him in conference: and as
for examination in Latin and in Physic, he refused to answer: And for the
point of practice, amongst many particulars alleged against him, he did
acknowledge in general, that he does give inward Physic, if his Patients in
Surgery do need it, and that the Apothecaryes do take of him 100 l. a year
for Medicines and drugs. And being charged with 2 several practices, the one on
the person of Mrs. Style, as does appear by the aforesaid Butler's confession
in our Register, for a sore Leg and a stopping in her Stomach, when she had no
sore Leg, but under that pretense he gave her Pills, of which she dyed
(according to the words of the Register) the same day: The which practice we
the President and Censors do condemn for ill and unlawful. The other practice
was upon the body of Margaret Shover, now again confessed by him, who took
upon him to cure her (as he says) of the Pox; but being by the Censors asked
what disease the Pox is, he did not give any reasonable answer, such is his
ignorance: But her disease upon Register does not appear to be so, although he
gave her the Unction for the Pox, and other purging Physic, neither according
to Science or Conscience.

Not long after he was complained of by a woman to whom he gave 25 Pills, for
which he expected 30 s. a piece; To another he gave 4 Purges, and had her
petticoat in pawn. He promised her help within 7 days or to give her 100 l. But
after 9 days she was very ill and continued in great weakness. Upon this and
the like complaints the Censors fined him 10 l. and ordered his imprisonment
for 14 days, and that he should not be released but by the President's order.
About 3 years after, he was again complained of for giving Pills of Opium to a
Woman, by which she was stupefied. Being called, he blew up a powder into her
Nose, promised her recovery, but she died in one hours time. The like evil
practice he was guilty of upon two more: For which the Censors ordered him to
be arrested; but he petitioned that he might answer the College action without
an arrest; which was granted, provided he would find Sureties to answer the
College Suit if he were cast at Law. Which being done, and this Cause appointed
to be heard at the King's Bench Bar, 6 of the Fellows of the College were
deputed to attend there; and after this hearing Dr. Harvey, the Treasurer, and
the 4 Censors were desired to take special care in the future management of the
College's cause against Butler; who had procured a protection from the Lord
Chamberlain, upon which account 4 of the Fellows were ordered by the President
to wait upon his Lordship to take off his protection, that the College might
proceed in their Suit against him. The Lord Chamberlain upon their application
declared his readiness to comply with the College's request, and ordered his
Secretary to write the following reference against Butler.

The College of Physicians having represented that one George Butler, under
color of being sworn an extraordinary Surgeon to his Majesty, does take
upon him to give Physic and practice Surgery without either skill or
License, to the apparent prejudice and endangering of the lives of his
Majesty's subjects; and thereupon desired leave to take the ordinary course of
Law to inhibite his practice, and to prevent the danger which may ensue
thereby: I do hereby declare and publish unto all such as it may concern, that
I have and do give free leave and liberty unto the said College to use all
lawful ways and means accustomed in like cases, either by arrest or
otherwise, for the suppressing and prohibiting of the said Butler's further
practice, in as free and ample manner as if the said Butler had never been
sworn the King's servant. Whitehall the 25th of November, 1626.

About 8 months after, several fresh complaints of great mischief done by
Butler in his practice were exhibited against him: As particularly for giving a
sleeping potion to one Patient, who was sound dead in his sleep. The wife of
this man thus murdered, applied her self to the Censors, and desired that Mr.
Butler might be punished for professing that, which he did not understand;
which she pressed the more, because (she said) such a man as he, might kill
many both Body and Soul, every one being not so well prepared for death as her
husband. She desired a Certificate from the College concerning Mr. Butler and
his ill practice. After this, Butler sent a Letter to the President and
College, which being read, was rejected. After this a servant of Butler's
acquainted the Censors, that while she dwelt with him, a woman came to him for
Cure, who within 3 weeks died and was carried away secretly, without tolling
the Bell, or any Minister being called. Upon this information, Butler
endeavored to imprison this servant, using all arts to take her, which
occasioned her application to the College for their protection, complaining of
the many injuries she had received from Mr. Butler since her appearing against
him. Wherefore the President ordered the following Letter to be drawn up and
presented to the Lord Chief Justice, in her behalf.

MAy it please your Lordship to understand, that the Petitioner on the 7th of
Jan. last past came to our College voluntarily to complain of the evil practice
of Mr. Butler as is in the petition specified; since which time we are
certainly informed, that he has laid heavy actions upon her and kept her in
prison as is above specified, We conceiving the chief grounds of his violent
proceedings against her to have risen upon her complaint made to us: In
consideration of her misery, (We having noe power to relieve her) do presume
humbly to entreat your Lordship to take such course as your Lordship in your
wisdom shall think fit, that she may obtain the benefit of her Petition.


After this, Dr. Winston signified to the College that Butler sent a petition
to him to be presented to the College, which he refused. Then Butler sent a
Letter to the President, after which it was agreed, that if he paid in the
money recovered and due to the College before the Term, then the other Suits
depending might be suspended, if it pleased the President.

A Letter about this time in the behalf of Butler was brought from the Lord
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas by Captain Butler, directed to the President
and Censors of the College, the Contents of which are the following.

Mr. Doctor Argent,
I Am informed of a Judgment which is obtained against Mr. Butler at your Suit,
and the rest of the College of Physicians for 60 l. which I find him very
willing and ready to satisfy, so far forth as his ability will give leave for
the present. He will pay half the money in hand, and the next some time the
next Term, which I conceive is no ill payment, his estate considered.
Therefore I desire you and the rest of your College to take him thus far into
your consideration: And what you do herein I shall take as done in respect of
me, who am entreated to write in his favor by some whom I am willing to
satisfy in this request, appearing to me to be but reasonable, and little
hurtful to your selves. But to animate him of any other against your
Government I neither do nor ever will write.

Your very assured loving friend, To. Heath.
Julii 1. 1633.

Captain Butler promised that on Friday 36 l. of the money due from Butler
should be paid, and desired time till the next Term for the payment of the
rest; The College took time to consider for a few days, and then promised him
their answer.

Upon the Friday aforementioned (according to promise) Captain Butler brought
36 l. from Mr. Butler, to whom (by Mr. President's appointment) was given the
following note.

It was ordered by Mr. President and Censors the 5th of July 1633. that Mr.
George Butler (having sent in 36 l. in part of Payment of the 66 l. due to the
College, by a judgment given against him in the King's Bench in Easter Term in
the 7th year of his Majesty K. Charles 1. his Reign) at the request of the
Lord Chief justice of the Common Pleas, should have time given him for the
payment of the other 30 l. till the 20th of November next ensuing; and in the
mean time, all prosecution upon the foresaid judgment should surcease.

Mrs. Bendwell was complained of by Thomas Audley for undertaking his cure in 3
days though in a Hectic Fever, she telling him that she had cured those whom
the Doctors had left and could not cure. She gave him a Purging drink that
wrought day and night, and brought him to exceeding weakness. He said that
about the same time, she gave his Laundress physic, of whom she had Linen to
pawn, which she was warned to bring in. Complaint was likewise made against her
by a man and his wife, who had bargained with her for a cure, and had pawned a
dozen of Napkins to raise money for her payment, etc. She was fined by the
Censors 40 s. and a Warrant was making out for her commitment to prison; But
being a miserable old woman, and submissive, the Warrant was stopped. After
this a fresh complaint was made against her, that for pain in the Head and
Stomach she gave drinks, and had Linen in pawn; She confessed her Dietdrink of
Liquorish, Senna and Coloquintida, accounting 16 drachms for one ounce. She was
commanded by the Censors to restore the Linen that night to the College Beadle,
and ordered a small fine, and prohibited all practice.

Thomas Greenwood, Surgeon, was accused by one William Adams, that for the
grief of a little skin rubbed off with his saddle in riding, he promised cure
in 4 days: but physick'd him a fortnight, gave him diet-drinks, purged and over
heated him, and now sued him for 20 l. for the cure. Being asked what his
disease was, he replied Morbus Gallico; The Censors order's his imprisonment,
and a mulct of 5 l. to be inflicted upon him.

Christopher Bean, a prisoner 7 years for Debt in the King's Bench, was
charged for giving Physic to one Mr. Sparks, who, as Bean said, had a Rheum
and sharp humor running from his Head to his Legs, which came by an
obstruction of the Liver, with an ascent to the Head and thence down, for which
he fomented, anointed and purged. He was told of applying of clouts, which he
said wrought by natural means; likewise using the Adamant, to which he used no
words, but said it was both attractive and repulsant; the one over draws, the
other draws back, North draws and South drives back: This he said he did to
drive back the humors; which it will disperse, that is, drive back. He being
poor and already a prisoner, was fined but 40 s. ordered to be kept in prison
by the Censors, and prohibited all practice.

In the 15th year of this King's Reign, the following Petition was presented to
his Majesty for the obtaining a Patent for the cure of Ruptures.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty,
The humble Petition of Robert Pawlet and Ralphkewe.
MOst humbly showing that your Majesty's poor suppliants have by their long
travail, experience and practice in Physic and Surgery attained unto a rare
secret for the curing of Ruptures in people of all ages without any pain or
administration of Physic, but only with outward application and inward
Cordials; and being willing to participate the benefit thereof to the glory of
God and comcomfort of your Majesty's subjects so diseased throughout your
Highnesse's Dominions,

We do most humbly entreat your Majesty's gracious Letters Patents during our
lives freely to practice the same by our selves or sufficient Deputies, without
the let or hindrance of any whatsoever. And that it may appear that we have
noe intent to abuse your Majesty's Grant or wrong your Subjects, we do freely
offer that it shall be contained in your Majesty's Letters Patents that no
party so grieved shall pay for his cure until he be perfectly cured, and that
all such as are poor and unable to pay, shall be cured freely without paying
any thing. And we shall according to our bounden duties ever pray to God for
your Majesty's long and prosperous Reign.

At the Court at Theobalds 25 Febr. 1617.
His Majesty's pleasure is, that the President of the College of Physicians in
London shall take consideration of this Petition, and certify his Majesty in
what manner it is meet for his Highness to grant the Petitioners request.

Sidney Montague.


The College returned the following answer.

THe President and College of Physicians of London the 20th of this present
March being assembled together to consider of the Petition referred unto them
by his Majesty, finding the effect thereof to be a Royal Patent to be granted
for the Practicing of a Secret in Ruptures, and suspecting all secret
practices, which for the most part are but colors and shadows for ignorance
and falsehood, and because there are many sorts of Ruptures and of diverse
causes not all curable by one Medicine, They do humbly pray his Majesty that
the said petitioners may come to the said President and College, and before
them make manifest by reasons and experience the truth of the said remedies,
and they will upon true knowledge had thereof inform his Majesty of the
certainty and truth thereof, leaving all to his Majesty's most Royal
consideration.

Henry Atkins President of the College of the Physicians of London.


John Lamb, a bold Empirick, was complained of for demanding 40 or 50 l. for
his Cures, as lately of Mr. Pickering in Cheapside who died in his hands. Mr.
Evans gave in the following account against him, and in these very words. The
persons to whom Lamb (a notable Mountebank and Impostor) gave Physic, and got
great sums of money thereby this last year, are; Mr. Springham a Mercer, Mrs.
Springham, Mrs. Puckle, Mrs. Cutts, Mr. Moss a Lawyer, Mrs. Newport, Mrs.
Littleton, Mr. Wilson the Keeper of Newgate; A Gentlewoman whom he undertook
to cure, and took a great sum beforehand and did her no good; He also cheated
one Parry of 6 l. by showing him delusions; He cheated one Mr. Penny of 40 s. by
showing him tricks in a Crystal; He cheated one Mrs. Littleton of 3 l. 10 s. by
making her believe he showed her what husband she should have. He gave Physic
to one Mrs. Palmer, and undertook to cure her for 40 Marks, whereof he had half
in hand, but the woman died, and he cousened her. He now gives Physic to one
Mr. Tristram, of whom he has received 40 l. to cure him; He gave Physic to
the Countess of Exceter, and by means of delusions in a Crystal insinuates
himself into Ladies esteem and conceits. On Saturday last he got 50 l. for
undertaking a cure. The Censors ordered Lamb to be summoned, and Evans was
required to prove the forementioned accusations against him. After this Lamb
procures the following Letter in his behalf from the Bishop of Durham.

To the Right Worshipful my very loving friends the President and the rest of
the College of Physicians of London.
WHereas the bearer Ioh. Lamb in some examinations of his taken by us has
professed that he makes a poor living by practice in Physic and Surgery,
whereto by his long experience and practice he holds himself sufficient,
affirming that he has done many and great cures in each kind: His Majesty
being herewith acquainted, has commanded me to send him to you, that upon the
conference with him you may both deliver you opinions of his fitness, as also
take such further course with him according to your opinions of his worth as
appertains to the care and trust of the welfare of his Majesty's Subjects
inhabiting in and about the City of London by Law committed unto you. So I
commit you to God and rest

Your very loving friend, B. Duresme.
Durham house Dec. 1627.

This Lamb was very famous throughout the Town, being admired for his great
skill in the hidden Arts of Magic and Astrology, for which reason he was
highly admired by some Ladies of Quality, who were very bountiful to him; But
in truth he was a very wretched Knave, and formerly well known to the College
for many of his wicked and knavish Impostures, and at this very time by the
command and at the instance of some persons of Quality, was in prison, out of
which that he might free himself he personated the Physician to the right
Reverend Bishop of Durham; who being sent by him (as appears by his Lordship's
Letter) to the College, He was by the Censors found most egregiously ignorant,
as appears by the following examination, a Copy of which with the College's
answer to the Bishop's Letter was sent by Sir William Paddy, the Contents of
which are the following.

To the Right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of Duresme, one of the
Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.
Right Reverend, and our especial good Lord,
ACcording to your Honors order signified unto us by your Letter, to take Mr.
Lamb into our examination, who was brought before us the 18th of this
December; It may please your Honor to understand, that we have attended the
performance thereof with all the duty and care we could. And for that we
conceived your Honor's pleasure was, and so likewise our own Statutes do
direct us, that he should be entreated with favor, rather than otherwise, We
therefore caused him to be opposed, though contrary to our custom, in that
language wherein alone he is good; and further in the easiest way of Physic
and Surgery that we could think of. The brief of which examination and of
his answers we have sent herewith to your Honor, that your Honor may see the
particulars of our proceedings with him; and from what confession of his own,
and from what other evidences besides it comes, that by the sentence of the
College Mr. Lamb stands convict and guilty of all manner of infufficiency and
ignorance in this faculty: Whereof that your Honor has been pleased to
require to be certified from us, and to that end has caused the Offender to be
brought hither as the true and proper place of his trial, as an Act intended by
your Honor to advance the cause of learning, We do acknowledge our selves to
be ever most highly bounden to your Honor, and in our most dutiful manner do
give your Honor most humble thanks therefore. Almighty God keep your Honor in
long prosperity. At our College house the 19th of this December.

Your Honors humbly at commandment Io. Argent Pres. Sim. Fox Regist. Othowell
Meverell. Fr. Herrin. Robert Fludd. Helkiah Crook.



The Examination of John Lamb before the College of Physicians as it was sent
to the Bishop of Duresme.

1. Being asked of his beginning in Physic, and of the means how he came by
his knowledge, and whether his bringing up were that way or no, and required to
read a little in a Latin Galen.

He answers, that he never had taken to that study, that he makes no
profession thereof, but that he lives by making Gentlemen merry; nor
understands Latin.

2. Being asked by what signs he knows a disease, and how to cure it.

He answers, he knows no signs but only as he is told by the party; and
for cure, that he is not wont to use any thing but a few outward things, and
sometimes a little pulvis sanctus, which from the Apothecaries he has learned
to be a Purge.

3. Being asked in Astrology what house he looks unto to know a disease, or
the event of it: and how the Lord Ascendant should stand thereto.

He answers, he looks for the sixth house: which being disproved, he says he
understands nothing therein, but what he has out of Caliman: and being asked
what books he has read in that Art, he says he has none but Caliman.

4. Being asked how he knows an Apoplexy, and how he cures it.

He answers, he knows nothing unless he be told, nor does use any thing for
cure but a few Oils and Unguents, and that for satisfaction only.

5. Being asked in Surgery, What is a Revulsion or Derivation.

He answers, he knows not the terms.

6. Being charged with contradiction, that in the College he confesses himself
ignorant and denies practice, whereas in his examination by the Lord Bishop of
Durham he made show of long experience and sufficience, and of having done many
great cures, as by his Lordship's Letter appears.

He answers, that he did not profess any such thing to his Lordship, and that
he craves mercy of the College, and that they would not be the cause of his
undoing.

7. Being pressed from the notoriousness of his practice and public fame that
goes of him, and the great resort made unto him.

He answers, it is without his desert, that he cannot hinder comers to him:
and that all he did was trifles, and fooleries, and babbles to get a little
money.

Dr. Alexander Leighton, being required by the Censors to give an account by
what authority he practiced Physic, He told them by virtue of his Doctour's
degree, which he had taken at Leyden under Professor Heurnius. He was charged
as being in Presbyter's orders, and asked why he did not stick to his
Ordination. He excepted against the Ceremonies, yet owned himself a Preacher,
and acknowledged his practicing of Physic. In several parts whereof he was
examined, but giving no satisfaction, and being perverse as to Ecclesiastical
affairs, He was by the President and Censors interdicted practice. After this,
endeavoring to procure a License, it was denied him, because in Holy orders,
the Statutes of the College declaring that none such should be admitted into
the College, or permitted to practice: Wherefore he was a second time forbidden
practice. But he still persisting to practice in London or within 7 miles, was
arrested, and afterward censured, tanquam infamis, he having been censured in
the Star Chamber, and lost his ears.

Ellin Rix, was complained of by Mrs. Lee for her boy dead of a consumption,
Rix having promised her in 14 days to make him sound, and bargained for 3 li.
she had 15 s. aforehand, and arrested her for the rest. She gave this boy
purging drinks once a day for 7 days together; and twice a day for 7 days more.
But the boy dyed in a fortnight after. She likewise complained of her for
promising an absolute cure to her husband in 14 days of a dead Palsy; she had
of him 3 li. and was to have as much more upon cure. She confessed practice,
and was censured imprisonment with a mulct of 5 li. and required to give bond,
that she would not practice for the future. She lay in prison for 14 days, then
endeavored her enlargement by Habeas Corpus; which being denied, and being
referred to the Censors, she was then willing to pay part of her fine presently
and the rest shortly after, and give a bond of 20 l. (with security to the
King) that she would not practice for the future.

George Houghton, Apothecary, was accused for giving of Pills to one Robert
Roe, by which he had in 2 days threescore stools, fell into a bloody Flux, and
the Emrods, and died therewith, upon which there was a suspicion of poison: but
he said that they were only Mastick Pills, and that but 3. The Censors
deferred their sentence for the present, he being bound to answer this
miscarriage in a higher Court. After this, the Censors passed the following
Judgment upon Houghton's practice upon the body of Mr. Robert Roe Counselor at
Law, That it was altogether unlawful for him to give Pills or any other
Medicine without the Counsel of some approved Physician. For the Pills, which
the said Houghton says were Mastichinae, it is not probable they could work any
such violent effect, being familiar and gentle Pills in themselves. He was by a
general consent of the Censors adjudged to pay the sum of 40 s. which he was
contented to do. After this, some members of the College accused him of
prescribing Physic to several, for which he was summoned, and appeared,
confessed his fault, begged pardon, was interdicted practice, and promised not
to be guilty for the future. But some time after he was complained of for
giving a drink wherein was Lac Sulphuris, for which he took 5 s. and agreed to
have 5 s. more, if it did the Patient good. He took it thrice, and after the
third taking fell into a great Fever, and so continued burning, still
complaining that the Rogue Houghton had killed him. Before his taking this, he
walked up and down the house and did eat his meat, which he never did after to
his death. Houghton confessed the giving of the said Lac Sulphuris, but he
thought he might do it without offense, saying he did give it in Charity; but
that was contradicted by his taking money for the medicine and compounding for
more. He confessed it was mixed with Cinnamon water, by which it was made much
more hurtful to the Patient, whom he conceived to be in a desperate case; Yet
he gave him this Lac Sulphuris, not esteeming it physic: but nourishment it is
not, and is therefore physic or poison. This case being examined by the
Censors was by general consent found to be evil practice, for which he was
fined 20 li. and committed prisoner to Newgate. But Mr. Leighton the Keeper of
Newgate after some time suffering Houghton to escape, had the following Letter
sent to him.

WHereas the thirtieth day of August last past the body of Geo. Houghton was
sent to your prison by the 4 Censors or Governors of our College for the time
then being, with an imposition of a fine of 20 li. him to keep without bail or
Mainprise till he should be released by us, upon pain of forfeiting the
double, as appears by the Statute of the first of Q. Mary: Now since you have
let our prisoner escape, by these we demand of you the said sum of 40 li. to
be brought to our President Dr. Fox at his house in Carter lane London;
otherwise you must give us leave to proceed against you by order of Law, as our
Council shall direct.


Abraham Hugobert, Apothecary, being summoned to appear before the Censors, was
by Dr. Argent charged for the following practice, viz. That about the beginning
of March, An. Dom. 1622. He gave pills to a servant of Mrs. Hillar near
Wool-Church, who within 3 or 4 days died. Hugobert confessed his giving pills,
but would have excused it by the poverty of the boy. Pills of Hiera he gave to
one weak and aguish with a naughty pulse. The Censors asked if those pills or
Aloeticks were fit in that case. He said he made no profit, but denied the
party had a Flux. The Censors fined him 5 li. and ordered his commitment to
prison.

Robert Booker, was examined by the President and Censors concerning his skill
in Physic upon the request of a person of Honor, to whom the Censors returned
the following answer.

WHereas by your Honor's appointment one Robert Booker was brought before us
to be examined concerning physic given by him to one John Parker lying in St.
Martin's lane, May it please your Honor to know, that we the Censors did
accordingly examine the said Robert Booker concerning the said party: and we do
find that he anointed him with certain Oils from the Neck to the Foot, using
at the time of his anointing this Charm: Three biters have bit him, heart,
tongue, and eye: Three better shall help him presently. God the Father, God the
Son, and God the Holy Ghost. And that also the next day he gave him a drink,
which he drank, and more he did not to the sick Patient, but he would have
done; and said it had been better for him he had followed his Counsel further:
making them believe that he was bewitched, and that he would discover who had
bewitched him. Of which witchcraft, howbeit there may be some by the strongness
of the sick man's infirmities, yet from our examination we cannot find the said
Booker to have any skill therein. And thus we thought fit to acquaint your
Honor, that after his punishment for his rash and evil practice he may be
further ordered as your Honor shall think fit.


Tobie Simson was cited to appear before the Censors, who for his absence was
excused by a Gentleman from Lord Holderness Kelly and Land, who had written for
him and his sister Agnes King in cases of the Gout and outward applications. At
length he appeared, and his Majesty's late Letter to the College for the
punishment of Empiricks was read to him. Several witnesses were examined
against him, who proved his giving of potions, powders and other medicines, for
which he received 10 li. and had got 40 li. in few months. Being asked what the
Palsy was, he could not tell; nor what the Gout was. Yet as to the kinds of
the Gout, He said there were the running and standing, and that in set parts.
Whence it had its Original, he knew not; but for the signs of it he could feel
them with his fingers. As for his Medicine, he made it not; and sor the
Ingredients he would not discover them: What Doses he gave of his powder and
whereof it was made, he could not tell. The Lord Bishop of London returned
thanks for respect had to his Letters, and desired that no extremity, but some
favor might be shown to Tobie Simson; who being present and continuing in his
ignorance, and refusing to reveal his Secrets, the Censors did agree that his
practice was evil practice, and therefore fined him 20 li. and ordered his
imprisonment.

Theodore N^ileman, having Letters wrote in his favor by a person of great
Honor for procuring him a License, was examined by the President and Censors.
He complaining of having received a hurt in his head, was asked, what part were
you hurt in? he answered in the Middlemost; the head is divided into 3 Coats.
Which are they? He replied the Suitors. What is the Suture runs down the head?
The Coronal. Being further asked what disease he had cured, he replied the
Yellow Jaundise. What is that? The overflowing of the Gall. What part goes it
to? To the Mawe. What is the Mawe? The place of the first decoction. Having
several other questions proposed to him, it was resolved by the Censors that he
was insufficient; and therefore forbid practice.

PROCEEDINGS Against Empiricks, etc.
In King Charles I. his Reign.
MAster President with 3 of the Fellows of the College waited upon the Right
Honorable the Lord Keeper Coventry to return him thanks in the name of the
College for the great favor he was pleased to express to them in the affair of
the Surgeons, who endeavored to procure a License for their practicing Physic
in all cases Chirurgical, and a power of Licensing for the future those that
should practice their Art. But this Noble person opposed their most unjust
Petition, refusing to grant the Seal, and gave the King a full and satisfactory
account of this his denial.

Edward Graves, Apothecary, was complained of by a Woman whose Husband died
under his ill practice, He having bled him whilst ill of a Dropsy and Tympany;
Graves confessed the practice, but charged the Patient's death upon an ill
course of diet and immoderate use of Wine. The Censors upon a full examination
of both parties unanimously agreed, that he should be imprisoned and fined 5 li.

James Winter, Apothecary, was accused for trying practice upon one Cottaw, to
whom he gave a purging Potion for a light galling. When Cottaw told him that he
was exceeding well in his stomach, he gave his opinion that he was therefore in
the greater danger, and for that reason prescribed him 9 pills; which (Cottaw
complaining) had done him no good, he ordered him another pill, with which all
his teeth grew loose. He extorted 30 s. from him. Winter confessed that he had
given him 2 pills of Turbith Mineral and diet-drink. For which the Censors
fined him 10 li. which he promised to pay within a week.

Dr. Iaquinto was accused of evil practice upon a Woman with Child, who
miscarried upon the use of his Medicines, for which the Censors ordered his
imprisonment and a fine of 5 li. to be inflicted upon him. Upon this he
procures the following Letter from the Earl of Manchester.

To my very loving friend Dr. Argent President of the College of Physicians in
London.
Mr. President,
I Am informed by Dr. Iaquinto, whom I have long known and heard well of, That
upon occasion of business that stays him for a while in this City, He was
requested by Mr. Basil Nichols to minister physic to his daughter, for which
he is now questioned in the College, though both the Patient and her Parents
confess she received good thereby. And he has entreated me to mediate his
freedom from further trouble and molestation during his stay, he behaving
himself inoffensively, without intruding himself into other men's Cures: Which I
am induced unto both for the honor of our Nation which has been ever
hospitable to strangers, and also for the respects I bear to learning and his
profession, having practiced in this Kingdom 25 years, and thereby done good
to many. I do therefore pray you and the rest of the College of Doctors, the
rather for my sake to afford him to favor that he may live quietly, demeaning
himself orderly, and I shall take it kindly, and wherein I may, rest

Your very loving friend, W. Manchester.
When it pleased God to visit me with a great sickness at Exeter this Doctor
was of use to me, which makes me willing to use for him any favor I have with
you.

W. M.
Canon Row, Feb. 14.



To this Letter the College returned the following Answer.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester, Lord President of his
Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.
Right Honorable and our very good Lord,
HAving seen your Honor's Letter directed to Dr. Argent, President of this
College, and by him showed unto us the Censors thereof and the rest of this
Society, in favor of one Mr. Iaquinto, that we would for your Honor's sake
forbear to molest him in his practice: It may please your Honor to
understand, that we are all of us exceeding glad to have this occasion offered
us to gratify your Honor, the rather for the remembrance we have of your
Honor's many favors done to this Profession, and of the support which your
Honor in general gives to the whole estate of Learning. And notwithstanding
we are not altogether without fear, lest your Honor in your deeper Judgment
may conceive us to be men somewhat too remiss in our public duty, in not
showing what we think has been misreported to your Honor in this business:
Whereupon happily might have followed, that your Honor would have been pleased
to relinquish the patronage of him, the matter whereof he is convicted being no
less than the miscarriage of a woman with Child, however it be now carried:
Yet we are enforced to satisfy your Honor in this in a double respect: First
for your Honor's care in not extending your demand further than that little
while which he is to stay here; and secondly for your Honor's testimony of
personal use made of him, against which we may not contest: So that there
remains now on the part of our duty, Humbly to entreat your Honor to take in
worth this poor service we present you, in suffering the said Iaquinto to live
quietly during the time limited: And what he has concealed from your Honor
for fear of a rebuke, which is, that he is fined by the College in a certain
sum of money, though but little, to the King, that your Honor would excuse
us of it, it being not now in our power to reverse it. And we most humbly
recommend our best service to your Honor, wishing to the same all increase of
estate and happiness.

Your Honor's humbly at commandment Argent, Pres. To. Fludd, Helkiah Crook,
Fr. Herrin, Otwell Meverell,
Censors.

At our College-house this 18th. of Feb. 1627.

About a year and half after, Iaquinto was summoned to appear before the
Censors, and admonished that he should not practice out of the Venetian
Ambassadors house. He was charged for a debt of 40 s. (being the remainder of
a fine imposed upon him by the College) which he promised to pay within a week.
He was after this accused by Dr. Crook for practicing physic and prescribing
improper remedies to a young woman sick of a Fever and Catarrh, which being
examined and judged by the Censors unsuitable for the Patient's distemper, He
was fined 5 li. which by the intercession of the Venetian Ambassador was
remitted, provided he abstained from practice for the future.

One Reve, an Apochecary, was charged by Dr. Clement for practicing physic,
and for behaving himself rudely toward Physicians; likewise by Dr. Hinsloe.
Reve excused himself that all he had given was by the prescription of Dr.
Yelverton. He was after this frequently complained of both by Physicians and
Patients, upon which account he procured the following Letter from the Earl of
Exeter.

To my very loving friends the President and Censors of the College of
Physicians.
Good Mr. President,
I Have had almost 20 years experience of the civil carriage, honesty and
sufficiency of my servant John Reeve Apothecary, and am confident that in all
affairs of his vocation he has as skilfully, carefully and legally demeaned
himself as any of his Profession whatsoever. Nevertheless I understand that at
sundry times since May last he has been molested with Messengers from you and
the Censors, to make his appearance personally before you, when by reason of
his great sickness my self was deprived of his desired attendance in my
service, and well might you in such case have spared him also. But I conceive
that the false information of malicious persons against him, and the Messengers
fond hopes to enforce unnecessary fees from him, was the cause of his
molestation. His service is of such consequence and esteem with me, that he is
daily and hourly upon every notice to attend me, and I may not want him, being
well assured of his honest and fair demeanor as well in the affairs of his
profession, as in all his actions. And therefore I desire you to forbear
sending Messengers for him, or interrupting him any further, wherein you will
oblige me (who in no wise would see him suffer) to acknowledge your respects
toward him, and rest always

Your very loving friend J. Exeter.


To this Letter the President and Censors returned the following answer.
Right Honorable,
WE have in our dutifullest manner received your Honor's Letter written to us
the President and Censors of this College, in the behalf of John Reeve,
Apothecary, your Honor's servant, of whom we are very glad to hear how honest
and useful he has been to your Honor, for the desire we have that your
Honor should be well served, and should be as glad to have had the like
testimony from others of his behavior toward them, wherein how little he has
answered the good opinion that your Honor has of him, your Honor may please
to understand by this ensuing report. Which is, That upon the 19th. of January,
1637. one Sibyll Butler came before us in our College, and declared how John
Reeve, Apothecary, finding her husband inclined to a Consumption, and for a
month before, and at that time being afflicted with a continual scowring, did
let him blood, and gave him a sleeping pill every other night for 3 weeks
together, whereupon he dyed; and thereupon the said Reeve being convented
before us the 26th. of the same month, the accusation was verifyed by
witnesses and made so plain that he was brought to confess how he had let
the said Butler blood twice, and given him certain pills and other things all
of his own head, and (as he said) out of his own Judgment, alleging for his so
doing that there were Physicians that would not give poor folks Counsel if
they wanted money. This practice found so soul and contrary to Art by the
Censors, in a person that has no calling or ability to give Physic, was the
cause of our sending for him, which whether it be a molestation or no, as he
informs your Honor, we remit to your Honor's Judgment, now that your Honor
is truly informed of the truth; wherein we humbly desire your Honor to
believe us without counterpoising his report with ours: and the rather, for
that we forbear to aggravate his fault with such circumstances as he knows
we are able to bring against him, if it were not for putting him out of your
Honor's favor. And for satisfying your Honor, and to show how absolute a
power your Honor has over us and every of us, we do remit to your Honor how
far the same shall be pleased to command us to proceed in the matter of the
complaint; Only we are humble Suitors to your Honor to excuse us in the point
of calling him before us upon the like occasions, except it be at such times as
we shall know he is in actual service with your Honor, for that this being the
due way granted us for the execution of our duty, unless we shall leave it as
a precedent for all other Offenders to decline us, we may not remit it, being
bound by the trust that the State puts upon us, and charged by the
continual commandments of the Kings and Queens of the Realm, and other
admonitions of the Lords of his Majesty's honorable Privy Council, and lastly
tied by Oath at our entering into these places, to look diligently to the abuses
committed by bad practisers upon the lives of his Majesty's Subjects, and in
which we as yet were never interrupted by any solicitation; and so with our
heartiest prayers for your Honor's long and prosperous estate, we humbly take
our leaves.

From our College-house, the 28. December. 1638.

Bartholomew Vanderlash was accused for practicing Physic, which he denied,
but yet confessed that he had given healing draughts. Upon which, order was
given for prosecuting him in the Court of Exchequer. After this, he was
complained of by Dr. Crook for giving purging pills to a woman in a Fever, and
Physic to another person, for a year and half: Dr. Spicer likewise exhibited
several informations against him to the President and Censors: As likewise one
Mrs. Fitten, to whom (for a small pain and redness in her leg and arm) he had
given a powder in white Wine, which purged her vehemently upward and downward
above 25 times, and 12 times the next day. After which he gave her 4 fluxing
pills (of which she took only 2) which caused a salivation for above 20 days,
for which she was forced to seek ease from Dr. Argent. Vanderlash denied not
this fact, but avouched that he gave her the physic by directions from Dr.
Read. But because he confessed that he had no bill from the said Doctor, the
Censors took it for his own practice, which they declared to be very bad: and
sent him to Newgate thereupon, with a fine of 20 li.

Russel Hutton, Surgeon, was complained of for giving pills of Turbith Mineral
to one afflicted with a Dysury, upon which he fell into pissing of blood,
ulceration of the mouth and other ill symptoms. He was punished 40 s. which if
not discharged by the next Censors day, he was to be committed to prison for
mala praxis.

Du Pont was accused for prescribing Mercurial powder to several persons, who
had received great mischief by them; One of them having lost 14 teeth; Another
by a Mercurial fumigation (prescribed by him) fell into swooning fits, lost her
teeth and was so dangerously ill, that 2 Physicians were called in for her
relief. Du Pont being taken by the Beadle and brought before the President, was
released upon his brother's engagement for his appearance before the Censors,
but he broke his word; his brother excusing him that he durst not come, lest he
should be imprisoned. But though he did not appear, yet evil practice being
proved against him by several, the Censors fined him 20 li. and ordered his
imprisonment (till it was paid) as soon as the College Officer could take him.

Mr. Buggs, Apothecary, was complained of for practicing physic; being charged
therewith, he said that he would not accuse himself, but that being proved
against him, he refused to give any answer, behaving himself very insolently
and saucily. After this, He was accused by a Gentleman to whom he gave great
hopes of curing his Son (pretending himself a Physician) but when he saw that
he would dye, he engaged this Gentleman to the Tavern, demanded money of him,
and after a week sent him a bill. Buggs gave a Vomit to another, which wrought
so churlishly, that for 3 hours the sick person was in continual lipothymies.
One Watson took physic of Buggs, who dyed under his hands. Dr. Grent
acquainted the Censors that a Pewterer complained of Buggs, who by his physic
put out his Eyes. Complaint was likewise made, that he gave physic to one
Burton, who dyed by 3 a Clock the next morning: the particular account of which
is the following.

Laurence Relfe, servant to Mr. George Burton, Haberdasher, says, that he was
sent by his Master to call Mr. Buggs to him; and he thinks that Mr. Buggs was
with his Master Maii 4o in the morning, and further says, that his Master was
that day abroad in diverse places, and that coming home he complained that he
was stuffed in the stomach and could hardly fetch his breath, and that having
sitten a while and rested himself, he found himself well. But he having met
with Mr. Buggs in the evening, and complaining that he was stuffed in the
stomach, Mr. Buggs promised speedily to help him, and thereupon in the evening
sent him a Clyster, which Mr. Burton then refused to take, finding himself
well, and having, as he said, a good stomach to his Supper, he would first sup.
After Supper Mr. Buggs's man came again, the rising from the Table he went to
his Chamber, where the Fellow gave him the Clyster, upon which he fell
presently very sick, so that the Fellow went home to tell his Master how ill
Mr. Burton was; who presently sent him some things to take (which was after
acknowledged to be Syrup of Violets and Flos Sulphuris.) But he growing worse
and worse, Laurence Relfe was sent to fetch Mr. Buggs himself, who brought him
by twelve a Clock at night to his Master, where presently Mr. Buggs did let Mr.
Burton blood: after which seeing him to grow sicker, Mr. Buggs went home,
saying he would send him some things to give him ease, which he sent by his own
servant, being three things, each of the bigness of a pryone, which he took all
severally, and dyed by 3 a Clock in the morning.

William Wallye, Mr. Buggs's man, being called to inform the College the truth
of this business concerning Mr. Burton says, that he knew Mr. Burton, and that
he dyed on Friday last, and that his Master made a Clyster for Mr. Burton,
which was sent by his younger Fellow and given about 7 at night, and that about
12 at night his Master let Mr. Burton blood, but this Wallye was not with his
Master at the doing thereof, for he was at the Tower, giving one Mr. Foster a
Clyster, which his Master ordained and sent him to give: and more he knows
not.

Upon this and the like informations the College prosecuted Mr. Buggs at Law,
whereby he was made a prisoner in the Fleet; after which, the President
presented to the College the following Letter sent from the Lord Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas about granting Mr. Buggs an Habeas Corpus for the Summer
Vacation.

To his very worthy friends the President and College of Physicians in London.
Gentlemen,
MAster John Buggs, a prisoner in the Fleet at your suite and at the suite of
one more only, has been a suitor for an Habeas Corpus. The other has both by
word and writing given his consent. He informs me that with a little liberty
he will make so good use thereof as to give you satisfaction, which otherwise
he shall be disabled to do; and he will not give your College offense. I
recommend him to your selves, and desire a word from you, whether you will be
entreated to do this for this tourn only. If his carriage hereafter shall not
be such as shall deserve your favor, his condemnation will be the greater;
otherwise you may do honor to your selves and subdue him by a courtesy. For
my self I am and shall always be

Your very loving friend
30 June, 1632. At the request of some friends I will him well; but will not
overrule, but persuade your consent.


To. Heath.


To this Letter the President returned the following Answer.

To the Right Honorable Sir Robert Heath, Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's
Court of Common Pleas, deliver this.
Right Honorable,
UPON the receipt of your Letter on the behalf of Mr. Buggs for the obtaining
of an Habeas Corpus, I called our Society together: Where I received a command
from all, first to give your Honor all humble thanks, That you would be
pleased to do so great a favor to our College as not to grant the Writ
without our consent; and especially with this addition, not to overrule us: For
the quality of this Buggs, we beseech your Honor to understand from us, that
he has always been a dangerous Empirick, and against whom there are many
complaints in our Register; and never any man behaved himself with that
insolency, and contempt against our College as he has done, in arresting and
suing to a trial 3 of our Doctors for performing service to the Commonwealth,
in searching his Shop and carrying away his dangerous and evil medicines to be
examined by the Censors. Yea and since his eviction in this our suite, he has
yet persisted in his evil courses, and has been an unfortunate Practitioner
upon one Master Burton, who having well supped, and then received certain
administrations from the said Buggs, who also let him blood that night with his
own hands, the Patient dyed before morning, as we are informed, and this very
day we purposed to examine this business, but that in tenderness to your
Honor we did forbear till we had given you an account of him and his
dangerous ways. As for the other Creditor, we are informed that the debt was
but supposed from the beginning, only to remove him from the Compter to the
Fleet, and therefore that consent was easy. Sir, the trust that the King and
State has placed upon us, binds us in all duty and conscience to prosecute
such dangerous abusers, for the preservation of the lives of his Majesty's
people. And therefore we beseech your Honor to continue your favor and help
to suppress and punish such illiterate men as formerly you have done. And we
shall be bound to pray God for your Honor's health and safety. And so I rest,

Your Honor's humble servant, Joh. Argent.
Julii 13. 1632.

After this, the Clerk of the Apothecaries Hall came to mediate for Buggs,
desiring that his Fine might be paid at 2 several payments. It was thereupon
agreed between the President, Censors and Buggs, that he the said Buggs should
pay 10 l. presently, 20 l. at 6 months end, and 20 l. at 6 months after; and
that he should seal a Release of Errors both to the College and all Ministers
and Officers used by the College in this business; which he agreed to, and
since has paid 10 l. and sealed the Bond and Releases. Within 2 months after
this Dr. Hawlye accused Mr. Buggs for giving Physic, whereupon order was given
for his citation, but producing Dr. Lawrence his Bills for the Physic given,
he was discharged. He was likewise accused for suing one Smith in the Exchequer
for Physic, and that in his Plea he termed himself [in Medicina peritus] and
sued pro curatione luis venereae. But to this accusation he said, that one Dr.
Cartmeale gave directions to that Smith for cure of the Pox. In July 1633. Dr.
Fox presented to the College Mr. Buggs his Bond, which was forfeited for not
paying of 20 l. which his Sureties neglected and refused to pay, though they
were put in mind thereof. It was therefore thought fit by the College that an
Action should be entered against them. Whereupon Mr. Townesend and Mr. Broomsall
(Mr. Buggs his Sureties) appeared, but refused to pay the money due to the
College for which they stood bound, wherefore their Bond was forthwith put in
suit by the College. After this, Mr. Buggs his Bills were brought to the
College, and he complained of by Dr. Clarke for practice. It was therefore
ordered by the College that Buggs should be arrested with a Quo minus out of
the Exchequer, notwithstanding he had taken a Doctour's degree at Leyden. After
this, the Physicians place in Christ's Church Hospital being void by the death
of Dr. Clement, and it being justly feared that Buggs or some other irregular
man was like (by the favor Buggs had with the Officers of that house) to get
into that place, to the prejudice and dishonor of the College; It was
therefore considered how to prevent that mischief. Some made him incapable,
because he could not practice in this City without authority of the College,
which was held a cause sufficient to exclude him. Others said that the Founder
of that place, Mr. Beale, gave it first to Mr. Bredwell, and ordained, that
after him one of the College should always succeed into the vacancy. That
reason was also allowed effectual as the other. In fine it was concluded, that
a Letter should be written from the College to the Lord Mayor to give him
notice of both: which was accordingly done and presented by Dr. Baskervile.
After this the President having heard by Dr. Oxenbridge, that there was further
cause for the exclusion of Buggs found in the Register of Christ's Church, of
this tenor; viz. That the Physician that is to be chosen to that place, is to
be a Learned man, well qualified, and approved by the College of Physicians in
London; He went himself together with Dr. Oxenbridge to the Lord Mayor, to
advertise him of the intention that the President of Christ's Church Hospital
had to thrust in Buggs as Physician to that Hospital contrary to all Law and
Reason, and the express words of the Donour found in the Register. By whom they
were received respectfully, and with a great deal of assurance, that he would
see the College should have right and favor shown them: and thereupon he sent
immediately the Sword Bearer to the President of the Hospital to certify him of
the College's reasons. Mr. Buggs after this upon summons appeared, and being
demanded how long he had practiced Physic, he answered that he had practiced 2
years or more, viz. since he returned with the title of Doctor from Leyden.
Being further demanded in what School or University he had been bred and
brought up, he answered, that he had never been an Academick, or brought up in
any University; but yet he had been bred in such a way as might well enough
enable him to become a Doctor of Physic, which was in a Poticary's shop;
which he held sufficient to make a Physician. Upon which Mr. President gave
express charge to the said Buggs that he should not any more presume to
practice Physic, being contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom, which were then
read out of the book of Statutes to him. He then asked how he should live, or
what he should do? It was replied, that he should return to his trade, and set
up an Apothecary's shop; so he might live honestly in the profession wherein he
had spent his life, and have the favor of the College, which had been formerly
offered by some of the Fellows, who for his better encouragement had promised
him half their practice. But he said, that would be too great a dishonor to
him. Whereupon the Beadle was commanded to take out the Copy of an Information
given in against Buggs in the Court of Exchequer, Anno 1632. for 2 years
practice, being an exact pattern drawn by great Council to direct the College
for the future in their proceedings against unlawful practisers; whom the
College till this time had sued only for one years practice. It was also
ordered by the President and the College, that out of hand a Suit should be
commenced against Buggs for 2 years practice.

James Winter, Surgeon, was complained of by Joan Kelloway, in that she being
lamish and troubled with a running pain, Winter undertook her Cure about
Midsummer was 2 years; for which cure, he was to have a Hen and 20 Chickens,
and a Lamb when she was well. After this, Winter sent her some Diaprunis (as he
called it) to purge her, by his Wife; who also after 3 days gave her a Pill,
upon which she said she should spit. At Michaclmas following he gave her the
unction, anointing her Legs, Thighs and Arms twice, upon which she spit 20
days. After this, he gave her Purges, Diet-drinks and Pills; He used also
Cupping-glasses, Vesicatories, and made Issues in her Legs, promising to make
her well: And for this cure he had 10 Sheep valued at 3 l. 10 s. only he gave
Harry Kelloway her husband 10 s. in money back. His wife also after her
anointing, took from this complainant her Wastcoat, her Smock and her
Head-geer, saying they were her Fees if they were worth 20 l. But this
complainant yet not finding her self well, about May last, by his appointment,
she had the Unction again, and Mr. Winter was once present at her anointing.
Upon this she fluxed more than before, which he seeing, said, that now she
would be a sound woman; and after, he gave her diet-drinks and pills, and then
his wife gave her 2 Clysters; for which she had a brood Goose and 2 Goslings;
for this he also challenged further content, but the man refused to give it
unless his wife were well, and then he would give him 20 s. more.

William Trigge, Shoemaker, was summoned to appear before the Censors for
practice objected against him; He confessed his practicing Physic in the
Rickets, bloody Flux, Plague and Gout; but now he understood that he ought not,
he would observe the President's commands and abstain totally from practice.
Yet notwithstanding this engagement, Elizabeth Goodridge within 5 months
exhibited complaints against him, for giving her husband Physic, of whom he
received 20 s. for which she was constrained by reason of her poverty to pawn
diverse of her clothes and household stuff; And he was to have 40 s. more at the
end of the Cure. Trigge prescribed him Drinks, Pills, Plasters, Vomits, etc.
Being called and asked whether he were the King's or Queen's servant, He
refused to answer, but said he was God's. He confessed his giving the Physic
charged against him by Goodridge. Wherefore the Censors taking into their
consideration the practice of the said William Trigge upon Thomas Goodridge,
and examining particularly the manner thereof, did censure it to be evil, and
therefore fined him 10 l. and committed him to the Compter prison in
Woodstreet, till he should pay his fine. About 4. months after this censure,
Mr. Cook the Surgeon informed, that upon the 13th of August 1631. Trigge came
to a woman sick of a burning Fever, to whom he gave a Clyster and Cordial, and
on the 14th a Vomit of his own preparing; after which she grew worse, still
declining, till the 18th, upon which day she died. Anno 1632. Philip Tiller of
London Bridge Cloth worker and William Ley of Lumbardstreet (who were bail for
Trigge) desired to be released from their bail by the College. Answer was made,
that if they restored the Prisoner, they should be freed. Dr. Winston likewise
proposed to the President and College the following request from the Warden of
the Fleet in reference to Trigge, viz. That whereas there was 25 l. recovered
from Trigge, to the which the Warden of the Fleet is liable, in regard of his
Escape: Yet now the Warden of the Fleet requests a mitigation, in regard the
prisoner is escaped; and is willing forthwith to pay to the College 20 l. The
College at the motion of Dr. Winston was not unwilling to accept that sum,
leaving the business to Dr. Winston's discretion; giving him full authority to
receive the said 20 l. to the use of the College; with this proviso, that if
hereafter the said Warden of the Fleet shall recover the full sum, that then he
shall pay the other 5 l. to the College, and not otherwise. Which 20 l. Dr.
Hodson paid Dr. Fox the College Treasurer, having received it of the Warden of
the Fleet as part of the debt due from Trigge, with a promise of paying the
rest in case he recovered it. After this Dr. Spicer and Dr. Hodson gave an
account to the Censors of Trigge's practice, and Dr. Oxenbridge complained of
his undertaking to cure an Hydropical woman by way of Paracentesis, and that
the patient died within 14 days. Upon this Trigge was summoned, but not
appearing, his wife came to excuse her husband's absence; She confessed he was
by his breeding a Shoemaker, but now he made profession only of distilling
waters, and that he did use to give certain Powders and Cordials to such as
were infected with the Plague. Henry Aron, Surgeon, appeared and averred that
he being called to view the body of one Widow Thompson (whom Trigge had
undertaken to cure of a Dropsy by Paracentesis) found, that the said Trigge
had opened her belly himself in a place not proper for that operation, viz.
upon the midst of the direct Muscle on the right side. Dr. Oxenbridge and Dr.
Rant were likewise present with Mr. Aron at that time, and were witnesses of
that indiscreet and Artless operation. Wherefore Trigge being brought to the
College by a Messenger of the Council table, and charged with opening the body
of an Hydropical woman, whereupon death ensued; he confessed the fact. And
being demanded how he durst presume to undertake such an operation, being a
Last-maker by his profession; he answered that he had seen Mrs. Nobes a Midwife
open a body dead of a Dropsy, and that thereby he learned to make some
observations, touching the dissection of Men's bodies. Besides, he excused
himself, that what he did was done in the presence and with the assistance of a
Physician, viz. Mr. Pordage. But the Censors judged it a bold, dangerous and
unlawful practice, for which they committed him to Newgate and fined him 20 l.
After this Trigge's wife appeared in the behalf of her husband lying in
Newgate, and being questioned touching his practice; she confessed that he made
his Pills and Electuaries himself, and particularly Mithridate and London
Treacle. That he had practiced Physic in London 4 years since he came from
Canterbury, and that otherwise he could not have lived. In conclusion, she paid
20 l. for her husband's fine; desiring he might be released from Newgate.
Whereupon a Warrant was signed by the President and Censors for his
Enlargement. A week after he was again summoned to appear before the Censors,
who interdicted him the practice of Physic any more, upon pain of the severest
punishment. He then professed, that he was bred and brought up in distilling of
waters, to which trade he purposed to apply himself. And complained that many
Distillers of Aqua vitae in London made use of the Lees of Starch Wash and such
trash to the great abuse of the King's Subjects, which he was able to make out.
But practice being afterward proved against him, he was prosecuted at Common
Law.

Thomas Cook, Surgeon, being charged for practicing Physic, confessed that he
gave some few medicines to the Poor. Being asked how he came to understand that
profession, he said from his Master Mollins. He was admonished to abstain from
future practice, which he promised, and so was dismissed. But about 3 months
after, Dr. Winston complained that he had Salivated a Woman, upon which
Salivation she died in 4 days. Wherefore, he was sent to Prison and fined 5 l.
But upon his payment of 40 s. and confessing his fault, he was taken out of
Prison. After this, he was again convened and accused for giving Mercurial
Pills; he craved pardon for his offense, and promised never to offend again,
and so he was sent away. Yet within a few years, he was again questioned
concerning the death of a person of great Quality, to whom he gave (as he
affirmed) first half an ounce of Cassia, and the like quantity of Manna for a
bole, then Mercurius dulcis 5 times. The flux began to rise the third day: In
conclusion this honorable Lady died. His Censure was, 1. To give security by
bond of 100 l. not to practice the same way of fluxing by Mercury. 2. To
acknowledge his ill practice to the Lady Knevet, and to bring back a testimony
from her to the College, that he had confessed the same. He accordingly brought
the ensuing Letter.

My good friends,
I Understand by this bearer Tho Cook, that he is by your command in custody
of a Messenger for some occasions best known to your selves; upon which you
have enjoined him, to repair to me to make submission; which accordingly he
has fully and fairly done with much sorrow; and for my part I remit and
forgive all offenses to me, and desire with your savours he may be freed; and
so wishing you all happiness I rest

Your loving friend, Ka. Knyvett.
This 2d of March, 1638.

In the 5th year of this King's reign, several Empiricks pretending their
Protection from Court, the President and Censors presented the following
Petition against them to the Lord Chamberlain.

To the Right Honorable Philip Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, Lord
Chamberlain to his Majesty,
The humble Petition of the President and Censors of the College of Physicians,
Shows,

THat whereas there are diverse Empiricks, which contrary to Law and conscience
presume to practice Physic in and about the City of London, as one Butler a
Glover, Trigge a Lastmaker, Buggs one of the Queen of Bohemia's Players,
sometimes an Apothecary; One Hill, one Blagden; one Blank a Pewterer; and one
Sir Saunder Duncombe a Pensioner to his Majesty, with diverse others, against
whom the College cannot take the benefit of their Charter and his Majesty's
Laws, by reason that they shroud themselves under the color of being his
Majesty's servants:

The Petitioners humbly beseech your Lordship, in tender regard of the health
and safety of his Majesty's subjects, to give them leave to take the ordinary
course of Law for the suppressing of the unlawful practice of the aforesaid
Empiricks, and all others that shall assume the like boldness.

And they shall pray, etc.

To this Petition the following answer was returned.

None of the persons complained of in this Petition, nor any other are admitted
to his Majesty's service to entitle them to the practice of Physic against
the Charter of the College and his Majesty's Laws. And therefore if the
Petitioners conceive that they have cause of Suit, having acquainted the
parties interested with my reference, they may freely take the benefit of his
Majesty's Laws for their relief.

Pembroke and Montgomery.
Febr. 7. 1630.

Humphrey Beven, Chemist, was complained of for giving a Vomit to one Royston's
daughter, who in the time of her vomiting fell into convulsions and died. After
this he was accused for giving a Medicine to Mrs. Lane on a knife's point, upon
the taking of which she voided clods of blood upwards, and next day her gums
were made black thereby, and so she fell to spitting and spawling till she
died. The President and Censors did not think this business fit for them to
censure; and therefore it was referred to the Courts of Justice.

Thomas Bowden, Surgeon, confessed that he directed severl Medicines (as
Purges, Diet-drinks, etc.) to a Patient for the Morbus Gallicus, and thought it
lawful, he being so taught by his Master. The Censors examining the case could
not discover it to be a Gonorrhoea impura, but only a strain gotten by a fall,
which caused the running of the reins. The practice having been 2 or 3 years
past, the Censors inflicted no other punishment upon him, but only discommuned
him until he submitted to the College, which was done by the consent of all
the Fellows, and signified by the Beadle to all their Members. About the same
time one Flud an Apothecary was likewise discommuned, who afterward submitted
himself to the College, and craved a release from their interdiction; which was
granted, he paying the mulct of 20 s.

Mr. Sweno Clark and Executour to one Mr. William Turner presented a Petition
against Mr. Clapham, an Apothecary, for giving physic to the said Mr. Turner,
whose bills of charges he presented. Mr. Clapham appeared, to whom Mr.
President declared the complaint made against him concerning his practicing
Physic upon one Mr. Turner, and of his suing the Patient's Executours, and
required him to produce what Doctors bills he had in that case. Mr. Clapham
answered, that he had Dr. Peter Moyden alias Muden his Bills, even from
September, 1630. till the latter end of March following: which Dr. Moyden was
sometime his fellow servants in Mr. Garret's house, but afterward fell to the
study of Physic. He confessed that the Doctor never was with Mr. Turner,
only saw his urines at Mr. Clapham's shop, and was instructed by him of the
disease. He says farther that Mr. Turner much despised Physic and Physicians,
yet relied upon him, and was content at the last that Dr. Bruart should be
brought to him, who came (as he said) too late.

Margaret Woodman, dwelling in Alhallows in the Wall, who kept Mr. Turner in
his sickness, says, that Mr. Clapham did usually look upon Mr. Turner's
urines, causing them often to be turned, sometimes liking and sometimes
disliking them: and that all the time she was with him, which was 10 weeks, she
knew of no other Doctor but Mr. Clapham: and she says farther, that by his
bathing and medicining him, his Legs did not only swell, but that his Toes
rotted, and his Legs became extremely noisome.

Mr. William Kerbye, in Maiden lane, Merchant, says, that Mr. Turner being
taken with a giddiness fell, and by his fall hurt his Hip, for which he did
advise him to use Counsel, and he answered, he used Mr. Clapham who was his old
acquaintance; but Mr. Kerbye wishing him to use better Counsel, he said that
Mr. Clapham told him he had the Counsel of a Doctor, and further says, that
then he could use his arms well, and that even to his death almost he had his
senses well: and he says that he told Mr. Turner, that Mr. Clapham had
received of him 50 li. to which he answered that he had had of him twice as
much. And he says that Mr. Bruart coming to him, said he was called too late.

Mr. Henry Shelberrye, Scr. faith that Mr. Turner had his fall about the 7th.
of October last, to whom Mr. Turner said he feared the swimming of his head, of
which he had a fit 20 years ago coming from Paul's; and he asked Mr. Turner,
whose Counsel he used? he said Mr. Clapham was his ancient Apothecary and one
that knew his body well, yet that he had moneys from him for a Doctor.

Mr. Slater says, that he was with Mr. Turner the day he dyed, and that he
heard Mr. Turner's Maid blame Mr. Clapham, who she said had received of her
Master in his sickness well near 100 li.

Mr. Clapham says, that if he would have taken 5 li. or 6 li. for his Bill,
that then this complaint had not been made. Mr. Clapham neglecting to attend
the Censors upon due warning, they gave Mr. Sweno the following Certificate
upon mature deliberation.

WHereas Mr. William Sweno, Executor to one Mr. William Turner deceased in
April last, has complained to us the President and Censors of the College of
Physicians in London, of William Clapham, Apothecary, for that he administered
Physic for diverse months together to the said William Turner, for which he
has received great sums of money to the sum of 80 li. and more, and yet
has presented more Bills, and sued the said Executors for 12 li. 14 s. and 10
d. more, as appears by his Declaration exhibited to the honorable Court of
Common Pleas. We taking into consideration the misdemeanors that are daily in
this kind presented unto us, and having sent for the same William Clapham, and
examined him concerning this business, as also having examined diverse of his
Bills, brought in by him to us, and affirmed by his Servant to be the Original
Bills, which we find not to agree with those mentioned in his Declaration,
neither in substance nor number; And that besides, the Bills presented to us,
are not likely to be of any Physicians prescribing, they being irregular and
contrary to Art. Therefore we do certify to all whom it may concern, that we
have just cause to think that the Patient has been unconscionably and
unreasonably dealt withal. In witness whereof we the President and Censors of
the College have hereunto set our hands. Dated the 18th. day of November at our
College.

Subscribed by the President and Censors.

In the 7th. year of the King's Reign, Mr. President presented a Letter sent to
him and the College by his Majesty's command concerning the poisoning of Mr.
Lane, the Contents of which Letter and of this whole affair are the following.

To my very loving friends the President and the rest of the College of
Physicians in London.
AFter my hearty commendations. Since the Sentence passed against one Cromwell
for the murder of his Master, because he persisted in a constant denial of the
fact, it has occasioned his Majesty's gracious care to inform himself by all
means possible, which might serve to draw the truth thereof into further light
and evidence. To that purpose as there has been employed the ministry of
Divines to persuade his conscience, and the fear of death to unmask it; so
his Majesty taking notice of some question was made amongst the Physicians,
whether the party dead were poisoned or not, has thought fit to hear the
judgment of you the College of Physicians thereupon, and does accordingly
require and authorize you to assemble your selves in such manner as in the like
enquiryes and consultations is accustomed, and there to take as exact
information as may be from the relation of such as were present, of the state
of his sickness, the manner of his death, and what has been besides observed
upon the view and opening of his body, or may yet be collected from the sight
and trial of the Medicine, if any part of it be still remaining. Whereupon
having heard and weighed the arguments on both sides, you are to set down your
opinions in writing, with the reasons of them, under your hands, and present
the same unto his Majesty before Wednesday next, his Majesty not intending to
suspend the course of Justice any longer, unless something may appear in the
mean time fit to induce and warrant a further act of mercy toward the
prisoner. Thus much I was commanded by his Majesty to signify unto you of his
Royal pleasure; and so I bid you heartily farewell, and rest

Your very loving friend He. Hollande.
Greenwich the 27th. of May 1632.

By this Letter, the College is commanded to take exact information from the
relation of such as were present, of Mr. Lane's sickness, of the manner of his
death, and what has been observed upon the view and opening of his body, as
also from the sight of the bolus which was left. It being therefore enquired of
Mr. Matthewes Apothecary (of whom without the Counsel of any Doctor he took
physic) what sickness Mr. Lane had, he answered that he was not sick, but that
he was desirous to take a Medicine, which Dr. Poe had heretofore appointed him;
and which he since had taken sundry times. The Medicine (he said) was this.

Pulv. Sanct. jss. Sir. Augustan. j. Vini albi iij ss. m. f. potio. This he
took upon Monday, and he had thereby 7 or 8 stools: But not thinking himself
sufficiently purged he desired Master Matthewes that he might have it again,
which Master Matthewes accordingly prepared on Tuesday, for Wednesday; but he
took not this Medicine till Friday following; upon the taking of which (after
the walking 5 or 6 turns) he vomited and grew sick. The Medicine also did work
downward much, even to the purging of blood, and the said Mr. Matthewes gave
Mr. Lane a Cordial of Diascordium.

Dr. Gifford was called to Mr. Lane on Sunday, and can say nothing what was
done before. He then found that Mr. Lane did cast and scowre much, and that he
was feverish, his breath stinking, his mouth black, especially on the right
side and about his gumms. The Doctor the nappointed him Clysters of milk, and
to drink milk and water. On Monday against night, he did appoint him a Bolus
with Laudani Parac. gr. j., which night he vomited the Bolus and purged much
more than before, casting and scowring blood after the Bolus. On Tuesday the
Doctor gave him some Diacodium and Plantain Water. On Wednesday he appointed
him Laudani gr. j. cons. flor. garyophyllor. j. Cromwell was sent for this
Bolus who returned not home in half an hour. The Apothecary's man says it was
sent gilt, but the gilt was broken, and being suspected to be more in quantity
than was appointed, it was tasted, and it made their mouths sore that tasted
it, and then it being searched, there appeared a white powder in it. And it is
confessed that Cromwell came to Mrs. Bacon's shop and bought 2 drams of
Sublimate there, which he pretended to grave knives withal; and with a third
part thereof he then and there did engrave a knife, the other 2 parts he
carried away with him, of which he being questioned, denied the same, making
this excuse, that the asker was neither Constable nor Justice: and being
further questioned what he did with the rest of the Sublimate, he said it was
between the window and his desk, where a piece of Sublimate was found but not
the powder. Dr. Gifford did think that there was a mortification in his mouth.

Dr. Gifford did answer to 2 Objections made concerning the poison.

1. That the Corpse was outwardly fair. Resp. The evacuation did prevent the
coming of the poison to the skin.

2. It was said, the bottom of the stomach was not offended. Resp. The sides of
the stomach were offended, and the evacuation came so suddenly upon the taking
it, that it did not settle.

Dr. Andrews says, that he was called with others to view the body of Mr.
Lane, which they found outwardly fair, his lips only appearing white as if
they had been blistered. Some blackness there appeared in his mouth, and his
Tongue was black and hard, but from his throat to his stomach it was very fair:
The stomach its self in the bottom was fair; but the upper part had a
blackness, round about which it was inflamed; the blackness he scraped off with
his nail, but the other coats were sound. In the Aspera Arteria, there was seen
no offense, but one lobe of the Lungs seemed to be rotten; and one part of the
Liver was pale and scirrhous.

Dr. Meverell says, that he being on Saturday to view the body, he found an
Eschar between the gumms and the Cheek, with blackness of the teeth, the tongue
also black and hard, but the gula all fair and clear. In the Stomach in the
upper part, a circular inflammation with a blackness in the middle, which with
his nail was easily scraped off. His Liver was hard and his Lungs bad, yet not
so as that they should cause his death. At the Sessions he said the same, but
there the Lord Chief Justice asking him, that if the Circumstances which were
alleged by the sworn witnesses were added to that he saw whether then he
thought him poisoned; The Dr. answered, that he did think that he died of
poison.

Francis White, servant to Mr. Matthewes says, that hearing that the Bolus was
disliked, he went and did fetch back the Bolus; and that opening it he found
Sublimate in it, which he showed Cromwell; and after this, Francis going home,
Cromwell followed him, and wished him by Fleet-bridge to cast it away, which he
refused to do.

Dr. Gifford did further declare that Cromwell had 2 powders, one white which
was sublimate, the other black which was some Amalgama of Quicksilver, which
Cromwell said he had out of his Master's pocket. He did also desire the College
to take into their consideration what Scammony could do, whether by that the
mouth and stomach could be made black so suddenly, and to cause an Ulcer with
an Eschar upon the side of the mouth. After the forementioned examination of
several Witnesses, the following Letter by his Majesty's Order was sent to the
College.

To my very loving Friends the President and College of Physicians in London.
AFter my hearty commendations: You have by some other of his Majesty's
servants understood his pleasure, in that which now I must by his express
pleasure require of you: That you assemble together, and inform your selves as
particularly as you can; First, whether that man (for whose death one Cromwell
a young man is condemned) did in your judgment dye of poison or otherwise. And
secondly, whether that Potion which was sent from the Apothecary and which he
received, had any poysonable Ingredients which might produce this effect. In
these things you must return to his Majesty the report of your Judgment on
Friday at the farthest; which you must do with the more care according to your
best skill, because herein you may perceive how tender his Majesty is both of
his Justice and Mercy: for as he is always most graciously inclined to favor
when the offense is of a nature capable of remission; so he is no less
graciously severe in regard of Justice and public example, that the crying
Crimes of blood, and especially by poisoning, which has noe pretense of sudden
anger, shall not escape unpunished. Do therefore your duties to inform him in
the truth to the uttermost of your knowledge. So I rest

Your assured friend to do you service John Cook.
Greenwich 29 Maii 1632.

BY this second Letter the College was required to resolve two things.

First, Whether Mr. Lane died of poison or no?

Secondly, Whether the Potion which was made by the Apothecary, and taken by
Mr. Lane, had any poisonable Ingredients therein, which might produce this
effect.

Mr. President was desirous to hear what might further be informed by the
Assistants, Doctors, or any other: and first there presented himself

Mr. Francis Banister of Bedford; who came to Mr. Lane his Son-in-Law, on
Wednesday about 2 or 3 a clock in the afternoon. There he found the of Dr.
Gifford's Bolus, which he sent by Cromwell to Mr. Matthewes; who after some
long stay, brought it to Mrs. Lane, which she did presently deliver to this Mr.
Banister her Father; which he seeing, thought it more than was directed by the
Doctor; and presently taking it, he found it sharp, offending his tongue: Then
he sent for one Walter Mr. Matthewes his man, to whom he said, the Bolus was
not rightly prepared; and therefore caused him to go to make another Bolus
according to the direction: Which Bolus being brought Mr. Lane took, and it did
well with him: and Francis the Apothecary's man coming thither on Thursday
morning, Mr. Banister caused him to taste the Bolus, of which he presently
complained; and that night both the Apothecary's men came and showed him the
Sublimate in it, by which both their mouths were distated; and on this Thursday
Mr. Banister told Dr. Gifford, that there were the symptoms of Mercury, for
his evacuations were bloody, his tortions great, his mouth black, exulcerated,
stinking, and withal he had convulsions.

Mrs. Elizabeth Lane, sister to Mr. Lane, who was in the house from his first
falling sick, says, that upon Friday, upon the taking the purge, he presently
after half a dozen turns in a little room fell a vomiting, and vomited black
humor and blood, and that upon every stool he was ready to faint; and she
says, that Cromwell found fault with the maid for giving the Child Pills in
that Porringer out of which Mr. Lane took the Medicine.

Dr. Fox, before he would make report of what he knew in this business,
produced the Copy of a Report made by himself, Dr. Andrews, Dr. Meverell, and
Dr. Ramsey which was as follows.

We are of opinion that having found in this body some inflammation and
mortification, whereof must necessarily follow death, by the force of them, and
that yet the same inflammation and mortification might proceed from some other
causes; it cannot be resolved by Art, whether this Gentleman died by Poison or
other means. Which he pressed much to be assented to by the whole College (and
the other Doctors did acknowledge this Note to be the sense of that which they
subscribed unto) but the College thought fit a little to advise thereon.

Then Dr. Fox related that he was called to Mr. Lane by a stranger to him, and
that he found some passion in the house. After some time the body was opened,
and the mouth, gula and stomach were found so as has been formerly related:
and says that the Surgeon said the Guts were fair. Then Dr. Fox, as a
Censor, began to enquire after the Physic given to Mr. Lane, and who gave it;
and calling for Mr. Matthews he enquired of the Potion, by whom he was informed
what it was. After this, the Dr. coming to consult, soon found cause to suspect
poison. Dr. Andrews conceived otherwise, by whom Dr. Fox was partly led, and
the rather because the Apothecary was found to have given one irregular
medicine; and the Dr. related how one Ioslyne died by Physic given him upon an
old receipt of Mr. Butler's.

Dr. Ramsey says, that about Noon one told him his Neighbor Mr. Lane was
dead, upon which he went thither presently, and heard their complaint: and then
he looked upon his gumms and teeth. Next day he came to meet the other
Doctors, and found things as formerly have been related. And he acknowledged
that he set his hand to the Note formerly related, and thought all had been
done; but withal he protested that he was and is of opinion, that Mr. Lane was
poisoned.

Mr. Pindar, Mr. Coxe, Mr. Dixon, and Mr. Scot Chirurgions, being all at the
opening of the Body, do severally acknowledge the blackness and Eschar in the
mouth, and the mortification in the stomach; and Mr. Coxe says, that a quarter
of a yard beneath the Stomach he found an inflammation inclining to a blackness.

After this information had, Mr. President propounded to the Colleagues to give
their opinions whether Mr. Lane died of a violent death or naturally.

They every one severally were of opinion that he died a violent death upon
some external cause.

Secondly, Mr. President propounded to the Colleagues whether they thought him
to have been poisoned or not.

The Question being considered severally by the Fellows, 18 of them were of
opinion that he died of poison: but 4 of them (namely, Sir William Paddy, Dr.
Andrews, Dr. Crook, and Dr. Cademan) did impute his death to the medicine.

Thirdly, Mr. President desired the Colleagues opinions concerning the medicine
sent from the Apothecarie's, whether that had in it any poisonable thing, which
might produce such an effect.

To this all the Fellows with one consent made answer, that they could not give
a direct censure concerning the Potion delivered by the Apothecary, and made
without the direction of a Doctor: but if it were no other than pulvis Sanctus
formerly set down, that then they were of opinion that there was no poisonable
thing in it, which might produce such an effect.

But in the Bolus which remained there was found poison, and all the Fellows
did acknowledge it to be Sublimate.

Dr. Fox pressed the Colleagues for their opinion concerning the Note by him
exhibited; and their general opinion was, that they having had no proofs but
only the inspection of the body, they could not certify assuredly of the
poison.

Then Sir Theodore Mayerne was requested by the President and the College, to
draw up the opinion of the Colleagues to be presented to his Majesty and to send
it to Mr. President, which he accordingly performed: and the Friday following
it was delivered to his Majesty by Mr. President, Dr. Clement, Dr. Hodson and
Dr. Meverell at Greenwich, in these words.

The determination of the College concerning the Questions proposed to them by
the King's Majesty about the death of Joseph Lane.
THe College of Physicians in London being lawfully assembled by the command of
their Soveregin Lord the King, about certain questions proposed concerning the
death of Joseph Lane, reported to be killed by poison, and having made a
diligent search, and well considering all circumstances relating, 1. As to the
state of the body of the foresaid Lane; 2. As to the disease which (by a long
series of violent symptoms) brought him to his end; 3. As to the kind and
appearance of his death; 4. As to the observations made upon his dead body by
the Physicians and Chirurgions present; 5. As to the conjectures taken from the
strict examination of a Bolus extremely suspicious, whose parts were
artificially separated, found in Mr. Lane's house when dead, and after brought
into Court before the Judges, and from thence to the Physicians at their
College: To whom (by the command and in the name of the King) Letters were
wrote from the Right honorable Sir John Cook principal Secretary of State,
that they might diligently enquire and give a faithful account to the
following Questions. 1. Concerning Lane's death, whether it was procured from
poison? 2. Their opinion about a purging potion carried the 4th of April, 1632.
from Mr. Matthewes an Apothecary's shop to Mr. Lane's house, and taken by Lane
the 6th, whether it had any thing of poison in it? The College after very
mature deliberation, did humbly present the following Decree to his sacred
Majesty as a testimony of their obedience.

1. That the said Joseph Lane did certainly dye of a violent death. 2. That he
had taken poison, and that corrosive. 3. That they could determine nothing
certainly concerning the Potion sent and given by Mr. Matthewes the Apothecary
to Mr. Lane without the advice of any Physician, because many of their
medicines were too negligently prepared by their servants. But if that Potion
did only consist of those ingredients which he had given an account of, and for
which we have solely his word, then there was nothing of poison contained
therein. 4. In the remainder of the foresaid Bolus there was found Mercury
Sublimate, not sweet, but the most harsh and highly caustic, which was
separated from the rest of the Bolus and shown to the whole College; In
testimony whereof the College by the unanimous consent of the President and
Fellows and all present at this consultation, signed this Decree with their own
hands, and sealed it with the College Seal, that it might appear more
authentic.

And because that from the beginning of the world to this very day good and
wholesome Laws have derived their original from evil manners, the whole College
of Physicians do most humbly beseech your most Sacred Majesty that, as the
Father of your Country, you would consult the health and welfare both of your
City Subjects, and would by your Royal Proclamation strictly command that for
the future, No Grocer, Drugster, Apothecary, Chemist, or any other person
presume to sell Arsenick, Quicksilver, Sublimate, Precipitate, Opium,
Coloquintida, Scammony, Hellebore, or other Druggs either poisonous or
dangerous, to poor sorry Women or poor people (which has been too common) but
only to those who are willing to give their names; that if there should be
occasion, they may give an account of the reason of their buying these
dangerous medicines.

May it likewise please your Majesty to issue out your Royal Edict under the
most severe penalties, that no Apothecary for the future shall dare to compound
for the Well, or administer to the Sick any medicines, especially Vomits,
Purges, Opiates, Mercurial or Antimonial remedies without the prescription of
Physicians then living; which prescription they shall be bound to produce upon
the command or request of the Censors of the College. He that shall act
contrary, shall be punished by the Law as a public enemy to the life of man.
Dated from the College of Physicians in London the Last day of May, 1632. And
Subscribed,

Dr. Argent, President. Sir Theodore Mayerne, Dr. Atkins, Dr. Harvey, Dr.
Clement, Dr. Fox, Dr. Fludd, Dr. Ramsye, Dr. Grent, Dr. Cademan, Dr. Andrews,
Dr. Crook, Dr. Oxenbridge, Dr. Rand, Dr. Winston, Dr. Wright, Dr.
Chamberlayne, Dr. Hawlye.



Francis Roes, alias Vintner, was accused by William Clarke of ill practice,
who (as he affirmed) undertook to cure his wife of a Tympany, of which disease
Vintner told him he had cured 40. and amongst those named one Ingram's wife. He
had of Clarke 4 l. when he began, and 3 l. after for medicines, and 4 l. more
he was to have when he had perfected the Cure. Vintner did not deny the
accusation, and being demanded by what authority he practiced, he answered he
was a Physician and Student in Trinity College in Cambridge, of which College
he had been a year or two; and further said that he had been instructed in
Physic from a Boy by his Father, meaning Mr. Vintner the Empirick. Being asked
what medicines he gave Clark's wife and Ingram's; at first he refused to
discover them, saying he had them noted in his books; but after long
expostulation, he named Ialap and Elatorium (as he pronounced the word) and
being questioned what Elatorium was made of, he said it was composed of 3 or 4
things, whereof Diagridium was one. He was censured for giving Elaterium (a
medicine he knew not) and particularly to a woman at his own house, whom he
afterward sent home through the open streets, telling her it was a Cordial. He
was fined 10 l. and committed to Prison.

Richard Hammond, Surgeon, was complained of by John Walton, for that he
undertook to cure his child of a Dropsy being 9 or 10 years old. He gave him a
Clyster, after which he fell into a looseness and died. Hammond confessed that
he gave the Child a Clyster made of Ale, Molossos, and white Hellebore, which
wrought so violently that the Boy died therewith. Walton likewise affirmed that
there was a red powder in the Clyster, which he judged to be red Mercury. For
this ill practice he was fined 5 l. and committed to the prison of the Compter
in Woodstreet.

James Virott, Apothecary, was accused by the Wardens of the Apothecary's
Company for decayed and ill medicines found in his Shop, which they brought.
The Censors refused to take any notice thereof, because they had not visited
his Shop which they promised speedily to do, and accordingly within a few days
they with the Wardens did visit it, and destroyed his corrupt and ill medicines.

Mr. President made complaint of the Apothecaries disrespect in general and in
particular of Mr. Smith's, who being served with a Sub-poena to appear as a
Witness in a College cause, neglected to come. Whereof being reproved by Mr.
President, that it was an affront to the College, he told him he might take it
as he pleased; and being advised by Dr. Harvey to come to the President to
compose this breach, Smith told him that he seared no body under the degree of
a Privy Counselor for any good or harm. Upon this complaint, it was thought
fit to put it to the table, whether Mr. Smith should be excommuned for using
Mr. President so unworthily, till such time as he should reconcile himself to
the President and the College; By scrutiny he was excommuned, till he should so
reconcile himself. About 3 weeks after, Mr. Smith came to excuse the offense
done to the President, and declared himself sorry that he should give any such
offense, and craved the favor of the President and College; wherefore his
suspension was remitted, and he again entertained into the favor of the
College.

Susan Dry was complained of for giving Physic to one Margaret Fox, to whom
she gave drinks of 10 s. a bottle. She gave physic to one Matthew Evans, of
whom she had 2 s. 6 d. in money; with an Apron and Pillow-bear: She took
another Woman's Ruff. She was committed for evil practice and fined 3 l. Upon
her submission Mr. President took 30 s. of her and released her. He delivered
the money to the Beadle, the most of which was distributed to pious uses.

In the 9th year of this King's reign, the College by advice of their Council
sent the following Letter to the Master, Wardens, and Fellowship of the
Apothecaries concerning the examination of their servants in order to their
freedom.

WHereas by your Charter, your Apprentices are to be examined and allowed by
the President, or one or more of the College which he shall appoint, before
they can be made free of the City of London; It has been thought fit by our
College for more convenience for you and us to appoint their examination to be
by the President or such as he shall appoint in that behalf in our College on
our ordinary Censors days, which are the first Fridays of every month, days
usual for the examination of University men: where if you shall present them at
the hour of 2 a clock in the afternoon they shall be examined without any
further trouble.


Mr. Briscoe, Apothecary, appeared before the President and Censors, being
accused that he had given one Mr. Primrose 2 drams of troch. de Alkakengi
instead of 2 drams of troch. Gordonii, appointed by Dr. Johnson, without asking
the Doctour's opinion therein. He confessed it was his fault, but when he gave
it, he knew not whether it were with Opium or no; and he could not deny but
that he said he had troch. Gordonii, when indeed he had not; and also that he
pressed the Dr. to give Mr. Primrose some Diacodium, which the Dr. refused to
do; and he confesses that he would have given it him all, but he took but half
thereof; and he further says, that Mr. Primrose lived 4 days after taking the
medicine. He also presented the Note of his Censure in the Apothecaries hall as
follows.

24 Martii. 1634.
Thomas Hicks, Master; Edward Cook, James Fothergill, Wardens; Gideon de Laune,
Richard Edwards, Leonard Stone, Abraham Webb, Roger Harry Young, Henry Field,
William Shambrooke, Richard Glover, John Sotherton.
WHereas John Briscoe is complained of to this Court for falsifying a Bill of
Dr. Johnson 's for James Primrose, who was dangerously sick of an Ulcer in his
Kidneys and Bladder, whereby his death was hastened (as is reported by diverse
Doctors) forasmuch as it appeared by the said Briscoe's own confession that he
did falsify the Bill of the said Dr. Johnson, viz. by putting into the Potion
prescribed troch. Alkakengi cum Opio, for troch. Gordonii, without the consent
of the Doctor, which is a breach of the orders of this Company; It is ordered
that the said Briscoe shall pay unto this Company for a fine for so falsifying
the said Bill or Prescript, 5 Marquis, according to the ordinances of this
Company, and for further punishment he shall be put off from being of the
Clothing of this Company.

Tho. Tailor Clericus Societati Pharmacop.

The Censors are willing to defer the Censuring of this business till they have
conferred with their Council.

The President and Censors considering that there was some difference between
the Fellows concerning the permitting of interdicted Apothecaries to make
medicines upon their Prescripts; It was agreed and ordered, that excepting
cases of absolute necessity, no fellow should give way to any interdicted
Apothecary to make his medicine, till they should be reconciled.

John Hope an Apothecarie's Apprentice.

The Coroner of London complained, that a person was suspected to be poisoned
by an Apothecarie's man with a Potion given by him; He desired the Censors to
examine the Case, which was the following.

Elizabeth Vaughan of Puddle Wharf, the Widow of Rowland Vaughan deceased,
complains, that her late husband being not very well went to Mr. Elliot's the
Apothecarie's house, whom he found not within, but found his man John; to whom
the said Vaughan said, There is no looking upon your Master under 2 s. 6 s. and
the said John answered, he might have a Medicine better cheap: but Vaughan
said, it must be a strong one, for he had a strong body. So the said John gave
him 2 Apples of Coloquintida directing him to boil them in white Wine, putting
thereto some Cinnamon and Nutmeg; which his wife accordingly did, and gave it to
her husband about 7 a Clock next morning, which wrought not till 11 at night,
but then he grew extreme sick in his belly, and cried out he could not live 2
days, the Medicine wrought both upward and downward; upward he vomited a fatty
matter, and downward he voided a pottle of blood. About 4 in the afternoon Mrs.
Vaughan went to Mr. Elliot's house crying for her husband, but Mr. Elliot
himself made strange thereof: but understanding that he had taken the infusion
of Coloquintida, it is said that he said he would not have given it to the
Devil; but he directed her to boil some milk and to give it him presently: But
John, Mr. Elliot's Apprentice, came home after her, and caused her to fetch
some red Rose leaves, and 3 ounces of honey, which he boiled in milk and put it
up for a Clyster, which he put up about 11 at night, and Master Vaughan died
about 7 the next morning. Besides the Clyster he also gave him half an ounce of
Syrup of Coral in some Carduus water.

John Hope, Apprentice to Mr. Elliot, being then present, acknowledged the
giving the 2. Apples of Coloquintida in the manner aforesaid: and he further
confessed that he had sold 12 Apples of Coloquintida to diverse women, who used
to boil them in white Wine, since he has dwelt with Mr. Elliot, which is about
2 years and a half.

The Censors sending for the parties examined, did particularly consider of the
practice of John Hope, Apprentice to Mr. Elliot, upon the body of the said
Rowland Vaughan, by giving him the decoction of 2 Apples of Coloquintida, and
adjudged the same to be evil practice in the highest degree, and such as did
transcend the Censure of our College, and therefore they did remit it in all
humility to the higher Courts of Justice. Upon which this Testimony following
was given to the said Elizabeth Vaughan.

WHereas this 9th. of May, 1635. Elizabeth Vaughan complained at the College,
that her late Husband Rowland Vaughan had taken the decoction of 2 Apples of
Coloquintida by the direction of John Hope Apprentice to Michael Elliot
Apothecary; These are to certify that we the sworn Censors for this year,
namely, Dr. Fludd, Dr. Winston, Dr. Hodson, Dr. Spicer do affirm, that it was
evil practice in the highest degree, and transcending the Censure of our
College; and therefore we remit it in all humility to the higher Courts of
Justice. This was the Act of the Censors the day and year above written.

Quod testor Guliel. Clement Med. Dr. Regestar. Collegii Medicorum London.

Mr. President desired that diligent search might be made after the sellers of
purging Diet-Ales, and such Comfit-makers as sold purging Confections.

Dr. Mayerne wrote a Letter to Mr. President complaining of Mr. Evans a
Minister who had abused his name about his Antimonial Cup; Upon which 4 Fellows
of the College were sent to the Archbishop of Canterbury to acquaint his Grace
therewith, and with the import of Sir Theodore Mayern's Letter. After this
Evans was brought before the High Commission, where the Archbishop asked him
for his Orders, which he had not then present. He then caused him to be sworn
to answer to such Articles as should be objected against him. His Grace was
highly displeased at the printing of his Book, of which all that could be found
were taken away. The College Beadle was to help to find out more, that they
might be destroyed. Sir Nathanael Kitch dyed of a Vomit made by this Antimonial
Cup. The Lady Amye Blunt died by the same Medicine in Charter House yard.
Another case of the same kind was reported by Dr. Harvey.

Mr. President admonished the Fellows, that none of them should send their
Bills to the discommuned Apothecaries; who were the following, viz. Mr.
Edwards, Mr. Cook, Mr. Weal, Mr. Haughton, Mr. Holland, and Mr. Kendall.

In the 10th. of this King's Reign, Dr. Winterton, Professor of Physic in
Cambridge, wrote the following Letter to Dr. Fox, President of the College,
concerning the University's giving Licenses or Degrees in Physic to unworthy
and unfit persons.

To the Right Worshipful and my much honored friend Dr. Fox, President of
the Physicians College, at his house in Carter lane, give these.
My service and best respects remembered.
MAster President and my much honored friend, Whereas I am given to understand
that you have heard that the last year I would not give way to two or three
for the obtaining a License to practice in Physic, nor to a Doctor of Leyden
to be incorporated with us without giving public testimony of his abilities,
and I further understand that your self and the whole College are well pleased
therewith, I have cause to rejoice: and further thought fit at this time to
acquaint you with my real intentions, which I shall eagerly prosecute, if I may
have countenance and assistance. I have observed and grieved to see sometimes a
Minister, sometimes a Serving-man, sometimes an Apothecary, oftentimes Masters
of Arts (whereof some have afterward assumed holy Orders) admitted to a
License to practice in Physic, or to be incorporated to a Degree without
giving any public testimony of their learning and skill in the Profession.
And what has followed hereupon? The Minister has neglected his own Calling
and trespassed upon another, not without endangering the Souls of the people
of God, and the loss of the Lives of many of the King's subjects. The
Serving-man and Apothecary upon a License obtained have been presently made
Doctors by the breath of the people, and Doctors indeed undervalued. Masters of
Arts after License obtained have taken, as I said, holy Orders, that if one
profession did fail them, another might supply them. And Incorporation being
in an instant obtained by a little sum of money, which by orderly proceeding
(I speak concerning the Doctor's Degree) would cost 12 years study in the
University, besides performance of exercises and much expense; It is come to
pass, that in the University at this time I do protest I do not know any one
that intends the study of Physic, and practice thereof according to the
Statutes. Surgeons and Apothecaries are sought unto, and Physicians seldom
but in a desperate case are consulted with, when the Patient is ready to dye,
and in this kind we have too many examples. The consideration of these
mischiefs redounding to the Church, Commonwealth, University and our
Profession, has often troubled me, when I had no power to prevent them. But
now seeing it has pleased God and the King to confer such power upon me,
that without me neither License nor Degree in Physic can be obtained at
Cambridge, (for I have solicited Dr. Nichols and Dr. Allet to join with me;
and I have prevailed so far with them, that they will do nothing without
me) I do intend by the grace of God to give way unto noe man to obtain a
License or Degree without keeping an Act at the least, etc. unless it shall
happen that with some one particular man it shall be dispensed withal by
supreme Authority or in some extraordinary case.

But all this will be to little purpose, unless your self and the College
will solicit Dr. Clayton, his Majesty's Professor of Oxford, and others of
the faculty there, to do the like; or rather Petition to my Lord's Grace of
Canterbury, who out of his innate goodness and clemency, and zeal for the
good of the Church and Commonwealth, and the honor of the Universities, I am
fully persuaded, will grant what you desire, against Apothecaryes and
Chirurgions, and all others which without License or authority do practice
Physic. I could wish there were some course taken; I know there be already
good Laws, if they were put in execution.

Thus much in haste, (as you may perceive by my writing) I thought good to
signify unto you, out of the grateful respect which I bear unto your self
and the whole College, tendering the honor of our common Profession, which I
will maintain as much as in me lies, and vindicate from the invasions of
Usurpers and Intruders. I have exceeded I fear the bounds of a Letter, but
that you will pardon, I hope, considering the occasion. And so with a
grateful acknowledgment of your love and favor toward me, and an ingenuous
profession of much service I owe unto you, I take my leave, as one that will be
ready, upon the least signification, to embrace your commands, and execute them
with all alacrity.

Yours in all dutiful respects, Ralphe Winterton.
From the King's College in Cambridge, Aug. 25. 1635.

Mary Butler was complained of for giving Physic; she undertook the cure of
the dead Palsy on a Woman, of whom she had 10 li. and also a promise of 10 li.
more when the Cure was performed, for which she sued the party. After this, she
was complained of by one Mrs. Ellison for taking upon her to give Physic, and
in particular for undertaking to cure her the said Ellison, to whom she gave C
s. in hand with promise of as much more when she performed the Cure; but this
was so far from being obtained, that she was never well since she took her
medicines. Mary Butler denied not that she gave her Physic, but professed that
she learnt her skill of a Jew: and first avowed that she was authorized to
practice Physic by Mr. Endymion Porter, and Sergeant Clowes; and when she
understood that they could not license her so to practice, she stick'd not to
affirm, that she had authority from the King; and for the evidence and proof
thereof, showed a Writ under Seal out of the Courts at Westminster for
attaching one that had not paid her for a Cure she pretended to have done:
which Seal she made her Neighbors believe was a License for her practicing of
Physic. She confessed she gave Physic to Mr. Richard Shipwright from
Christmas till this present, and so continues still. She has given him inward
medicines, and likewise cupped and scarified him: she caused him to be let
blood in the forehead, and under the tongue and in the foot: and so she
directed Mr. Whittel the Surgeon now dwelling in Croched Friars. For which her
pains and physic she has had already C. s. and is to have a C. s. more when
he is well. The Censors thought fit to send her to Newgate for these
misdemeanors, and fined her xv. li.

John Hogsflesh, Surgeon, was accused by several for giving Physic, having no
skill nor authority so to do. Others complained of his giving purging Physic
and Mercurial Unctions, particularly one Anne Harvey made complaint for giving
her husband physic for the Pox, who died of that physic with his mouth full
of Ulcers. He had considerable sums of money from many; And was charged for
giving to one John Gladwin 3 pills every other day for twice, whereupon he
vomited so vehemently, that his sight and hearing failed him for a time. This
was proved by his own Letters as well as by Gladwin and his Wife, and a third
person. The Censors condemned him to prison and fined him 10 li.

In the 12th. year of the King's Reign, an Order was sent to the College from
the Star Chamber, to examine the pretended Cures of one Leverett, who said that
he was a seventh Son, and undertook the curing of several Diseases by
stroaking. A full and particular account of this whole affair is the following.

At the Star Chamber, the 20th. of October, 1637.
Present Lord Archbishop of Cant. Lord Keeper, Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal,
Earl of Dorsett, Lord Cottington, Lord Newburghe, Mr. Treasurer, Mr.
Comptroller, Mr. Secr. Coke, Mr. Secr. Windebank.

WHereas upon the complaint of Mr. Sergeant Clowes against one Leverett a
Gardener, for practicing and taking upon him to cure the King's Evil and all
other Diseases, the said Leverett was this day convented before the Board, and
heard in whatsoever he could allege for himself; Their Lordships conceiving
his pretended Cures to be Impostures, did then order that the President and
some of the principal Members of the College of Physicians should be hereby
authorized and required forthwith to call the said Leverett before them, and to
examine his said pretended Cures, as well upon such information and proofs as
shall be given them by Mr. Sergeant Clowes, as by any other ways and means
which they shall think fit for discovery of the truth. And likewise to cause
him to make experiment of his said Cures in their presence, and thereupon to
make Certificate to this Board of what they shall find appear before them, and
of their opinions concerning the same; and in the mean time the said Leverett
is to continue in the Messenger's Custody.

Ex. Edw. Nicholas.

3o Novembris, 1637.
Present Dr. Fox, President, Dr. Argent, Dr. Harvey, Dr. Caddiman, Dr. Smith,
Dr. Winston, Dr. Hodson, Dr. Meverell, Dr. Spicer, Censors.

This day there was brought by Mr. Harvey, Counselor of Gray's Inn, an Order
from the Lords dated the 20th. of October last, concerning the practice of one
Leverett, who there appeared at the same time, together with diverse Men, Women
and Children that he said he had cured, and prayed the College to examine them.
The College answered that it was not in their order to look back, but to go
forward, and therefore wished the Patients for that time, that they would
forbear and leave the said Leverett according to the Lords direction to the
College, which they did, the College then promising that they would take a time
to examine them likewise.

Mr. President at the same time presented several Articles of Mr. Sergeant
Clowes against this Leverett, of all which he was examined; and first he was
demanded whether he was committed to the custody of a Messenger; he answered he
came of his own accord.

He says that he is 60 years of age, that he is the 7th. Son of 8 his Father
had, and the 9th. which was last, was a Daughter named Anne, but he did not
challenge any virtue by being the 7th. Son.

He says likewise that about 3 years since and a half he did his first Cure
upon his own Wife, who had been full of pain 3 quarters of a year from her
Wrist to her Elbow: In all which time although he did live with her, yet he
never touched her Arm, till at last upon her entreaty she desired him to take
off the splints and rowlers and look on it, which he did; that being bound up
by a Surgeon, he felt it and sought for Kernels, but found none. His Wife found
present ease and therefore desired him to hold her by the Wrist, which he
refused, but she earnestly desiring it, saying she felt ease, he did it, and
the next day she was perfectly cured of her pain and was weeding in his Garden.

Some 6 months after, a Maid dwelling in Thames Street was his second Patient;
who desired to be touched by him for a pain in her Elbow, which he did, and she
was cured. The third was a Woman in Turn-ball Street, who coming to him and
craving his help for a pain in her Arm, he answered she was a foolish Woman;
but she said, God had given him the gift of healing. So by her importunity she
prevailed that he touched her, and she was very well: their names he knows
not.

In the touching of these he did not use any words, nor till he had cured above
a dozen; but since, he has used these words, God give a blessing, I touch, God
heals. He says that upon touching some 30 or 40 in a day, he finds himself
weakened by the Virtue which goes out of him, more than when he was a Gardener
by digging up 8 roods of ground; so that he is brought to that weakness by
touching, that he is forced to go to his bed to recover his strength, which in
his daily labor he was not wont to do.

He says, he is not always disposed to touch, especially if his hands be cold.
He says he has cured 300 at the least, he takes money for his Cures, but not
by contract; if he should not take money, he might starve, having forsaken his
Trade by the calling of God. He denies Virtue to be either in his Gloves or
Linen, or any thing that touches his naked body, although that was then
objected against him.

He says that whilst he dwelt at Ratcliff he was assaulted in the Highway one
evening by some Surgeons or Physicians, and his Thumb was wrung and strained;
but by his own touching he cured it; and that he stood in fear of his life from
some Physicians and Surgeons, but of whom he knows not.

He cures the King's Evil, Dropsies, Fevers, Agues, all Diseases and Sores in
any part of the body, but he promises not any Cure to any, as he is a Sinner,
but God cures and he does his duty.

He says that he touches none above twice or thrice, and that the first time
they find ease and good effect of his touching.

He was commanded by the College to attend the Tuesday following, which was 8o
Novembris, and was promised to have diverse provided by the College for him to
touch. He seemed to be very joyful at it, and insisted that they might be of
the King's Evil, for that he had cured those that the King had touched, and
also some of them under the Surgeons hands, which could not be cured by them.

8o Novembris, 1637.
Present Dr. Fox, President, Sir Simon Baskervile, Dr. Ridgley, Dr. Smith, Dr.
Argent, The 4 Censors, Dr. Clark.

This day he retracts that any Virtue goes out of him, but says he is grown
weak by touching, which is as much in effect. He says he must touch 4 or 5
times before they be cured. He professes himself at this time to be in good
disposition to touch; Whereupon one Richard George, aged about 23 years, and
who had complained about 2 years of a tumor in his right knee, was presented
to him to be touched. When he saw his knee, he seemed to be discontented, and
asked if it were not out of joint; he was answered that it was not. He lamented
that the College did not, according to promise, present to him those that were
troubled with the Evil; yet in fine he touched this George. He began with these
words, I do not promise any Cure, God Cures, God give a blessing, I do but my
duty. Then bowing down and laying both his hands a little above the knee,
stroaking it down, he said to the Patient, You must pray to God to give a
blessing to my hands that they may take effect: And so he touched and said,
very softly, God bless, I touch, God heals. These words he repeated twice or
thrice, still stroaking downwards, and then spoke to the Patient with some
iterated vehemence to pray to God to give a blessing to his hands. In putting
on the Linen to his knee, the Patient touched his own knee with his fingers,
whereat he grew into Choler, and said that he had spoiled all, for neither he
nor any body else must touch it, nor any Oils nor Ointments nor Plasters must
come upon it, and so he touched it twice as before, and repeated the words 6
times again. Then he wiped his hand about the cloth on both sides, and so
pinned the Linen about his knee himself, and commanded him not to touch it
again till himself should see it. And likewise that the Patient should pray to
God for a blessing upon his hand, that his hand might take effect. And further
commanded the Patient to drink no small beer but strong, nor wash his hands or
face in cold water, but warmed.

The second Patient was Elizabeth Appleton, aged about years; she was all
swelled in the Neck and under the Ears, which is the King's Evil. To which
Patient he said as he did to Rich. George the first Patient, only he seemed to
cross her Cheek and Neck, where the knots and tumors were.

10o Novembris, 1637.
Present Dr. Fox, Dr. Gifford, 4 Censors, Dr. Ridgley.

This day Leverett appeared, who professed that he was indisposed to touch.

He touched Rich. George and Eliz. Appleton the second time.

Also Judith True, who had a running sore in her breast. Hester Fisher, and
Sarah Anderson ulcerated and tumify'd fingers.

Henry Welsh was presented then to him to be touched for a pain in his left
hand, from which arose vapors sometimes, which brought him into Convulsion
fits; of which Disease Leverett said he had cured some Patients, but he denied
to touch the said Welsh, saying that he did not know but there might be some
mischief in his hand that might do him harm: Yet at the same time he would
have touched one whom he appointed to meet him at the College, that was
troubled (as the party said) with Convulsion fits; but the College would not
suffer him to be touched in their presence, till it did appear to them that he
was really troubled with those Fits.

His touching of Sores is different from the former tumors; for first he lays
his whole hand, and says his charm or words thrice; then he puts constantly the
top of his middle finger and repeats his Charm thrice more, and so till he has
done 9 times.

The binding up is different, for he takes a piece of Cloth and wreaths it into
a Circle, then he puts that over the sore, so that the Cloth touches it not.
And herein he is very curious that it touch not the sore. Then he binds a
broader Cloth all over it, and exhorts the Patient to pray to God his hand may
take effect.

14o Novembris, 1637.
Present Dr. Fox, President. 4 Censors.

This day he touched all that he had touched the 10th. day, and also the
foresaid Henry Welsh, and likewise one Tho. Scamodye who had a tumor in his
foot.

This day Richard George desired he might be no more touched, for that his Leg
and Foot did begin much to swell, which was not swelled before; his knee did
not abate in swelling, and his pain there was much greater than it had been 6
months before, but he was persuaded by the College to try further.

17o Novembris, 1637.
Present Dr. Fox, President, Dr. Argent, 4 Censors.

This day Welsh desired that he might be no more touched by Leverett, for that
the said Welsh was for 5 hours after Leverett's touching benumbed in his hand
and amazed in his head.

Leverett was expected till after 4 of the Clock, having promised to come with
the Messenger.

Also Sergeant Clowes came this day to the College and brought diverse
Certificates with him; but the College entreated him to bring the parties
themselves the Tuesday following, which was the 21th, which he promised.

21o Novembris, 1637.
Present Dr. Fox, President, Dr. Argent, Dr. Gifford, 4 Censors, Dr. Harvey,
Sir Simon Baskervile, Dr. Cadyman, Dr. Ridgley.

This day Leverett appeared, and excused his absence on the 17th, saying he was
not now disposed to touch. Being asked, Why not himself, as well as his finger?
He answered nothing.

He says that among his words he never uses the name of Jesus or Jesus
Christ; the reason he would not give.

Mr. Clowes was expected according to promise, but came not. Leverett was
(according to his own desire) willed to come the 25th. following, and to bring
6 Patients along with him, whom he said he had heretofore cured.

25o Novembris, 1637.
Present Dr. Fox, President, 4 Censors, Dr. Cadyman, Dr. Argent, Dr. Smith,
Hamey, Goddard, Sheafe.

William Butts, Messenger, presented Leverett to the College, and Leverett
brought diverse with him, 3 whereof were examined by those present, as he
presented them. The first was Robert Monday, Son of Richard Monday of Chelsey,
Waterman, aged about 8 years, for a Sore (as was conceived by the College a
Bile) under his left Arm. He says that he had been Patient to Cook a
Surgeon, and was healed by the said Cook; Yet afterward the sore brake forth
again, but not deep: Leverett touched him 4 times, and the party says, he put
a brown paper upon it; Leverett said it was a linen cloth.

Richard Monday, the Father of the said Robert, aged 37 years, says that his
Child had the sore for one year and a half. He was touched 3 times in less than
a months space, but his Wife knew better: He put a cloth on it, Leverett
wrapped his Child's hands in a cloth lest he should touch it; It was dried up
in a quarter of a years time as it began. Leverett took no money for his Cure.

Elizabeth Monday, Mother to the said Child, aged 29 years, says, that her
Child was sore about 12 months, it brake of it self; Cook the Surgeon gave her
salve, which almost cured it. Then it brake forth again; Leverett touched it 3
times in 9 days, and so it wore away and dried up by degrees betwixt April and
Midsummer. Leverett used words in touching.

The second Patient was Elizabeth May, Daughter to Martin May, aged about 11
years. She says, that she had the King's Evil in her eyes 7 years, with scales
in her face, which hung by Geometry. She learned that word from her Father. Her
head likewise brake forth, and was well and ill of it self. Leverett laid his
hands only on her eyes and bid her serve God. Leverett touched her 3 times in
9 days, and 3 days intermission between every time. She fell into a looseness
before he touched her. She had been with the King 2 years before, and carries
the Angel still, but was not well by the King's touching, but within 9 days
after Leverett touched her, she was well.

Martin May, Father of the said Elizabeth, dwelling in Soper-lane, Cook,
says, He was Host to Leverett half a year, and that Leverett touched her many
times, but how often he knows not.

The third Patient was Peter Norris, aged 6 years. Leverett says that he had
the King's Evil in his left eye. He says he has touched it many times, but
the Child says it is not yet well, and it so appeared unto the College.

28o Novembris, 1637.
Present Dr. Fox, President, 4 Censors, Dr. Argent.

This day Sergeant Clowes brought with him diverse persons which signed the
Certificate following.

Accusations laid to the charge of James Leverett an Impostour and cousener of
the King's people, under pretense of being the 7th. Son of a 7th. Son, by
curing or healing all manner of Diseases, especially the King's Evil, by way of
stroaking or touching with his hand, without the using of any Medicines either
internal or external.
HE blasphemously says when he stroaketh any to cure them, there goes out of
him Imprimis,
so much virtue and strength, that he does not recover it in so many days, to
the great dishonor of God.

2. He scornfully slighteth his Majesty's sacred gift of healing (by his
blessed hand) that Disease commonly called the King's Evil, in comparison of
his cure, to the dishonor of his Majesty amongst his Subjects.

3. He says he cannot touch any (to heal them) until he find a disposition to
it, by the working of one of his hands, and that hand must not be touched by
any hand, except it be to put a Pipe of Tobacco or an Angel into it.

4. He says the Sheets wherein he has layen are a special remedy for many
Diseases (especially the rising of the Mother) and that many Lords and Ladies
have made suit to lie in them, and to my knowledge they have been tried to no
purpose.

5. He says that he goes in fear that the Physicians and Surgeons of London
will murder him, and dare scarce drink with any man for fear of poisoning, for
which he is the more followed.

6. He has contemptuously used his juggling tricks since he was before the
Lords of the Council convicted as a Delinquent.

7. Since great Lords and Ladies and Gentlemen and rich men have fondly gone
unto him, whereof many of them to my own knowledge are blushingly ashamed, yet
if it may appear and be proved by any man, That any man, this man, the 7th.
Son, or any Son can do it, I think it not fit that his Majesty's Royal Person
should be troubled and his health endangered by such unwholesome and noisome
people, as many of them be, when it may be done by any other.

All these things before written have been credibly reported to me by honest
men, of very good credit, who have been abused by him, and are ready to
testify upon their oath if it shall be required; and I conceive it to be my
duty and office to call it to examination, which I leave to your grave and
learned considerations.

And rest at your service, W. Clowes, Sergeant Surgeon to his Majesty.

THese are to certify whom it may concern, that about 16 or 18 months now past,
coming to Leverett with my Child; Leverett used these words in my hearing, to
some there present, viz. Do you see this fool? He left me and went to the King
for the cure of his Child, but I will now make him stay my leisure before I
touch him; and so caused me to stay 2 or 3 days, and then touched my Child 3
times upon 3 several days, which did my Child no manner of good, as I conceive.
And further, Leverett would reprove any one sharply that offered to touch his
hand, saying that virtue went out of him when he was touched. And when
Leverett's hands grew hot and began to sweat, he would say, Now I must go to
work. And I further certify that the said Leverett willed me by any means to
stop up my Child's issue and take off the Angel, pretending that he the said
Leverett would do the cure: which issue I did stop for 3 days, and it was like
to have cost my Child's life. Nov. 28. 1637.

Edward Pate.


THese are to certify whom it may concern, that James Leverett, by profession a
Gardener, has heretofore undertaken to cure all diseases with the touch of his
hand, but more particularly the King's Evil, which he did undertake to cure in
my Child, pretending that he would take no money, nor make any bargain: But I
did find by the carriage and passage of all his proceedings, that he did intend
and expect nothing more than money and profit; for notwithstanding he had
sufficient security by the promise of a friend for his satisfaction when he had
done his work, yet he would constantly perform nothing in the Cure as was
expected, unless he were daily fed with Wine and Tobacco, and other gifts, as
also with much entreaty; for his pretense was (in these words) that if he
should touch so often, he should feel virtue and strength go from him so much
that he could not go up stairs to his bed but upon all four. But I think it was
rather Drink and Tobacco that did weaken, than any virtue that could go from
such a deceiver; for I can prove that he was so drunk upon a Sunday some 3 or 4
months past, that he was fain of necessity to creep up stairs to his bed upon
his hands. And I do think he is a mere Impostour and Cousener of the King's
Subjects. Nov. 14. 1637.

Moreover, I was present when he would not touch a Maid unless she would kiss
him, to which she did offer her self.

Tho. Clowes.


THese are to certify whom it may concern, that having been in company with
James Leverett, I have heard him utter such words as these; How that after he
had touched several parties in the day time, he found such a weakness to
possess him at night, that he was not able to get up stairs to bed without the
help of his hands. And this I will affirm if I should be called to answer upon
my Oath.

Samuel Turner.


THese are to certify whom it may concern, that James Leverett some months
since promised the cure of a Tettar upon my right hand, which he would do by
way of touching my hand. I told him I did not believe he could do me any good
by that means, the infection being in my Liver. He replied, that he could do by
way of touching my breast, and could give me as many stools as the cause
required, by the way of touching with his hands. And he often touched my hand
and breast, yet did me no good at all, nor had no purging operation. For his
pains he received 10 s. To speak truth I do believe this Leverett to be a mere
Impostor, and one that daily abuses his Majesty's Subjects.

Witness my hand the 15th day of Nov. 1637. G.


THese presents certify whom it may concern, that James Leverett, who named
himself so to be, some days since promised the Cure of a sore Breast which my
Wife had, and likewise my daughter of the King's Evil by way of touch with his
hand, which he made trial of. Notwithstanding which they found no benefit
thereby. For which his undertaking he received 20 s. of me. This fellow I
believe to be a mere Mountebank and deceiver of his Majesty's people.

Witness my hand the 15th of Nov. 1637. Robert South.


An exact Note taken the 12th of November, 1637. out of the Register book of
the Parish of St. Clements East-cheap, London, as follows, viz.
Samuel Leverett, Butcher, was married to Agnes Whitaker, 13 Febr. 1576. His
Childrens names are as follows,
1. John Leverett his first Son was baptized the 20th of July, 1577. 2. Henry
Leverett his second Son was baptized the 20th of December, 1579. 3. William
Leverett his third Son was baptized the 20th of January, 1582. 4. James
Leverett his fourth Son was baptized the 19th of September, 1585. 5. Henry
Leverett his fifth Son was baptized the 16th of October, 1586. 6. Simon
Leverett his sixth Son was baptized 16 Feb. 1588. 7. Anne Leverett daughter of
the said Samuel was baptized 17 Ian. 1590.

This Register was searched from the time of his marriage, and before, many
years, to the time of his death, who was buried in the said Parish the 8th of
May, 1621. and so never had any other wife.

By me David Morris Clerk of St. Clement's East-cheap.
Geo. Brom Officer of the College of Physicians London.

The humble answer of the President and College of Physicians London to the
Lords and others of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council concerning
James Leverett of Chelsey Gardener, aged (as he says) about 60 years.
May it please your Lordships,
THat according to your Honors order dated the 20th day of October last, we
the said President and Fellows of the College of Physicians have called before
us the said James Leverett, whom we find by the Certificate annexed, to be the
4th Son of one Simon Leverett late of St. Clements East-cheap Butcher deceased,
and examined him and made trial of him 6 several days according to his own
appointment concerning his 3 years and a half practice; for so long he pretends
to have had the gift of healing, and forsaken his trade, and lived by means
acquired by touching of diseased persons.

First he says, that when he began to take upon him to cure he used a bare
touching without words, but being told, by a woman (whose name he knows not)
that came to him to be touched for a pain in her Arm, that God had given him
the gift of Healing, he afterward used words whilst he was touching; but who
put those words into his mouth, or the certain time when or where, or to whom
he first used those words he will not confess.

Among many whom he pretends to have cured, he made choice of 3 of them, and
brought them and others with him to the College to be examined concerning the
Cure he had done upon them; namely, Robert Monday aged 8 years, the son of
Richard Monday Waterman, for a sore under his Arm, which 3 months after his
touching dried up of it self: Eliz. May aged 11 years for the King's evil in
her Eyes; She was cured by a flux of belly which happened before and continued
after: and Peter Norris aged 6 years, for the Evil, as is pretended, in the
left Eye, which is not yet well, as appears to us, nor bettered by his
touching, as the Child said. And likewise Sergeant Clowes brought some others,
as their Certificates annexed do show, whom he the said Leverett has formerly
touched, but none of these are bettered by his touching.

In obedience to your Honor's command, we have presented unto him 6 more,
which he touched, for that he desired to touch those, and especially if the
King have touched them: and he has touched those 6 diverse times in our
presence, according to his own appointed times, without the least contradiction
or interruption by us made, to which he promised, if not present cure, yet
ease; But we find that some of them immediately upon his first touching grew
worse, and desired the College that they might be no more touched by him. Yet
to remove all scruple and for the better satisfaction of your Lordships we
caused him to touch them again, albeit they were nothing bettered thereby when
they last appeared at the College, and therefore we remitted them to those who
formerly had them in cure.


The manner and fashion of his touching is as follows.

1. He observes in his touching to lay his hands in certain forms upon the
places affected.

2. He observes his own disposition of body or indisposition to touch; for if
his hands be cold he will not touch, or if he be ill affected in his body, as
he was the 17th of Nov. last, when he absolutely denied to touch any.

3. He mutters whilst he touches a certain number of set words, viz. God give
a blessing, I touch, God heals.

4. He touches the parts ill affected a certain number of times, as thrice,
thrice and thrice.

5. He covers the part himself with a Cloth, first wiping the Cloth on both
sides with his hands.

6. He exhorts the Patient to call upon God, that his hands may take effect.

7. He professes that what he does is by the special gift and calling of God,
and that he does but his duty in these practices.

8. In touching he never uses the blessed name of Jesus or Jesus Christ, and
denies to give his reason thereof.

9. After his touching he enjoins, that neither the Patient nor any other touch
it till he himself take off the cloth.

10. In touching of Sores, if the circled cloth do touch the Sore, then his
touching is in vain for that time, and he must touch again.

11. He commands the Patient that during the time of his cure no oils,
ointments or salve touch the cloth or the part affected.

12. He commands the Patient to eat the best meat, and to drink strong beer,
and to wash his hands and face in warm water, and in no case to touch cold
water.

13. He says he is the Seventh Son of the Eight his Father had.

To this superstition he adds first this blasphemy, viz. That upon touching he
does find virtue to go out of him, so as he is weakened more by touching 30 or
40 in a day, than when he dug 8 rods of ground in a day. And it is credibly
affirmed to us by a person of good reputation, that the said Leverett has
said, that if he touch a Female, he is much more weakened.

And lastly he adds scorn and contempt toward those whom the Sacred hand of
his Majesty has touched for the Evil, as appears by the Certificate of Mr.
Edward Pate.

We therefore the President and Fellows of the College of Physicians (in
contemplation of the premises, since it has pleased your Lordships by your
foresaid Order to command us to deliver our opinions therein) do conceive the
said Leverett to be an Impostor and a deceiver of over credulous people, who
are heartened in their credulity by an erroneous opinion of some prodigious
virtue inherent in a Seventh Son, which yet this Leverett is not. Also we
conceive his pretended Cures, with the manner of them, to be full of
Superstition and Sorcery, and not to savor of any skill of Physic or Surgery,
or the operation of natural causes. All which notwithstanding, we in all
humility submit to your Honors grave wisdoms and considerations, etc.

Simon Fox, John Argent, Tho. Winston, El. Hodson, Otwell Meverell, Ric. Spicer.
Censors.
Dat. 6. Dec. 1637.

A Doctor in Physic attempting a project to procure the sole and absolute
power, either to License, or approve of all the Midwives practicing in and
about London before their admittance; They presented a Petition to the
President and College of Physicians, the Copy of which is the following.

To the Right Worshipful the President and other Doctors of Physic, Fellows
of the College of Physicians within the City of London,
The humble Petition of diverse ancient Midwives in the City of London
Shows,

THat through the molestation of a Doctor in Physic by appointing them to
meet at his house once every month without authority, and with intention, as
they suppose, to bring about a project of his to have the sole Licensing of
them or approving of all such as shall hereafter be Licensed, out of an opinion
of himself and his own ability in the Art of Midwifery, implying a necessity of
using him and no other both in those cases, and in all other occasions that
shall happen to women with Child, presuming that he has more exact skill than
all the grave and learned Physicians in the Kingdom in those cases; for he
threatens that he shall not repair unto such Women as are distressed, whose
Midwives have refused to conform themselves to him.

Your Petitioners have been enforced to Petition to his Majesty and the most
Reverend the Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace for redress therein: And his
Majesty has most graciously hearkened unto the complaint, and referred the
same unto the Lord of Canterbury and Bishop of London, in whose Jurisdictions
and by whose authority they are and have been always licensed, to call the said
Doctor before them, and to take such course therein as shall befit.

And whereas they conceive the said Doctor has erred and been short in his
respect unto this grave and learned Society in such his peremptory assumption
of skill beyond them in all cases concerning Women with Child; And that as they
are informed other practisers in Midwifery have been examined upon the like
occasion by command from King James of ever blessed memory, in the very
business and Art of Midwifery;

They humbly desire your Worships to take the same now into consideration, and
so far to respect your Petitioners in this their humble and just complaint, as
to give them Certificate unto those Reverend Prelates that there is no such
necessity of depending upon the said Doctor more than upon any other
Physicians whom these Petitioners do desire to be free and at liberty to make
use of in all occasions requisite for their advice and help as well as of the
said Doctor, who for ought as they can discern by his carriage would
monopolize the whole practice among Childbearing Women, being a young man, to
the disparagement of all other Physicians and the enslaving of your Petitioners.


To this Petition the College returned the following answer, which was
delivered by the Midwives to the most Reverend the Archbishop of Canterbury
and the Right Reverend the Bishop of London.

May it please your Lordships,
UPon consideration taken of this Petition hereunto annexed, presented unto the
President and College of Physicians by the Midwives, We the College of
Physicians conceiving the said complaint to be grounded upon just grievance,
and to conduce to a general good, in the timely prevention of so growing an
inconvenience, Have particularly informed our selves concerning the said
business, and do certify that the like project was formerly attempted by
another, which is now intended by the Doctor, and therefore was referred by K.
James of blessed memory to the Lords of the Council, and by their Lordships to
the College of Physicians to certify their opinions thereof; who upon mature
deliberation made report to their Lordships of the unfitness of the said
proposition, there being no such custom ever used either here or in any other
Kingdom. Whereupon the same was rejected and died. And whereas we understand
that the said Doctor does ground his complaint upon the insufficiency of
Midwives, whom he would undertake to teach, though licensed by your Lordships
Officers, whom we do believe to be as careful in admitting of Midwives as they
are in other Kingdoms; Only we are informed that diverse do practice without
License, and some are Deputies to others, through whom we probably conceive
some abuses to grow, because their abilities and honesty of lives and
conversations are not testified upon oath as others are who are licensed. But
for adding sufficiency to them by the Doctour's instruction, he is not
otherwise able to instruct them than any other the meanest Fellow of our
College, unless he understand it by the use of Iron instruments, which
Physicians and Chirurgions may practice if they please; and some do and have
done with as good success and dexterity as himself, and therefore there is no
necessity of a sole dependence upon him. And it being true that is reported by
the Midwives, the Doctor does often refuse to come to the poor, they being not
able to pay him according to his demands; and for the rich he denies them his
help until he has first bargained for great rewards; which besides that they
are in themselves dishonest, covetous, and unconscionable courses, they are
also contrary to the Laws and Statutes of our College, to which by Oath he is
bound. We therefore for this and other reasons we can allege, conceive his
suit to be unreasonable and inconvenient. And so do humbly leave the same to
your Lordships grave judgments, unto whom his Majesty referred the
consideration thereof.


Mr. Shambrooke, one of the Wardens of the Apothecaries, presented 2.
Apprentices to be examined. He was asked whether they had been examined and
approved by their Company. He answered, they had not. Whereupon Mr. President
gave him to understand that the College would not hereafter examine any of
their Apprentices, except they were first examined and approved by their own
Officers; for so and no otherwise the College had decreed to proceed in that
business.

Mary-Peak was complained of for undertaking the cure of one Major's daughter,
for which she had 20 l. and 10 s. per week for diet. Yet was she so far from
curing her, that she had left her in a worse condition than when she undertook
her Cure. She was by the Censors fined 10 l. for her foolish and desperate
practicing Physic. Her imprisonment was remitted for some considerations,
provided she gave security for the payment of her Fine within 26 days.

Mr. Shepherd appeared before the President and Censors upon summons, he was
rebuked for his practicing upon Madmen without calling any Physician to the
cure according to the tenor of his permission granted him by the College and
his own promise. Upon some excuses made by him, his submission to the College
Censure, with fresh promises of better conformity hereafter, he was dismissed.

Physicians of the College of London are bound to write the day of the month
and the year of our Lord upon their Bills or prescripts, and to subscribe their
proper names thereto, and the Apothecaries should not make any such medicine,
as is not so noted and subscribed; except they know the hand to be the
handwriting of some one of the Physicians of the College of London, or that
such Apothecaries with their own hands do first date such bills, and note down
the names of the Physicians so directing them.

Christopher Barton, Weaver, was accused for practicing the Art of Physic
unskilfully and to the hurt of many. One charged him for taking money to cure
an old Cough, for which he gave him only white Wine and Sugar, which profited
him nothing. Another complained that she had given him money to cure her, but
was nothing the better. Upon these complaints he was left to the Messenger till
the next Censors day; when appearing, 4 persons more brought fresh accusations
against him for his illegal and ill practice. This Barton affirmed of himself,
that his Cures were by virtue of his hand, and not by the drinks and liquours
he gave. This he understood by his mother, who wished him, having a scald head,
to stroke his head with his own hand, whereby he was cured. And therefore
sometimes he used only his hand, sometimes he gave Wine, whereinto he dipped
his finger, that the people might have somewhat to take, but the virtue came
from his hand. Barton was censured to pay 20 l. and to remain a prisoner in
Woodstreet Compter till released by the President, where he continued till the
19th of October following, never having all that time petitioned the College
for his liberty: And then by virtue of a Writ of Habeas Corpus which he had
sued forth of the King's Bench, he was carried with his cause to the King's
Bench Bar at Westminster. The Copy of which Warrant and the Return thereof,
here immediately ensue.

NOs Johannes Warner and Thomas Adams Vic' Civitat' London, Serenissimo Domino
Regi in London. ss.
brevi huic schedul' annex' nominat' ad diem and locum in eodem brevi content'
Certificamus, quod ante adventum nobis praedict' brevis, scil' duodecimo die
Septembris Anno regni dicti domini Regis nunc Anglie, etc. decimo quinto,
Christoferus Barton in dicto brev' nominat' commissus fuit Prisone dom' Regis
scil' Computator' scituat' in Woodstreet London praedict' and in eadem Prisona
sub custodia Isaaci Pennington and Johannis Woollaston tunc vic' Civitat'
praedict' and in eorum exit' ab officio suo sub custodia nostra detent' virtute
cujusdam Warranti Otwelli Meverell, Laurentii Wright, Edmundi Smith and
Willielmi Goddard in Medicinis Doctor and Censor' Collegii Medicor' in London
sub sigillo communi Collegii Medicor' London praedict' custodi praedict'
Computatorii London praedict' vel ejus deputat' direct' Cujus quidem Warranti
tenor sequitur in hec verba.

ss. We Otwell Meverell, Laurence Wright, Edmund Smith and William Goddard
Doctors in Physic and Censors of the A Copy of the Censors Warrant for the
commitment of Empiricks to prison.
College of Physicians in London, being chosen by the President and College of
Physicians aforesaid to govern and punish for this present year all offenders
in the faculty of Physic within the City of London and the Suburbs thereof,
and seven miles compass of the said City, according to the authority in that
behalf to us duly given by certain Letters Patents under the great Seal of
England made and granted to the said College and Comminalty by the late King of
famous memory King Henry the Eighth bearing date the 23th day of September in
the Tenth year of his Reign, And one Act of Parliament made in the 14th year
of the said late King Henry the Eighth concerning Physicians, Whereby the
Letters Patents aforesaid and every thing therein are granted and confirmed:
And by virtue of the said Act of Parliament and Letters Patents aforesaid and
one other Act of Parliament made in the first year of the Reign of our late
Sovereign Lady Queen Mary entitled An Act touching the Corporation of
Physicians in London, did cause to be brought before us the sixth day of this
instant September at our College house in Pater noster Row in London one
Christofer Barton; and we have examined the said Christofer Barton, and upon
his examination and other due proofs we have found that the said Christofer
Barton has unskilfully practiced the Art of Physic within the City of London
and Precinct aforesaid upon the bodies of Richard Ballady of Aldermary Parish
London, Michael Knight of St. Buttolphs Parish Aldgate London, and the child of
one Jane Big and some others in the month of January in the year 1638.
contrary to the Laws in that behalf made and provided; whereupon we have
imposed upon the said Christofer Barton a fine of 20 l. for his evil practice
in Physic aforesaid; and we have also for the same cause sent you the body of
the said Christofer Barton, Willing and requiring you in the Kings Majesty's
name to receive and keep him in safe custody as Prisoner, there to remain at
his own costs and charges without bail or mainprize until he shall be
discharged of his said imprisonment by the President of the said College, and
by such persons as by the said College shall be thereunto authorized according
to the Statute in that behalf made, And this our Warrant shall be your discharge.

Given at the said College the eleventh day of September in the 15th year of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles. Otwell Meverell, Law. Wright,
Edm. Smith, William Goddard.


To the Keeper of Woodstreet Compter London or his Deputy.
To Mr. John Penyall one of the Messengers of his Majesty's Chamber in
Ordinary to execute this Warrant*
ET hec est causa acceptionis and detentionis praefati Christoferi Barton in
Prisona praedict' sub custodia nostra. Corpus cujus quidem Christoferi coram
praefat' domino Rege apud Westm' parat' habemus.
Being at the Bar the said 19th of October, for that the Lord Chief Justice Sir
John Brampston was not present, the other Judges present would not accept of
bail, which the said Barton tendered; but suspended the matter until Tuesday
the 12th of October following. Barton for that time was returned back, and
coming to the Bar again on the said Tuesday with his Council and Bail, the Lord
Brampston being then present, my Lord demanded the return of the Warrant which
was neglected by the Clerks of the Court, and left in the Crown Office in the
Temple; so my Lord would not proceed, but respited the cause until Thursday
the 24th of October following, when all parties appearing with Council on both
sides, the Warrant and Return was read and the Cause debated, and there the
Court plainly declared that he should not be Bailed, it being against the Law,
and the Letter of the Warrant grounded upon the Statutes. Then it was desired
by Barton's Council, that he might go over to the King's Bench, which also was
denied, because he was committed originally to the Compter, and willed if he
would have liberty, to submit to the College and make his peace there. Barton
being in custody of the Sergeant that carried him up to the Bar exhibited his
humble Petition to the President and Censors the 25 of October signed with his
own hand, for abatement of part of his fine and for his enlargement, submitting
in all things unto them. Whereupon the President and Dr. Meverell one of the
Censors were contented to abate the half of his fine of 20 l. and to accept of
10 l. the one half to be paid in hand, which was paid, and the other half at
our Lady day next. And so upon the 29th of October signed his discharge and set
him at liberty, he being put again before his enlargement into the said Prison.

Mr. President gave order, that upon the commitment of any Offender, the name
of the Constable or other Officer to whom the delinquent was delivered, should
be registered.

John Hunt was presented for setting up Bills for the Cure of several diseases.
He was pardoned conditionally, that he set up no more, neither practiced for
the future.

Dr. Gerard Boet was accused and confessed that he gave Physic to one Mrs.
Stone sick of a Pleurifie; being examined by the Censors as to his practice, he
was condemned by them of ill practice, fined 10 l. and sent to the Compter in
Woodstreet.

Mr. Phige, Apothecary, was charged by Mr. Tho. Canby for giving a Clyster,
several Papers of Powder, and letting blood one Mr. Robert Canby, who was sick
of a Dropsy. Phige refused to give any other answer to the Censors, than that
if he had offended the Laws, he was willing to satisfy them. Robert Canby
exhibited a note, particularly expressing the said Phige his practice upon him,
signed with his own hand. The Contents whereof he likewise attested to be true
to the Censors. Wherefore the practice of the said Phige was censured in the
following words.

The Censors of the College of Physicians London at Mr. Robert Canby his
request have taken into consideration the practice of Mr. Phige Apothecary used
on the body of the said Mr. Canby, and gi^e their judgment, That the practice
of the said Phige was altogether unwarrantable, dangerous and prejudicial to
the health of the said Mr. Canby, and the administration of his Medicines they
censure evil and undue. Subscribed, John Clerk, William Goddard, Edmund Smith,
John Bathurst.


Mr. Philips, Distiller of Waters and Spirits, being accused of practice,
because he sold those Waters with notes how to use them, promised that
hereafter he would give no more directions.

Dr. Whitaker, being summoned before the Censors, was asked by what authority
he practiced Physic; he replied that he had taken a degree at Leyden and was
incorporated at Cambridge: He behaved himself very rudely and insolently;
Wherefore Orders were forthwith given by the Censors for his prosecution at Law.

Andrew Kipping, Surgeon, confessed that he had practiced Physic in London for
12 months: He pleaded Letters testimonial given him by the President and
Elects. He was admonished by the President and Censors that for the future he
should abstain from all practice. Yet being after guilty of illegal practice,
proved against him, order was given for his prosecution at Law the next
Michaelmas Term.

James Oyston, Master of Arts in Edinburgh, appeared before the President and
Censors, and produced Letters Patents from the Most Reverend the Archbishop of
York, and from the Right Reverend the Bishop of Durham, whereby they had
granted him a License of practicing both Physic and Surgery: But being now
satisfied, that by the Laws of the Kingdom, those Licenses were invalid, He
desired to pass the examination of the College, that he might carry their
Letters Testimonial into the Country with him. His request was granted, he
examined, and Letters Testimonial given him, drawn up after the ordinary form.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
A.
ANatomy, Liberty granted the College by Q. Eliz. Charter to take yearly 4
Bodies in London, Middlesex, or in any County within 16 miles, p. 35, 36.
Liberty granted them by K. James his Charter to take 6 Bodies yearly, for
Anatomies in London, Middlesex, or Surrey, 113.

Antimonial Cup, Several killed by the use of it, p. 442, 443.

Apothecaries, the principal heads of their Charter: They and the Grocers made
one Corporation 4 Jac. p. 119. The grounds for their obtaining this new
Charter, 119, 120. By what Physicians it was approved, 120. The Apothecaries
separate from the Company of Grocers and made one Incorporation, 120, 121, 123,
124. Subject to the Magistracy of the City as well as other, 121. The persons
first incorporated, 122, 123. They were incorporated by the name of the Master,
Wardens, etc. and made a Body politic, 126. Capable to purchase or sell lands,
126, 142. To have a Common Seal, 127. To sue and be sued, ibid. Power to choose
a Master, two Wardens and 21 Assistants, 128. To have an Hall, ibid. To keep
Courts, ibid. To consult about Statutes, Laws, Articles, etc. ibid. The Master,
Wardens, etc. being 13 in number to make Laws for the government of the
Society, 129. In all their Orders concerning Medicines, to advise with the
President and four Censors of the College of Physicians, 130. To punish by
Fines and Amerciaments to the use of the Master, etc. without giving account
131. Their Fines to be moderate and not contrary to Law, ibid. Their first
Master, Wardens and Assistants, 131. 132. To take an Oath before the Attorney
General, etc. 132. The Master and Wardens to be sworn before the Assistants,
ibid. Power granted to the Assistants to choose a Master and Wardens, 133. To
choose others in case of death or removal, 134. To choose new Assistants and
swear them, 135. To administer the Oath to the Master, Wardens, etc. ibid. No
Grocer to keep an Apothecaries shop, under the penalty of 5 l. per men's. 136.
No Apprentice to be made free unless allowed by the President, or some
Physician or Physicians deputed by him; who is or are to be present at his
examination by the Master and Wardens, 137, 138. Power to enter Shops and
Houses to search and try Medicines, and to burn all unwholesome and hurtful
Medicines, 139, 140. Officers to be assistant to the Master, Wardens, etc. in
their search, 140, 141. Power to buy and sell Druggs, etc. 141. To choose a
Clerk who is also to be sworn, 143. To choose a Beadle and to give him his Oath,
144. A saving of the power of the President and College of Physicians and their
authority, ibid. The College to have the same power in their searches, to call
the Master and Wardens of the Apothecaries Company as of the Grocers, 145. What
Medicines Surgeons may have for their own use, ibid.

Their wares, Druggs and Stuffs to be searched by the Censors, and burnt, if
found faulty, 18, 19, 33, 49, 311, 438. The forfeiture of an Apothecary
refusing this search, 19, 33. The forfeiture of such as being elect, refuse to
be sworn or to make search, 19. Magistrates shall assist Physicians in this
their search, 33. They are not to divulge the names of Medicines, nor deliver
Physicians Bills, 310. They should expose their Ingredients to open view upon
making a dispensation of Medicines, 311. No poisonous or venomous Drugg to be
sold by them without noting the name of the Buyer and time of buying, unless
there be a bill sent from some learned Physician for their discharge, 312, 436.
Required by a Warrant from K. James his Council to deliver the bills of all
illegal Practisers to the President and Censors, 382. Not to compound or
administer Medicines without prescription, 437. In all their bills there should
be entered the Patient's name, the day of the month and year, 344, 345, 466.
Censured for falsifying bills, 439, 440. little advantaged by taking Degrees in
Physic, 443, 444. Interdicted practice, 310, 364, 440. required to give bond
not to practice, 354. discommuned, 375, 438, 440, 443. Certificates given by
the Censors against practicing Apothecaries, 427, 471. Sued for practice, 415,
416, 417, 418. Fined, or fined and imprisoned for the same, 333, 340, 351, 354,
364, 375, 403, 406, 407. Their Apprentices not to be examined but at the
College, 439. Refused examination, when not first examined by their own
Company, 466.

Arms, Collegiates discharged from bearing or providing Arms, 58, 115, 282,
323, 378.

C.
Cambridge, Dr. Winterton, Professor of Physic there, refused to give Licenses
to some, and incorporation to a Leyden Dr. and why, 443, 444. He resolved
against giving any Licenses without keeping an Act, 444.

Cases reported, Dr. Bonham's by Coke, p. 178. by Brownlow, 202. Butler's by
Jones, 221. Croke, 225. Littleton, 229. Huybert's 267. Needham's 273.

Censors, They are yearly to be chosen: out of whom, and by whom, 9, 70, 75.
Their office and power to examine persons and medicines, 9, 44, 49, 88. Their
power to search Apothecaries shops, and to burn or destroy corrupt or defective
medicines, 18, 19, 33, 49, 92, 305, 308. To punish for making bad medicines, or
not according to Physicians prescriptions, 49, 50, 51, 95. To summon
Apothecaries, etc. to testify against illegal practisers, and to punish them
upon refusal, 47, 48, 50, 90, 91, 93, 94. To supervise practisers, and to
summon, censure or punish any of them offending, 44, 45, 86, 87. To impose
fines, 9, 32, 44, 46, 50, 51, 84, 89, 91, 94, 95, 279, 280. To imprison, 9, 31,
32, 44, 46, 50, 84, 89, 95, 111, 112, 279, 280, 343, 344. In what cases they
have power to fine and imprison, and in what not, 188, 189, 195, 207, 215, 216,
217, 279, 280. How the first of Q. Mary has enlarged their power, 198. Several
things to be observed for their better direction, 200, 219. They may commit to
prison upon refusing examination; if an ordinance of the College be made to
that purpose, 280, 281. No Action of false imprisonment can lie against them
for committing for unskilful or temerarious practice, 281. They may sue for
two years practice, 419. The form of a Censors Warrant to imprison, 467, 468.
To discharge from prison, 351. They are sworn duly to execute their Office, 80.
They are to take the Oaths of Obedience and Supremacy, ibid. They may be
removed, and for what causes, 76, 78.

Charter of H. 8. why granted, p. 6, 7. recited in other Charters and in trials
with Empiricks, 38, 39, 62, 63, 148, 164.

Charter of Q. Elizabeth, 35.

Charter of K. James, why granted, 40. The King promised to consent to a bill
in Parliament for confirmation thereof, 59.

Charter of our present Sovereign K. Charles 2. why granted, and at whose
humble petition, 66, 67. The King promised to consent to a bill in Parliament
for confirmation thereof, 116.

Charter of K. James to the Apothecaries, 119.

College of Physicians, why and when made a Body Corporate within London and 7
miles thereof, p. 6, 7, 10, 11, 37, 38, 62, 148. They shall have perpetual
succession and a common Seal, 8, 68, 69. They shall be of ability to purchase
lands, 8, 57, 68, 114. They may sue and be sued, 8, 42, 68, 107. They may make
lawful Assemblies and Ordinances for Government, 8, 53, 54, 83. None shall
practice Physic in London or 7 miles, unless he be admitted by the College, 8,
9, 85. Not to be summoned on Iuries, and to be exempted from watch and ward and
all Parish Offices, 10, 17, 18, 115. To have a Hall, 53, 82. To have a
Register, 55, 109. To appoint other Officers and to give them an Oath, 56, 110.
To remove them upon just cause, 56, 110. Power to take Recognizances to the
King, 57, 110, 111. The King's moiety given to the College, 43, 106. All fines
given to the College, 51, 52, 106. 6l. per an. to be paid into the Exchequer
for and in respect of the King's moiety and fines, etc. 60, 108. The College
has power to remove any of the Elects, Censors or Fellows, and why, 56, 78.
Not less than 15 can make a College, 83. Any of the Physicians in London may
practice Surgery, 20. Power to punish by fine or imprisonment, 84.

Their Charter confirmed by Acts of Parliament, Royal Patents and adjudged
Cases, 11, 31, 35, 39, 40, 41, 64, 115, 116, 152, 159, 163, 164, 169, 172, 180,
197, 205, 215, 221, 229, 230, 245, 250, 276. All fines except 10 l. and 5 l.
per men's. to go to the poor, charges first deducted, 107, 108.

Copies of several of their Declarations agianst Empiricks and illegal
practisers, 147, 164, 178, 202, 261. Their Declaration may be in the name of
the President and not of the College, and yet good, 223, 225, 251, 256. They
may either bring their Action, or exhibit an Information, 217, 229. This
information may lie in any of the King's Courts of Westminster notwithstanding
the Statute of the 21 K. Jac. c. 4. 233, 234, 243, 256.

The College may imprison for breach of private Statutes, and impose reasonable
fines thereupon, and continue Delinquents in prison till paid, 279.

They may take a reasonable Sum upon admissions, 279.

A Letter writ by them against the admission of Dr. Saul to be the Queen's
Physician, 357.

Their opinion required about the death of a Noble Lady, 381. About a Patent to
be granted for the cure of Ruptures, 395. About a person suspected to be
poisoned, 428. Concerning one pretending great cures as being the seventh Son,
446, 447, etc.

E.
Elects. Eight appointed by Act of Parliament, p. 11. Their power what, 11, 12.
Ten appointed by the last Charter, 70. their names, 71. They may be removed and
why, 77, 78. They should take the Oaths of Obedience and Supremacy, 80.

Elections. They are duly to be made, 72. Each Fellow has his single voice,
79. Where voices are even, a casting voice is allowed the President, ibid.

Empiricks. Their several pleas, 154, 222, 265.

Butler's plea for practice was the 34, 35 H. 8. c. 8. p. 222, 226, 229. The
College's Answer, 222, 226, 229. Butler demurrs and why, 222, 226, 230. Errors
assigned by him, 222, 223, 225. Judgment given against him, 222, 223, 224, 228,
259. How Butler exceeded the license of the 34, 35 H. 8. p. 234.

Gardiner's plea the same, 154, 156. The President's reply, 157. He pleads the
insufficiency of that answer, 158.

The President defends it, ibid. A judgment given against Gardener, by the
Court of Kings Bench upon the Charter of 10 H 8. and the Statutes confirming
it, 159. He moves for an arrest of judgment and why, 161, 162, 163. The Court
upon hearing the Record, adjudged for the College, 163.

Huybert. The College's Declaration against him, 261, 267. His plea, viz. that
the 14, 15 H. 8. was no Statute, 265, 267. The College's reply, 265. The Record
of the 14, 15 H. 8. brought out of Chancery to the Court of King's Bench by
Mittimus, 267. Huybert's Council objected that this was no Act of Parliament,
wanting the Royal Assent, 267. The Court replied and showed the different
method of passing Acts of Parliament with the difference betwixt Statute Rolls
and Rolls of Parliament, 268. The Royal Assent not entered till after H. 5. in
the Statute Rolls, ibid. The Record brought by the College was not a Transcript
of the bill upon which the Answer of the King was written, but a Transcript of
the Entry which was made upon the Statute Roll; upon which it is not necessary
that the Royal Assent should be entered, and why, 269. The 14, 15 H. 8. appears
by the Record certified to be a good Act of Parliament, 270. The Royal Assent
was entered at the end of that Session, 271. If the Certificate be false, the
Defendant may bring his Action against the Clerk of Parliament or the Clerk in
Chancery, 271. The court of Kings Bench cannot cause the Parliament Rolls
themselves to be brought into Court, ibid. The second objection made by
Huybert's Council was; That the Issue was, whether there was such a Record, and
that is to be tried by the Record it self; now here the tenor of the Record
was only certified and not the Record it self, ibid. The Court answered, that
upon the Issue of Null tiel Record, a Certificate of the tenor was sufficient
to prove the Issue, 272, 273. Judgment entered for the College against Huybert,
273.

Needham. The College declares against him upon an Action of Debt 273. His plea
double, 273, 274. The College demurred and why, 274. Judgment entered against
him, ibid.

Empiricks how described in the 3 H. 8. p. 1, 2. not known to the Law, neither
can they have action, 252. One set in the Pillory, 306. Another set on
Horseback with his face to the Horse-tail, the same tail in his hand as a
bridle, with a collar of Iordans about his neck, ibid. The President and
College bound by solemn Oath and conscience to prosecute them, 318, 321, 325,
328, 330, 352, 353, 387, 412. A warrant sent from K. James his Council to the
Magistrates of London for their Attachment, 370. The Kings Letter to the
President and Censors, requiring them to put the Laws in execution against
Empiricks, 372. the King's Letter directed to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and
Justices of London, requiring them to assist the President and Censors in
suppressing Empiricks and illegal Practisers, 374. Keepers of Prisons
prosecuted for suffering any of them to make their escape, 329, 361, 403, 421.
they ought not to practice Physic in prison, 314. they cannot be bailed, 344,
345, 469, 470. How the College proceeded against them when they procured
protections, 338, 339, 352, 355, 391, 423, 424. They were summoned to appear
upon penalty, 354, 355, 369. punished for exposing bills, purging diet-drinks,
purging confections, or tables of the virtue of their Medicines, 333, 363, 364,
365, 368, 369, 442, 470, 471. Several of them examined and rejected, 315, 323,
324, 326, 331, 334, 337, 342, 364, 368. their dangerous and evil practice, 315,
323, 331, 332, 333, 334, 335, 351, 355, 357, 365, 367, 368, 389, 391, 392, 402,
421, 425, 441. their unconscionable dealings, 335, 352, 366, 369, 391, 394,
397, 419, 420, 439, 445, 446. their egregious ignorance and knavery, 322, 326,
330, 334, 337, 354, 355, 384, 385, 390, 395, 399, 400, 404, 405, 421, 445, 446,
467. Interdicted practice, 322, 323, 333, 337, 346, 347, 356, 364, 368, 384,
389, 394, 395, 405, 422. Required to give bonds not to practice, 314, 315, 316,
319, 322, 323, 324, 325, 326, 332, 333, 334, 342, 347, 349, 355, 368, 375, 386,
387, 401, 420. Letters testimonial granted against them, 332, 392, 403, 442.
Some of them fined, others fined and committed to prison, 313, 314, 315, 316,
319, 320, 322, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 333, 334, 337, 338, 341, 342, 349, 352,
354, 356, 357, 365, 369, 384, 385, 387, 388, 391, 401, 404, 413, 420, 422, 439,
446, 466, 467. Sued or prosecuted by the College, 147, 161, 162, 221, 225, 229,
259, 261, 273, 275, 305, 308, 310, 313, 314, 319, 339, 356, 387, 388, 391, 393,
394, 421. they may be sued for 2 years practice, 419. Country Empiricks sued
or prosecuted by the College, 309, 310, 313, 314. What the Common Law against
Empiricks was before Acts of Parliament were made against them, 251.

F.
Fellows of the College. Forty constituted by the last Patent, 70. the names of
them, 40. they were to continue for life, if not removed for cause, 71. How to
be chosen, 77. Power to amove any of them, 78. they are to be sworn duly to
execute, 80. to take the Oaths of Obedience and Supremacy, ibid.

Fines. All fines, forfeitures and amerciaments to be approved by the next
College Court, and registered, before any levy is made, etc. the 10 l. and 5 l.
excepted, 100, 101. An appeal may be made to Visitors appointed by the King
within one month after the fine is approved, 101, 102. These Visitors are to
receive and determine appeals, etc. 102, 103, 104, 105, 106.

H.
Hospital of Christ Church. No Physician should be chosen into that Foundation,
but one approved by the College, 418.

L.
License. A License from the Elects will not justice practice in London, 362,
471. The Bishop's license cannot do it, 471, 472. the College's license not to
be allowed to those who have been in Holy Orders, 376, 401, 443. Their
obtaining a License is a general detriment, 443, 444.

M.
Midwives. A Petition presented by them to the College, 463. The College's
Answer to their Petition, which was by them delivered to the Archbishop, 465.

O.
Oaths of Obedience and Supremacy to be taken by the President, Fellows and
Officers of the College, 80. Power given to the Elects or to any two of them to
administer these Oaths to the President, 81. The President to administer them
to the Fellows and all Officers, 82.

P.
Physicians. By whom to be allowed for City and Country, 2, 3, 8, 12. All
Physicians practicing in the several Dioceses out of London (Graduates
excepted) must be examined by the President and 3 of the Elects, 12. they are
to be licensed by the President and Elects, or any four of them, 96. they are
first to be examined, and if able, to be approved by Letters testimonial under
the hands of the Elects, 97. Power given to the President and Elects to summon,
examine and give testimonials and to reject unfit persons, 97. None are to
practice in the Country till they be licensed under pain of 5 l. per men's. and
how to be recovered, 98. None to practice in London or within 7 miles of the
same, without license under their Seal, 8, 9, 343, 344, 345.

Practice of Physic, what is to be esteemed such, 281.

President of the College, His office and duty, 7, 8. Power allowed him to make
a Vice President, 74, 75. He is to be sworn duly to execute his office, 80. to
take the Oaths of obedience and Supremacy, ibid. to administer them to the
Fellows and all College Officers, 80, 81, 82.

R.
Register made by Patent, 55, 109. He is to be sworn for the true performance
of his Office, 56, 110.

S.
Seventh Son. The cheats of one who pretended himself a Seventh Son, with an
Historical account of the College's proceedings with him, 446, 447, etc.

Statutes or Acts of Parliament, how to be expounded, 247, 248. The difference
betwixt Statute Rolls and Rolls of Parliament, 268. By whom Statutes were
formerly drawn up, 268, 269.

Statutes relating to Physic or Surgery. 3 H. 8. c. 11. p. 1. 5. H. 8. c. 6.
3. 14, 15 H. 8. c. 5. 5. 32 H. 8. c. 40. 17. 32 H. 8. c. 42. 20. 34, 35 H. 8.
c. 8. 28. 1 Q. M. Ses. 2. c. 9. 30.

The 3 H. 8. repealed in effect by the 14, 15 H. 8. 185. repealed by the 34 H.
8. 230, 231. Its imperfections, 252.

The 14, 15. H. 8. Thirty six Acts passed in the same Session of Parliament
when this was made, 16. confirmed by the first of Q. Mary, 229. It repeals the
3 H. 8. in 3 main points, 238. not restrained by the 34, 35 H. 8. 253, 254, 258.

The 34, 35 H. 8. whether repealed or not, is disputable, 227, 230, 236, 238,
250. This Act extends only to Surgeons, 235, 258. It gives liberty only to
those who practice for Piety and Charity, excluding all that take money or
gain, 258.

Surgeons. By whom to be allowed for City and Country, 2, 3. Exempt from being
Constables, bearing Armor, keeping Watch and Ward, etc. 3, 4, 5. The Authority
and liberty of Barbers and Surgeons being made of one Company, 21. By whom and
when the Barbers of London were incorporated, ibid. The benefits like to ensue
by joining the Barbers and Surgeons into one Company, 22. The Barbers and
Surgeons made one Company and incorporated, ibid. The Barbers and Surgeons in
London exempt from bearing of Arms or being in Watches or Inquests, 24.
Surgeons may yearly take 4 condemned persons for Anatomies, ibid. No Barber in
London shall use Surgery, 25. No Surgeon in London shall use the craft of
Shaving, 26. Every Surgeon in London shall have a Sign at his door, ibid. None
shall be a Barber in London but a Freeman of the Company, ibid. Four Wardens
shall be chosen, and their authority, ibid. The forfeiture of offenders, 27.
Any person may keep a Barber or Surgeon as his servant, ibid. Any person being
no common Surgeon may minister outward medicines, 28. By what means the
Surgeons of London have abused the Statute of the 3 H. 8. c. 11. for their own
gain, ibid. It shall be lawful for any person to cure outward Sores,
notwithstanding the Statute of 3 H. 8. c. 11. 29.

A Letter sent to the Surgeons from the College, requiring them to abstain from
the practice of Physic, 340. They are not to give inward medicines, 315, 316,
343, 344. Their endeavors to procure Letters Patents and an Act of Parliament
to prescribe inward medicines in Wounds, Vlcors and French Pox, 359, etc. The
College's resentment thereof, 361. A second attempt of theirs to procure
License to administer Physic in all cases Chirurgical, 406. Interdicted
practice, 348, 363, 367, 422. Required to give bond not to practice, 332, 341,
368, 423. Discommuned, 425. Fined, or Fined and imprisoned by the Censors, 315,
319, 331, 332, 333, 340, 341, 348, 349, 355, 365, 367, 375, 384, 395, 413, 422,
438, 446.

T.
Trials of the College against Empiricks, and e contra. Versus Gardener, page
147. Versus Dr. Bonham, 164. Dr. Bonham versus the College, 178, 220. versus
Butler, 221. Butler versus the College, 225. versus Butler, 229. versus Bugge,
259. versus Huybert, 261. versus Needham, 273. Trials of the College against
Empiricks, etc. Versus Bourne, 275. Harder, Merry, Stone.

U.
Universities. Dr. Bonham's case; The College's Declaration against him for
practicing Physic in London without license, 164. Dr. Bonham's Plea, 171. The
President's reply, viz. that his plea was invalid, 175. Dr. Bonham justifies
it, ibid. Judgment given by the Court of Kings Bench for the College against
Dr. Bonham, 177. He brings an Action of false imprisonment against the College,
178, 202. The College's Plea, ibid. Bonham's reply, 183, 203. The College
demurs, and why, 184. The Judges divided in their opinions, 184, 186, 209. Why
Judgment was entered for Dr. Bonham, 188, 189, 196, 201, 220.

Their Privileges secured in the 3 H. 8. p. 3. They may not practice in London,
etc. 184, 185, 204, 211, 212, 277, 335, 336, 364. Summoned to give an account
of medicines prescribed in London, 377. Why they are subject to the
examination, correction and government of the College, 278. Some of them
rejected upon examination, 315, 348, 350, 362, 376. Interdicted practice, 334,
350, 364, 366, 377, 383, 409, 419. gave bond not to practice, 347, 349. Sued or
(...) by the College, 164, 178, 202, 314, 335, 350, 351, 366, 367, 376, 418,
419, 471. Fined, or fined and imprisoned, 334, 348, 350, 362, 363, 366, 376,
407, 409, 438, 47^.

THE END.

