THE Law against Bankrupts: OR, A TREATISE Wherein the STATUTES AGAINST
BANKRUPTS are Explained, BY Several Cases, Resolutions, Judgments and Decrees,
both at Common Law and in Chancery. TOGETHER With the Learning of Declarations
and Pleadings relating thereunto. To which are likewise added Forms and
Directions for Commissioners, and Presisidents, sit for the perusal of Lawyers,
or Merchants and Tradesmen.

Sic utere tuis, ut aliena non Laedas.

By T. G. Sergeant at Law.

LONDON, Printed for S. Heyrick, C. Harper, J. Place, J. Harrison, S. Keeble,
D. Brown, J. Cleave, W. Rogers, R. Sare, W. Freeman, T. Goodwin, M. Wotton, R.
Vincent, A. Roper, and J. Brixey, 1695.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Statutes of Bankrupts, and the Proceedings thereupon (to any persons who
entertain the least Commerce, and know the World but at an ordinary rate) will
certainly appear to be very important; and not only in respect of the greatness
of the Estates, the variety and multiplicity of Debts, Credits and Accounts,
about which they are concerned (the effects whereof are derived down upon
thousands of Families) but also in regard of the extreme Severities and
Penalties which are inflicted on the Offenders. And I have often wondered, that
so little has been written on a Subject which makes so great a Figure amongst
Men of Business, either at Westminster Hall, or upon the Exchange. Nay, I may
add (to carry on this Reflection a little further) the concerns of Bankrupts,
which were heretofore almost wholly managed within the Precincts of our Capital
City or famous Marts, are now descended into Country-Towns and Villages, so
that it is become a matter of Public Consideration.

There are but two (that I know of) who have designedly Treated on this
Subject: Mr. Sergeant Stone, who was a Learned Lawyer and the greatest
Commissioner in his time, has left us his Readings on one of the Statutes
against Bankrupts; which are indeed full of Moot-Cases, ingeniously contrived,
but there are not many stated Resolutions; the Cases of Services, Tenures,
Seisins, Wardships, and the like, are not practicable now; and besides, he has
applied his Reading to one Statute only, and that the first; whereas the
defects of that Law has been abundantly aided and supplied by subsequent
Statutes, so that He cannot be sufficiently directive in this Grand Concern:
And Mr. Billinghurst, who, for so much as he has attempted, is Acceptable; but
we must say, he has done little more than to improve the method to which the
Statutes themselves naturally lead him; the Resolutions are but few, neither do
they extend to thousands of Cases that daily happen in these weighty matters.

Having therefore had some loose Papers, relating to this Subject, brought to
my hands, upon perusal of them, I found they might be useful as well for
Lawyers as Merchants and other Traders: I considered we are not born merely for
our selves, we are sometimes, at least, obliged to render our selver
serviceable to the welfare of the Public Society whereof we are Members, and
to do something that may be useful for others. I then (the whole being left to
my disposal) made some Additions and Substractions, as I thought convenient,
and molded them into some Frame and Order; the result whereof is this little
Piece (for Voluminousness I never affected) which I now present to you. Whereof
I think it becomes me to give this short Account:

To address my self then in the first place to the Gentlemen of the Long Robe,
I conceive it might be some advantage, not only to cite* (under Proper Titles)
our Printed Law Cases, and in some places to correct them, (but that very
sparingly, for it is expected we should read Reporters in their own Words) but
to add some Cases not extant, which I have observed in the Course of my
Profession. I have, in some measure, considered the Learning of Declarations
and Pleadings upon Actions brought by the Assignees of the Commissioners, the
usefulness whereof I need not stand to Illustrate. The Forms and Presidents
(though I have not displayed all the Arcana's of the Commissioners Practice) will
be sufficient to give such hints and helps to an ingenious inquisitive Mind, as
thereby to enable him, upon occasion, to frame Instruments of the like nature.
In which let me recommend the President of the Scire Facias upon a Judgment
recovered by the Bankrupt against an Executrix, which I take to be the exactest
in its kind, and which was found in the Manuscripts of Mr. Pynsent, a very
Judicious Practiser and Prothonotary of the Common Pleas (now deceased.)

As for the Merchants and Tradesmen, the advantage of a Treatise of this Nature
will appear if we consider them as Creditors or Debtors, and into one of these
two Ranks we may generally cast them. For, it is morally impossible to think
that a Merchant can make a solemn Protestation in this sort; I owe to no Body,
and no Body owes to me. Affairs of this nature cannot admit of such even
Balances: If we consider the prospects and allurements of Advantage and
Profit, the insinuations of Business, the Twistings and Links of Commerce; in
short (I say) if we reflect on the Revolutions, Movements and Intreagues of
Trading, we may then find reason to pronounce, that no Trading Merchant (while
he continues such) can say to his Shop* Book (which is as restless as that
watery and unstable Element) hitherto shall thou go and no further.

You who are not not only dipped, but drencht in Debt, may see here how to manage
your Concerns with so much Prudence, as to avoid those dangerous Shelfs on
which thousands of Families have been irrecoverably ruined. For I am very
confident, many have committed, or suffered such Acts of Bankrupcy, which they
never understood would bring them within the Compass of the Statutes, but have
thought that it only consisted in Absconding or downright Running.

You who are Creditors, may in this receive hints how to secure your Debts in
time, and to be precautioned not to be too forward in any fraudulent
Contrivances, when you are sensible your Debtor is a Bankrupt, though no
Commission be awarded out against him: And also how, and in what time you are
to be relieved by the Statutes, and whether you are such Creditors who are
capable of Relief.

It must be granted, and it is the subject of pity rather than scorn, that many
good Men may, and do insensibly sink and decay in their Estates, either by
losses at Sea or Land, living up to support a Credit, and shore up a Reputation
(no mean Mystery in this World) or by the fatal and hidden determinations of
Providence, which will sometimes baffle human designs, and will teach us not to
ascribe Success always to our own Industry: And therefore frequently presents
Instances to confirm the truth of the Wise Man's Observation, The Battle is not
always to the Strong, neither Bread to the Wise, nor yet Riches to Men of
Understanding.

A Bankrupt, by Fraud, I always hated, I mean one that breaks on purpose to
raise a Fortune by the ruin of others; though my Charity and Reason will induce
me to believe such are not very ordinary. To leave a dear Family to the taunts
and scorns of inconsiderate and insulting Fools, to roll about the World ones
self like an Outlaw or a Fugitive, certainly are not things of choice, they are
in no wi^e amiable. If such Monsters are to be found, I conceive our Laws are
no^ fevere enough against them. But I regret the proceedings against Bankrupts
by Accident, (if we must allow of that distinction) and am sorry they are
involved in the same Penalties.

But I must digress no further. I have only to add, My design in this is for
the Public Good of my Countrymen: And upon that score I must rely upon the
Readers pardon for my Mistakes: However, if he will be so inexorable as not to
grant me a total discharge from my Errors, yet I hope my honest intentions may
molli^ie him into some reasonable composition for them.

T. G.

A TABLE OF THE CASES.
A.
ABYN, a Turkey Merchants Case,page 26 Allens Case in Chancery,p. 183 Andrews
and Spicer,p. 133, 161 Audly and Halsey,p. 94, 118, 119, 123. Aylmer and
Gerard,p. 131
B.
Backwell and Littcott,p. 126 Backwells Case,p. 130 Baker and Edmonds,p. 139
Sir Anthony Batemans Casep. 16, 17, 31, 108, 109 Barnes and Carry against the
Sheriffs of Bristol,p. 60, 77 Bailey and Bunning,p. 118, 121, 130, 168 Benson
and Flower,p. 44, 120, 132 Bets and Mico,p. 130, 143, 169 Bingly and Warcupp,p.
124 Bolston and Ractliff,p. 126 Boylstones Case,p. 136 Bradford and
Bludworth,p. 28, 41, 42, 110 Bradshawes Case,p. 130, 142
C.
Calchmans Case,p. 133 Cartwright and Underhill,p. 38 Churchman and Osborn,p.
44, 107 Clayton and Monks Case,p. 46, 122 Coply and Dockmanque,p. 143, 163
Crisp and Platt,p. 14, 37, 108, 112 Craven, etc. contra Knight in Chancery,p.
174 Cullamers Case,p. 48, 118
D.
Danby and Wellengton,p. 143 Day and Thomas.p. 144 Dean and Dr. Lake,p. 180
E.
Eclor and Jacobson,p. 134 Edwards Case,p. 69
F.
Fitzwilliams and Lewis,p. 137 Fuller and Lane in Chancery,p. 48, 171
G.
Gerard and Aylmore,p. 131 Gibson and Tompson,p. 17 18 Green and Morgan,p. 132,
142 Gray and Feilder,p. 146 Grove and Smith,p. 133
H.
Sir John Harrison and Sir Job Harvey,p. 15, 16 Hecrost and Hall,p. 16 Haylor
and Hall,p. 16, 174 Hanslop and Hales,p. 166 Hind the Bankers Case,p. 25 Holt
and Scarscrog,p. 245 Benjamin Hintons Case,
J.
Jacobson and Eclor,p. 134 Jekells Case,p. 77 Jollifer and Horn,p. 38 Jonas and
Boulton,
L.
Lidcot and Backwell,p. 196 Dr. Lake and Dean in Chancery.p. 180
M.
Morgan and Green,p. 132, 142
O.
Osborn and Bradshaw,p. 165 Osborn and Churchman,p. 44, 107 Overman and Wright
in Chancery,p. 45
P.
Parker and Bleek,p. 112 Penrice and Wing,p. 77 Pickerings Case,p. 46 Powel
versus Stust and Timewell,p. 137, 146 Prin and Beal,p. 133, 165 Puckridge and
Brown,p. 143
R.
Rugles Case,p. 48 Radford and Bludworth,p. 28, 41, 42 Reeve and May,p. 170
S.
Scott and Bell,p. 107 Selby and Walker,p. 164 Smith and Mills,p. 118 Spencer
and Vancure,p. 111 Stiff and Timewell,p. 146 Stoover and Hastings,p. 133
T.
Tailor and Hills,p. 25 Thomas and Day,p. 144, 173 Thursby and Platt,p. 144
Trigg and Newton,p. 14 Tuckee and Cosh,p. 106
V.
Vanacre and Spencer,p. 111
W.
Ward and O^fly,p. 125 Watson and Norbury,p. 167 Wellempton and Danby,p. 143
Widows and Berman in Chanceryp. 174 Wood and Hays,p. 182 Sir John
Woolstenholms Case,p. 17, 19, 20
Y.
Yardly and Knight,p. 133
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I.FOrms of the Affidavit: Bond to the Lord Chancellor: Petition and
Commission; with some short Remarkes. CHAP. II.What Trade or Profession a man
must be of, and Profess: Or what kind of Trader he must be that brings him into
the Statutes of Bankrupts. CHAP. III.What Acts a man must do, or suffer to be
done, before he can be said to be a Bankrupt. CHAP. IV.Rules for the
Construction of the Statutes, and when the Bankrupcy shall be said to commence,
CHAP. V. Of Creditors. Who are Crditors within the Statutes, and who are not:
Of their Preference: Of their coming in, and within what time they are to come
in, or their refusal: And of Contribution to the Charges: And the Form of an
Authority to receive Contribution-Mony. CHAP. VI.Of the Proceedings of the
Commissioners: The Form of the Oath: Of the Style of the Depositions: Of
declaring him to be a Bankrupt: Inhibition: A Warrant for Witnesses: A Warrant
to send one to the Goal, who refuses to be sworn, or to answer: And of the
proof of Debts. CHAP. VII. The Commissioners Power in reference to the
Bankrupt: Of Proclamations, and the form of it: Of breaking Houses: And in
reference to the Bankrupts Wife: Of the Examination of the Bankrupt and his
Wife: Of the Examination of Witnesses, and other for the discovery of the
Estat^ and Debts of the Bankrupt: O^ the Penalties of refusing to ^ sworn, to
be Examined, or to Discover: Of Perjury; and the for feitures how to be
applied, and ^ Interrogatories. CHAP. VIII.Of the Disposition of the Bankrup^
Estate, Freehold and Copyhold Of Redemption of Lands Mortg^ged: Of Trusts,
Sales and Se^tlements of Lands: What shall ^ accounted Fraudulent; and when and
in what Cases Purchasers a^ safe; with many Late Cases an Resolutions
thereupon. CHAP. IX.Of the Disposal of the Personal Estate or Goods of the
Bankrupt: How, and where the Goods of a Bankrupt liable to Execution, may be
sold by the Commissioners, and where not: Of Trusts and Bonds taken in the
Bankrupts name, with several Cases and Resolutions. CHAP. X.Of the Disposition
and Assignment of the Bankrupts Debts; and what Assignment made by the
Commissioners shall be good, and what not; and of Declarations. CHAP. XI. Of
Actions brought by Assignee of Commissioners for the recovery of Debts, or
Goods of the Bankrupt: Of Declarations thereupon: Of Actions brought by the
Bankrupt himself; and the Forms of Declarations at large. CHAP. XII.Of
Pleadings in respect of the Statutes of Bankrupcy by the Debtor, or by the
Commissioners, to Actions brought against them; and what Pleas shall be good,
and what not. CHAP XIII.Of the Venue, Evidence and Trial. CHAP. XIV.Of
Distribution: Notice to Creditors: of a Dividend, and the Form; as also the
Form of a Deed of Distribution. CHAP. XV.Of Bankrupts: Where they are Partners
and of Joint-stocks. CHAP XVI.Of other things to be done, or the Consequentials
after Examination, Discovery and Distribution: Of Bills of Conformity. CHAP.
XVII.Of Scandalous Words relating to a Man's Trade.
PRESIDENTS.
DEclaration by Assignees of the Commissioners of Bankrupts against a Debtor.
Sur Emisset. Declaration by Assignees of the Commissioners upon a Bond made to
t^^ Bankrupt. Plea to an Indebitat' Assumpsit, the it was assigned by the
Commissioner of Bankrupcy. Plea to a Bond for performance Covenants (or
Articles) for payment of Rent: That the Plaint^^^ was a Bankrupt, and that the
Defendant paid the Money to the A^signees of the Commissioners of Bankrupcy.
Scire Facias for the Creditors upon the Statute of Bankrupts, upon judgment
recovered by the Bankrupt against the Executrix. An Indenture of Assignment by
the Commissioners. Another Form of an Assignment. A Deed of Distribution.
The Courteous Reader is desired to Correct these few Errors that have passed
the Press.

ERRATA.
FOlio 6. antepenult, add many have. f. 6. after line 25 put 28, 29, 30 lines.
f. 31. Hench r. French. f. 32. add and Tompson Defendant. f. 18. add and
French. f. 19. l. 1. add sole Merchant. f. 22. l. 14. adjusted, r. adjudged. f.
27. l. 7. 27, r. 7. f. 44. l. 26. add an. f. 52. l. 16. r. be discovered. f.
74. l. 7. Officers r. Offices. f. 78. l. 14. corrected r. convicted. f. 8. l.
5. after Sales add and. f. 100. l. 13. before Debts add the. f, 104. l. 18.
after Feme add sole. f. 109. l. 1. r. whose use f. 119. l. 21. r. Fi. Fa. f.
120. l. 21. r. Fi. Fa. l. 23. r. Exemption f 133. l. 13. Suit r. same. f. 136.
l. 13. one r. once. f. 142. l. 13. r. Remedy. f. 200. l. ult. r. disgraceth. f.
228. l. 21. form r. force. f. 195. l. 20. r. 2 Bulst. l. 22 r. 1 Brouhl. f.
196. l. 1. r. 2 Bulst. l. 5. Cr. Eliz. 21. r 843. f. 197. l. 11. 41. r. 40. l.
12. 40. r. 46.

THE LAW Against BANKRUPTS.
CHAP. I.
Forms of the Affidavit, Petition, and Commission; with some short Remarks.

AS soon as you perceive your Debtor has done or suffered some Act, whereby he
is become a Bankrupt within the Statutes of Bankrupts; in the first place the
Creditors must make Affidavit before a Master in Chancery, Ordinary or
Extraordinary, to this effect following:

Affidavit to be made before a Master in Chancery, before the Suing ^ut a
Commission of Bankrupt.
A. B. of, etc. makes Oath, that R. B. of the City of L. Merchant, is truly
and justly Indebted to this Deponent (and others his Creditors) in the sum of
100 l. and upwards; and that he is become a Bankrupt within the true meaning of
one or some of the Statutes made against Bankrupts, as this Deponent believes.

Jurat. A. B.

Then there must be a Petition presented to the Lord Chancellor, or Lord
Keeper, in manner following:

The Form of a Petition to the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, to grant a
Commission of Bankrupts.
In most humble manner show unto your Lordship,
YOur daily Orators A. B. of, etc. and C. D. of, etc. and W. L. of, etc. as
well for themselves, as all other the Creditors of R. D. of the Parish of, etc.
in, etc. Merchant: That whereas the said R. D. using and exercising the Trade
of Merchandise, by way of Bargaining, Exchange, Bartering and Chevisance,
seeking his Trade of living by Buying and Selling upon good and just Causes,
for Wares and Merchandise to him sold and delivered, and also for ready Money to
him Lent, being indebted to your Orators, and others his Creditors, in diverse
and several sums of Money, amounting in the whole to the sum of, etc. and
upwards: Of late, that is to say, about the Month of November last past, did
become Bankrupt within the several Statutes lately made against Bankrupts, to
the intent to defraud and hinder your said Orators, and all others his
Creditors, of their just Debts and Duties to them due and owing, (that is to
say) within the Statute, made in the Parliament begun and holden at Westminster
the second day of April, in the Thirteenth year of the Reign of our late
Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, concerning Bankrupts; and within the Statute
made in the Parliament begun and holden at Westminster aforesaid, the
nineteenth day of March, in the first year of the Reign of our late Sovereign
Lord King James, of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland the seven and
thirtieth; Entitled, An Act for the better Relief of the Creditors, against
such as shall become Bankrupts: As also within the Statute made in the
Parliament* begun and holden at Westminster the nineteenth day of February, in
the one and twentieth year of the Reign of our said late Sovereign Lord King
James, of England; France and Ireland, and of Scotland the seven and fiftieth;
Entitled, An Act for the further description of a Bankrupt, and Relief of the
Creditors against such as shall become Bankrupts; or within some or one of
them. In tender Consideration whereof, may it please your Lordship, to grant
unto your Orators His Majesty's most gracious Commission, to be directed to
such and so many wise, honest and discreet persons, as to your Lordship shall
seem meet; Authorizing them thereby, not only concerning the said Bankrupt, his
Body, Lands, Tenements, Freehold and Customary Goods, Debts, and other things
whatsoever; but also concerning all other persons, which by concealment, claim,
or otherwise, do or shall offend touching the Premises, or any part thereof,
contrary to the true intent and meaning of the same Statutes. To do and execute
all and every thing and things whatsoever, as well for and toward satisfaction
and payment of the said Creditors, as toward and for all other intents and
purposes, according to the Ordinances and Provisions of the same Statutes.

And your Orators shall pray, etc.
Note, The Creditors must name Seven Commissioners, h^w m^n*
(at the least) Commissioners (whereof Two must be Esquires, for the Quorum) of
whom the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, strikes out Two. This is the usual
way; but many times, in Matters of great weight, there are Nine or more
Commissioners, and Three or more of the Quorum.

If the Petition (which is to set forth the Time when he became a Bankrupt) do
show that he was a Bankrupt 1st June 18 Jac. and the Commissioners find that he
became a Bankrupt 1st November following, yet its well enough; for it suffices
that he is a Bankrupt, and the Time is not material, so it be before the Date
and suing forth the Commission.

One sole Creditor shall not sue out a Commission sued out by one Creditor.
Commission; for it ought to be at the Suit of the Creditors; by Mr. Stone. Q.
But the daily Practice is the contrary, and so I perceive the Law to be; for it
may so happen that the Creditor cannot have a satisfaction, but by a
Commission: As in case the Bankrupt be Tenant in Tail of Lands and Tenements,
or a Copyholder, which Estates may be sold by the Commissioners; which by no
other means can the Creditor have for the satisfaction of his Debt.

The Bond to be entered in to the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, upon suing
out the Commission of Bankrupt.
NOverint universi per psentes me I. A. de, etc. teneri and firmit ^^ligari
prehonorabili B. etc. Domino Cancellario Anglie, solvend' eid' Domino
Cancellario, out suo certo Attormat Executoribus, Administrat, vel Assignat
suis: Ad quam quidem solu^onem been and fidelit faciend' obligo me Heredes,
Executores, and Administratores m^os firmit per psentes. Sigillo mco sigillar
dat, etc.

THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if R. B. of the City o^ L.
Merchant, be a Bankrupt within all or any the Statutes lately made against
Bankrupts, according as the above bound A. B. by his humble Petition, exhibited
to the abovenamed Lord Chancellor of England has alleged: Then this
Obligation to be void, or else to stand in full force.

I shall add the Form of a Commission, though you have it out of the Office,
paying the Fees.

The Commission is in this manner:
WIlliam and Mary, by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, etc. To our trusty and well-beloved
A. B. of E. in Com', etc. Esquire; C. D. of, etc Esquire; R. S. T. S. and L. W. Gent.
Greeting. Whereas we are informed, that J. R. of K. in, etc. Merchant, using
and exercising the Trade of Merchandise, by way of Bargaining, Exchanging,
Bartering and Chevisance, seeking his Trade, and of living by buying and
selling (such a day and year) did become Bankrupt within the several Statutes
made against Bankrupts, to the intent to defraud and hinder A. B. of, etc. and
W. K. of, etc. and others his Creditors of their just Debts and Duties to them
due and owing, we minding the due Execution, as well of the Statute touching
Orders for Bankrupts, in the Parliament begun and holden at Westminster
aforesaid, the second day of April, in the thirteenth year of the Reign of our
Dear Sister Elizabeth, late Queen of England, made and provided: As of the
Statute made in the Parliament, begun and holden at Westminster aforesaid, the
19 day of March, in the first year of the Reign of the late King James the
First, of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland the 37th; Entitled, An
Act for the better Relief of Creditors, against such as shall become Bankrupts.
And also the Statute made in the Parliament, begun and holden at Westminster
aforesaid, the nineteenth day of February, in the 21th year of the Reign of the
said late King James the First, of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland
the 57th; Entitled, An Act for the further description of a Bankrupt, and
Relief of Creditors against such as shall become Bankrupts. Upon Trusts of the
Wisdoms, Fidelities, Diligence and provident Circumspection which we have
conceived in you, do by these presents Name, Assign, Appoint, Constitute and
Ordain you our special Commissioners, giving full Power and Authority unto you,
Four or Three of you, whereof you the said A. B. or C. D. to be One, according
to the same Statutes, and every or any of them, not only concerning the said
Bankrupt, his Body, Lands, Tenements, Freehold, and Customary Goods, Debts, and
other things whatsoever; but also concerning all other persons, which by
Concealment, Claim, or otherwise, do or shall offend touching the Premises, or
any part thereof, contrary to the true intent and meaning of the same Statutes,
or any of them, to do and execute all and every thing and things whatsoever, as
well for and toward satisfaction and payment of the said Creditors, as toward
and for all other intents and purposes, according to the Ordinances and
Provision of the said Statutes: Willing and Commanding you, Four or Three of
you, whereof you the said A. B. or C. D. to be One, to proceed to the
Accomplishment and Execution of this our Commission, according to the true
intent and meaning of the same Statutes, with all diligence and effect, as our
special Trust is in you. Witness our selves at Westminster the, etc.

If after Seizure, and before Distribution, Death of Commissioners.
all the Commissioners but Two die, or if they of the Quorum die, they cannot
proceed alone; but a New Commission must be awarded, and the New Commissioners
may call the Old ones to an Account.

The words in the Statute 1 Jac. c. 15. Charges of the Commission.
[ For the Charges of the Commission,] are to be extended to all the Charges
arising by the suing of it out, and in the Execution of it also. Hutton, fo. 38.

CHAP. II.
What Trade or Profession a man must be of, and profess: Or, what kind of
Trader he must be, that brings him within the Statutes of Bankrupts.

IN the next place I shall show, how and when one may be said to be a Bankrupt;
and what it is that makes a man become a Bankrupt.

And as to that, it is to be considered;

1. What kind of Trade, Occupation, or Profession a man must be of, or what
kind of Dealing he must follow, before he can be adjudged to be a a Bankrupt.
2. What Acts one must do, or permit and suffer, which will make him a Bankrupt
within these Statutes, or any of them.
1. What kind of Trade, Occupation, or Profession a man must be of; or what
kind of dealing he must follow, before he can be adjudged to be a Bankrupt.

Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 1. If any Merchant, or other person, using or exercising the
Trade of Merchandise, by way of bargaining, exchange, re-change, bartry,
chevisance, or otherwise, in gross or by retail; or seeking his or her Trade of
Living by buying and selling, and being a Subject born of this Realm, or any of
the Queens Dominions, or Denizen, shall depart the Realm; or begin to keep his
or her House or Houses; or otherwise to absent him or her self, or take
Sanctuary; or suffer him or her self willingly to be Arrested for any Debt or
other thing, not grown or due for Money delivered, Wares sold, or any other just
or lawful cause, or good consideration or purposes, will suffer him, or her
self, etc.

Stat. 1 Jac. c. 15. That all and every such person and persons, using or that
shall use the Trade of Merchandise by way of bargaining, etc. prout in the
Stat. 13 Eliz. cap. 7.

Stat. 21 Jac. c. 19. That all and every person and persons using, or that
shall use the Trade of Merchandise by way of bargaining, exchange, chevisance,
or otherwise, in gross or by retail; or seeking his or her living by buying and
selling; or that shall use the Trade or Profession of a Scrivener, Scrivener.
receiving other men's Moneys or Estates into his or their custody, shall be
liable to be a Bankrupt.

Stat. 14 Car. 2. c. 24. Whereas diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen, not bred up in
Trade, have notwithstanding put great Stocks into the East India and
Guiney-Company, Stocks in Companies.
it is declared, That no persons, Adventurers for putting in Money or
Merchandise into the said Companies; or for adventuring or managing the
Fishing, called the Royal-Fishing-Trade, shall be reputed or taken to be a
Merchant or Trader within any Statutes for Bankrupts, or be liable to the same:
Provided that persons Trading or Trafficking in any other way or manner, than
the said Companies or Fishing, shall be liable to the Commission of Bankrupts.

Observe, That by the Proviso in the later end of the Statute of 21 Jac. c. 19.
That that Act, and all other Acts heretofore made against Bankrupts, shall
extend to Strangers born, as well Aliens as Denizens, Aliens
as effectually as to the Natural born Subjects; both to make them subject to
the Laws as Bankrupts, as also to make them capable of the benefit or
contribution, as Creditors by those Laws.

Notes, Cases, and Resolutions upon the Clauses of the said Statutes, relating
to the Trade, Profession, or Occupation of such an one as shall be accounted a
Bankrupt; and what shall be said a buying and selling within the Statutes.
IT is not buying and selling 1 Note.
of Land, but of Personal things, that makes a man a Bankrupt, March Rep. 37.

2. Selling alone will not make a Bankrupt, unless he also buy, 2 Keb. 487. Nor
Buying alone.

3. One single Act, though it let a man into a general Dealing, will not make one
a Bankrupt. Vid. infra.

4. He that is a Bankrupt must get his living by buying and selling, or the
chiefest part thereof. Vid. infra. Except in special Cases.

5. It must be a general Trade by which his livelihood is got, and not
particular Employments. Vid. infra.

Such as live on their Manual Labor Particular Employment.
only, as Husbandmen, Laborers, bare Handycrafts-men, etc. are not Traders
within the Statutes, Cro. Car. 31. But,

Such as buy Wares, and convert them into saleable Commodities, and so get
their livelihood by such buying and selling, may be within the Statutes. As,

A Shoemaker, that buys Leather and Shoemaker.
sells it in Shoes, may be a Bankrupt, Cro. Car. 31. Crump and Barnes Case.

So of an Iron-monger that buys Rod-Iron Iron-monger.
or Bar-Iron, and causes it to be worked up into Wares.

So a Naylor, Lock-smith, etc. by the A Trading Smith.
same Reason of a Shoemaker.

A Clothier that buys the Wool, and Clothier.
has it made up into Cloth, may be a Bankrupt; so if he work it into Cloth
himself, by the reason of Crump's Case.

A Tailor that makes Garments only Tailor.
and as Servant to his Customers, shall not be a Bankrupt. But,

A Sales man, by the reason of Crump* Sales-man.
Case, may.

A Carpenter in London has been adjudged Carpenter.
a Bankrupt; but not qua ^ Working-Carpenter.

Mr. Stone's Opinion, p. 166. that ^ Shoemaker, etc. is no Bankrupt, is no^
Law.

An Inn-holder qua such, is not within Inn-holder.
the Statutes, and may not be a Bankrupt by 3 Justices against Berkly: For the
he buy Provisions to be spent in h^ House; yet he does not properly sell i^ but
utters it at such Rates as he thin^ reasonable Gains: And the Guests d^ not
contract or take it at a certain price but they may have it, or refuse it and
if he take excessive Rates, he ^ Indictable: And in cases of Innkeeper
Provisions are not only respected, b^ Furniture of Rooms, Attendants of
Servants, etc.

But if an Innkeeper be a Grazier, he Grazier.
may be a Bankrupt, Cro. Car. 548. Crisp and Platt. March Rep. 35, 36. mesme
Case And likewise so lately Adjudged in the King's Bench, in the Case of Trigg
verse Newton, an Innkeeper at Blossoms-Inn i^ London.

A Vintner may be a Bankrupt; or ^ Vintner. Brewer.
Brewer.

A Farmer, who buys in Cattle and Farmer.
spends some, and sells others, is not a Bankrupt, Cro. Car. 458. March Rep.
35, 36. But,

A Grazier or Drover may be a Bankrupt; Drover.
and whether he graze his own Land or not, alters not the case. Wherefore I
wonder that Mr. Stone, p. 165. says, If he hireth Grounds, and feeds the
Cattle, he shall be a Bankrupt; but not if he graze upon his own Freehold. And
it has been since Adjudged to the contrary.

A Cow-keeper at Islington, was lately Adjudged a Bankrupt.

An Husbandman is not within the Husbandman.
Statutes, unless he be a Drover also: Per Baron Denham 3 Car. at Wilts Assizes.

Any Trading, though the Trade be never so Inferior in it self; yet if they get
their living by buying and selling, and deal considerably in it, makes a
Bankrupt, with other acts of Bankrupcy.

One is not a Trader within these Statutes, Leaving off Trade.
who has left his Trade, but sells his Goods lying upon his hands, for the
Debts which he has contracted afterward; unless that the Debts were
contracted during the Trade: But,

If such Persons Trade again, and so Trading again.
become Indebted, he is a Bankrupt for this; but not for the Debts between. Sir
John Harrison and Sir Job Harvey's Case, cited in Sir Anthony Bateman's Case,
Siderfin, p. 411. So,

He shall become a Bankrupt for Debts due before he gave over Trading, and
continued for new Security taken since he gave over his Trading, Stone Lect. 7.

Discontinuance of Merchandise is not an exemption from the Statute, when the
Creditors have taken New Securities.

Therefore, its Resolved, it is not necessary he continue his Trade by buying
and selling, to the time that he becomes a Bankrupt; but it suffices that he
has used the Trade, and during that time Debts owing when he was a Trader.
that he became Indebted, and for that Debt he is now become a Bankrupt. As if
a Merchant leave his Trade, and go into the Country for two years, and after he
absents himself from his Creditors, by reason of the Debts he owed when he was
a Merchant, Mich. 20 Jac. B. R. Hicroft and Hall's Case. And the same was
Agreed for Law in Palmer's Rep. 325. in Evidence to a Jury at King's Bench.

If one for a time deal in a Trade, and after he forsakes his Trade; but leaves
his Stock in the hands of another, and Partner.
he has part of the Gain, and is partaker of the Loss: If such an one after
desert and conceal himself, he is a Bankrupt within the Statute, Palmer's Rep.
325. in the Case of Hayler and Hale. Vid. infra.

Sir. A. B. had the 16th part in a Coleship, Cole-Marchant
which Coleships are victualled and employed by the Owners. But it appeared
when Sir A. B. purchased the said 16th part, the Ship was indebted to him (
viz.) to Repairs, and it is their custom to repair them upon the Credit of
their Bottom, and this Ship had not gained so much as to pay for her repairs.
This makes not a Merchant Bankrupt, Siderfin p. 411. Sir Anthony Batemans Case.

That Sir A. B. imported Goods in his Importation of Goods.
own name, is not sufficient, unless he does issue out the Proceed so imported,
as he did employ goods taken in Prize in Revictualling another Ship, which made
one a Bankrupt, although he was a Gentleman.

A Joint Stock is not sufficient, unless Joint stock.
some disposition of it be actually proved as it is in Sir John Wooltenholm's
Case, 14 Car. 2. c. 4. So though he be Partner of a Coleship, where the Freight
and Ownership are not distinct, as in Ships Trading to other parts, 2 Keble,
487.

Sir Tho. Littleton, Mr. Papillion, and Mr. Child by contract with King Charles
2. were to victual the Fleet at 8d per diem a Head, who made an under contract
with the Pursers of the Ships (two of which, viz. Mr. Gibson, Mr. Hench were
Plaintiffs) to victual at 6d per diem, and gave a Note of 800 l. at 6d per
diem; and before this Contract Sir Thomas was no Trader, as was agreed; and per
Curiam, this Contract to Victual a Fleet is no more than to Table with a
private man, which will never make a Trader within this Statute; which looks on
general Particular Employments.
Trades by which livelihood is gotten ordinarily, not on particular
employments; for so the King's Butler or Steward, or any other Officer might be
a Trader.

2. Although Provisions made for the Fleet, be by the King's direction, but
applied to other purposes than was contracted, yet this is no more than a
particular Command to a man to buy Provisions for that purpose.

3. It was resolved, that if under disguise of such contract, Sir Thomas trade
with other Merchants underhand or secretly; that shall be a Trading within the
Statute. But the selling off a Surplusage Selling off a Surplusage.
is no more a Trading, than a Gentleman's selling off the Surplusage of Hay; and
he must be a Buyer and Seller too, that is within the Acts. It Is not sufficient
to Buy alone, or Sell alone; and one single Act, though it let a man into a
general dealing, will not make a Bankrupt, ^^ewards* Farmers of Customs
no more than a Commission of Excise, or a School-keeper that boards Scholars,
or Stewards of the Inns of Courts, or Farmers of the Customs, Gibson verse.
Tompson. p. 27. Car. 2. B. R.

A Feme Covert Merchant may be a Feme Covert-Merchant and her Husband*
Bankrupt, and so shall her Husband be; it shall be accounted his folly to
suffer his Wife to Trade as such, and the outlawry of the Husband for the Wives
debt shall make him a Bankrupt.

By a Special Provision in 14 Car. 2. c. 14. Noblemen and Gentlemen, not bred
up in Trade, that have put in Stocks into the East India and Guiney Companies.
Companies, and are adventurers for putting in of Money or Merchandise into
Adventurers*
the said Companies, or for adventuring or managing the Fishing, called The
Royal Fishing Trade, are not to be reputed Bankrupts. But persons trading or
traficking in any other way or manner, shall be liable to the said Commissions
of Bankrupts. In the Turkey Company every man Trades on his own account and
estate, and not like the Guiney Company or East India Company.

Now before this Statute of 14 Car. 2. was made, one Sir John Woolstenholme was
A Gentleman* Trader.
one of the Corporation of the East India Company, and a Gentleman of 3000 l.
per annum, and had a Stock in the Company of his own, and sat in the Committee
of the said Company as a Merchant in the management of Trade, and did receive
at several times the Proceed of his Stock upon returns of Ships, and became
indebted to diverse persons, and absconded himself. It was held, that though he
did not get the greatest part of his Living by Buying and Selling, yet his
Employment in the said Committee and Trade, was such a Buying and Selling, as
brought him within the Statutes of Banckrupts, and that the Statute was to be
taken largely for the Creditor against the Bankrupt, and his taking out of his
Stock and Goods, and disposing them was a selling within the Stat. of 21 Jac.
Hughes grand Abridgment. Sir John Woolstenholms Case. But this Verdict and
Judgment against Sir John was reversed by the said Stat. 14 Car. 2. c. 4. but
not to avoid any sale of his Lands made by the Commissioners.

If a man trade in the East India Company, East India. Africa.
and in the African Company, or Guiny Company and abscond, etc. he is not
within the proviso of this Statute, but shall be a Bankrupt. A Virginia
Merchant Virginia.
is within the Statute, and so others.

CHAP. III.
What Acts a Man must do, or suffer to be done, before he can be said to be a
Bankrupt.

13 Eliz. c. 7. IF any such Trader as aforesaid, shall depart the Realm, or
begin to keep his or her House or Houses, or otherwise to absent him or her
self, or take Sanctuary, or suffer him or her self willingly to be Arrested for
any Debt or other thing not grown due for Money delivered, Wares sold, or any
other Just or Lawful Cause, or good Consideration, or Purposes, or will suffer
him or her self to be outlawed, or yield him or her self to Prison, or depart
from his or her Dwelling House or Houses, to the intent or purpose to defraud
or hinder any of his or her Creditors, being also a Subject born as aforesaid,
of the Just Debt or Duty of such Creditor or Creditors, shall be reputed,
deemed and taken for a Bankrupt.

1 Jac. c. 15. -- All and every such Traders (as aforesaid) that shall depart
the Realm, or begin to keep his or her House or Houses, etc. (usque) or yield
him or her self to Prison, or willingly and fraudulently shall procure him or
her self to be Arrested, or his or her Goods, Money or Chattels to be Attached,
or Sequestered, or depart from his or her Dwelling House, or make, or cause to
be made any fraudulent Grant or Conveyance, of his, her or their Lands or
Tenements, Goods or Chattels, to the intent, or whereby his, her or their
Creditors, being Subjects born as aforesaid, shall or may be defeated or
delayed for the recovery of their just and true Debts; or being Arrested for
Debt, shall after his or her Arrest, lie in Prison six months or more upon that
Arrest, or upon any other Arrest, or Detention in Prison for Debt, and lie in
Prison six months upon such other Arrest or Detention, shall be accounted and
adjusted a Bankrupt, to all intents and purposes.

21 Jac. c. 19. For the further description of a Bankrupt. -- That all, and
every such Trader (as aforesaid) who shall either by himself or others by his
procurement, obtain any Protection or Protections, other than such person or
persons as shall be Lawfully protected by the privilege of Parliament, or
shall prefer or exhibit unto his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, or unto any
of the King's Courts, any Petition or Petitions, Bill or Bills against his or
her Creditor or Creditors, or any of them, thereby desiring or endeavoring to
compel or enforce them, or any of them, to accept less than their just and
principal Debts, or to procure time or longer days of payment, than was given
at the time of their Original Contracts; or being indebted unto any Person or
Persons, in the sum of One Hundred Pounds or more, shall not pay or otherwise
compound for the same within six months next after the same shall grow due, and
the Debtor be Arrested for the same, or within six months after an Original
Writ sued out to recover the said Debt, and notice thereof given unto him, or
left in writing at his or their Dwellinghouse, or last place of abode; or being
Arrested for Debt, shall after his or her Arrest lie in Prison two months or
more upon that or any other Arrest or Detention in Prison for Debt; or being
Arrested for the sum of One Hundred Pound or more of just Debt or Debts, shall
at any time after such Arrest escape out of Prison, or procure his enlargement
by putting in Common or Hired Bayl shall be adjudged a Bankrupt. And in the
said cases of Arrest, or lying in Prison for such Debt or Debts, or getting out
by Common or Hired Bayl, from the time of his or her said first Arrest.

This Description consists of these several parts.
1. ABsconding or withdrawing himhimself, and that is Four Ways.

1. By departing the Realm. Mr. Stone in his Lecture, puts this Case. If a man
Departing the Realm.
depart the Realm, and long time after his departure becomes non solvent, his
absenting himself in such a Case brings him within the Statute of Bankrupts, p.
133. It seems otherwise, For suppose a Wealthy Merchant goes beyond Sea with a
good Cargoe, and states his Accounts with his Creditors, who know of his
Voyage, and are pleased therewith, and he sends over several effects to them,
and they trust him in the way of Merchant-factor; and after five or seven years
space, he by Losses becomes nonsolvent, and abides beyond Sea; I conceive this
is not within the Statute. For the Statute of 17 Eliz. c. 7. says, That this
withdrawing or absenting, etc. must be on purpose to defraud his Creditors; and
this can never be construed so; and we must imagine after his nonsolvency, he
must stay to get up his Eects.

2. Departing from their Dwellinghouses. Departure from his House.
It need not be a total departure; for as it is rightly put, If one that has
an House, and yet absents for fear of Arrest, for a time, and then returns, yet
he is a Bankrupt. Suppose a man has no Dwelling House, but sojourns sometime
at one place, and sometime at another, yet if he appear not at his usual times
or places of Trade as formerly, nor can be ^ound as formerly, this is within
the words of 13 Eliz. c. 7. or otherwise absent himself. So a Lodger in a
Chamber. Yet Query: For if he sometimes absent himself, and at other Denial to
be at home.
times when he thinks himself safe from Arrests, appears publicly, as upon the
open Exchange, this seems to be a purging of absenting or withdrawing himself
before, as it was held in the Case of Hind the Banker, who was sometimes denied
at his House, though within; yet afterward appearing upon the open Exchange,
'twas held in that Case, that this appearing publicly purged such his denial
or absence.

3. Keeping their Houses. 20 Jac. B. R. Tailor and Hills Case. It was resolved,
Keeping his House.
That the keeping within his House, unless to defraud and delay Creditors,
makes him not a Bankrupt. But if he conceal himself for Debt, for which he is
sued, and to delay and defraud his Creditors, though but for an hour, this makes
him a Bankrupt. Palmers Rep. 325. Haylor and Hall. Yet it is adjudged, Croke,
Eliz. Fo. 13. -- If a Trader, on notice of Process issued forth against him,
keeps in to secure himself from the Arrest, and after goes forth again; and
then upon like notice keeps his House, and then goes forth again, this brings
him not within the Statutes; because he uses to go at large, and he may be met
with one time or other. But Quere of this Resolution. For if this be Law, then
I do not understand the words in 1 Jac. c. 15. or begin to keep his or her
House: And also certainly this is a keeping in to delay and hinder Creditors,
17 Eliz. c. 7. If the keeping in be to defraud or delay the payment, he is a
Bankrupt: And Sergeant Stone faith well, Fo. 10. If a Trader absents himself
for fear of being Arrested by a Writ de Excommunicato Cap. Or if a Decree in
Chancery be made against him to execute a Conveyance, and he keeps in, or
withdraws himself for fear of being Attached for not performing the Decree;
such withdrawing does not make him a Bankrupt. Aliter, Perhaps if such Decree
had been for payment of Money, as it was held in the Case of one Albyn, a Turkey
Merchant. If a Church warden (Trader) keeps the Church; that is either a
keeping his House, or taking Sanctuary. So if a Miller keep in his Mill, that
is a keeping his House.

4. Taking Sanctuary. These were privileged places formerly, but now the Kings
Officers may go into any place. If a Merchant abscond, and list himself a
Dragooner in the Kings Service, or buy a Captains place; yet a Commission may
go out against him, this is no protection within the the Statute. If a Trader
be pressed into the King's Service, I conceive it otherwise.

II. The next part of the description is, about the Bankrupts being Arrested
and Imprisoned: Which is either

Voluntary and permissive, and fraudulent, Or, Forced, and so continuing in
Prison.

1. Voluntary and permissive, 13 Eliz. Feigned Actions.
c. 27. If any such Trader shall suffer him or her self willingly to be
Arrested for any Debt, or other thing not grown, or due for Moneys delivered,
Wares sold, or any other just or lawful Cause, 1 Jac. 15. Or shall willingly or
fraudulently procure him or her self to be Arrested, 13 Eliz. c. 7. 1 Jac. c.
15. If any such Trader shall yield him or her self to Prison; this is to be
understood of voluntary and feigned Actions; as running into the Kings Bench or
Fleet.

Or shall suffer him or her self to be Outlaw^^.
outlawed. 13 Eliz. c. 7. 1 Jac. c. 15. One Outlawed in Ireland, is not thereby
a Bankrupt here; for that the Record is not pleadable here, Stone 172. Now the
Reason of this Clause is, because by the Outlawry the King is entitled to the
Goods, and so seems to be a fraud to the Creditors, which the Law abhors: But
if the Debtor reverse the Outlawry, before the Commission of Bankrupts sued
out, it seems otherwise, as Mr. Billinghurst conjectures. If it be Reversed for
want of Proclamations, all done in the mean time by the Commissioners is void.

If the Jury or Special Verdict, find a Bankrupt Outlawed, they must find he
was outlawed in Fraudem Creditorum, and to that intent, 1 Keb. 11. Bradford's
Case.

2. Forced Arrest or Imprisonment, and there the description is this: 1 Jac. c.
15. If such a Trader (as aforesaid) being Arrested for Debt, shall after her or
his Arrest lie in Prison six Months or more upon that Arrest, or upon any other
Arrest, or Detention in Prison for Debt, and lie in Prison six Months upon such
Arrest or Detention, shall be judged a Bankrupt. 21 Jac. c. 19. If any such
Trader (as aforesaid) being indebted unto any Person or Persons in the sum of
100 l. or more, shall not pay or otherwise compound for the same within six
Months next after the same shall grow due, and the Debtor be arrested for the
same; or being Arrested for Debt, shall after his or her Arrest lie in Prison
two Months or more upon that or any other Arrest or Detention in Prison for
Debt; or being Arrested for the Sum of 100 l. or more of just Debt or Debts,
shall at any time after such Arrest escape out of Prison, or procure his
Enlargemement by putting in Common or Hired Bail, shall be adjudged a Bankrupt;
and in the said Cases of Arrest, or lying in Prison for such Debt or Debts, or
getting out by Common or Hired Bayl from the time of his, or her said first
Arrest.

Observe this difference,

If such Trader owe 100 l. and upwards, and does not pay or compound for the
same, within six Months next after the same shall grow due, and the Debtor
shall be Arrested for the same, he is a Bankrupt, per 21 Jac. 19. But a Clause
comes after, And being Arrested for Debt, shall lie in Prison two Months and
more; which includes as well under as above an 100 l. So that if a
Statute-trader owes me 100 l. and does not pay it or compound for it within six
Months after its due, and he be Arrested for it, this makes him a Bankrupt; and
if he owe me 20 l. and shall be Arrested for it, and lie in Prison two Months,
this makes him a Bankrupt. Durus Sermo. The Act says, if he do not compound;
suppose his Creditors will not, then he must of necessity lie in Prison; ( upon
any other Arrest or Detention for Debt.) I conceive the meaning of these words
are, for Debt originally, and not Debt by reason of a Fine imposed, etc. For
the Statute has respect to Creditors, either by way of Contract, Exchanging,
Buying, etc. and not Fines or Amerciaments, etc. which no way respect Trade.
(or shall lie in Prison after his or her Arrest two Months or more, on that or
any other Arrest, or Detention in Prison for Debt) on which I will put this
Case. One owes 100 l. and is Arrested and Imprisoned, and in a Fortnights time
pays Lying in Prison.
it; and during that Fortnight another Action of 100 l. is entered against him,
and he pays that in a Fortnights time after; and so another Fortnight he pays a
third Action off. Quere if this be within the Statute lying two Months or more
on that or any other Arrest. I conceive not. For by that payment he is
discharged from that Debt, and so not in Prison on that account.

But the Case which Mr. Billinghurst puts. Suppose (says he, p. --) a man be
Arrested upon a Bond before the day of payment, as by the Custom of London he
may, and lie in Prison two Months, etc. The Quere is, whether this be such an
Arrest for Debt as is within the Statute. It seems doubtful. For though it be
debitum in praesenti, and so a release of all Debts shall extend to it; yet it
is not properly a Debt within the words or intent of the Statute, for that must
be such a Debt for which a Cause of Action is given; and there can be no cause
of Action properly, till the forfeiture, for the Obligation is guided by the
Condition; and the Custom of London will not help it: For the Custom is not,
that he shall be Arrested for the Payment of the Money, but to find better
Sureties. And the Statute only intends Detention in Prison for a just Debt
really due. But I submit my reason to the Judicious Reader.

Mr. Stone puts a Question. If a man remaining in Prison six Months at the Suit
of the King, makes him a Bankrupt? It may be Answered, if it be for a Debt, it
does; if on a Criminal Matter it does not.

The next part of the Description is, 21 Jac. c. 19.

If such a Trader being indebted unto any person or persons, in the Sum of One
Hundred Pounds or more, and shall not pay or otherwise compound for the same
within six Months next after the same shall grow due, and the Debtor be
Arrested for the same, or within six After an Original Writ sued out.
Months next after an Original Writ sued out to recover the said Debt, and
notice thereof be given unto him, or left in writing at his or their
Dwelling House, or last place of abode. This is plain, and needs no
explanation. It was resolved in the Court of Kings Bench, on a Trial against
Sir Anthony Bateman, Term. Mich. 1671. That one may become a Bankrupt, by
reason of a Suit in the Exchequer, although the Statute speaks only of Original
Writs; for the Statutes shall have a beneficial construction. Per Hales.

The next is per Stat. 21 Jac. c. 19.

If such Trader (as aforesaid) being Arrested Escape.
for the Sum of 100 l. or more of just Debt, shall at any time after such
Arrest Common Bayl.
escape out of Prison, or procure his Enlargement by Common or Hired Bail, he
shall be adjudged a Bankrupt; and in the said Cases of Arrest, or lying in
Prison for such Debt or Debts, or getting out by Common or Hired Bail, he shall
be adjudged a Bankrupt from the time of his first Arrest.

Suppose one so Arrested lies in Prisons three Terms, and no Declaration comes
in against him, and he by course of Law is let out at Common-Bayl, Quere, if he
be within the Statute: for that is a Legal Course; and the word (procure) in
the Statute is taken in malam partem.

The next is, per 21 Jac.

If such Trader shall by himself, or others Protections.
by his procurement, obtain any Protection or Protections, other than such
person or persons as shall be lawfully protected by the privilege of
Parliament, shall be adjudged a Bankrupt.

This is plain, All Protections are within this Statute, except Parliament
Protections duly obtained.

The next is,

Or if such Trader shall prefer or exhibit Petition to compound or procure time.
unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, or unto any of the Kings Courts,
any Petition or Petitions, Bill or Bills against his or her Creditor or
Creditors, or any of them; thereby desiring or endeavoring to compel or
enforce them, or any of them to accept less than their just and principal
Debts; or to procure time or longer days of payment, than was given at the time
of their Original Contracts, shall be adjudged a Bankrupt, Statute 21 Jac. c.
19.

But if the Debtor call his Creditors together, and they grant him License for
longer time, this Act makes him not a Bankrupt; this is no fraud, nor intention
to defraud.

The last part of the description is about Frauds; and that is in two
Paragraphs.

1 Per Stat. 1 Jac. 15. If such Trader Fraud as to Goods.
(as aforesaid) shall willingly or fraudulently procure his or her Goods, Money
or Chattels to be Attached or Sequestered, shall be adjudged a Bankrupt. But
then note, That this must be of the Parties immediate procuring, and not by his
mere Default or Latchess. For the words of the Statute are willingly and
fraudulently; therefore Mr. Stone, p. 172. is right in this Case. A Merchant,
etc. has an Impropriate Rectory; the Choire is not repaired, the Tithes are
sequestered; it is no Sequestration within this Statute; for though this is his
default in not repairing the Church, yet it is not of his immediate procuring.
So in Cases of other Attachments out of any Court.

2. Per Stat. 1 Jac. 15. If any such Trader Lands or Goods.
shall make, or cause to be made any fraudulent Grant or Conveyance of his, her
or their Lands or Tenements, Goods or Chattels, to the intent, or whereby his,
her or their Creditors, being Subjects born (but Per 21 Jac. it extends to all
Strangers) shall or may be defeated or delayed for the recovery of their just
and true Debts, shall be adjudged a Bankrupt.

But for the further explication of this last Paragraph about fraudulent Sales
and Conveyances, I shall show

What Sales and Conveyances, made by the Bankrupt, shall be said to be
fraudulent within this Statute, and what not; I mean as to make him a Bankrupt:
for as for what Conveyances shall be adjudged fraudulent in this Statute in
reference to Purchasers, I shall consider afterward.

And they may be considered two ways.

1. Either such as are made long before he becomes a Bankrupt. Or, 2. Such as
are made some short time before; for what is done after the time of Bankrupcy
is totally void.
But first I shall observe any one single Act of these descriptions is
sufficient to make such Trader (as aforesaid) a Bankrupt. And that (as by the
Preamble of the several Statutes against Bankrupts it appears) the main intent
of the Statutes is to relieve Creditors against Frauds and Deceits; though in
some of the forementioned descriptions a delaying of Creditors is provided
against, as the lying in Prison six Months, or two Months, or not paying or
compounding, per 21 Jac. etc. yet Fraud and Cheat lies, or should lie at the
bottom of all; and I understand not the distinction of a Bankrupt by Fraud, and
a Bankrupt by Accident, which I find in some of our Books, as the Laws have
been expounded.

Any Fraudulent Conveyance within the Stat. 13 Eliz. and 25 Eliz. is within
this Clause. But I shall not stand upon the explication of those two Statutes,
it being a distinct Head from my present purpose; but shall come to set down
some Cases, wherein Conveyances and Sales, made by the Bankrupt, have been
adjudged Fraudulent, and which make him such.

If a Trader, finding himself sink in his Estate, and does make a Conveyance of
all his Lands and Goods to Trustees for the payment of his real Debts, and then
absents; yet this Conveyance, though it may be truly and honestly made and
intended, shall not excuse him; for his very absconding makes him a Bankrupt:
But if he abscond not, but declares his intention to pay his Debts, and the
Trustees act accordingly, and pay as far as it will go proportionably, this
Conveyance, without other act shall not make him a Bankrupt; for here is no
fraud.

Of Settlements voluntary.
R. B 9 Jac. Purchased Copyhold-Lands to him and his Son for their Lives, the
Remainder to the Wife in Fee, 11 Jac. he became an Inholder; and about twelve
years after, a Commission of Bankrupcy is awarded against him, and the
Commissioners sell the Copyhold-Land. R. B. dies, his Son enters and made a
Lease to the Plaintiff, the Defendant entered upon him, and he brought
Ejectione Firmae.

1. Per Cur. An Inholder is not a Bankrupt. 2. In this Settlement there does
not appear to be fraud apparent, and none being found, the Plaintiff had
Judgment.

If a man make such a voluntary Settlement, and be indebted at that time, he
shall be an Offender within this Statute of 13 Eliz. The words in the last
Proviso of that Statute are, Provided always, that this Act shall not extend to
any Lands, etc. Free or Copyhold, which shall be hereafter assured by any
Bankrupt before he became a Bankrupt: So always that such Assurance be made
bona fide, and not to the use of the Bankrupt himself, or his Heirs; and that
the Parties to whose use such Assurance shall be made, be not at, or before the
making such Assurance, privy or consenting to the fraudulent purpose of any
such Bankrupt to deceive his Creditors. But if he be not indebted at the time,
if he purchase for another, and give unto another; if no fraud be found, it is
not within the Statutes; or else Lands purchased forty years before might be
defeated, March. Rep. 34. Crisp. and Platt. this Case is well reported by Croke
Car. 548, 549, 550. this Land was given by the Father (six years before he
became a Debtor) to his Son, and no fraud found (being on a special Verdict)
although there be circumstances of a fraud by the sole taking the Profits, until
he became a Bankrupt.

It is reported in Justice Hutton, That Every Deed made to defraud other
Creditors (but those to whom it is made) is not sufficient to make one a
Bankrupt. But if he make any Deed after he begins to be a Bankrupt, that shall
not bind, per Stat. 1 Jac. which makes him a Bankrupt, that makes a fraudulent
Deed: It must not be made long before he becomes a Bankrupt, Hutton. 42, 43. 1
Croke 13. March. 34. The Case was,

A Merchant had made a fraudulent gift of his Goods to the Defendant, but
afterward he went to Church and Exchange, and did Trade and Commerce, yet it
was contained in the Indenture of the Commissioners to the Plaintiff, that he
had made this fraudulent Deed, and that he had traded till a day after, at
which day he absented himself, and the Defendant had Judgment in Trover upon
this Verdict, Causa qua supra. The Statue 1 Jac. that makes him a Bankrupt that
makes such a Deed of Fraud, must not be as this Case is ( viz.) so long before
he becomes a Bankrupt, Hutton 42. Cartright and Underhill. But I conceive the
Law is contrary to this resolution, and the case is misrepored.

Of fraudulent Deeds and Settlements, in reference to Purchases, vide infra.
Of a man's becoming twice a Bankrupt.
Note. In the Case of Jollyser and Horn, Hill. 1657. in Com. B. The Commission
was sued out within five years after he became a Bankrupt, and it was confessed
he was a Bankrupt in 1641. but it was said he became a Bankrupt again in 1649.
And Hales puts this difference, that if one become a Bankrupt by a transient
Act, as suit, etc. he may again become a Bankrupt; but if by a Continued Act,
as Imprisonment, withdrawing himself, etc. he may not become a Bankrupt again;
so with this difference you may understand how it is said, once a Bankrupt and
always a Bankrupt.

CHAP. IV.
Rules for the Constructions of the Statutes, and when the Bankrupcy shall be
said to Commence.

THE Statutes having made a full description of the Bankrupt; do then order
how, and in what manner the Commissioners shall act. Before we fall directly
upon that, I shall name two or three things out of these Statutes which are
necessary and useful to be known. As,

Note 1. Per Stat. 21 Jac. c. 19. These Statutes of Bankrupcy are favorably to
be construed for the Creditors, being made for the suppression of Fraud. Vide
this explained in many Cases hereafter; and yet this should not be too far
extended. For the Statutes are highly penal, and my Lord Bacon's Remark is
good, It is an hard case to torture Laws, that they may torture Men.

Note 2. By Stat. 13 Eliz. He that is a Alien.
Bankrupt must be a Subject born in the King's Dominions or Denizen.

One is born in the Isle of Man. Mr. Stone seems, that he cannot be a Bankrupt,
because it has been adjudged that it is not parcel of the Realm. But without
dispute it is within the Kings Dominions; and the King grants it to a Subject,
and by the precedent Rule the Statute must be construed favorably for
Creditors.

A Denizen of Ireland may be a Bankrupt within the intent of the Statute.

One born in a Ship on the Coast of Flanders, may be said to be born in the
Kings Dominions.

If the Husband be an Alien, and the Wife a Subject; or the Wife an Alien, and
the Husband a Subject; by Mr. Stone it is all one as to Goods, they are both
within the Statute, but the Lands are the Kings. Yet I cannot conceive, that if
an Alien marry a Subject Woman, of a great Fortune, that he can be within the
Statute, for he is no Subject nor Denizen; and in such case I never heard of a
naturalization by an Apron-string.

But by the Proviso in 21 Jac. c. 19. Alien* Denizen.
That Act, and all other Acts made against Bankrupts shall extend to Aliens,
and they shall be subject to the Laws as Bankrupts, and capable of the benefit
as Creditors.

Note 3. When the Commission is to be sued out, and the effect of it; by the
Statute 21 Jac. It is provided, that no Purchaser, for good and valuable
consideration, shall be impeached by virtue of any of the Statutes of
Bankrupts, unless the Commission to prove him or her a Bankrupt, he sued forth
against such Bankrupt, within five years after he or she shall become a
Bankrupt. In other Cases I find no time limited for the taking out the
Commission; though its without doubt the sooner the better for the Creditors.
Vide postea Tit. Settlement, Purchasers; and the Proviso, that the Commission
must be sued within five years after some time when he became a Bankrupt, 1
Keb. 12. Bradford and Bludworth.

Note 4. From what time the Bankrupcy shall commence, per Stat. 21 Jac. c. 19.
If any such Trader (as aforesaid) being Arrested for one hundred pounds, or
more, of just Debt or Debts, shall after such Arrest escape out of Prison, or
procure his Enlargement by Common or Hired Bail; he shall be adjudged a
Bankrupt from the time of his first Arrest. Also by the said Statute,

If such Trader, being indebted unto any person or persons in the sum of 100 l.
or more, shall not pay, or otherwise compound for the same within six Months
next after the same shall grow due, and the Debtor be arrested for the same, he
shall be adjudged a Bankrupt from the time of his said first Arrest. For the
Statute says in the said Cases of Arrest, or lying in Prison.

But the Statute does not mention in the Case of Escape. Yet I conceive it is
within the intention, the escaping being a more notorious offense than the
others.

Per Stat. 21 Jac. A man is only a Bankrupt by relation from the time of his
Arrest; when he makes an escape, or comes out upon Common Bail.

A Merchant is imprisoned, and after becomes a Debtor to A, and then the six
Months pass, A is relievable as a Creditor, for he is not a Bankrupt by
relation, per Mr. Stone, p. 182.

How a Bankrupt is to be accounted from the first Act of Bankrupcy. Vide infra
Cap. 8. Radford and Bludworth's case and Spencer and Vanacres, case.

CHAP. V.
Of Creditors. Who are Creditors within the Statute, and who are not. Of their
Preference. Of their coming in, and within what time they are to come in, or
their refusal; and of Contribution to the Charges. And the Form of an Authority
to receive Contribution Money.

Who are Creditors within the Statute, and who not.
A Merchant enters into a Statute Conisee.
or Recognisance; the Conisee is a Creditor, and must come in and contribute,
or else he shall have no relief.

An Executor becomes a Bankrupt, a Legatee.
Legatee shall be relieved as a Creditor.

Mortgagee is not a Creditor within Mortgagee*
the Statute, and need not come in* for he is provided for by the Statute. So a
a Merchant pledgeth Goods, and becomes a Bankrupt, the party need not come in.

As well Aliens as Denizens may come Aliens.
in as Creditors, per Stat. 21 Jac. c. 19.

A Surety may come in as Creditor. Sureties.
O. and B. are Sureties for J. S. for the payment of Money; and had Counterbonds
from J. S. to save them harmless: The Money was not paid at the day. O. and B.
the Sureties pay it. J. S. after becomes a Bankrupt, Per Curiam. O. and B. are
Creditors within the Statutes, Croke, Jac. 127. Osborn and Churchman.

One has a Debt not yet due, yet he Debt not due.
shall be relieved with rateable respect of abatement for the time.

Mr. Stone says, One that recovers damages Recoverer of Damages.
in Waste or Trespass, shall not be relieved as a Creditor; Quaere, if that be
Law? For in Benson and Flowers Case. Jones Rep. fo. 215. A man recovered
Damages in an Action on the Case for Words, and became a Bankrupt, after
Judgment, when it is reduced to a certainty, it may be assigned. By the same
reason, if the Plaintiff recover Damages against the Defendant, and has
Judgment, and the Defendant becomes a Bankrupt, the Plaintiff is a Creditor: It
is a Debt due to him, and Action of Debt lies upon the Judgment. Quaere.

The Plaintiff that has the Defendants He that has the Defendants Body in
Execution.
Body in Execution, shall not come in to be relieved. But if he have his Body
in Execution on a Statute Merchant, aliter, per Mr. Stone. Quaere.

A. is Bail for B. either to bring his Body, Bail.
or to pay the Condemnation-mony. B. becomes a Bankrupt, and absents, A. pays
the Money, he may come in as Creditor.

If one trust a Bankrupt, after he becomes Trusting a Bankrupt.
a Bankrupt, he shall not be relievable as a Creditor.

Vide infra, The Case of Craven and Knight in Chancery.

A Statute extended upon a Bankrupts Lands, before the Liberate filed, Lord
Chancellor ordered to take like composition with other Creditors. Overman
against Wright, Hill. 17 Jac. li. B. fo. 807.

Per Stat. 21 Jac. It is enacted, That Judgmentees, Conusees and Attachers by
Foreign Attachment to come in as Creditors for their share.
all, and every Creditor and Creditors, having security for his, or their
Debts, by Judgment, Statute, Recognisance, Specialty with Penalty, or without,
or having no security, or having made Attachment in London, or any other place,
by virtue of any Custom, there used, of the Goods and Chattels of any such
Bankrupt, whereof there is no Execution or Extent served and executed upon any
the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, and other Estate of such
Bankrupt, before such time as he, or she shall, or do become a Bankrupt, shall
not be relieved upon any such Judgment, Statute, Recognisance, etc. for any
more than a rateable part of their just and due Debts with the other Creditors
of the said Bankrupt, without respect to any such penalty, or greater sum
contained in any such Judgment, Statute, Recognisance, etc. Of Foreign
Attachment, Vide infra.

Of Preference.
THE Bankrupt cannot prefer one Creditor before another, 2 Rep. 23.

The King shall be preferred before a The King.
private person by the Stat. 21 Jac. But one part shall be allotted to him by
the Commissioners, according to the proportion that other Creditors have. Sir
Simon Nevels Case, Hill. 3. Car. 1. and Pasch. 1650. Pickerings Case.

It was moved in Monck and Claytons Case, 3 Keb. 68. and p. 14. That Money of
the Plaintiffs being a Bankrupt, and an immediate Debtor to the King by returns
of Monys from the Commissioners of Excise, might not be delivered out of Court,
to the Assignee of the Commissioners of Bankrupts, Sed non allocatur. But the
Money was ruled to be delivered to the Assignee, and that the King may by Scire
Fac. recover it against them.

As to the Case of the King, when the King has Title at Common Law, as by
Outlawry, etc. and the Subject Title by Act of Parliament, as in this Case of
the Creditors, which shall be preferred, Vide infra, sub Titulo Assignment.

Of Creditors coming in, and of Contribution.
IT is Enacted, That Per Stat. 1 Jac. c. 17.
it shall be Lawful for any of the Creditors of the said Bankrupt within four
Months after any such Commission shall be sued forth, and until distribution
shall be made by the said Commissioners for the payment of the Bankrupts Debts,
as in such Case has been used, to partake and join with the other Creditors,
that shall sue forth any such Commission for satisfaction and payment of his,
her or their Debts, to him or them owing, without any Hindrance, Let or
Disturbance of any of the same Commissioners, or of any of the other Creditors,
or of any such Bankrupts; the same Creditors so coming in to contribute to the
Charges of the said Commission; and that if the said Creditors come not in
within four Months, then the Commissioners to have power to distribute.

If certain Creditors sue a Commission, and others within four Months or more
being Creditors, come before distribution, and will join in the charge of the
Commission, and all that belongs to it, and tender their parts, they shall not
be refused, but have their equal parts as Creditors. But if any Distribution be
made of any part of the Estate, no Creditors are to be admitted after, that
come not in before, Hobert 287. Hutton 37. Rugles Case. So that they may come
in at any time before distribution.

A Merchants Factor refuses to come Refusal.
in as a Creditor, but claims Goods given to him by the Bankrupt in
satisfaction of his Debt, since he became Bankrupt, he shall not have any thing
in the Distribution.

Every Creditor may take notice of Notice of the Commission.
the Commission, it being matter of Record, and so must take care to come in in
time, 2 Rep. 26. b. Cullamers Case. But it is a good Custom now to give public
notice in the Gazets, or filing such Notice at Guild Hall, or the Exchange, or
such public places.

The offer of Creditors to be joined, Contribution,
and before they be partakers, is not an effectual offer, without offering to
be Contributory to the Charges; but to offer any particular sum is not
necessary. Hutton. p. 38.

In Canc. inter Fuller and al' contra Lance and al' Hill. 14. Car. 1. A
Bankrupt makes an agreement with his Creditors, and after breaks the same; some
of the Creditors take out a Commission, and after seven Months assign the
Estate; and other Creditors who have notice of the Commission, prefer their
Bill to have the Agreement performed, or be admitted to an equal dividend, but
they were denied relief.

The Form of an Authority to receive Contribution Money.
MEmorand', We whose Names are hereunto subscribed, being the major part of the
Commissioners, named and Authorized by the King and Queens Majesty's
Commission, grounded upon the several Statutes made concerning Bankrupts
awarded against J. S. do hereby think fit, and order by, and with the Consent
of the Creditors of him the said J. S. whose Names are subscribed ( though this
is not necessary) that the said Creditors of J. S. who are all willing to come
in and pay Contribution-mony toward the charges of suing forth and prosecuting
the said Commission, and discovering and recovering of the Estate of the said
J. S. Such Creditors that have already, or shall hereafter come into the said
Commission in due time, and seek relief thereby, shall and are hereby ordered
to pay the sum of -- in the pound for Contribution-mony, for every of their
several Debts which they claim to be due and owing to them by, and from the
said J. S. And we likewise further order and think fit, that the said
Contribution-mony be paid into the hands of A. B. of etc. who is appointed
hereby to receive the same, and to disburse the same, as he shall be by us
directed, and as occasion shall be.

It would be convenient that the Commissioners take Bond of the Treasurer of
the Contribution-mony, to disburse as he shall be by them directed, and to
render a due account of all his Receipts, Payments and Disbursements.

Of Distribution, Vide infra.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Proceedings of the Commissioners. The Form of the Oath. Of the Style of
the Depositions, Of declaring him to be a Bankrupt. Inhibition. A Warrant for
Witnesses. A Warrant to send one to the Goal who refuses to be sworn, or to
answer; and of Proof of Debts.

HAving considered the Statutes, and cited many excellent Cases, and
Resolutions of the Judges, what it is that makes a man become a Bankrupt, in
reference to his Trade or Profession, and his Acts or Omissions, and who are
Creditors, and what they must do if they will be relieved; I shall now come to
treat of the behavior and management of the Commissioners in this most weighty
and important Concern.

The Commissioners in the first place summon Witnesses to appear before them,
or rather they have them generally provided ready by the Creditors, to examine
first, as to his Dealing and Trade, and then as to his Absconding, Fraudulent
Deeds, Imprisonment, or other Acts which bring him within the Statutes. And for
the better Certainty and Evidence, they take the Depositions of the Witnesses
in Writing.

The Form of the Oath to be Administered to the Witnesses upon their Examination.
YOU are here produced as a Witness, by virtue of a Commission out of the High
Court of Chancery, to us, and others directed, to be by us examined concerning
the Bankrupcy of A. B. late of -- etc. Now to such Questions and Iterrogatories
as shall be propounded and administered to you concerning the said A. B. his
Trade or Profession, his Absconding, and other Acts which he has done or
suffered, by which he may discovered to be a Bankrupt; and also concerning his
Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels, Debts and Duties, Frauds and
Concealments, and other matters and things in obedience to the said Commission,
and pursuant to the several Statutes made concerning Bankrupts, you shall true
and direct Answer make, and swear the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but
the Truth, So help you God. Or you may put the Form of the Oath shorter if you
please.

The Style of the Depositions.
EXaminations and Depositions of Witnesses, and other Proceedings, had taken
and executed the day of, etc. in the Second Year of the Reign, etc. Anno. Dom.
and at other times and places by Adjournment by W. W. Esquire S. M. and C. L. by
Virtue of the King and Queens Commission of Bankrupts under the Great Seal of
England (grounded upon the several Statutes made concerning Bankrupts) bearing
Date at Westminster the day of etc. and awarded against J. L. of etc. and
directed to W. W. Esquire R. P. Esquire S. M. L. C. and A. B. Gent. Commissioners
thereby appointed for the Execution thereof, or any four or three of them as
follows.

After the Depositions of the Witnesses to the Trade or Profession, and to the
Offense or Acts committed or suffered; sometimes the Commissioners sign a short
Memorandum to this purpose.

Upon the Evidence and Examinations Declaring him a Bankrupt.
aforesaid, We whose Names are subscribed, being the major part of the
Commissioners appointed for the execution of this Commission, do conceive that
the aforesaid T. L. the day, etc. was, and did become a Bankrupt within all, or
some of the Statutes made concerning Bankrupts; and accordingly we declare him
to he a Bankrupt, and to have been so from that time.

But the Commissioners are generally cautious in declaring the Bankrupcy from a
certain time, but leave it to a Trial at Law, in case there be any Question or
Doubt of it; and this for their own security against Actions that may be
brought against them.

Note. The declaring of the Commissioners whether he be a Bankrupt or not, does
not acquit him or charge him, unless in truth it were so. 2 Siderfin, 176.

Then let the Commissioners issue out their Inhibition to all persons who are,
or have been Debtors to the Bankrupt, or have had dealings with him, or have
any of his Goods and Effects in their hands, not to pay any of their Debts, or
deliver any of the Goods to him, or his Order. The Form of which Inhibition you
may soon frame, or repair to a Gazett.

It is convenient to fix this in some public place of the Town or Towns
adjacent where the Bankrupt lived; and let them give notice to the Creditors to
prove their Debts.

As to the proof of Debts. The Commissioners Proof of Debts.
must swear the Creditors which will come in, of the Truth and Value of the
Debts due to them.

The Form of the Oath for proving a Debt.
YOU shall swear that A. B. late of, etc. at the time of his becoming a
Bankrupt, was justly, and Bona Fide indebted to you in the sum of and that you
have not sithence been any ways paid or satisfied for the same, or any part
thereof.

Debts proved upon Oath by the Creditors, as follows.

Let every man subscribe his Debt.

Be sure to observe and enquire if the Debts were contracted during the Trade.

Vide of this more infra.

A Warrant from the Commissioners for Witnesses.
WHereas the King and Queens Majesty's Commission under the Great Seal of
England, bearing date the etc. last past at Westminster, grounded upon the
several Statutes made concerning Bankrupts, has been awarded against A. B. of
etc. and directed to us, who have hereunto subscribed our Names, and put our
Seals; and to B. etc. (here name the rest of the Commissioners) And we being
the major part of the Commissioners therein named, having taken upon us the
execution of the said Commission; and it appearing to us, upon good and
sufficient proof, That the said A. B. has for several years last past gained
his living by buying and selling of Cattle, Malt and other Merchandise, and
thereby became indebted to several persons in the sum of one hundred pounds and
upwards; and whereas upon good and sufficient proof to us made, we have
adjudged the said A. B. to be a Bankrupt to all intents and purposes, within
the true intent and meaning of the said several Statutes made against
Bankrupts, some, or one of them, before the suing forth of the said Commission.
And whereas we are credibly informed, that you whose Names are hereunto
subscribed, are necessary Witnesses for the discovery of the said A. B. and his
Estate: These are therefore in their Majesty's Names, and by virtue of the
Statutes and Commission aforesaid, to Will, Require, Charge and Command you,
and every of you, whose Names are subscribed; That you be, and personally
appear before us, at the House of D. E. situate, etc. upon Tuesday the day of
this instant Month of by eight of the Clock of the same day; then, and there to
Answer such Questions and Interrogatories as shall be then, and there demanded
of you, and administered to you concerning the said A. B. and his Estate;
whereof you are not to fail, under the penalties, in and by the said Acts
provided against Contemners of the said Authority. Given, etc.

Having served those Persons you intend for Witnesses with this, leave an
Abstract of it in writing with them severally. As thus,

E S.
YOU are hereby summoned personally to be, and appear before the Commissioners,
on Thursday, the day of instant by Nine of the Clock in the Forenoon, at the in
L. in the County of etc. concerning a Commission of Bankrupcy in prosecution
against L. M. of etc. And hereof you are not to fail at your peril. Dated, etc.

A. B. C. D. E. F.


A Warrant to Commit a Person to the Goal who refuses to be Sworn, and to
Answer Interrogatories.
WHereas their Majesty's Commission under the Great Seal of England, bearing
date the day of last past, at Westminster, grounded upon the several Statutes
concerning Bankrupts, has been awarded against A. B. of etc. directed to us,
who have hereunto put our Seals, and subscribed our Names, and to B. L. etc.
and we being the major part of the Commissioners therein named, having taken
upon us the execution of the same Commission; and it appearing to us upon good
and sufficient proof, That the said A. B. has for several years last past
sought his livelihood by buying and selling of Cattle, Malt and other
Merchandise, and thereby become indebted to several persons in the sum of one
thousand pounds and upwards; and whereas upon good and sufficient proof to us
made, we have adjudged the said A. B. a Bankrupt, to all intents and purposes,
within the true intent and meaning of the said several Statutes made against
Bankrupts, some or one of them, before the Date, and suing forth of the same
Commission; and whereas J. S. was suspected to have imbesled, concealed and
secretly disposed of a great part of the Goods and Estate of the said A. B. and
was duly summoned to appear before us; but has made default in contempt of our
Authority; but at length coming and appearing before us, we then sitting in
execution of the said Commission, did obstinately refuse to be sworn, and make
answer to such Interrogatories and Questions, as we by virtue of the said
Commission required him to answer unto concerning the said A. B. and his
Estate, according to the true meaning of the said Statutes, for the discovering
the Estate of the said A. B. in contempt of the said Statutes, and of the
Commission aforesaid, and the Authority thereby to us given. These are
therefore to Will, Require and Authorize you, and every of you, immediately
upon receipt hereof, to Apprehend, Arrest, and to take into your Custody the
Body of the said J. S. and him safely to convey to their Majesty's Goal for the
County of and him there to deliver to the Keeper of the said Goal, who is
hereby Required and Authorized by virtue of the said Commission and Statutes
aforesaid, to receive the said J. S. into his Custody, and him safely to keep
and detain, without Bail or Mainprise, until he shall conform himself to our
Authority, and be thence delivered by due course of Law. And for his, and your
so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant. Given under our Hands and
Seals, the day of etc.

Commissioners commit one to the Goal for refusing to answer Interrogatories
for the escape of the Committee; Action is brought against the Jailer. The
Action lies.

There were three exceptions to the Declaration.

1. Because it is said the Lord Chancellor dedit plenam Potestatem, which is not
good, for his Office is Ministerial, and the Statute gives the Power; but per
Curiam, the Declaration is good; for it is per Commissionem dedit, and it is
also juxta Statut. 2. Exception, it is alleged the Defendant suffered him to
escape, and he does not say he was not satisfied. Per Cur. it is good, and
shall be intended he is not satisfied, and the escape is the Tort. 3. It is
alleged the Commissioners offered Interrogatories to him, and it is not showed
what they were. But this was overruled, and Judgment pro Quer. 1 Roll. Rep. 47.
Barnes and Carry against the Sheriff of Bristol.
CHAP. VII.
The Commissioners Power in reference to the Bankrupt: Of Proclamation, and the
form of it; of breaking Houses, etc. in reference to the Bankrupts Wife: Of the
Examination of the Bankrupt and his Wife: Of the Examination of Witnesses, and
others for the discovery of the Estate and Debts of the Bankrupt: Of the
Penalties of refusing to be Sworn, to be Examined, or to Discover: Of Perjury;
and the forfeitures, how to be applied: And of Interrogatories.

Commissioners Power.
1. As to the Bankrupt himself.

To cause him to appear By Proclamation. By breaking up Houses.


IF any such Bankrupt Per Stat. 13 Eliz.
does withdraw himself from his usual Mansion House; that then the
Commissioners, or the major part of them have full Power and Authority to award
five Proclamations Proclamations.
in the King's Name, upon five sundry Market-days, in such places, near the
place where such Bankrupt has commonly dwelled, or made his abode; commanding
them by the same Proclamations in the King's Name, to return with all
convenient speed, and to yield his Body before the said Commissioners, having
Authority as aforesaid, or one of them, at such time and place, as by the said
Proclamation shall be appointed: And if the said person do not repair and yield
his or their Body, as is aforesaid, that then the Body of such Offender shall
be adjudged and taken to all intents and purposes out of the Kings Protection.
And Concealing the Person of the Offender.
that also every Person and Persons that shall wittingly and willingly Receive,
Detain, or keep secretly any Person or Persons so demanded by Proclamation, as
aforesaid, shall suffer such pains, by Imprisonment of his, or their Bodies, or
to pay such Fine to our Sovereign Lord the King's Majesty, as to the Lord
Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal (being informed thereof) by the
Commissioners so to be appointed, as aforesaid, or the major part of them shall
seem meet and convenient for the said Offense or Offenses. Per Stat. 1 Jac. c.
15. The said Commissioners may call before them, or the major part of them the
said Bankrupt; and if upon lawful warning left or Warning.
made in Writing at three several times, at the dewlling place or House where
the said Bankrupt, his Wife, or Family for the most part of his abode did
Lodge, or remain within one year next before he, she or they became Bankrupt,
the said Bankrupt shall not appear before the said Commissioners, or the
greater part of them, that then, and thenceforth it shall be Lawful for the
greater number of the said Commissioners to appoint, to proclaim the said
Proclaim.
party a Bankrupt, at such public place or places where the said Commissioners
shall think meet, warning him, her or them to appear before them upon the said
Commission at some time appointed. And that if upon such several Proclamations
made in some public place, the party offending yield not his Body, etc. the
Commissioners may award a Warrant to such fit persons as they Warrant to
Apprehend.
think meet, to apprehend the Body or Bodies of such Offender, and to bring him
before the said Commissioners, wheresoever the said party or parties offending
may be found in place privileged, or not, to be examined by the said
Commissioners, or the greatest part of them.

After notice left in writing three several times as the Statute directs; then
the Commissioners may proceed to Proclamation.

The Form of a Proclamation.
OYes, Oyes, Oyes, The King and Queens Majesty's do straightly Charge and Command
A. B. late of that he on the day of this Instant, etc. do yield his Body before
E. M. Esquire etc. their Majesty's Commissioners, named and appointed for the
execution of the Statutes of Bankrupts against the said A. B. or the major part
of them that shall be then present at the House of R. L. etc. upon the Pains
and Peril in the said Statutes in that case made, provided and appointed.

God Save the King and Queen.
The Commissionrs Power in breaking up Houses.
BY the Stat. 21 Jac. c. 29. It is enacted, That in the execution of the said
Commission, it shall be Lawful to, and for the said Commissioners, or the
greater part of them, or any other Person or Persons, Officer or Officers, by
them, or the greater part of them, to be deputed and appointed by their Warrant
or Warrants under their Hands and Seals, to break open the House or Houses,
Chambers, Shops, Warehouses, Doors, Trunks or Chests of the said Bankrupt,
where the said Bankrupt or any of his or her Goods or Estate shall be, or
reputed to be; and to seize upon, and order the Body, Goods, Chattels, ready
Money, and other Estate of such Bankrupt, as by the said former Laws are limited
and appointed, whether it be by Imprisonment of his or her Body, or otherwise
as the said Commissioners, or the greater part of them shall think meet.

The Commissioners may break open the House of a Bankrupt for Debt of the
Debtor; and if the Bankrupt convey his Goods to his Neighbors House, the
Commissioners may not, but the Sheriff may break open the House, because he is
a sworn Officer of the Kings. The Commissioners may break open the Booth of
another to come to the Bankrupts Goods, per Mr. Barckdale, Lect. Lincoln's Inn,
1627. But Quaere if the Commissioners do not now break open any House, Shop or
Room where the Bankrupt or his Goods are, though they are in the House of a
Stranger, Sed Cave, for this part of the Statute is very penal, and shall be
taken strictly. And possibly a Judge at a Trial may think that to be Law, which
upon mature reflection appears not to be so.

The Commissioners Power concerning the Bankrupts Body, and concerning the
Bankrupts Wife.
The words of the Statutes concerning this are as follow.

PER Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 7. It is enacted, That the Commissioners by virtue of
that Act, and of such Commission, shall have full Power and Authority to take
by their Discretions such Order and Direction with the Body and Bodies of such
person, wheresoever he or she may be had, either in his or her House or Houses,
Sanctuary or elsewhere, as well by Imprisonment of his or her Body or Bodies,
as also with all his or her Lands, etc.

Per Stat. 1 Jac. c. 15. It is enacted, That if upon Lawful Warning or Notice
left, or made in Writing three several times at the Dwelling House, etc. (vide
supra) the Bankrupt shall not appear, then they may make Proclamation
Proclamation.
( prout supra) and if then the Bankrupt appear not, then the Commissioners are
empowered to award a Warrant to Warrant.
such sit Person or Persons as they think meet, to apprehend the Body of such
Offender, and to bring him, her or them so offending before the said
Commissioners, wheresoever the Parties so Offending may be found in place
privileged or not, to be examined by the said Commissioners, or the greater
part of them. And if therein the Offender or Offenders shall refuse to be
examined, or refuse to answer fully to every Interrogatory, to him, her or them
to be administered by the said Commissioners, or the greater part of them, it
shall be lawful for the said Commissioners, or the greater part of them, to
commit the said Offender or Offenders to some close or strait Imprisonment,
Imprisonment.
there to remain until he, she or they better conform him or her self.

And by the Stat. 21 Jac. c. 19. It is Enacted, That after such time as any
Person shall by the said Commissioners, executing the said Commission, or the
greater part of them, be lawfully adjudged or declared to be a Bankrupt; the
said Commissioners, executing such Commission, shall have Power and Authority
to examine upon Oath, the Wife Wife Examined
and Wives of all and every such Bankrupt, for the finding out and discovering
of the Estate and Estates, Goods and Chattels of such Bankrupt or Bankrupts,
concealed, kept or disposed of by such Wife or Wives, in their own Person and
Persons, or by their own Act or Means, or by any other Person or Persons. And
that she and they, the said Wife and Wives shall incur such danger and penalty
for not coming before the said Commissioners, or for refusing to be sworn and
examined, or for not disclosing the truth upon her or their examination, as in
and by the said former Laws, or either of them is already made and provided
against any other Person or Persons in the like Cases.

So that by this Law the Wise must be summoned to come before the
Commissioners, and if she come not, or refuse to be sworn, they may imprison
her as well as her Husband: So likewise if she refuse to discover the truth.

A Bankrupt was committed to the Fleet, the Warrant to the Warden of the Fleet
was, to receive and keep in Prison, to answer and to satisfy all such matters
as shall be objected against him. The Question was, If the Commissioners may
license him to go at large to treat about his Debts. Per Cur. If the Warrant
had been that the party should have been in Execution, then he could not be
enlarged; but the Court advised them to take security, lest he should withdraw
himself. But if one had Judgment against a Bankrupt, and upon an Habeas Corpus
brought, he is committed in Execution, without a Cap' Utlagat' then the
Commissioners cannot enlarge him, Noy 140. Edwards* Case.

By Stat. 21 Jac. c. 19. It is Enacted, That if any Bankrupt, upon his or her
Examination or Examinations to be taken before the said Commissioners executing
the said Commission, be found fraudulently or deceitfully to have conveyed The
Bankrupts fraudulent conveyance away of his Goods.
away his or her Goods, Chattels, Lands, Tenements, Offices, Fees, Rents or
Annuities, or other Estate, or any part thereof, to the value of 20 s. or
above, to the end and purpose to hinder the execution of this Statute, or of
any other the aforesaid Statutes, or thereby to defraud, delay or hinder his or
her Creditors of the same, and shall not upon his or her examination discover
unto the said Commissioners, and (if it lie in his or her power) deliver unto
the said Commissioners all that Estate, Goods and Chattels, so fraudulently and
deceitfully conveyed away, as aforesaid, or by him or her, his or her means
kept or detained from the said Commissioners, or that cannot make it appear
unto the said Commissioners, that he or she has sustained some casual loss,
whereby he or she is disabled to pay, what he or she then owed, shall or may be
indicted for such fraud or Indictment*
abuse, at the Assizes or General Sessions, to be holden before the Judges of
Assise, or Justices of the Peace of the County or Place where he or she shall
become Bankrupt: And if upon such Indictment or Indictments, the Bankrupt be
thereof convicted, he or she so convicted, shall be set upon the Pillory in
some Pillory.
public place, for the space of two hours, and have one of his or her Ears
nailed to the Pillory, and cut off.

Of the Examination of the Bankrupt. his Wife. other Persons as Witnesses,
Concealers, etc.
And of their refusal to swear and discover the Truth, and the Consequence.
BY Stat. 1 Jac. c. 15 If upon five several Proclamations the Bankrupt appear
not, the Commissioners may award a Warrant to apprehend his Body, and to bring
him before the said Commissioners wheresoever he may be found, to be examined
by the Commissioners, prout prius more at large.

And that it shall be lawful for the said Commissioners, or the greater part of
them, to examine the said Offender or Offenders upon such Interrogatories
touching the Lands, Interrogatories.
Tenements, Goods, Chattels, Debts, Bills, Bonds, Books of Accounts, and such
other things as may tend to disclose his, her or their Estate, or the secret
Grants, Conveyances, Eloyning of his or their Lands, Tenements, Goods, Money and
Debts, as they shall think meet: And if the Bankrupt shall refuse to be
examined, or to answer fully to every Interrogatory, that then he shall be
committed to Prison, prout supra.

By Stat. 21 Jac. c. 19. The Commissioners have Power to examine the Bankrupts
Wife upon Oath; and if she come not, or refuse to be sworn, then to incur the
like penalty with others, prout supra more at large.

Of the Examination of Witnesses, and others, for the discovery of the
Bankrupts Estate Real and Personal, and his Debts, and the penalty for refusing
to be sworn and examined, or to discover.
PER Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 7. It is Enacted,

That if after any such Act or Offense committed, and complaint thereof made to
the said Commissioners or the major part of them, by any party grieved
concerning the premises, knowing, supposing or suspecting any of the Goods,
Chattels, Wares, Merchandises or Debts of such Offender or Offenders, Debtor or
Debtors to be in custody, use, occupying, keeping or possession of any person
or persons, or any person or persons to be indebted to any such Offender or
Offenders, do make relation thereof to the said Commissioners, so to be
appointed, or the major part of them; That then the said Commissioners,
Concealers.
or the most part of them, shall by virtue hereof and of the said Commission,
have full Power and Authority to send for, and call before them by Debtors.
such Process, Ways or Means, as they shall think convenient by their
discretions, all and every such person and persons so known, suspected or
supposed to have any such Goods, Chattels, Wares, Merchandises or Debts in his
or their custody, use, occupation, keeping or possession, or supposed or
suspected to be indebted to such Offender or Offenders; and upon their
appearance to examine them, and every of them, as well by their Oaths as
otherwise, by such ways and means as the said Commissioners, or the major part
of them by their discretions shall think meet and convenient, for, and upon the
specialty, certainty, true declaration and knowledge of all, and singular such
Goods, Chattels, Wares, Merchandises and Debts of any such Offender or
Offenders, as be supposed or suspected to be in his or their custody, use,
occupation or possession, and all such Debts as by them or any of them shall be
supposed or suspected to be owing to any such Offender or Offenders.

And if any such person or persons, upon such Examination, do not disclose, and
plainly declare and show the whole Truth of such things as he or they shall be
examined of concerning the premises to his knowledge, or do deny to swear;
then every such person or persons, so denying to swear, or being examined, do
not declare the plain and whole Truth concerning the Premises, upon due proof
thereof to be made before the said Commissioners, or the major part Ponalty for
Obstinacy.
of them, by Witnesses, Examination or otherwise, as to the said Commissioners,
or the major part of them shall seem sufficient in that behalf, shall lose and
forfeit double the value of such Goods, Chattels, Wares, Merchandises and
Debts, by them, or any of them so concealed, and not wholly and plainly
declared and showed; which forfeiture shall be levied by the said
Commissioners, or the major part of them, of the Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels of such persons so denying to swear, or not
disclosing the whole Truth, as is aforesaid, by such ways and means, and in
such manner and form, as is before limited and appointed for the principal
Offender or Offenders, Debtor or Debtors, and the same forfeitures to be
distributed or employed to, or for the satisfaction and payment of the Debts of
the said Creditor or Creditors, in such like manner, rate and form, as is above
declared concerning the ordering of the Lands and Tenements, Officers Fees,
Goods and Chattels of such Offender or Offenders, Debtor or Debtors, as is
aforesaid.

Per Stat. 1 Jac. c. 15. For a further inforcement for discovery of the
Bankrupts Estate, by Examination of Trustees, Concealers, or of such that have
Conisance of his Estate, according to the Concealers.
Statute of 13 Eliz. It is Enacted, That if any person or persons, being known,
supposed or suspected to have or detain any part of the Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels or Debts of the said Bankrupt, or to be indebted
to, or for the benefit of the said Bankrupt, shall after lawful warning to the
said person or persons given, to come before the said Commissioners, or the
greater part of them, to be examined according to the intent of the said
Statute, refuse to come, or shall not come before the said Commissioners at the
time appointed, having no lawful impediment, such as shall be admitted and
allowed of by the said Commissioners or the major part of them, and which shall
be then signified or made known to the said Commissioners at the time of their
assembly; or that any such person or persons, having knowledge or warning of
any other assembly or meeting of the said Commissioners again, shall not come
and appear Refusal to appear, or answer, or disclose.
before them at such time as he or she lawfully may come, having no such lawful
impediment as shall then be made known to the said Commissioners, and by them
admitted and allowed of as aforesaid, or being come before them, shall refuse
to be sworn, and to make answer to such Interrogaorties as shall be administered
unto him or them, according to the true intent and meaning of the said Statute
made in the 13 Eliz. or of this present Act, That then it shall be lawful for
the said Commissioners to commit to such Ward or Prison, as to them or the
major part shall be thought meet, all such person and persons as shall so
refuse to be sworn, and make answer to such Interrogatories as shall be so
ministered as aforesaid; and also to direct their Warrants to such person or
persons, as to them or the greater part of them shall be thought meet, to
apprehend and arrest such person and persons as shall refuse to appear before
them as aforesaid, and to bring him, her or them before the said Commissioners
or the greater part of them, to be examined, as abovesaid; and upon his, her or
their refusal to come, or to be examined before the said Commissioners, as
aforesaid, to commit the said party so refusing, to such Prisons as the said
Commissioners or the greater part of them shall think meet, there to remain
without Bail or Mainprise, until such time as the said party so refusing to
come, or to be sworn to answer before the said Commissioners, shall submit him
or her self to the said Commissioners, and be by them examined according to the
true intent of the said Statute, and of this present Act.

Note. By Stat. 1 Jac. c. 15. It is provided, Witnesses. Charges.
That such Witnesses as shall be sent for, shall have such costs and charges as
the Commissioners in their discretion shall think fit, the same to be rateably
born by the Creditors according to the proportion of their Debts.

Per Stat. 21 Jac. 15. The Commissioners may examine upon Oath, or by any other
ways or means, as to them shall seem meet, any person or persons for the
finding out and discovery of the Truth and certainty of the several Debts due
and owing to all such Creditor or Creditors, as shall seek relief by the
Commission.

Two refuse to be examined, and the Commissioners make a joint Commitment, it is
ill; and it was quousque they conform, and upon return of the Habeas Corpus, it
is not averred that they were obstinate, 29 Car. 2. B. R. Penrice verse. Wing.

Note. Action on the Case lies against a Sheriff for suffering one to escape,
who was committed by the Commissioners of Bankrupts, because he refused to be
examined, 1 Roll. Rep. 47. More 834. -- -- The Case of the Sheriffs of Bristol,
Vide supra.

The Commissioners committed one Jeakile for refusing to swear upon a
Commission against Thompson. Now he did not refuse to swear, but had sworn he
had none of the Bankrupt Thompsons Estate in his hands, but he would not answer
whether any of Thompsons Estate came to his hands before the Commssion sued
out, etc. having received his own Debt before, nor per Curiam is he compellable
to swear so, upon 1 Jac. c. 15. and then he was committed by A. B.
Commissioners, for refusing to swear, etc. whereas the Commission was to A. B.
and others, it appears not that A. and B. were a majority or a Quorum, which is
ill, 3 Keb. 837. Rex verse. Jeakill.

Of Perjury, By the Bankrupt, Witnesses, Concealers and others, and the
Penalties.

1 Jac. c. 15. IF upon the Bankrupts examination it appears that he or she, or
they have committed any wilful or corrupt Perjury, tending to the hurt or
damage of the Creditors of the said Bankrupt, to the value of 10 l. of Lawful
Money of England or above, the party so offending shall or may be thereof
indicted in any of the King's Majesty's Courts of Record, and being lawfully
corrected thereof, shall stand upon the Pillory in some public place, by the
space of two hours, and have one of his Ears nailed to the Pillory, and cut
off. And if any other person or persons, other than the Bankrupt, either by
subornation, unlawful procurement, sinister persuasion, or means of any others,
or by his own Act, consent or agreement shall wilfully and corruptly commit any
manner of wilful perjury by his deposition to be taken before the said
Commissioners, or the greater part of them, as aforesaid, that then the Parties
so offending, and all, and every person and persons that shall unlawfully and
corruptly procure any such unlawful, wilful and corrupt Perjury, shall or may
therefore be indicted in any of the Kings Majesty's Courts of Record; and after
his or their conviction thereof, shall incur such forfeitures, and receive and
suffer such pains and punishments as are limited by the Statute concerning
perjury, in the 5th Year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth.

The punishment by the said Statute is, The Perjured Person shall forfeit 20 l.
and endure half an years Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize, and his Oath
never after to be received. And if he has no Goods or Lands of that value,
then to be set in the Pillory in some Market Town, and to have both his Ears
nailed, and to be disabled to be a Witness in any Court, 5 Eliz. c. 9. And by
the same Statute the procurers of Perjury are to forfeit 40 l. and if they have
not Estate of that value, then Imprisonment for half a year, and Pillory, and
to be admitted no Witness in any Court of Record.

Of Forfeitures on these Acts, and how to be disposed.
PER Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 7. The Commissioners are empowered to call before them
all such Persons as are known, supposed or suspected to have any Goods, Wares,
etc. in his or their Custody or Occupation, etc. and to examine them; and if
such person or persons upon such examination, do not disclose, and plainly
declare and show the whole Truth of the Premises, etc. ut supra, shall lose
and forfeit double the value of all such Goods, etc. which forfeitures shall be
levied by the said Commissioners of the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods
and Chattels of such persons so denying to swear, or not disclosing the whole
Truth, by such ways and means, and in such manner and form as is before limited
and appointed for the principal Offender or Offenders, Debtor or Debtors; and
the said forfeitures to be distributed or employed for the satisfaction and
payment of the Debts of the said Creditors, etc. prout supra.

And by the said Statute of 13 Eliz. c. 7. It is Enacted, That if at any time
before, or after that any such person becomes a Bankrupt, any persons do
fraudulently, by Covin or Collusion, claim, demand, recover, possess or detain
any Debts, Duties, Goods Chattels, Lands or Tenements, by Writing, Trust or
otherwise, which were, or shall be due, belonging or appertaining to any such
Offender, other than such as he or they can and do prove to be due by Right and
Conscience, for Money paid, Wares delivered, etc. before the Commissioners, etc.
that then every such person (Concealer, etc.) shall forfeit and lose double as
much as he or they shall so claim, demand, detain or possess, which said
forfeiture shall be levied, recovered and employed in manner and form as is
before rehearsed.

Provided also, and be it further Enacted, That if it shall fortune, the
Creditors to be satisfied, and paid off their Debts and Duties, of, or with the
proper Lands, Tenements, Goods, Chattels and Debts of the said Bankrupts, or
of, or with the same, and some part of the forfeitures of the said double
values, to be forfeited as is aforesaid, and that there shall remain an
overplus of the said forfeitures, of the said double values; That then the one
moiety of the said overplus, of the said forfeitures of the double values so
remaining, shall be by the said Commissioners so executing the said Commission
within convenient time after the levying thereof, paid unto the Queens Majesty,
her Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety thereof shall be by the said
Commissioners employed and distributed to, and amongst the Poor within the
Hospitals, in every City, Town or County where any such Bankrupt shall happen
to be.

Per Stat. 1 Jac. c. 15. It is Enacted, That all and every Sum and Sums of
Money, which shall be forfeited by force of this said Act, shall be sued for,
and recovered by the said Creditors only, or any of them that will sue for the
same, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of the Kings
Majesty's Courts of Record; and the Sum or Sums of Money so recovered, the
Charges of Suit being deducted, shall be distributed and divided toward the
payment of the said Creditors of the Bankrupt.

If persons suspected to have Goods, etc. of the Bankrupt, do not upon their
Examination discover the whole Truth, they forfeit double the value of the
Goods. If persons fraudulently claim, detain, etc. any Lands, Debts, Duties,
Wares, Goods, etc. of the Bankrupt, either before or after he becomes a
Bankrupt, shall lose double as much as they shall so claim, etc. He that is
guilty of Perjury, in his Examination, shall forfeit 20 l. and he that is
guilty of Subornation of Perjury, shall forfeit 40 l. besides other Penalties.
Vide supra.
Interrogatories.
AS to Interrogatories, they are to be framed according to the matters to be
examined to; though some will have ready all the general Interrogatories that
will fit the Examinations throughout all the Statutes. Some Commissioners again
will not examine by Iterrogatories at all, for fear of some leading Questions
may make Witnesses frame Evasions. But I cannot commend this way, it being a
sort of careless behavior, and too slight for such a weighty matter as this,
considering the Penalties attending the Offenders against the Statutes.
Besides, at a Trial, Depositions may be made use of as Evidence (especially
against the party himself, or in case of the Death of Witnesses) and to read a
Deposition without referring to Interrogatories, is to judge upon an Answer
without knowing the state of the Question. I had thought to have inserted here
the Forms of some Comprehensive Interrogatories, but there is such variety of
Examination in the executing this Commission, that I shall leave that to the
Ingenuity of the Commissioners, who may easily form Interrogatories, as the
nature of the Case, and the Matter before them shall direct.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Disposition of the Bankrupts Estate, Freehold and Copyhold: Of
Redemption of Lands, Mortgaged: Of Trusts, Sales, Settlements of Lands: What
shall be accounted Fraudulent; and when, and in what Cases Purchasers are safe,
with many late Cases and Resolutions thereon.

PER Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 7.

The Commissioners shall have full power and authority to take by their
Discretions, such order and Direction with all (the Bankrupts) Lands or
Tenements, Hereditaments, as well Copy or Customary-hold as Freehold, which he
or she shall have in his or her own Right, before he or she became Bankrupt;
and also with all such Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, as such person shall
have purchased or obtained for Money, or other recompense jointly with his Wife,
Children or Child, to the only use of such Offender or Offenders, or of, or for
such Use, Interest, Right or Title, as such Offender or Offenders then shall
have in the same, which he or she may lawfully depart withal, or with any
person or persons, of trust to any secret use of such Offender or Offenders;
and also with his or her Money, Goods, Chattels, Wares, Merchandises and Debts
wheresoever they may be found or known, and cause the said Lands, Tenements,
Fees Annuities, Offices, Goods, Chattels, Wares, Merchandises and Debts to be
searched, viewed, rented and appraised to the View.
best value they may, and by Deed indented, enrolled in one of the Queens
Majesty's Courts of Record, to make Sale of the said Lands, Tenements and Sale.
Hereditaments, and of all Deeds, Writings and Evidences touching only the
same, belonging to such Offender or Offenders, Debtor or Debtors; and also of
all Fees, Annuities, Offices, Goods and Chattels, or otherwise to order the
same for true satisfaction and payment of the said Creditors; that is to say,
to every of the said Creditors a portion, Distribuiion.
rate and rate-like, according to the quantity of his or their Debts; and that
every Direction, Order, Bargain, Sale, and other things done by the said
persons so Authorized, as is aforesaid, in Form aforesaid, shall be good and
effectual in the Law, to all intents, constructions and purposes, against the
said Offender or Offenders, Debtor or Debtors, his or their Wife or Wives, Heir
and Heirs, Child and Children, and such person or persons as by such joint
Purchase, with the said Offender or Offenders, as is aforesaid, have, or shall
have any Estate or Interest in the Premises; and against all other person and
persons, claiming by, from, or under such Offender or Offenders, Debtor or
Debtors, by any Act or Acts, had, made or done, after any such person shall
become Bankrupt, as is aforesaid; and also against the Lords of the Manors,
whereof the said Copyhold or Customary Lands been holden, their Heirs,
Successors and Assigns, and every of them.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That all, and every person or persons,
Copyhold.
to whom any such Sale of Copyhold or Customary Lands or Tenements shall be
made, shall before such time as they, or any of them shall enter or take any
profit of the same Lands or Tenements, agree and compound with the Lords of the
Manors, of whom the same shall be holden, for such Fines or Incomes as
heretofore has been most usual and accustomed to be yielded or paid therefore;
and that upon every such agreement or composition, the said Lords for the time
being, at the next Court to be holden, at, or for the said Manors, shall not
only grant to the said Vendee or Vendees upon request, the same Copy or
Customary Lands or Tenements, by Copy of Court-Roll of the said Manors, for
such Estate or Interest as to them shall be sold, and reserving the Ancient
Rents, Customs and Services; but also in the same Court admit them Tenants of
the same Copy or Customary Lands, as other Copyholders of the same Manors have
been wont to be admitted, and to receive their Fealty accordingly.

And it is further Enacted, That if any person or persons, which is, or shall
be published and declared to be a Bankrupt within this Act, shall at any time
Purchase after Bankrupcy.
after purchase any Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments Free or Copy, Offices,
Fees, Goods or Chattels; or that any Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments Free or
Copy, Offices, Fees or Chattels shall Descend, Revert, or by any means Descent
after Bankrupcy.
come to any such person or persons being Bankrupt, as is aforesaid, before
such time as their Debts due to their Creditors shall be fully satisfied and
paid, or otherwise agreed for; that then the said Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments as well Free as Copy, Offices, Fees, Goods and Chattels, shall by
virtue of this Act be by the said Commissioners or the major part of them,
bargained, sold, extended, delivered and used for, and toward the payment of
the said Creditors, in such like manner and form, as other the Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments Free or Copy, Offices, Fees, Goods and Chattels of the
said Bankrupts, which they had when they were first declared to be Bankrupts,
should, or might have been bargained, sold, disposed or used, by virtue of this
Act.

Provided always, that this Act shall not extend to any Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments Free or Copy, which heretofore have been assured by any such
Bankrupt, or hereafter shall be assured by any Bankrupt, before he becomes
Conveyance bona fide.
a Bankrupt: So always that such assurance be made bona fide, and not to the
use of the Bankrupt himself only, or of his Heirs: And that the Parties to
whose use such assurance has or shall be made, be not at, or before the making
of such assurance, privy or consenting to the fraudulent purpose of any such
Bankrupt, to deceive his Creditors.

Per Stat. 1 Jac. c. 15. It is Enacted, That if any person which hereafter, is,
or shall be Bankrupt, by intent of this Statute, shall convey or procure, or
cause to be conveyed to any of his Children, or other person or persons, any
Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Offices, Fees, Annuities, Leases,
Goods, Chattels, or transfer his Conveyance.
Debts into other Men's Names, except the same shall be purchased, conveyed,
Settlement.
or transferred for, or upon Marriage of any of his or her Children, both the
Parties Married, being of the years of Consent, or some valuable consideration,
shall be in the Power and Authority of the Commissioners in this behalf to be
appointed or the more part of them, to Bargain, Sell, Grant, Convey, Demise, or
otherwise to Dispose thereof, in as ample manner as if the said Bankrupt had
been actually seized or possessed thereof, or the Debts were in his own Name of
the like Estate or Interest, to his or their own use, at such time as he or she
became a Bankrupt. And that every such Grant, Bargain, Sale, Conveyance and
Disposition of the said Commissioners, or of the greater part of them, shall be
good and available to all intents, constructions and purposes in the Law
against the Offender or Offenders, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and such Children and Persons as shall be subject to this Statute, and
against all other Person and persons claiming by, from, or under such Offender
or Offenders, or such said other persons to whom such Conveyance shall be made
by the said Bankrupt, or by his means or procurement.

And as for the Power of the Commissioners, touching the Debts due to the said
Bankrupt, it is further Enacted, That the Commissioners of Bankrupts Debts due
to Bankrupt*
or the greater part of them, shall have Power to Grant and Assign, or
otherwise to Order or Dispose all, or any of the Debts due to, and for the
benefit of the said Bankrupt, by what person or persons soever, or in what
manner and form soever, to the use of the Creditors of the said Bankrupt,
according to the true intent of the Statute of 13 Eliz. And that the same Grant
Assignment or Disposition of the said Debts in form aforesaid, to be made by
the said Commissioners or the greater part of them, shall so vest the Property,
Right and Interest of the said Debt and Debts, in the person or persons of him,
her or them, to whom it shall be Granted, Assigned or Ordered by the said
Commissioners or the greater part of them, as fully to all intents and
purposes, as if the said Bill, Bond, Bonds, Statutes, Recognisances, Judgments
or Contract, whereupon the said Debt or Debts, Deed or Deeds shall arise or
grow, had been made, to or with, or for the said person or persons, to whom the
same shall be so Granted, Assigned or Disposed by the said Commissioners; and
that after such Grant, Assignment or Disposition made of the said Debts, that
neither the Bankrupt, nor any other to whom any such Debt shall be due, shall
have power to recover the same, nor to make any Release or Discharge thereof;
neither shall the same be Attached as the Debt of the Bankrupt, Attachment.
or such said other person or persons to whom the same shall be due, by any
other person or persons, according to the Custom of the City of London, or
otherwise; but that the Party or Parties to whom the same Debts shall be
assigned, shall have like remedy to recover the same, as fully and lawfully in
the Name or Names of the person or persons to whom the same shall be so
Granted, Assigned or Ordered by the said Commissioners, in all respects and
purposes, as the party himself might have had, any Law, Statute, Use or Custom
to the contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding.

Per Stat. 21 Jac. c. 19. It is Enacted,

Tha the said Commissioners, or the greater number of them, shall have Power by
Deed indented and enrolled within six Months after the making thereof, in some
of his Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster, to Grant, Bargain, Sell and
Convey any Manors, Lands, Tenement or Hereditaments, whereof any Bankrupt is,
or shall be in any ways seized of any Estate in Tail, in Possession, Lands
Entailed.
Reversion or Remainder and whereof no Reversion or Remainder is, or shall be
in the King's Majesty, his Heirs or Successors of the Gift or Provision of his
Majesty, his Progenitors, his Heirs or Successors, to any person or persons,
for the relief and benefit of the Creditors of all such Bankrupts; and that
all, and every such Grants, Bargains, Sales and Conveyances shall be good and
available in the Law, to such person or persons, and their Heirs against the
said Bankrupts, and against all, and every the Issues of the Body of such
Bankrupts, and against all and every person and persons, claiming any Estate,
Right, Title or Interest, by, from or under the said Bankrupts, after such time
as such person shall become Bankrupt, and against all, and every other person
and persons whatsoever, when the said Bankrupt by Common Recovery, or other
ways or means might cut off or debar from any Remainder, Reversion, Rent,
Profit, Title or Possibility, into, or out of the said Manors, Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments.

And it is further Enacted, That if any Bankrupt shall Grant, Convey or Assure
any Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, or other Estate unto any
person or persons, upon Condition Mortgages.
or Power of Redemption at a day to come, by payment of Money or otherwise; That
it shall and may be lawful to, and for the said Commissioners, or the greater
part of them, before the time of the performance of such Condition, to Assign
and Appoint under their Hands and Seals, such person or persons as they shall
think fit, to make tender or payment of Money, or other performance according to
the nature of such Condition, as fully as the Bankrupt might have done: And
that the said Commissioners or the greater part of them, shall after such
Tender, Payment or performance, have power to Sell and Dispose of such Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels, and other Estates so Granted,
Conveyed or Assured, upon Condition, to and for the Benefit of the Creditors,
as fully as they may Sell or Dispose of any the Estate of the Bankrupt.

General Notes of Sales by Commissioners.
OBserve, That if Commissioners sell the Lands of the Bankrupt, and one of them
has right to the Land so sold, his right by this will not be extinct, Godb. p.
319.

Note, It Is laid down in Jones Rep. p. Where the Sale of the Commissioners may
be defeated.
203. In Awdley and Halsey's Case, as a Rule, where the owner of Goods or
Lands, by his own Act may not control a Gift or a Charge; there if he become a
Bankrupt, the Gift or Charge may not be defeated. If a man Bargain and Sell
Lands, and before Enrolment, he becomes a Bankrupt, and after the Deed is
enrolled, there the Bargainee shall hold the Land discharged from the
Commissioners of Bankrupts: So if a Man gives Goods or Lands upon a precedent
Condition, and after becomes a Bankrupt, and after the Condition is performed,
this defeats the Power of the Commission. If a Man makes a Feoffment, or gives
Goods upon Condition, and after becomes a Bankrupt, and the Lands or Goods are
sold by the Commissioners, and afterward the Condition is broken, and the
Feoffor or Donor re-enter or re-seise the Goods, the Sale is defeated.

The Explication of these Statutes will be better illustrated with the ensuing
Cases and Considerations.

First as to the Bankrupts real Estate. Freehold. Copyhold.


Of the Sale and Disposition of the Freehold Estate of the Bankrupt.
I. SUch Lands which are in his own possession at the time of the Bankrupcy, as
an Estate in Fee, in Tail for Life or Years. II. Remainder and Reversion. III.
That which he purchased, or descended to him afterward. IV. Settlements on
Marriage, or on Wife and Children, and Estates conveyed in in Trust, and in
reference to Purchasers. V. Lands Mortgaged. VI. Lands extended by such as
pretend to be Accountants to the King, or Goods seized, vide infra sub Tit.
Disposal of the Personal Estate, etc.
I. Lands in his own possession at the time of his becoming a Bankrupt.

1. What he has in his own Right, as Estate in Fee, Tail, Life or Years,
Freehold Entailed Lands.
or Copyhold. The Commissioners may sell all Entailed Lands (except such
whereof the Reversion or Remainder in the King, of the Gift or Provision of the
King) and such Sale shall be good against the Bankrupt and his Issue, and all
those in Remainder or Reversion, which the Bankrupt by common Recovery or
otherways might cut off or debar. So that in such Case the Sale by
Commissioners shall bar those in Reversion or Remainder, as much as if the
Bankrupt himself had suffered a Common Recovery; and observe the words in Stat.
21 Jac. Cut off or Debar from any Remainder, Reversion, Rent, Profit, Title or
Possibility, into, or out of any Manors, etc.

I will put this Case. Lands are settled Contingent Estate. Son.
to A. and B. for their Lives, and after their Deceases, to the use of the
first Son of their Bodies, lawfully to be begotten, and to the Heirs Males of
such first Son, and for want of such Issue, to the use of the second Son, etc.
in Tail Male, and so to the tenth Son. A. becomes a Bankrupt before he has a
Son: Whether the Commissioners may sell these Lands, and make to the Purchaser
a Good Estate? I hold they may; for though A. be not Tenant in Tail, but bare
Tenant for Life, yet the words in the Statute being the Bargain and Sale shall
be good against all and every other person and persons whomsoever, whom the
Bankrupt by Common Recovery or otherwise might cut off and debar from any
Remainder, Reversion, Rent, Profit, Title or Possibility: It seems this Bargain
and Sale shall be good. For A. the Father, before Issue, by his bare Feoffment
might destroy the contingent Estate, as it is in Archer's Case. But were the
Settlement made so as to support the contingent Remainder (as is usully done)
so that the Father could by no means debar it by any act he could do, then it
would make a greater Question; and yet if the Commissioners could not sell in
such case, as Settlements Voluntary Settlement.
are generally made now; the Act in this Point might be easily eluded. (This is
to be understood of voluntary Settlements.)

A Man makes a Lease of certain Lands to A. B. for three Lives to begin after
the death of J. S. if the three Lives shall so long live. A. B. becomes a
Bankrupt. This Lease to A. B. is but a possibility, Possibility.
for J. S. may survive all the three Lives, and so it is a thing not grantable.
Yet I think the Commissioners may sell this within the intent of these words;
for though A. B. cannot properly grant this, yet it is such a thing as he may
forfeit or extinguish.

A. is Tenant in Tail, Remainder to B. in Tail. B. becomes a Bankrupt, A makes
a Feoffment in Fee and dies, and the Commissioners sell these Lands before B.
has recovered in a Formedon, who shall bring the Formedon? Or whether the Act
does vest the Estate in the Purchaser, that he may enter, and have Ejectment? I
hold that this Sale is good; for though the Remainder Man claims no Estate under
the Bankrupt, yet the Bankrupt by Common Recovery might have barred him; and
the Act says such Bargains and Sales shall be good, and the Assignee shall
bring a Formedon.

A Bankrupt commits Felony, the Land shall not Escheat, but the Commissioners
Escheat.
may sell it; this is to be understood of a Common Lord.

If one Bargain and Sell his Land, and Bargain and Salo, and Bargainor becomes
a Bankrupt before Inrollment.
before Inrollment becomes a Bankrupt, this Land may not be sold by the
Commissioners, according to the Rule put before by Jones: But if he makes a
Feoffment, and a Letter of Attorney to give Livery, and then becomes a Bankrupt
before the Seism delivered, these Lands in such case may be sold, B. R. 4 Car.
1. The reason of the difference is, in the first Case the Bargainee is in by
the Bargain and Sale, and not by the Inrollment; and the Bankrupt could not by
his own Act defeat this; but no Estate in the other Case passes at all till
the Livery be executed: And then in the last Case, his Letter of Attorney is
revocable, and his becoming a Bankrupt before the Estate executed, is quasi a
Countermand or Revocation in Law. The first Reason is best.

2. Lands settled in other Men's Names; Lands in other men's names*
in Trust for the Bankrupt.

It is plain these are within the Statute.

If a Bankrupt grant his Lands or Goods, or transfer his Debts in other Men's
Names, except to his Children upon Marriage (they being at the Age of Consent)
or upon valuable Consideration, the Commissioners notwithstanding may sell
them, and the Sale shall be good.

But if one be a Merchant, and not in Debt, and he purchase for another, or
give to another, and there be no fraud in it to deceive Creditors, this is
good, March. 12. p. 32.

Of Lands Purchased by, or Descended or Devised to the Bankrupt since he was a
Bankrupt.
PER Stat. 13 Eliz. If any person who is or shall be declared to be a Bankrupt,
shall at any time hereafter purchase any Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments Free
or Copy, or Offices, Fees, Goods or Chattels; or that any Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments Free or Copy, Offices, Fees, Goods or Chattels shall descend,
revert or by any means come to any Bankrupt before such times as Debts due to
their Creditors shall fully be satisfied and paid, or otherwise agreed for,
then the said Lands* etc. shall be sold as other Lands, etc. which the Bankrupt
had at the time of his becoming a Bankrupt. Vid. supra.

This Clause is to be understood of such Lands which descend or revert to him,
and which were in a remote possibility of ever happening. As suppose a Father
seized of Lands in Fee, has issue a Son, and the Father dies, and the Uncle is
a Bankrupt, then the Son dies, and the Lands descend to the Uncle, these could
not be sold by the Commissioners, without this Clause in the Statute. Though
Reversions after Estates for Life or Years might have been sold by the other
Clause of this Statute, or any Estate wherein the Bankrupt has an Interest in
futuro. But though a Bankrupt has the Remainder or Reversion in Fee after an
Estate in Tail, yet this cannot be sold by Commissioners till it fall, because
the Tenant in Tail has power to bar this Remainder or Reversion.

Suppose a Judicial Office, or Office of Offices.
Trust, which cannot be executed by a Deputy, be granted for Life, and the King
grants the Reversion to J. S. for Life, he who has the Grant of the Reversion
becomes a Bankrupt, and then the Office falls, how shall the Commissioners
dispose of this Office? They cannot execute it themselves, neither can they put
in a Deputy. I conceive if the Officer absents, he forfeits his Office, and
then the King grants it over; but this is no relief to the Creditors: Therefore
Mr. Stone thinks well, the Statute does not mean such Offices of Trust, which
are annexed to the Party; but other Offices of Inheritance, as Keeper of a
Forest, Warden of the Fleet, etc.

Land is devised to a Bankrupt, the Of Land devised to a Bankrupt.
Commissioners may sell, and the Bankrupt shall not wave the Devise.

Of Lands Mortgaged, or Estates on Condition.
PER Stat. 31 Jac. c. 19. The Commissioners may Assign and Appoint such Person
as they may think fit, to make tender or payment of the Money, as fully as the
Bankrupt might have done; and after such tender or payment they shall have
power to sell, etc. Vid. supra.

This is in Case the Bankrupt has Mortgaged any Lands to another. But suppose
Lands are Mortgaged to him; as a Feoffment in Fee for 500 l. is made to him and
his Heirs, provided that if the Condition of a Feoffment, that if the Feoffor
pay not such a sum, then for a further sum the Feoffor to make the Estate
absolute.
Feoffor do not pay such a sum of Money such a day, then for a further sum the
Feoffor is to make it an Estate absolute. The Feoffee becomes a Bankrupt, and
the Money is not paid at the day, the Commissioners have not power by this Act
to force the Feoffor to make an absolute Fee, but Chancery will compel him.

A. B. makes a Lease, rendering Rent with a Clause of Re-entry, and then becomes
a Bankrupt and absconds, etc. who shall enter if the Rent be unpaid? The
Assignee of the Commissioners, especially if the words be in, that then it
shall be lawful for the Lessor, his Heirs or Assigns to Re-enter; for though the
Assignees of the Commissioners are not the Assignees in Fact to the Bankrupt,
yet they are so in Law; and especially by the Equity of this Statute: And so it
should seem to be in other Cases of Entries for Conditions broken, or Distress
for Arrears.

If a Lease is made to A. B. for 21 Conditions.
years, provided if he do such an Act, then he shall have Fee; A. B. becomes a
Bankrupt and absconds. Quaere if the Assignee of the Commissioners shall
perform this Act, and so gain the Fee? Vide infra.

A Merchant makes a Feoffment in Fee, Commissioners tender the Money on a
Mortgage.
upon Condition upon payment of Money, to Re-enter, he becomes a Bankrupt, the
Commissioners may tender the Money at the day, and sell the Land.

Of Lands whereof the Bankrupt is jointly seized.
IT is clear, that if two be jointly seized of Lands, and one becomes a
Bankrupt, his moiety may be sold by the Commissioners, nay, though he be dead,
and Survivorship shall not take place, Vide infra.

Put the Case, there are two Jointenants, and they are disseised; one of the
Jointenants becomes a Bankrupt, and then dies; I question whether the
Commissioners shall sell in this Case? for the words of the Statute of 13 Eliz.
are, Such Use, Interest, Right or Title as such Offender might lawfully depart
with: Now before Entry he could not grant his moiety; yet he may release before
he dies.

Two Women Jointenants of a Lease for years; and one takes Husband who becomes
a Bankrupt; the Commissioners may dispose of the Interest of a Moiety; and yet
quaere, for Chattels real are given to the Husband if he survive; but if the
Husband die before the Wife, she shall have it.

A Bankrupt has Land in the Right of The Wives Land.
his Wife, it may be sold during the Coverture; and if she be a Feme Merchant
the whole shall be sold.

A Feme sole is seized of Land in Fee, B. contracts with C. an Ironmonger, and
D. a Working Smith only (for Money paid by them) to marry A. and then that after
the said Marriage, he and A. will levy a Fine of the Land of A. to the use of
C. and D. and their Heirs: The Marriage is had, the Fine is levied, C. is
outlawed, D. absents. In this Case C. is a Bankrupt, but not D. and the sale of
the moiety of the Land is good, per Mr. Stone.

The Dower of a Bankrupts Wife shall never be sold. Aliter, If she marry one
that is a Bankrupt.

Two Jointenants, one is a Bankrupt, the Commissioners seize a moiety, the
Bankrupt dies, no part shall be sold by Stat. 13 Eliz. but by Stat. 1 Jac. a
moiety may be sold; for that Statute says the Commissioners shall proceed as
if he were living.

Lands Settled. Sold.
Settlements: What shall be accounted Fraudulent and shall be avoided, and the
Sale by the Commissioners good, and what not.
Vide supra Stat. 1 Jac. c. 15. Conveyance to Children, except on Marriage, or
some Valuable Consideration.

Vide Supra, Crisp and Plats Case, 1 Croke, 548.

IN consideration of Marriage; a man makes a Conveyance to the use of himself
and his Wife, and afterward becomes a Bankrupt; a Commission is taken out
against him, and the Lands are sold by the Commissioners; the Sale adjudged
good, and the Deed fraudulent. In this Case within half an year after this
Settlement he became a Bankrupt; so as there seems to be fraud in the
Conveyance; but this is not expressed in the Pleading, as it might have been; and
this is not in dispute upon a Special Verdict, but comes in question on point
of pleading, which is to be taken strongly against him that pleads it; and he
has not expressed any Valuable Consideration as he Valuable Consideration.
might have done; as Consideration of a Portion, or performance of Articles
made upon Marriage, or that the Wife had joined in selling some part of the
Land.

The Wife is within the Statute 1 Jac. Wife, Children.
and the providing for Wife and Children is providing for himself, Styles Rep.
288, 289. Tucker and Cosh. But I have seen this Case reported by a Grave
Sergeant at Law, that the Land may not be sold, quia guerdon pudicitiae.

All fraudulent Conveyances, to deceive Creditors, are within this Statute.

A fraudulent Deed must be so at the Fraudulent Deed.
beginning, for subsequent fraud cannot make it so.

If a Man purchase Land after the time of his Trading, and his being in Debt,
and do purchase it in the Name of his Wife or Children fraudulently, this will
be liable to sale. Aliter, If it be purchased before he becomes to be a
Merchant, Marsh Rep. 34. A. purchased Copyhold to him and his Son for their
Lives, the Remainder to his Wife in Fee; and after this becomes a Merchant and
a Bankrupt, and solely took the Profits till he became a Bankrupt, this shall
not be sold by the Commissioners, Vide supra Crisp's Case

A Settlement made by the Husband Wife joins with the Husband in selling part
of her former Jointure.
for the Jointure of the Wife, reciting that the Wife had joined with the
Husband to sell part of the former Jointure in which he and she were Tenants
for Life, the Remainder in Tail to the first and tenth Son, Remainder to his
Heirs; by Hales at a Trial at Bar, this is not fraudulent, though he alone having
no Issue might bar this contingent Remainder, B. R. 24 Car. 2. Scot and Bell.

In an Assise between Creditors and Bargain and Sale. Consideration.
the Bankrupts Son. It was found, that the Father by Indenture, in
consideration of love which he bore to his Son, and for natural affection to
him, bargained, sold, gave, granted and confirmed the Land unto him and his
Heirs; this Deed was Enrolled: This Land shall not pass unless Money had been
paid, or the Estate executed, for the Use shall not pass. Crok* Jac. p. 127.
Osborn and Churchman.

In a Trial at Bar; the Son and Daughter of Sir Anthony Bateman were Defendants
in Ejectment; the Defendants admitted the point of Sir Anthony's Bankrupcy, but
set up a Conveyance made by Sir Anthony to them for the payment of 1500 l.
apiece, being Money given to them by their Grandfather, Mr. Russel; to whom Sir
Anthony took out Letters of Administration; per Hales, It is a Voluntary
Voluntary Conveyance or not.
Conveyance, unless that you can prove that Sir Anthony had Goods in his Hands
of Mr. Russels at the time of the executing it; so they proved that he had, and
there was a Verdict for the Defendants, Mod. Rep. 76. Sir Anthony Bateman's
Case.

A Man may settle Lands on his Son Settlement.
before he be a Bankrupt, and if it be not by fraud and to deceive Creditors,
it shall be good, (and the fraud must be found by the Jury) the Statute says,
the Sale shall be good against such Offender, and he is no Offender till he is
a Bankrupt, Jones p. 438. Crisp and Platt. Vide supra.

What Sales and Assurances shall be avoided, and where the Purchasers are safe
or not.
IT is provided by Stat. 13 Eliz. That the said Act (which enables the
Commissioners to sell the Bankrupts Lands) shall not extend to any Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments Free or Copyhold, which heretofore have been assured
by any such Bankrupt, or hereafter shall be assured by any Bankrupt, before he
became a Bankrupt. So always that such assurance be made bonafide, and not to
the use of the Bankrupt himself only, or of his Heirs; and that the Parties to
whose such assurance has, or shall be made, be not at or before the making
such assurance privy or consenting to the fraudulent purposes of any such
Bankrupt to deceive his Creditors.

And per Stat. 21 Jac. c. 19. It is provided, That no Purchaser, for good and
valuable Consideration, shall be impeached by virtue of this Act, or any other
Acts heretofore made against Bankrupts, unless the Commission to prove him or
her a Bankrupt, be sued forth against such Bankrupt within five years after he
or she shall become a Bankrupt.

Any Sale of Lands and Goods by a Bankrupt before he comes in Debt, or before
his Trading, is without question good; and so are all the Acts he does before
he comes to appear to be a Bankrupt, Marsh Rep. 34.

If one be a Merchant, and not in Debt, and he purchase for another, or give to
another, and there be no fraud in it to deceive the Creditors, this is good,
Marsh 32.

Sir John Harrison Merchant, seized of Lands and indebted to diverse persons; on
Action brought against him, he conceals himself, for which he was outlawed, and
An. 43 becomes a Bankrupt, An. 47 he acknowledges two Judgments to Andrews,
and An. 1648 he makes a Lease to the Plaintiff; An. 1653 Commission issues out
against him, and extends by Elegit 1650. the Plaintiff justifies as coming in
under Valuable Consideration of 5000 l. Per Glyn he is a Bankrupt by the
Outlawry; and also by the fraudulent Lease: But he shall be accounted a
Bankrupt To be accounted a Bankrupt from the first Act of Bankrupcy.
from the first Act of Bankrupcy, 2* Siderfin p. 115. Radford versus Bludworth;
and p. 176. the Question was, if the Plaintiff shall be assured by the Clause
of 21 Jac. 19. as being a Purchaser on a Valuable Consideration, the Bankrupt
having sold above five years before the Commission sued out; when the
Commission of Bankrupts issues out the Creditors shall have all the benefit of
all his Estate which he had Anno Dom. 1643. Excepting Purchasers for a Valuable
Consideration: His being a Bankrupt after the Sale, that will not hinder
Judgment for the Purchaser, 1 Keb. 11. Bradford and Bludworth.

A Man purchases Lands of one who is a Bankrupt, for a Good and Valuable
Consideration; and a Commission is not taken out within five years; this
Purchaser shall not be Impeached. But if one purchases Land for Good and
Valuable Consideration, before the Vendor becomes a Bankrupt, it is no question
but he is safe; and thus is this Clause to be understood.

J. H* a Bankrupt was committed two Months, An. 1651. and recommitted for
another Act in 1657. then the Bankrupt sells the Term for years, whereof he was
possessed, to the Defendant, and in 1660 the Commissioners sold to the
Plaintiff. This Commission shall* not relate Where it shall not relate to the
first Act.
to the first Act in 51. for the words of the Act are not, after he shall first
be a Bankrupt; for then the earlier being a Bankrupt, would after five years be
a perpetual Supersedeas to all Tradesmen. But if one has sold, and then five
years pass without any Act of Bankrupcy, the Purchaser is safe, and no
after-Act can hurt him. But where the Bankrupt continues in Possession, any
after-Act is sufficient to bind the Term, 16 Car. 2. Spencer and Vanacre.

A Merchant sells Land bona fide to J. S. Monstra l^^ Faits.
and after becomes a Bankrupt, J. S. may choose to show his Evidences.

Concerning the Sale of Copyhold Lands.
YOU may see in the recital of the Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 7. that Copyhold Lands are
to be sold by Deed Indented and Enrolled in any of his Majesty's Courts of
Record (as other the Bankrupts Lands) but by the same Statute it is provided,
That all persons to whom any such Sale shall be made, shall before such time as
they shall enter or take any profits of the same, agree and compound with the
Lord of Manor, of whom the same shall be holden, for such Fines or Incomes as
heretofore Fines.
has been most usual and accustomed to be yielded or paid therefore: And upon
every such composition, the Lord for the time being, at the next Court to be
holden at, or for the said Manor, shall not only grant to such Vendee upon
request, the same Copy or Customary Lands or Tenements by Copy of Court-Roll of
the said Manors for such Estate or Interest as to them shall be sold, and
reserving the ancient Rents, Customs, and Services; but also in the same Court,
admit them Tenants of the same Copy or Admittance.
Customary Lands, as other Copyholders of the same Manor have been wont to be
admitted, and to receive their Fealty accordingly.

Copyhold Lands are within all the Statutes of Bankrupcy, Croke, Car. 550.
Crisp and Platt.

Title to a Copyhold cannot be made Title to a Copyhold, how to be made by
Commissioners.
by the Commissioners without surrender or admittance, 1 Keb. 24. Croke Car.
596.

It is adjudged in Croke Car. 569. in The Estate vested before admittance.
Parker and Bleeks Case, that by Bargain and Sale, made by the Commissioners of
Bankrupcy, the Estate of the Copyholder is vested in the Bargainee before
admittance, though he may not enter and take the Profits till admittance: The
Bargain and Sale binds the Copyholder and bars his Estate, and he is no
Copyholder after the Bargain and Sale enrolled: And when the Bargainee is
admitted by the Lord, it shall have relation to the Bargain and Sale; and the
Copyholder dying, his Wife shall be barred of her Widows Estate.

A Bankrupt purchases a Copyhold, and the Tenant surrenders into two Tenants
Hands to the use of the Bankrupt, and now he will not be admitted. Mr. Stone
makes some Quere if this may be sold by the Commissioners, but he conceives
they may; and the Vendee may pay the admittance.

Tenant by Copy is disseised, and the Disseisor is admitted Tenant by the Lord.
The Lord Bargains and Sells the Manor to J. S. in Fee: Disseisee becomes a
Bankrupt, the Commissioners may sell the Copyhold, and the Vendee shall
compound with the Bargainor, Stone 142.

CHAP. IX.
Of the disposal of the Personal Estate, or Goods of the Bankrupt: How and
where the Goods of a Bankrupt, liable to Execution may be sold by the
Commissioners, and where not: Of Trusts, and Bonds taken in the Bankrupts Name,
with several Cases and Resolutions.

PER Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 7. The Commissioners have Power to take such Order and
Directions by their Discretions, with the Bankrupts Money, Goods, Chattels,
Wares, Merchandises and Debts, wheresoever they may be found or known, and
cause the said Goods, Chattels, Wares Merchandises and Debts to be searched,
viewed and appraised to the best value they may, and by Deed Indented and
Enrolled, etc. to make sale of them, or otherwise to order the same for true
satisfaction and payment of the said Creditors.

And by another Clause in the said Statute, The Commissioners have power to
sell all the Goods and Chattels that the Bankrupt shall purchase, after he
became Purchase.
Bankrupt, and all such Goods and Chattels that shall any wise come to him
before such time that the Debts due to the Creditors are fully satisfied and
and paid, or otherwise agreed for.

Per Stat. 1 Jac. c. 15. Leases, Goods, Trusts*
Chattels or Debts of the Bankrupt, by him conveyed, or procured to be conveyed
or transferred to any of his Children, or other person or persons, except the
same shall be purchased, conveyed or transferred for, or upon Marriage of any
of his or her Children, both the parties Married being of years of Consent, or
some Valuable Consideration, Debts transferred in other Men's Names.
or transfer his Debts into other Men's Names, shall be by the Commissioners
Bargained, Sold, Granted, Demised or otherwise Disposed of, in as ample manner,
as if the said Bankrupt had been actually seized or possessed thereof, or the
Debts were in his own Name of the like Estate or Interest to his or their own
use, at such time as he or she became a Bankrupt; and that every such Bargain,
Sale and Disposition of the Commissioners shall be good and available to all
Intents, Constructions and Purposes in the Law against the Offender or
Offenders, his Heirs, Executros, Administrators and Assigns, and such Children
and Persons as shall be subject to this Statute, and against all other person
and persons, claiming by, from, or under such Offender or Offenders; and such
said other persons to whom such Conveyance shall be made by the said Bankrupt,
or by his means or procurement.

Per Stat. 21 Jac. c. 19. If it happen any Lands, etc. Good, Chattels, Debts,
or other Estate of any Bankrupt to be extended after Extent.
such time as he or she became a Bankrupt, by any person or persons, under
color or pretense of his or their being Accountant, or any ways indebted to
the Kings Majesty; then shall the Commissioners examine upon Oath, whether the
said Debt were due to such Debtor or Accountant, upon any Bargain Kings
Accountant.
or Contract originally made between such Accountant and the said Bankrupt,
etc. and his or their Servants; and if the said Bargain or Contract was
originally made to, and with any other person or persons, then the said Debtor
or Accountant; or for the Use or Trust of any other person or persons, then the
said Commissioners shall dispose of such Lands, etc. Goods and Chattels, etc.
to, and for the use of the Creditors; and that the Order and Disposition of the
said Commissioners shall be good against the said Extent; and the Bargainees
shall have good Remedy, to have, demand and recover the same against such
person or persons as shall detain the same.

And by the said Statute of 21 Jac. c. 19. For that it often falls out, that
many persons before they become Bankrupts, do convey their Goods to other Men,
upon good Consideration, Goods transferred, and yet ownership kept on foot.
yet still do keep the same, and are reputed the owners thereof, and dispose
the same as their own: It is Enacted, That if at any time hereafter, any person
or persons shall become a Bankrupt, and at such time as they shall so become a
Bankrupt, shall by the consent and permission of the true owner and proprietor,
have in their possession, order and disposition, any Goods or Chattels, whereof
they shall be reputed owners, and take upon them the Sale, Alteration or
Disposition as Owners, that in every such Case, the said Commissioners or the
greater part of them, shall have Power to Sell and Dispose the same, to, and
for the benefit of the Creditors, as fully as any other part of the Bankrupts
Estate: And for the better payment of Debts, and discouraging men to become
Bankrupts, per the same Statute, If the Bankrupt shall grant any Mortgage,
Pawns.
Goods, Chattels or Estate unto any person or persons, on condition or power of
Redemption at a day to come, then the Commissioners shall assign some person to
make tender or payment of the Money, or other Performance, according to the
Nature of the Condition, as fully as the Bankrupt might have done: And after
such tender or Payment, shall sell the said Goods and Chattels so conveyed or
granted, etc. Vide this Paragraph at large supra.

So that you see the Commissioners have Power to Sell or Dispose the Bankrupts
Personal Estate, which he had, and was possessed of at the time of his becoming
a Bankrupt; and also all such Goods and Chattels which the Bankrupt shall
purchase, or which shall come and accrue to him after he became a Bankrupt.

Observe, They must be searched, viewed and appraised.

Sale of Goods by a Bankrupt, after Commission awarded, is void, albeit the
Commissioners be never seized of the Goods, Moore Case 805. Smith and Mills.

This Statute says, Sale by Commissioners Deed Indented. View.
must be by Deed Indented, and that after view of the Goods; yet a Sale by any
other Deed, and before the view, is good, 2 Rep. 26. The Case of Bankrupts.

The Goods of the Bankrupt lie liable to the Sale of the Commissioners,
notwithstanding the Bankrupt had sold them in Market Overt, this Sale is
avoided by Goods sold in Market overt.
relation, Siderfin. p. 272. 2 Keb. 33. in Baly and Bunnings Case.

How, and where the Goods of a Bankrupt, liable to Execution, may be sold by
Commissioners, and how, and where not.
ABecomes a Bankrupt after an Extent, and before a Liberate, and the
Commissioners sell these Goods to Creditors, Per Cur' they cannot be sold,
Croke Car. 106, 149. Audly and Halsey.

This Case is well reported by Mr. Justice Jones, Rep. 202. Though the words of
the Statute are, That the Commissioners have Power to sell the Goods which were
his at the time that he became a Bankrupt, and although he becomes a Bankrupt
before the Liberate; and although the Property remains in the Conusor, until the
delivery by the Liberate; yet the Extent had bound the Goods so, that when the
Liberate comes it defeats this, and devests the property of the Goods out of
the Conusor, as to any mean Action or Encumbrance from the time of the Extent.

The Goods extended before he becomes a Bankrupt, and delivered by the Liberate
after he became Bankrupt, cannot be sold, 2 Siderfin. 115. they are in Custodia
Legis.

Execution was sued by Ca. Sa. the Money levied, and in the Sheriffs hands, and
the man became a Bankrupt Per Curiam; the Money recovered in the Sheriffs hands
was not assignable by the Commissioners to the Creditors; for it was quasi in
Custodia Legis. The Case was thus, B. and his Wife brought an Action on the
Case, for words spoken of the Wife; upon not guilty pleaded, and Verdict for
the Plaintiff, and 5 l. Damages assessed, and 7 l. Costs, they sue Execution;
and after the Money was levied by the Sheriff, and before the return of the Writ
the Plaintiff became a Bankrupt; and by the Commissioners of Bankrupts, the
said 12 l. so recovered, was assigned by the Name of the Money of B. to
Blackwell and other Creditors: The Sheriff brings the Money into Court; the
Plaintiff who recovered, prayed to have the Money delivered to him out of Court;
and the said Blackwell and the Creditors pray that the Money may be delivered to
them, according to the Sale and Assignment of the Commissioners: Per Curiam,
the Money in the Sheriffs hand was not assignable, though by the Judgment the
Damages and Costs were ascertained and turned in Rem Judicatam; for it cannot
be said to be the Bankrupts Money, until it be paid to him; and in the mean time
it is in the hands of the Sheriff, and in Custodia Legis: And this Case is the
stronger, because it is upon a Ca. Sa. and the Money paid to the Sheriff to
satisfy the Enecution; and none may give a Discharge thereof, but the
Plaintiff who is party to the Record, and the Assignees are Strangers to the
Record; and as they cannot have the benefit thereof, so they cannot acknowledge
satisfaction, Croke Car. 166, 176. Benson and Flower, and Jones, 215.

M. recovered against E. one hundred pounds; the Sheriffs Bailiff takes the
Goods upon F^. Fa. Test 4 Junii. 6 June He whose Goods they were, becomes a
Bankrupt. Commission of Bankrupcy was taken out the 8th of June, the Fi. Fa.
was made the 11th of June, and executed on the Goods the 17th of June. The
Plaintiff, as Assignee of the Commissioners, brings Trover: Per Cur. for the
Defendant upon Special Verdict, and that the Goods were liable from the time of
From what time the Goods liable to Execution.
the Test of the Fi. Fa. and this shall be said Emanatio Brevis; and the
Sheriff cannot divine when a Commission will be taken out, 2 Keb. 33. Bailey and
Bunning, Siderfin. p. 271. Mesme Case. Per Siderfin, the Goods are liable to
Execution from the time of the Test of the Fi. Fa. and the practice is, that
the Bailiff is found guilty, if the party were then a Bankrupt; per Keb. in
this Case, the Court agreed a right in the Creditors by the Act of Bankrupcy,
and thereby the Goods are bound, though the Creditors have no Action till
Assignment, Vide Stat. Stat* of Frauds and Perjuries.
of Frauds and Perjuries, that the property of the Goods shall be bound only
from the time that such Writ shall be delivered to the Sheriff.

A man brought an Action of Debt on a Bond, and had a Verdict, and before the
day in Bank became a Bankrupt; it was moved, that the Debt was assigned over,
and prayed to have the Money brought into the Court, which the Court refused,
and adjudged, that Judgment could not be stayed, the Assignee of the Bankrupt
being a Stranger, in Com. B. Mod. Rep. cited in Moncks Case, p. 93, and in 3
Keb. p. 1.

On motion for G. Assignee of Commissioners to stop having Money out of Court,
the Plaintiff being a Bankrupt since the Judgment; but the Judgment being
affirmed before the day of the Commission sued out, the Money was ordered to be
delivered to the Plaintiff, no execution being sued out, unless a Special Sci.
Fac. and per Twisden, How can we S^ii^ Fac.
take notice that he is a Bankrupt? Any execution may be stopped at that rate,
by alleging, that there is a Commission of Bankrupts out against the
Plaintiff. If he be a Bankrupt you must take out a Special Sci. Fac. and try
the matter, whether he be a Bankrupt or not, which the Court granted; he may
bring a Special Sci. Fac. as Assignee, or Det on the Judgment, 3 Keb. p. 1.
Mod. Rep. 93.

Suppose after Judgment, and before Execution, one becomes a Bankrupt, and the
Creditors assign this; and after the Judgment is reversed, quaere who shall
make Restitution? I conceive the Creditors Restitution.
are not compellable, not being Parties to the Record.

In the Case in Dier 67. Stringfellows Case, Though the Goods were extended, yet
they were not delivered to the Conusee, and the Writ was not returned; and the
Writ of Privilege was for Debt due to the King, wherein the King has his
Prerogative by the Common Law; and so it differs from Audly and Halseys Case,
Croke Car. 148.

The Statute is where an Execution or Extent is served or executed: Per Cur.
this is accounted the executing of an Extent, when the Goods be apprised, and
the Writ returned, Croke Car. 150. Audly and Halsey, Vide Stat. Frauds and
Perjuries. So by these Cases, this Vexata Quaestio is well settled.

If the Bankrupt convey his Goods, Leases, Chattels to any of his Children or
other Person, such Leases, Goods and Leases and Goods conveyed by the Bankrupt.
Chattels shall be sold by such Commissioners, except in two Cases.

1. What shall be conveyed to any of his Children upon Marriage. Or,

2. Upon some Valuable Consideration.

The Statute 21 Jac. Provides, that Goods Attached by Foreign Attachment shall
be sold by Commissioners, which proves, that after the Statute 13 Eliz. until
the Statute 21 Jac. the Commissioners had no power to meddle with Goods taken
upon a Foreign Attachment, yet they are but a pledge to draw the party to
answer; and if he appear, the Foreign Attachment.
Foreign Attachment is discharged. And therefore before the Statute 21 Jac. If
Goods were attached by Foreign Attachment in London, and before Recovery, the
party becomes a Bankrupt, and after Recovery is had, this should avoid the Sale
by the Commissioners; therefore to remedy that, the Special Proviso is added in
Stat. 21 Jac. that in this Case the Goods shall be in the possession of the
Vendee as the Goods of the Bankrupt, Seis^^^ p^^ Sheriff.
unless the Goods were seized by the Sheriff before the Party became a
Bankrupt, though they were seized before the Test of the Commission, yet the
Goods are bound by the Bankrupcy, 3 Keb. 480. Bingly and Warcup.

As to Goods Extended after such time Of Goods Extended on pretense of Account
to the King.
as he shall become a Bankrupt, by such as pretend to be Accountants, or
indebted to the King, the Statute directs the Commissioners to examine upon
Oath, whether the said Debt were due to the Accountant upon any Bargain or
Contract originally made between the Accountant and the Bankrupt, and his and
their Servants: And if it appear the said Contract was originally made with any
other person than the Accountant, or for the use and trust of any other person,
then the Commissioners shall Sell such Goods, and their Assignee shall have
good Remedy to recover the same: So that if it appear the Original Contract
(before he became a Bankrupt) was made between the Accountant and Bankrupt,
bona fide, the Extent shall be good, and the Estate shall not be sold by the
Commissioners.

As for what Remedy the Assignee shall have against those that shall detain
such Goods, it may be by Trover, etc. the same as the Bankrupt might have had,
Vide infra.

Trust. Of other men's Goods, of which the Bankrupt is in possession, and
reputed Owner: Or Bonds take in his name.
THOUGH the Bankrupt (before he is a Bankrupt) convey his Goods to other men upon
good Consideration, yet if he keep the same, and is reputed Owner thereof, and
disposes of the same as his own, such Goods shall be sold by the
Commissioners, and accordingly has it been resolved: If one shall to the
intent to support the Credit of a Bankrupt, suffer him to have his Goods in his
Custody, and to dispose of them; this shall be accounted the Goods of the
Bankrupt, and not of the Owner, Styles Register, 48, 49.

In Debt on Bond the Defendant pleaded, Bond in the Bankrupts name.
that the Obligation was made to the Plaintiff, to the use of him and other
Creditors of O. and that one of the others releast; it is an ill Plea, he being
a Stranger, and the matter but Equity, 2 Keb. 333. Ward and Ossler.

Bonds.
R. indebted to S. and B. jointly; S. becomes a Bankrupt, and the Commissioners
assign this Obligation to B. the Assignee must have the same Remedy as the
Bankrupt had; therefore this or none, 1 Keb. 167. Bolston and Ratcliff.

If J. be obliged to J. S. and he before Bond Assigned.
Bankrupcy assign the Bond, this is liable to the after-bankrupcy of J. S.
being only suable in his name, 2 Keb. 331. Backwell and Littcott.

One becomes indebted to a Bankrupt, and he and the Bankrupt became bound for
this Money to L. in Trust for the Bankrupt; a Commission issues, and this Debt
is assigned to the Creditor, and good; the Bond being to his use, Vide plus
infra, Gerard and Aylmores Case.

Of Goods Pawned.
IF the Bankrupt have conveyed away his Goods upon Redemption, then the
Commissioners may assign some person to tender or pay the Money at the day; and
after such tender or payment shall sell the same.

Disposition of Rent.
A Rent-seck, though there have been no seizure, shall be sold; Commissioners
sell a Rent or Reversion, it may be good without Attornment; it vests by the
Statute.

A. makes a Gift in Tail, rendering Rent to him and his Heirs, and dies, the
Rent is Arear. B. Disseisor enters and levies a Fine, and five years pass; the
Heir of A. is a Bankrupt, who was to receive the Rent: Now this Rent, and the
Arrrears may be sold by the Commissioners. Vide infra.

CHAP. X.
Of the Disposition and Assignment of the Bankrupts Debts; and what Assignment
made by the Commssioners shall be good, and what not.

PER Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 7. The Commissioners are Empowered to Sell and Assign
Debts due to the Bankrupt. And,

Per 1 Jac. c. 15. If the Bankrupt transfer his Debts in other Men's Names, they
shall by the Commissioners be disposed of in as ample manner as if the Debt^
were in his own Name.

As to Money Recoverd, Vide prius.

The words of the Statute of 1 Jac. c. 15. that fully enable the Commissioners
to dispose of the Bankrupts Debts, are; Be it Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That the Commissioners of Bankrupts shall have Power to Grant and
Assign, or otherwise to Order and Dispose all, or any of the Debts due to, and
for the benefit of the* said Bankrupt, by what person or persons soever, or in
what manner and form soever, to the use of the Creditors of the said Bankrupt,
etc. and that the same Grant; Assignment* or Disposition of the said Debts* in
form aforesaid, to be made by the said Commissioners, shall so vest the
Property, Right and Interest of the said Debt and Debts in the person or
persons of him, her or them, to whom it shall be Granted, Assigned or Ordered
by the said Commissioners or the major part of them, as fully to all intents
and purposes, as if the said Bill, Bond, Bonds, Statutes, Recognisances,
Judgments or Contract, whereupon the said Debt or Debts shall arise or grow,
had been made to, or with, or for the said person or persons, to whom the same
shall be so Granted, Assigned or Disposed by the said Commissioners; and that
after such Grant, Assignment or Disposition made of the said Debts, that
neither the Bankrupt, nor any other to whom any such Debt shall be due, shall
have power to Recover the same, nor to make any Release or Discharge thereof;
neither shall the same be Attached as the Debt of the Bankrupt, or such said
other person or persons, according to the Custom Foreign Attachment.
of the City of London, or otherwise; but that the Assignees shall have like
power to recover the same, as fully and lawfully in the Name or Names of the
person or persons to whom the same shall be so Granted, etc. by the
Commissioners in all respects, as the Party might have had, any Law, Statute,
Custom, etc. to the contrary notwithstanding.

There is a Right in the Creditors by the Act of Bankrupcy, and thereby the
Goods are bound, though the Creditors have no Action till Assignment, 2 Keb. 33.
Bailey and Bunning, Siderfin, p. 271.

If a Bankrupt be indebted to one 20 l. and to another 10 l. and he has a Debt
due to him by Bond of 20 l. now the Commissioners may Assign and Divide
Dividing a Debt.
this ( viz.) to every Creditor a portion, part and part-like; and it seems in
this Case the Assignees may sue severally for it, Godb. 195. See Bradshawes
Case.

J. S. is obliged to J. B. and he before Obligee before Bankrupcy assigns the
Bond.
Bankrupcy assigns the Bond, this is liable to the after-bankrupcy of J. S.
being only suable in his Name, 2 Keb. 331. Backwells Case.

If the Goods of the Bankrupt come to Where the Commissioners have power of the
Money only, on the Sale of Goods.
the hands of A. and be sold to B. the Commissioners have power only of the
Money; but on Sale to A. by the Bankrupt, the Commissioners may elect to have
Money or Goods, 2 Keb. 348. Micons Case.

If an Obligation before day of Payment Obligation assigned before day of
payment.
be assigned by Commissioners of Bankrupts to a Creditor, although the Obligation
after becomes forfeit, the Bankrupt shall never after take advantage by this;
for all is become a Debt to the Creditor, Siderfin, p. 327. in the Case of
Robbins and Standard; and this disposition made by the Commissioners saves the
forfeiture of the Obligation, 2 Keb. 202.

If a Bond be taken in the Name of Bond taken in ones Name to the use of the
Bankrupt, may be sold.
another to the use of the Bankrupt, the Commissioners may assign that, Noy,
142.

In Debt the Plaintiff shows the Statute of 13 Eliz. and 21 Jac. c. 5. of
Bankrupts, and shows how E. C. 10 Jac. became a Bankrupt, and then was indebted
to the Plaintiff, and that in 22 Jac. the Defendant becomes bound to one L. in
a certain sum, which he avers was to the use of E. C. aforesaid; and upon
Special Pleadings the Case was this. One becomes Bankrupt and his Debtor bound
to L. in trust for the Bankrupt, Executor of L. releaseth; yet this Debt
assignable.
indebted to a Bankrupt, and he and the Bankrupt became bound for this Money to
L. in trust for the Bankrupt; a Commission of Bankrupcy issues, and this Debt
is assigned to the Creditor, and the Obligee dies, and his Executor releaseth
the Debt, and the Creditor brought an Action of Debt, Per Cur. it lies: For the
Interest of the Debt is transferred to the Creditor per Stat. 21 Jac. the Bond
being to his use, and for this the Release is no Bar: So it makes nothing that
the Bankrupt himself was bound, for the Bond was in trust for him, and Judgment
accordant, Palmers Rep. 505. Gerrard and Aylmer.

A Man recovers Damages in an Action Damages.
on the Case for words, and becomes a Bankrupt, per Cur. after Judgment when
this is reduced to a Certainty, it may be assigned: But the Case went further.
The Plaintiff takes Execution for the Damages, and the Sheriff received the
Money of the Defendant; it cannot be assigned so long as it lies in the Sheriffs
hands, not till he receive it, Jones Rep. 215. Benson and Flower, Vide this
Case devant.

Debt upon a Simple Contract may be Debt on Simple Contract. Assignees Remedy
for Debts of the Bankrupt.
assigned over to the Creditor, but the Assignee shall have no other Remedy
than the Debtee himself had; and this is by Action of Debt, or Action on the
Case. For if the Debtor become Bankrupt, and die, the Assignee shall not have
an Action of Debt against the Executor, but he may have an Action on the Case.
The Statute does not alter the Course of the Law for Recovery of this in other
nature, than the Law before allowed, and does not give more advantage to the
Assignee than the Principal Creditor had, p. 6. Car. 1. Morgan and Green.

There is a Proviso in 1 Jac. c. 15. That no Debtor of the Bankrupt shall be
thereby endangered for the payment of his Debt truly, and Bona Fide, to any
such Bankrupt, before such time as he shall understand and know that he is
become a Bankrupt.

Per Hales and Tot. Curiam, Payment by O^ Payment before notice, or Commission
sued.
a Debtor of a Bankrupt to himself or to his Creditor before notice of the
Bankrupcy, and before the Commission sued forth, is a discharge against the
Commissioners or their Assignee. Quaere of the payment after the Test of the
Commission, and before notice, 3 Keb. 190. Grove and Smith.

A Debt assigned before a Commission sued out, was ruled good, in Yardly and
Knights Case.

Payment to a Bankrupt after notice is void; but if there is no notice, or if
the Party be compelled to pay the Suit before any Commission sued out, it' a
good discharge. Anciently, till Commission sued out, the Debtor ought not to
repay, though he had notice of Bankrupcy, M. 25. Car. 2. B. R. Prin and Beal; and
Stooer and Hastings Case, 3 Keb. 298. payment before a Commission sued out is
good enough, Andrews and Spicers Case.

What Goods, or other Estate of the Bankrupt may be sold and assigned by them,
Vide supra.
THE Commissioners may assign Debts in Trust, Noy 142. Calchmans Case, Vide
supra.

The Commissioners here may sell a Bankrupts Goods in Ireland, and Irishmen
Ireland.
may sue the Commission.

They may assign a Judgment, 2* Keb. 706, Eclor and Jacobson.

Leases disposed by the Commissioners.
IT is made a Quaere in Mr. Stone, if a Proviso not to sell.
Lease for years is made with a proviso, he shall not alien, and the
Commissioners sell; whether this be a forfeiture? I hold it is not; for the Act
of Parliament which empowers them to sell to pay Debts, shall not be controled
by such an inofficious proviso.

A Lease for years is devised to A. if he live so long, the Remainder to one B.
the Commissioners shall not sell the possibility, Vide supra.

Advowsons, Presentations.
A Bankrupt has an Advowson, and the Church becomes void, the Commissioners
sell the Advowson, the Vendee presents, the sale is good, but the presentation
not; yet I think it is not Symony. Symony.


One grants an Advowson to a Feme Covert, sole Merchant, the Church becomes
void; the Husband in consideration that J. S. enters into Bond to Preach twice
a Week, presents him to the Benefice: The Feme becomes a Bankrupt, the Husband
dies, the Feme waves the the Grant, the Commissioners within six Months sell
the Presentation and the Advowson, this is a good Sale of the Advowson, but the
King shall present.

Common.
A* Had Common for a Cow in Pasture to him and his Wife, and to the Heirs of
their two Bodies begotten; A. the Husband grants the Common to E. the Wife dies
without Issue, E. is a Bankrupt; this is neither Land, Tenemnet nor
Hereditament which may be sold by the Commissioners, Stone p. 123.

Rents, Vide supra. Herriots, Reliefs.
LORD and Tenant; the Lord is a Bankrupt, the Tenant dies, the Commissioners
shall sell the Money or Debt due for the Relief: So of an Harriot: So of the
amerciaments of a Lee^*

What Assignment by the Commssioners shall be good, and what not.
THE Commissioners may assign Money to one, and Corn to another of the
Creditors, 2 Bulst. 26. But,

They may not make an Assignment to many Creditors together for their Debts,
but it must be severally, to every one apart, or it is not good, Godb. 195,
196. the Commissioners may assign a Debt due to the Bankrupt to one of his
Creditors for the payment of his Debt, but may not divide it and assign it more
than one. lbid.

But the constant course and practice is to make an Assignment to one or more
Creditors in Trust for themselves and the other Creditors.

R. is indebted to S. and B. jointly; S. One Jont obligee becomes a Bankrupt.
becomes a Bankrupt, and the Commissioners assign this Obligation to B. 1 Keb.
167. Boylstons Case.

The Assignment is a sufficient bar against the Parties, though it appear not
what was proportionable, 1 Keb. 491.

The Plaintiff in Audita Querela counted that Sir H. B. to whom he was
indebted, became a Bankrupt, and that certain Creditors had his Debt assigned
One of Creditors Assignces accepted a part of his Debt.
to them; and that one of them accepted part of his Debt in satisfaction of the
whole. The Defendant demurs, because he had not showed what were the Debts of
the Creditors, that so his payment might appear proportionable to the Debts;
but per Cur. it is well enough, especially being an Action brought by one that
is a Debtor; and the very Assignment is a sufficient bar against the Parties;
and if there be any Surplusage, the Defendant Surplusage.
has remedy in Chancery, 1 Keb. 491. Fitzwilliams against Lewis.

If the Plaintiff had been indebted in as great a sum as the Bankrupt had been
indebted to him, and yet his Debt assigned, this Assignment had not been good;
but this Debt was here assigned inter alia, and so other Debts to be intended;
and this may be good. The Defendant here ought to have demanded Oyer of the
Indenture, and of the Schedule to the same annexed, in which the several Debts
are contained. If there Uncore, vide Styles* ^^.
be more in this than his proper Debt, then the Assignment is not good; but the
same being here with an ( inter alia) this is good and sufficient, 2 Bulst. 26.
Powell verse. Stuff and Timewell.

Declaration.
IN an Action on the Case, the Plaintiff Declares, That the Defendant was
indebted to one Good in the Sum of 43 l. 1 s. for, etc. And being so indebted,
promised to pay him; which Good was indebted to the Plaintiff, and became
Bankrupt; whereupon a Commission was sued out, and the Commissioners assign
debita p^d Good in quadam Schedula continen p^d summam 43 l. 1 s. to the
Plaintiff, etc. Defendant pleads he made no such Promise to Good. And by
Special A different sum assigned.
Verdict it was found that the Defendant was indebted to Good but in 41 l. ^ s.
which he promised to pay; and that the Commissioners assigned debita p^d Good
menc^onat in quadam Schedula continen p^d summam 43 l. 1 s. to the Plaintiff:
And if this be the same Promise that the Plaintiff has declared upon, they
find for the Plaintiff. It was said, that upon the whole Record it appears,
that the Plaintiff has not made a good Title to his Action, for he has
alleged the Assignment to be of a Debt of 43 l. 1 s. whereas the Debt was but
41 l. 1 s. And this being an entire thing, will not pass by the Assignment of a
greater Sum: But it was resolved,

1. That it was the same Promise; for if Good himself had brought the Action,
he should have recovered upon this Verdict, and the Assignment by the
Commissioners vests the Debt in the Plaintiff, and he has the same Remedy to
recover that the Brankrupt had. And,

2. The Assignment is not in question, and that which they found touching the
Assignment is not material; however the Assignment is not laid to be of such a
Sum, as by that name, for then the Court inclined to believe it would not have
been good, Allen Rep. p. 28. Baker and Edmonds.

The Commissioners of Bankrupts have power to Sell, Grant and Assign, but they
cannot bring an Action; their Assignees must bring all Actions, Mod. Rep. p.
30. But per Twisden, Commissioners of Bankrupts might have an Action of Trover,
if they did actually seize any Goods of the Bankrupt, as they might by Law.

It is dangerous for Commissioners of Bankrupts to Assign Debts particularly;
as in Baker and Edmonds Case.

One that is a Bankrupt is felo de se. Mr. Stone puts the Question, whether the
Commissioners may assign the Goods to be sold for the Creditors, or whether
Whether the King shall be preferred before a Subject.
the King shall have them? And resolved it for the Creditors. For, says he,
very well; though it is resolved in the Lady Hales Case in Plowden, that when two
Titles come together ( viz.) the Kings and a Subject, the Kings title shall be
preferred; yet the King by these Acts has given away his Title to the
Creditors. And yet in my Opinion this may admit a Dispute; the Judges never
construing an Act of Parliament to give away the Kings Right, but wherein he is
mentioned; and so is the Opinion in Jones Rep. 203. as to this Statute.

The like Case is, A Bankrupt has a Term, and is a Recusant convict* Whether
the King or the Creditors shall have the Term?

So; Whether the Creditors by the Commission, shall have the Goods of an
outlawed person, or the King.

A pain of 10 l. is laid upon a Resiant to A Debt for an Amerciament in a L^^t.
reform a public Nuisance made by him before such a day, and at next Court he
is presented: The Lord becomes a Bankrupt, the Commissioners sell all the Debts
of the Bankrupt to A. A. shall have Action of Debt for this Amerciament, Stone
p. 149.

A. sues an Execution of a Statute Merchant, and the Conisors Land is Extended
at too high a rate, and refused by the Extendor, and delivered to the Jurors,
B. defeats the Execution by extending an elder Statute. A. is a Bankrupt, the
Commissioners sell all his Debts, the elder Statute is satisfied, and the
Jurors will not enter, the Vendee shall have a Sci. Fa. against Sci. Fa. to
revive a former Execution by Vendee.
the Tenant by the elder Statute, and the Terrtenants, and the Jurors to revive
the former Execution, Stone p. 149.

Two Tenants in Common recover Damages in Trespass; the one dies, the other is
a Bankrupt; all the Damages Damages.
shall be sold by the Commissioners.

A Bankrupt recovers Damages by an Damages Assigned, and then the Judgment
reversed.
erroneous Judgment, the Commissioners assign them to the Creditors, who
recover them in Execution; the Judgment is Reversed; the sale is good, but the
Assignees shall make restitution, Vide ^ Keble.

CHAP. XI.
Of Actions brought by the Assignee: Of the Commissioners for the Recovery of
Debts, or Goods of the Bankrupt: Of Declarations thereupon: Of Actions brought
by the Bankrupt himself; and the Forms of Declarations at large.

DEBTS were assigned by the Commissioners to the Creditors, and they sued
Actions in their own Names for the Debts, and good, 2 Croke 105. Bradshaws Case.

They shall have the same Redemedy as the Bankrupt himself might have had, 1
Keb. 167. The Statute does not alter the Course of the Law for Recovery of this
in another nature than the Law before allowed, and does not give more advantage
to the Assignee, than the Principal Creditors had, Pasch. 6. Car. 1. Morgan and
Green.

Action on the Case, for an Escape of a Commit of the Commissioners of
Bankrupts against the Sheriff of Bristol. The Commissioners put him into Goal
for refusing to answer Interrogatories, Vide supra, Cap. 5.

Assignee shall have Debt on a Bond: Trover, Det on Contract; Indeb. Assumpsit:
Action on the Case, etc. and other Remedies as the Bankrupt might have.
ASsignee shall have Trover. If the Goods of the Bankrupt come to the hands of
A. and be sold by B. no Trover lies for the Money or Goods, Trover*
Commissioners power of the Money, and not Goods sold.
but the Commissioners have only power of the Money. But on the Sale to A. by
the Bankrupt, the Commissioners may elect to have Money or Goods, 2 Keb. 348.
Micons Case.

Trover lies of Conversion between the Bankrupcy and Assignment: It was held no
Trover lay, but on specially showing the Bailment before and Conversion Mean;
yet it has been held to lie generally, 3 Keb. 294. Wellempton and Danby.

In Debt by an Assignee of Commissioners of Bankrupts, the Defendant waged his
Law Instanter, the Debt being Wager of Law.
on single Contract between the Defendant, and E. the Bankrupt, 2 Keb. 360.
Puckridge and Brown; Siderfin, p. 372. Mesme Case, 3 Keb. 337.

An Action on the Case on Indebitatus, Assumpsit to pay Debt assigned by the
Commissioners of Bankrupts, 3 Keb. 625. Coply and Dockmanque.

In Assignment of Debts by the Commissioners, there is nothing but a naked
thing in Action transferred, and no Estate or Reversion to which it may be
annexed, and therefore Privity of Contract What kind of Privity is transferred.
must be transferred, or otherwise nothing shall be transferred: But if a man
seized in Fee, makes a Lease for years, reserving Rent, and after he becomes a
Bankrupt, and the Commissioners of Bankrupts assign over the Reversion and the
Rent.
Rent, there the Assignee shall have an Action of Debt upon the Privity of the
Estate, and not upon Privity of the Contract, 1 Sanders 240. Thursby and Platt.

Action of Trover lies by the Assignee of one Partner a Bankrupt, against the
other, 2 Keb. 750. Thomas and Day.

Of Actions brought by the Bankrupt himself.
IN Trespass by a Bankrupt against a Stranger, he cannot plead the Plaintiff
has done such an Act to make him a Bankrup, 2 Keb. 32.

The Plaintiff may have Trespass or Covenant, etc. where the Damages are
uncertain, but any Debt certain is assignable. Debt certain.


Indebitatus by the Plaintiff, being a Bankrupt, the Defendant prayed to be
discharged on Common Bail, in regard the Debts are assigned, and so the
Commissioners must bring the Action; and this Assignment may be given in
Evidence; the Court discharged him upon reasonable Bail ( viz. of 100 l.) the
Debt being 1500 l. 1 Keb. 372. Holt and Scasgrogy.

Of Declarations by Assignees of Commissioners of Bankrupt.
NO place of Assignment by Commissioners Place of Assignment.
is alleged, per Curiam its ill, 3 Keb. 345. Copleys Case.

In Action of Debt brought upon the Statute of Bankrupts, the Plaintiff lays
in his Declaration the Debt due to him, and quod vigore Statuti p^dicti Actio
accrevit. Per Cur. the Plaintiff ought not Plaintiff need not mention the
several Creditors, but only his own Debt due to him.
in his Declaration to mention his several Creditors; but this ought to come on
the other side, to set forth that there were no other Goods but those which are
named, and there were other Creditors, but the Plaintiff is not to set forth
this in his Declaration, it being sufficient for him only to set forth his own
debt due to him, and that virtute cujus Actio accrevit.

It was excepted to the Declaration, that it is uncertain, because it is not
expressed upon what Statute the Action is brought, but per Curiam it is good; for
Vigore Stat* prea^, how to be referred.
these words in the Declaration ( vigore Statuti p^dicti Actio Accrevit) shall
be referred unto the Statute which gives the Action unto the Creditor upon the
Assignment by the Commissioners, and this is only the Statute 1 Jac. c. 15.
These are general Statutes, and therefore notice must be taken of them, 2
Bulst. 26. Powell versus Stuff and Timewell.

Det on Obligation assigned by the Monstre del Obligation.
Commissioners, and does not show the Obligation; wherefore it was demurred*
Per Cur. it is good enough, whithout showing it in Court; because he comes in by
Act in Law, and has no means to obtain the Obligation, Croke Car. p. 209. Gray
and Feilder.

Diverse Debts were assigned to the Plantists, being Creditors, by the
Commissioners, upon the Statute 13 Eliz. of Bankrupts; and they sued an Action
in their own Names for the Debts. Per Cur. it well lies; for it is a Debt
transferred by Parliament, and being upon a Contract, the Defendant waged his
Law, and Wager of Law, Vide supra.
was admitted thereto; for though the Parliament transferred the Debt, yet it is
not any Debt of Record: But as he might have waged his Law against the
Bankrupt, so he may against the Plaintiffs, Croke Jac. 105. Vide supra in Jones
Rep.

The Statute 1 Jac. gives an Action to the Assignee in his own Name, but he
must declare specially.

The Form of a Declaration by Assignees: Of the Commissioners of Bankrupts
against a Debtor.
Land ss. F. B. nuper de W. in Com Sur emiss^^*
S. Chapman sum^onit fuit ad respond P. S. and I. L. de plito quod reddat eis
41 l. quas eis debet and injuste detinet, etc. Et unde ijdem P and I. p W. C.
Attorn suum dicunt quoth tum p^d F. -- die -- Anno, etc. apud Lon in poch, etc.
emisset de quodam Petro Elston de L^nd Leatherseller quatuor scaplos Papiri
Anglice Reams of Piller-Paper, pro 20 s. duodecim ^undelas fili Anglice White
Thread pro 20 s (ac sic diversas seperales pcellas) solvend p^fa^ Thome Elston
scilt cum inde requisitus fuisset; que quidem separales sum in toto se
attingunt ad 47 l. 5 s. 4 d. Cumque p^d Petrus Elston 10 die Iulij Anno, etc.
indebitatus fuisset eid I. L. ac quibusdam A. B. and I. U. and diversis alijs
psonis Creditotor^ p^d Petri Elston (ipsis I. L. A. B. and I. D. and p^sat
Petro Elston existen subditis natis hujus Reg^ Ang^) in diversis denariorum
sum^is in toto se attingen ad 1000 l. leglis monte Ang^ ipu^que Metro Elston
sic indebitat existen ac p^d 47 l. 5 s. 4 d. p^fat Petro Elston p p^d F. minime
solut existen idem Petrus E. postea selt (tale die and Anno) apud L. in poch
and warda p^d ( ^od I. L. and alijs Creditoribus p^d Petri E. de debitis suis
p^d minime satisfact existen) incepit Custodire domum suam Anglice did begin to
Act del Bankrupcy.
keep his House ibid existen ad intentionem defraudand Creditores suos p^d de
veris debitis suis p ipsum P. Elston debit. Et superinde eod 10 die Aug. Anno,
etc. su^dict apud L. in p^och and warda p^d manifest devenit decoctor
(Anglice) became a Bankrupt qui quidem P. Elston tempore quo ip^ sic ut
p^fertur devenit decoctor Anglice a Bankrupt fuit and adhuc est subditus notus
hujus Regni Anglie videlt apud Londn p^dict in p^och and warda pd ac tunc and p
multos annos ante tunc in ead poch and warda p^d querebat facultatem suam
vivendi Anglice did seek his trade of living p viam emendi and vendendi Ac cum
postea selt (tali die and Anno) apud Westminster in Com Midd ad peticon p^d A. B. I.
L. I. D. and Petition.
aliorum Creditorum p^d P. Elston tunc Thome dom Elsmere Dno^ Cancellario
Anglie exhibit and fa^t pro remedijs suis versus p^fat P. Elston tunc existen
decoctorem (Anglice a Bankrupt) in hac pte hend ijsdem Abr^ Jacob and Iohe and
ceteris Creditoribus p^d P. Elston de debis suis p^d tunc minime sati^fact)
quedam Commissio dicti Dom Regis super Statuta contra decoctores Anglice
Bankrupts edit and provi^ sub Magno Sigillo diet Dom Regis Anglie Sigillat and
hic in Cur^ a prolat geren Commission
dat apud Westminster p^d 16 die, etc. Anno, etc. quibusdam ^. S. Ar^ H. S. Ar^ I. H.
Mercator^ R. H. Mercator^ and W. R. Mercator^ direct fuit p quam quidem
Commissionem dict Dom Rex dedit plenam potestatem and authoritatem p^diet
Commissionar^ quatuor vel tribus eorum quorum p^d I. S. vel H. S. unum esse
voluit juxta separalia Statuta de decoctoribus Anglice Bankrupts in hujusmodi
casu edit and provi^ in dicta Commissione men^onat non solum concern p^d
decoctorem Anglice Bankrupt corpus p^d decoctoris, terras libera tenementa and
customar^ bona debita and alias res quascunque sed etiani concern omnes alias
psonas que p concelamentum clameum vel aliter offenderet Anglice shall or do
offend tangen p^d p^missa vel aliquam ptem inde contra intentionem and
propositum dictorn Statutorum vel utriusque eorum ad faciend and exigend sedm
dicta Statuta and utrumque eorum omnes and quastibet rem and res quascunque tam
erga and pro satisfactione and solu^one p^dict Creditorum quam erga and pro
o^bus alijs intentionibus and propositis sedm ordinationem and provisionem
eorumdem Statutorum per quam quidem Commissionem idem Dominus Rex voluit and
dedit in mandatis quoth p^d Commissionar^ quatuor vel tres eorum quorum p^d I. S.
and H. S. unum esse voluit ad procedend ad executionem and complementn p^d
Commissionis sedm veram intentionem and propositum dictorum seperalium
Statutorum and utriusque eorum cum omni diligentia and effectu secundum
specialem fiduciam dicti Dom Regis in illis repositam; prout p eandem
Commissionem before liquet and apparet Virtute cujus quidem Commissionis and
vigore Statutorum p^dictorum p^d H. R. and W. ^ meliori remedio Creditorum p^d
post maturam deliberac^onem inde capt postea selt 5 die, etc. apud London in
poch and Warda p^d per quandam Indenturam assignac^onis inter Assignment.
ipsos H. R. and W. ex una pte and eosdem Petrum Jacob and Iacobum ex altera
pte factam, cujus alteram partem Sigillis ipsorum H. R. and W. signat ijdem P.
I. and I. in Curia Recital.
proferunt, cujus d^^ est die and Anno ult supra diet testat existit quoth cum
placi^erit Regis Majesta^i p Commissioneth suam sub Magno Sigillo Anglie
Sigillat geren dat 16 die, etc. Anno Regni sui 11 direct p^d I. S. H. S. I. H.
R. H. and W. R. dantem plenam potestatem and authoritatem eis vel aliquibus
quatuor aut tribus eorum quorum p^d I. H. vel H. S. unum esse voluit, pro
executione Statutorum tangen ordines pro decoct Anglice Bankrupts quorum unum
editum fuit in Parliamento inchoat and tent apud Westminster p^d 19 die Maij Anno,
etc. intitulat Actus pro meliori relevio Creditor^ contra eos qui devenirent
deco^^ Anglice Bankrupts vel aliquem eorum sup Corpus terras bona debita pd P.
Elston qui devenit decoctor ea intention quoth tam Creditores p^d P. Elston
essent ratabiliter and proportionabilit satisfact de debitis suis in tant quant
status p^d P. Elston extenderet, quam erga and pro omnibus alijs materijs
intentionibus and propositis sedm ordinationes and provisiones dictorum
Statutorum and utriusque eorum prout p p^d Commissionem and Petitionem eidem
annex' liquere potest p^d Commissionarij pro debita executione inde juxta
officiorum eorum debitum processerunt in eisdem sedm equitatem and purport
Anglice purport p^diceorum Statutorum and Commissionis and pro eo quod
invenerunt per examinationem p^d P. Elston and aliorum quoth cirea (tali die and
Anno) P. Elston secret remanebat Anglice did keep himself secret in Domo sua
in Fryday-street London and recusabat colloquium eum Creditoribus suis vel ire
for as ex proposit ipsum custodire a sectis and arrestationibus Creditorum
suorum ac defer and impedire eos a recupera^^n^ debitorum suorum and sic eo
modo induxit seipsum Anglice did bring himself infra periculum Anglice within
the compass predictorum Statutorum de decoctoribus, and fuit eod tempore
possessionatus ut in jure suo proprio de diversis mercimonijs, merchandizis,
bonis, utensilibus, and pecuniarum summis, and huit diversa debita tunc ei
devcn ad magnum valorem, pars quorum quidem mercimoniorum, merchandi^',
bonorum, debitorum, and summarum pecunie devenerunt ad manus diversarum
personarum, quarum nomina quam etiam particulares parcelle quorum mercium,
merchand, bonorum summar^ pecunie ac debitorum sunt specificat and content in
schedula indent p^d Indenture annex' ijdem Assignment.
Commissionarij pro and in consideratione mill librarum current monete Anglie
solvend p eosdem P. I. and I. prout in Indentura p^dicta postea mentionabates
and ex perte eorumdem P. I. and I. convent pro tanto quantum legitime
potuerunt, concessissent barganizassent vendidissent and allocassent Anglice
set over and p eandem Indenturam barganizaverunt vend assign and allocaverunt
eisdem P. I. and I. and eorum assig^ omnia and singula p^dicta bona mercimon
merchandi^' utensilia debita and summas pecunie and quamlibet ptem and pcellam
inde que legitime potuissent vendere, and que devenissent and remansissent in
manibus p^dictarum personarum quarum nomina ro^tent ^uere in schedula p^d'
p^dicte Indenture annex' ^end' and tenend' omnia p^dicta bona, mer^im
merchandiz' deba summas pecu^^ie ac omnia and singula p^dict barganizat vendit
and assignat p^missa, ac quamlibet ptem and pcellam inde, eisdem P. I. and I.
executoribes administatori^es and assign suis imppetuum. Et ijdem P. I. and I.
pro seipsis executo^ administrator^ and assign suis and pro quolibet eorum
convenerunt Covenant.
promiser^ conces^ and agreaver^ ad and cum p^fat I. S. Hen' Ioh' Harper Rob'
and Wolst and ad and cum utroque and quolibet eorum and utriusque eorum
executo^ibus and assign p eandem Indenturam quoth ijdem P. I. and I. execut and
assign sui and quilibet eorum cum omni convenienti celeritate sectarentur
Anglice will sue arrestarent impla^itarent and utentur eorum and cujus^ihet
eorum optimis medijs and open p leges hujus Regni se^ alia legitima media,
recuperare capere vel recipere de p^d personis in p^d Indentura and Schedula
p^d' eid' Indenture annex' menc^onat eorum heredibus, executoribus, vel aliquo
eorum p^dicta bona mercimonia, merchand utensilia deba and summas pecunie ve^
verum valorem inde and quoth P. I. and I. hered exec administ vel assign sui vel
aliqui eorum ad aliquod tempus pos^ datum Indenture pd non acquietarent relax'
seu exonerar^ vel causar^ seu pro^urar^ fore acquietat relax' vel exonerat
p^dictas p^sonas in p^dicta Indent vel indentata Schedula p^dicte Indenture
annex' menc^onat hered administ vel assign suos vel aliquem eorum de and ab p^d
bonis mercim merchand utensil debis veris, summis pecunie, seu de vel ab aliqua
p^te vel p^cella eorum set tantummodo tal qual ijdem P. I. and I. essent
accomptabil p^d Commissionar^ seu tribus eorum ad minus quorum, etc. fore unum.
Et ijdem P. I. and I. pro seipsis execut adminise and assign suis and pro
quolibet eorum convener^, concesser^, etc. quoth super recuperatione and
receptione p^dictorum bonorum, Account.
etc. and summarum pecunie, seu alicujus partis inde, ijdem P. I. and I. exec
admin vel assign sui de tempore in tempus infra 10 dies post quamlibet
requisitionem eis fiend p pdi^^ Commissionarios vel aliquos tres eorum facerent
justum and verum computum omnium talium sum and summarum pecunie qual ipsi
vel eorum aliqui reciperent pro aliquibus p^dict mercimon vendit vel pro debis
solut seu ^pro vel super aliqua composic^one conce^n eadem, p^d Commissionarijs
vel aliquibus tres eorum vel alicui psone si^^ psonis quas ipsi in Scriptura
nominarent and appunctuarent, existen Creditoribus p^fat P Elston, qui sedm
p^dicta Statuta contribuerent o^eri p^dicte Commissionis: Et sic computantes quoth
ijdem P. I. and I. seu exe^ admin vel assign sui vel aliqui eorum immediate
super quolibet tali Comput solverent and deliberarent seu causarent solvi and
deliberari p^dict Commissionar^ ut p^d est in tali modo and forma seu talibus
psone vel psonis qual p^d Commissionar^ nominarent and appunctarent sedm
p^dicta Statuta vel utrumque eorum and p^d Commissionem omnes tales summam and
summas pecunie qual ille vel illi reciperent ut p^d est: Except and reservat
eisdem P. I. and I. exec and assign suis omni tal ^ationa^il summa and summis
monete qual essent disburs^t seu expendit pro and erga recuperationem and
recepc^onem p^d bonorum mercim merca^d sum^e vel summarum pecunie ut supradict
est prout p eandem Indentur^ inter al before apparet. Et ijdem P. I. and I. in
fa^^o dic quod p^d debitum 48l. 5s. 4d. in Schedula p^dicta inter alia p^dicte
Indenture annex' and inter alia ijsdem P. I. and I. per Com^issiona^ p^d assign
and p^d debitum 48l. 5s. 4d. superius specificat fore debitum est unum and
Averment.
idem debitum and non allud neque diversum and est tam ad usum p^d P. I. and I.
^uam ad usum reliquorum Creditorum p^d P. Elston p quod ac vigore Statutor^ p^d
actio accrevit ijsdem P. I. and I. ad exigend and ^end de p^fat Francisco
p^dict 48l. 5s. 4d. p^dictusque Francilcus de 7l. 4s. 5d. inde ijsdem P. I. and
I. postea satisfecisset p^dictus tame Fr^ licet sepius requisites p^d 41l. inde
resid eisdem P. I. and I. nondum reddidit sed, etc. Tr. 13 Jac. Rot. 3365.

Det per Assignee of the Commissioners of Bankrupcy, upon a Bond made to the
Bankrupt.
W. B. queritur de T. R. de Longlane in peroch Sancti Sepulchri London nigro
pistore alias dict T. R. de ead Civitat nigro pistore in custodia Marr^, etc.
de plito quod reddat ei december lib leglis monete Anglie quas ei debet and
injuste detinet pro eo videlt quoth cum p^d T. 11 die Febr^ Anno Regni Dom Caroli
nunc Regis Anglie, etc. nono apud Land p^d videlt in perochia beat Marie de
Arcubus in warda de Cheap' London p quoddam scriptum suum obligatorium sigillo
ipsius T. sigillat Curieque dict Dom Regis nunc hic osten^ cujus dat est eisdem
die and Anno cogn se teneri and firmit obligari cuidam I. B. nuper de London
Upholster in december libris solvend eid I. cum inde requisitus esset* Cumque
etiam p^d I. postea selt quarto die Martij Anno Regni dict Dom Caroli nunc Rs^
Anglie undecimo apud London p^d in poch and warda p^d indebitat fuisset eid W.
and diversis alijs Creditoribus ipsius I. existen subdit not hujus Regni Anglie
in diversis sepalibus denariorum sum^is in toto se attingen ad duas mill
libras legalis monete Anglie ipsoque I. sic eid W. and p^d alijs Creditoribus
ipsius I. indebitat existen ac p^d 10 libris in manibus ipsius T. ut p^fertur
insolut existen Idem I. p^dicto quarto die Martij anno undecimo supradict apud
London p^d a Domo sua mansional decessit (Anglice) did depart ea intention ad
defraudand Creditores suos Act des Bankrupcy.
p^d de veris and justis debiti^ suis eis p ipsum I. debit per quod Creditores
sui impedit fue^ Anglice were delayed de obtentione justorum and verorum
debitorum suorum Et superinde p^d I. I. eod quarto die M. Anno undecimo
supradicto apud London p^d manifest devenit Decoctor (Anglice became a
Bankrupt) and fuit and adhuc est subditus natus hujus Regni Anglie (videlt)
apud London p^d in paroch and warda p^d and adhuc and p multos annos ante tunc
querebat modum suum vivendi (Anglice) did seek his trade of living p viam
emendi and vendendi Cumque etiam postea selt decimo die Martij anno undecimo
supradict apud Westminster in Com Midd ad petitionem p^d W. and quorundam aliorum
Creditorum p^d I. tam pro seipsis quam pro alijs Creditoribus ipsius I. hon^li
viro Tho^ Dom Coventry adhuc and adtunc dno^ custod Magni Sigilli dicti Dom
Regis nunc Anglie exhibit and fact pro remedijs suis versus p^fat I. tum
existen decoctorem (Anglice a Bankprupt) in hac pte hend eid W. and alijs
Creditoribus p^d I. de debitis suis p^d tunc minime solut sive satisfact
existen quedam Com^issio Dom Regis super Statut Commission.
contea decoctores (Anglice Bankrupts) edit and provi^ sub Magno Sigillo ipsius
nuper Regis Anglie sigilla^ and hic in Curia prolat geren dat apud Westminster p^d
p^d decimo die Martij anno undecimo supradict quibusdam I. G. Ar^ T. E. Ar^ A.
H. Gen I. W. Gen and R. U. Gen direct fuit per quam quidem Com^issionem idem
Dom Re^ nunc adtunc and ibidem dedit plenam potestatem and authoritatem sd
Commissionar^ quatuor vel tribus eorum quorum p^fat I. and T. unum esse voluit
juxta separalia Statuta de decoctoribus Anglice Bankrupts, and quodlibet eorum
in hujusmodi casu edit and provis in dicta Commissione men^onat non solum de
and concernen dictum decoctorem Anglice Bankrupt corpus suum terras liberas and
custumar^ bona debita and alia quecunque sed etiam concernen omnes alias psonas
que p concelament clameum vel aliter offendissent vel offenderent (Anglice do
shall and offend) concernen pmissa vel aliquam ptem inde contra inten^onem and
proposit (Anglice the meaning) eorundem Statutorum vel alicujus eorum, and
agere and exequi sedm sdicta Statuta and eorum alicujus omnes and singulas rem
and res tam erga and pro satsfac^one and solutione Creditorum pd quam erga and
pro omnibus aliis intentionibus and propositis sedm ordinationem and
provisionem eorundem Statutorum dictus Dom Rex p eand Com^ssionem volens and
pcipiens eisdem Commissionar^ quatuor vel tribus eorundem quorum p^fat I. G.
and T. E. unum esse voluit ad procedend ad executionem ad accomplementum sd
Commission^s sedm veram intentionem and proposit (Anglice meaning) eorundem
separalium Statutorum and alicujus eorumdem cum diligentia and effectu prout
specialis fiducia dicti Dom Regis in eis posit fuit prout p eandem Commissionem
before apparet Virtute cujus quidem Com^issionis and vigore Statutorum p^dict
p^d I. G. A. H. and T. W. tres Com^issionar^ p^d' and p^d' I. B. pro meliori
remedio p^d' W. B. and pro alijs bonis causis ipsos ad inde specialiter moven
post maturam deliberationem inde cap^ selt decimo quarto die, etc. Anno Regni,
etc. per quoddam script^ suum indentat sigillis eorundem I. G. Assignmet.
A. H. and I. W. sigillat ad and cum consensu creditorum sd' I. B. qui
Com^issionem sd' prosecut fuissent and impetrassent Ac etiam ad and cum assensu
p^d' I. W. decoctoris and in executione Com^issionis illius assignaverunt and
extraposuerunt (Anglice have set over) eid' W. W. p^d' debitum december librarum
inter alia p^fat I. B. p sfat T. R. in forma p^d' debit hend' tenend' petend'
demand' sectand' recuperand' and recipiend' debitum p^d' quamlibet ptem and
percellam inde eidem W. executoribus administratoribus and assign suis tanquam
bona sua propria and ad suum proprium usum and beneficium imppetuum absque
aliquo Compo^ p ipsum W. B. executores vel assign suos alicui psone vel
aliquibus psonis quibuscunque pro eisdem fiend' p quod ac vigore Statutorum
p^d' actio accrevit eid' W. B. ad exigend' and hend' de p^dict T. R. p^d' december
lib p^d' tamen T. licet sepius requisitus etc. p^d' 10 l. p^fat I. W. nondum
solvit sed illi ei hucusque solvere omnino contradixit and adhuc contradicit ad
damnum ipsius W. quinque librarum Et inde producit sectam, etc.

CHAP. XII.
Of Pleadings in respect of the Statutes of Bankrupcy by the Debtor or by the
Commissioners to Actions brought against them, and what Pleas shall be good,
and what not.

IN an Action on Assumpsit for Wares sold; the Defendant pleads such* day the
Plaintiff became a Bankrupt, and yet is so; to which the Plaintiff demurred,
because he says not he was a Tradesman, 3 Keb. 134. which should be, Hanslop
and Hales; yet the Plea seems to be ill, Vide Case sequent' and 2 Keb. 32.

In Debt on Obligation, the Defendant Plea, that the Plaintiff was Bankrupt
before Action brought, ill.
pleaded, before the Action brought the Plaintiff became a Bankrupt; to which
the Plaintiff demurred. Per Curiam, it is an ill plea; and until assignment be
made, the Debtor is defensless: Payment before Commission sued out is good
enough, and so it is before his Debt is assigned; quaere de hoc. Judgment pro
Quer' 3 Keb. 616. Andrews and Spicer. Q.

Det on Obligation for performance of Articles for payment of Money for Rent;
Defendant pleads that the Plaintiff was a Bankrupt, and that the Defendant paid
the Money to the Assignees of the Commissioners of Bankrupcy, Tompsons Entrys,
Fo. 166.

Det on Obligation, on Oyer the Defendant protestando that this Debt was not
assigned by the Commissioners of Bankrupcy of Holt, for plea says, that this
was not due to the Plaintiff, and alijs Crediroribus of Holt; to which the
Plaintiff replied it was so due, and the Defendant demurred specially as
double. Twisden conceived the Replication ill, and that the Assignment to the
Plaintiff should be showed, that being traversable as well as the Bankrupcy:
This Case seems not to be well reported here, therefore let us see how it is
reported three or four Leaves after. In Det on Obligation, Defendant pleads
that it was in trust for Holt who is a Bankrupt, and virtute Bankrupcy
traversable as well as the Assignment.
Commissionis quibusdam Commissioners, etc. this Debt was assigned to Ashly and
Penning and alijs Creditoribus, etc. to which the Defendant demurred specially
for doubleness; the Court conceived the Bankrupcy traversable as well as the
Assignment, but the Issue is well enough, 3 Keb. 710, 737. Jonas and Boulton.

Action on the Case, Indebitatus Assumpsit to pay a Debt assigned by the
Commissioners of Bankrupts; the Defendant pleaded the Statute of Limitations,
and that Causa Actionis non accrevit infra sex Stat. Limitations.
Annos. Mr. Stone has made a Quaere whether he that comes in as Creditor, and
has a Debt made over unto him by the Commissioners, may not be barred by the
Statute of Limitations. Mr. Billinghurst, p. 129. very roundly answers the
matter, that he shall be barred. But it seems this is not within the Statute of
Limitations: And certainly the Commission being dated within the six years, the
plea should have been infra sex annos, after the Commission. Let us
distinguish: If a Commission be not taken out within six years (as it may be so
long and longer except in case of Purchasers, for then it must be taken out
within the space of five years) then perhaps to this Action, being on Contract,
the Defendant may plead the Statute of Limitations; but if Commission be taken
out within the six years, and Assignment made within six years, then the
Statute seems to preserve this Debt by the Assignment, it being to relieve
Creditors against such base Fraud: But to allow this Knavish Plea to cover
former Knavery of this high Nature, it is intolerable, Vide in 3 Keb. 625, 645.
in Coply and Dockmins Case, an Anonymous Case cited by Weston, that it was
adjudged in C. B. that this Debt is not within the Statute of Limitations. On
Covenant by Assignee to account.


In Det on Bond given to the Plaintiff to perform Covenants between the
Defendant as Assignee, for the benefit of the other Creditors, and the
Commissioners of Bankrupts, which was, inter alia, to give an account to the
other Creditors, or to either of their Assignees on request: The Plaintiff said
he had not given him an account in his Replication; (the Defendant having
pleaded performance in bar) to which the Defendant demurred, because the
Covenant is joint as to Creditors, to which the Court inclined, there being a
subsequent Clause several as to Assignees, 1 Keb. 815. Selby and Walker: But
per Keeling, the Covenant is several, according to the interest and subject
matter, and each of the Creditors may call the party to an account, but the
Covenant was by the Defendant and his Brother, which was severally to do their
endeavors to bring in the Debts, and super requisitio' eis fact', they would
account; therefore both are bound to account jointly, though the Bond is only
given by one. Court held it ill, the Plaintiff being no party to the Covenant,
p. 843. Mesme Case.

In Trespass by a Bankrupt against a Stranger, he cannot plead the Plaintiff
has done such an Act to make him a Bankrupt, 2 Keb. 32.

In Debt by Assignee of the Commissioners, the Defendant pleads nil debet,
Wager of Law.
and wages his Law; and by the Court he may well, though the interest and power
to sue in his own name be good to the Plaintiff by the Statute of Bankrupts:
But otherwise if the duty it self had been originally due by the Statute, Noy
p. 112. Osborn and Bradshaw. Vide supra.

In Assumpsit, the Defendant pleads that after the Promise, and before the
Action, the Plaintiff became a Bankrupt, denying himself to Creditors, of which
the Plaintiff had notice. Per Cur' payment Payment before notice, or Commission
sued o^t
to a Bankrupt after notice, is void; but if no notice, or if the party be
compelled to pay by Suit, as here before any Commission is sued out, it is a
good discharge. Formerly till Commission sued out, the Debtor ought not to
repay though he had notice of Bankrupcy, 3 Keb. 231. Prin and Beal.

Of Pleadings to Actions brought against the Commissioners.
IN Trespass against the Commissioners of Bankrupts, if the Plaintiff declares
To the breaking the House it must be specially pleaded.
of the entry into his House, the Defendant may not plead not guilty, and give
the Special Matter in Evidence; but he ought to plead the Commission of
Bankrupcy, and all the Special Matter; but Aliter, As to taking Goods.
if it had been for taking of Goods only, he may plead not guilty generally,
Litt. Rep. 356. By the Statute 1 Jac. 15. It is Enacted, That if any Actions of
Trespass, or other Suit shall happen hereafter to be brought against any
Commissioner authorized by the Statute made in the 13th of Eliz. for Bankrupts,
or any other person or persons having Authority by virtue, or under the
Commission, authorizing the said Commissioners for the doing or executing any
matter by force of the said Statute, or this present Act, that the Defendant or
Defendants in any such Action or Suit may plead not guilty, or otherwise
justify that the Act or thing whereof the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs complained
was done by authority of the said Act of 13 Eliz. or in this present Act
respectively, without expressing or rehearsal of any other matter or
circumstance contained in either of the said Acts, and without enforcing him or
them to show forth their Commission authorizing the said Act or thing,
whereunto the Plaintiff shall be admitted to reply, that the Defendant did the
fact supposed in the Declaration, of his own wrong, without any such Cause
alleged by the said Defendant; whereupon the issue in such Action shall be
joined to be tried by twelve men; and upon trial of that Issue, the whole
matter to be given on both parties in Evidence, according to the very truth of
the same: And if Verdict upon such Issue shall pass for the Defendant, the
Defendant to have his Costs.

Now the reason of the difference seems to be, that the Commissioners may plead
the General Issue, or any thing done by the Statute of 13 Eliz. and 1 Jac. and
neither of those Statutes do authorize the breaking open Houses; but that
Authority is given by 21 Jac. and no such General Pleading is provided for by
that Statute.

Action on the Case was brought by Former Action of Trespass no Plea to an
Action on the Case.
the Plaintiff for the breaking his House, and taking his Goods away, by
pretense of the said Commission; whereas he was no Bankrupt, per quod he was
impaired in his Credit. Defendant pleads the Plaintiff brought an Action of
Trespass for the same Trespass against him, and that he recovered therein; It
is no Plea, Styles Rep. 3. 201, 202. Watson and Norbery.

As for the Form of Pleas, Vide postea.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Venue, Evidence, Trial.

Of the Venue.
IN Action of Trover by Assignee of the Commissioners, the Visne may be laid in
Middlesex, whence the Commission issues, or in the place where the Cause of
Action arises, at the Plaintiffs Election* the Commission being the Foundation
of all* ^ 15. and 16. Car. 2. Bailey and Bunnings Case

Evidence (...)
THE Evidence (...) were the Depositions before the Commissioners Depositions.
of the Bankrupt, which per Curiam is good enough* bu^ the Defendants Council
opposing them* they proved viva voce what the Bankrupt con^est.

In a Suit in Chancery on Assignment of Lands, etc. the Depositions which were
taken before the Commissioners, not allowed as Evidence; but a Special
Commission taken out: The Defendant excepted to a Witness because he was a
Witness.
Creditor, and so might come in before division made: But after four Months
after any Dividend duly made, he is a good Witness; for no other Dividend shall
be intended, 2 Keb. 348 Bets and Mico.

What Evidence sufficient to prove a man Bankrupt, Vide Siderfin, 411. Sir
Anthony Batemans Case, and alias supra.

On Trial at the Bar in Trover and Conversion for 4000 l. which was the Money of
Sir A. C. a Jew, and upon his Bankrupcy, assigned by the Commissioners of
Bankrupts to the Plaintiff, and exception was taken to the Evidence, because
the Assignment of the Commissioners was 18 No. 67. and the Plaintiff demands
the Money of the Defendant 21 No. 67. and the Declaration is of the same Term (
Sil't) Mich. 67. which relates to the first day of the Term: And so Action
brought before Action before Cause of Action.
Cause of Action. But per Cur. an Action in B. R. shall not be said to
commence, until the Defendant has made his appearance, which is not until Bail
filed, (if it be by Bill) Siderfin, p. 373. Lidcott and Backwell.

Maxims of Bankrupts.
ONCE a Bankrupt and always a Bankrupt, per Glyn. 2 Siderfin, 115. Vide prius.

Statues favorably to be construed for the Creditors, Vide le Stat. 2
Siderfin. 115.

He that is a Bankrupt to one Creditor, is a Bankrupt to all, Styles Reg. 48.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Distribution: Notice to Creditors: Of Dividend, and the Form; as also the
Form of a Deed of Distribution.

Of Distribution, Vide prius sub Titul' Assignment.
THE Commissioners may sell and prepare for Distribution presently upon the
execution of the Commission; but till the four Months are past, they may not
proceed to Distribution, Hutton, p. 38.

Per Coke and VVinch. 10 Jac. Reeve verse. May, The Commissioners may divide a
Debt upon Obligation.

Distribution must be to every one of the Creditors a portion, rate and
rate-like, according to the quantity of his or their Debt, 2 Rep. 25, 26.

Commissioners ought to make several Distribution to several Creditors, and not
to make a joint-Sale or Assignment to several Creditors: For if he owe to A.
20l. to B. 20 l. and to C. 5 l. a joint Sale or Assignment to A. B. and C. is
not according to their power given by the said Act 13 Eliz. but if by the
Special Verdict it appears that the Debt was due to the Plaintiffs jointly,
then the joint Sale is good, 2 Rep. 26.

If a Bankrupt be indebted to one 20 l. and to another 10 l. and he has a Debt
due to him by Bond of 20 l. Now the Commissioners may assign and divide this (
viz.) to every Creditor a portion, part and part-like; and the Assignees it
seems may sue severally for it, Godb. 195. See Bradshaws Case.

Per Stat. 21 Jac. Judgmentees, Conisees, Attachers, per foreign Aattachment,
if there be no Extent sued and executed upon any the Lands, etc. Goods and
Chattels of the Bankrupt before the time of his Bankrupcy, shall only have a
rateable part with other Creditors for their just Debts, Vide Prius Cap. 5.

If any Distribution be made of any part of the Estate, no Creditors are to be
admitted after, that come not in before, Hob. 287. vide supra Cap. 6. Fuller
and Lance in Chancery.

Notice to Creditors of making a Dividend; upon paying Contribution Money, and
proving their Debts.
WE whose Names are subscribed, being the major part of Commissioners named and
authorized in the Commission of Bankrupt awarded against A. B. of, etc. the
Four Months since the the date and suing forth of the said Commission, having
been long since elapsed and expired; and the Creditors who prosecute the same,
having desired that we should proceed to make a Dividend of the Estate by us
already discovered and assigned, as by the Statutes we are empowered, do
therefore by these Presents give fourteen days notice thereof, and that we do
intend and appoint to meet for making the said Dividend, on Friday the first
day of September next ensuing, by Ten of the Clock in the Forenoon of the same
day, at the Irish Chamber in in Guildhall, London; and such Creditors who do
intend to come into the said Commission for their respective Debts, are to take
care to pursue the directions of the said Statutes, in paying in their
Contribution-mony, according to our former Order in this Affair, lest they be
excluded the Dividend; and they are also at the same time and place, to come
prepared to make due proof of their respective Debts; dated the 18th day of
August, in the fifth year of, etc.

CHAP. XV.
Of Bankrupts: Where there are Partners, and Joint-stocks.

AN Action of Trover well lies by the Assignee of one Partner a Bankrupt,
against the other, p. 23. Car. 2. B. R. Thomas and Day, agreed at a Trial.

If there be two Partners, and one breaks, you shall not charge the other with
the whole, because it is ex maleficio: But if there are two Partners, and one
of them die, the survivor shall be charged for the whole. If he be sworn before
the Commissioners of Bankrupts, he is admitted no Partner, per Twisden, Mod.
Rep. 45.

If one for a time deal in a Trade, and after he forsakes his Trade, but leaves
his Stock in the hands of another, and he has part of the gain, and is
partaker of the loss; if such a one after desert and conceal himself, he is a
Bankrupt within the Statute, Palmers Rep. 325. in the Case of Hayler and Hall.

Craven and al' and Knight, etc. In Chancery. The Bill sets forth that the
Defendant George Widows being indubted to the Plaintiffs, became bound to
them in several Bonds; and the said Widows, and the Defendant Berman for
several years past, were Copartners, and Widows by Articles of Copartnership
was entitled to two thirds of the whole Stock, and the Defendant Berman to one
third part; the said Widows and Berman 25 August last became Bankrupts, and a
Commission of Bankrupcy was awarded again them; the Commissioners of Bankrupts
assigned all the Estate of the said Bankrupts to the Defendant Knight and
others, and refuse to let the Plaintiffs Creditors of the Bankrupts to come in,
and intend to divide the said Estate amongst the Joint-Creditors of the
Bankrupts, by reason whereof the Plaintiffs Debts will be utterly lost.

The Defendants insist, that it was agreed by Indenture of Copartnership, that
all such Debts as should be owing Joint Debts to be paid out of the Joint Stock.
on the Joint-Account should be paid out of the Joint Stock; and at the end of
the Partnership each Copartner take and receive to his own use his share of the
Joint Stock, and that the Joint Stock or Trade should not be charged with the
private or particular Debts of either of the Partners, but that each should pay
their private Debts out of their particular Estates, not included in the
Joint Stock: That if both the said Parties should be living at the end of the
first three years of the six years, that the said Berman should come in
Joint-Partner accordingly; and during the said Joint-Trade, the Copartners
became jointly indebted to the other Defendants, Knight, etc. in 6000 l. and
that Widows became indebted to the Plaintiffs, as aforesaid, without the
consent of Berman; and the Money due upon the said Bonds was not brought into
the Account of the Joint Stock; and the said Widows was only a Surety, and
received none of the Money; and the Defendants insisted, that the
Joint-Creditors ought to be first paid out of the Estate of Partnership; and
that the Commissioners have no power to grant the Joint-Estate to pay the
Plaintiffs, they being separate Creditors of Widows: And if a Surpluss of the
Joint-Estate, after the Joint-Creditors paid, then the Plaintiffs can have but
a jointmoiety of such Surpluss, toward their satisfaction, the said Bermans
moiety being not liable to pay the said Widows his separate Debts; and the
Debts then claimed were the proper Debts of the said Widows; and yet after all
the Joint-Debts are paid, there will be an overpluss; so that thereby the said
Berman will be discharged, and have Money paid unto him: But if the Plaintiff,
and other separate Creditors of Widows be Separate Creditors.
admitted to the Joint-Estate, there will not be sufficient to pay the
Joint-Creditors; so that thereby not only Bermans Estate will be applied to pay
widdows's Debts, but will be liable to the Joint-Creditors. But there can be no
division of the Joint-Estate whereby to charge any part thereof with the
private Debts of either Party; and till the Joint-Debts are paid, and till
division made of the Surpluss, both parties are alike interested in every part
of the said Joint Stock; that the Commissioners have no power by the Commission
to administer an Oath to the Plaintiffs for proof of their Debts, they claiming
Debts from the said Widows only; and the Commission is against Widows and
Berman jointly, and Creditors.
not severally, and therefore cannot admit the Plaintiffs Creditors.

The Court declared, that the Estate belonging to the Joint-Trade, as also the
the Debts due from the same, ought to be divided into moieties, and that each
moiety of the Estate ought to be charged in the first place with a moiety of
the said Joint-Debts; and if there be enough to pay all the Debts belonging to
Joint-Trade, with an overplus, then such overplus ought to applied to pay the
particular Debts of each Partner; but if sufficient shall not appear to pay all
the Joint-Debts; and if either of the said Partners shall pay more than a
moiety of the said Joint-Debts, then such Partner is to come in before the said
Commissioners, and to be admitted as a Creditor, for what he shall so pay over
and above the moiety; and was decreed acco^dingly.

Per North, Chief Justice. If there are Accounts between two Merchants, and one
of them becomes a Bankrupt, the Course is not to make the other, who perhaps
upon stating the Accounts, is found indebted to the Bankrupt, to pay the whole
that was originally entrusted to him, and to put him for the recovery of what
the Bankrupt owes him, into the One Merchant is only to pay what is due to the
other Merchant on Account.
same condition with the rest of the Creditors; but to make him pay that only
which appears due to the Bankrupt on the foot of the Account. Aliter, for
Accounts between them, after the time of the others becoming a Bankrupt, if any
such were.

CHAP. XVI.
Of other things to be done, or the Consequentials after Examination, Discovery
and Distribution.

Remedy for the Creditors for the Remainder of their Debts.
BY the Statute 13 Eliz. cap. 7. It is Enacted, That if the Creditors of the
Bankrupt be not fully satisfied, or otherwise contented for their Debts and
Duties, by the ways and means before specified and declared; that then the said
Creditor or Creditors, and every one of them shall, and may have their Remedy
for the Recovery and Levying of the residue of their said Debts or Duties,
whereof they shall not be fully satisfied, paid or otherwise contented in form
aforesaid, against the said Offender or Offenders, in like manner and form as
they should or might have had before the making of this Act. And that the said
Creditor or Creditors, and every of them, shall be only barred and excluded by
virtue of this Act, of, and for every such part and portion of the said Debts
and Duties, as shall be paid, satisfied, distributed or delivered unto him or
them by order of the said persons, as is aforesaid; and of no more portion or
parcel thereof.

Suppose the Assignee of the Commissioners has sued a Debtor of the Bankrupt,
and recovered upon Bond made to J. S. and distribution is made to the
Creditors, amongst whom J. S. was one, and he is not satisfied: He sues the
Bankrupt himself upon the Bond formerly made to him, and which was produced and
proved before the Commissioners; in whose name shall he Sue, and how shall he
Declare? The Act gives him leave to Sue in like manner and form as he might
have done before the making of this Act: So that I conceive he may Sue in his
own Name; but when he Declares, he must confess what part he has received, but
not set forth how, and which way he received it. Q.

To show how the Law hates a Knave, and favors honest Creditors, I shall set
down a short Case, which though not very pertinent to the matter in hand, yet it
discovers how that a man may in some Cases recover the Remainder of his Moneys,
though he has given a Release.

A Scrivener runs away with 2000 l. with which he was entrusted to lend out,
and absconds himself; and after some time writes to the party, that if he will
take 500 l. of his Money, and give him a Decree for Money against a Man's own
Release.
Discharge, he should have it; which he did, not knowing how to come by his
Money; yet after the Creditor was relieved in Chancery for the rest,
notwithstanding his own Release, Inter Dr. Lake and Deane; for by Lord Egerton,
Volenti non fit injuria, si dolo sit inductus ad consentiendum.

Of the Commissioners Account to the Bankrupt, and of the Overplus of the
Estate, if any be.
BY the Statute 13 Eliz. cap. 7. It is Provided and Enacted, That such of the
said Commissioners as shall put the said Commission in execution, shall upon
Lawful Request to them made by the said Bankrupt, not only make a true
Declaration to the same Bankrupt, of the employing and bestowing of their said
Lands, Tenements, Offices, Fees, Goods, Chattels and Debts so paid and
satisfied to their said Creditors, but also make payment of the overplus of the
same (if any such shall be) to the said Bankrupts, their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns.

By the Statute of 1 Jac. c. 15. It is further Enacted, That such of the said
Commissioners as shall put the said Commission in execution, shall upon Lawful
Request to them made by the said Bankrupt, not only make a true Declaration to
the said Bankrupt, of employing and bestowing of his, her or their said Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, Offices, Fees, Goods, Wares, Monys, Chattels and
Debts, which shall be paid and satisfied to their said Creditors, as is in like
Case limited and appointed by the said former Statute, made in 13 Eliz. but
also make payment of the overplus of the same, if any such shall be, to the
said Bankrupts, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns; and that
the said Bankrupts, after the full satisfaction of the said Creditors, shall
have full power and authority to recover and receive the Residue and Remainder
of the Debts to them owing.

If the Bankrupt die, yet his Executors shall have an Action against the
Commissioners to account. Quaere, If all the Commissioners die, whether the
Executors, or Executor of the Survivor shall be accountable.

What Remedy the Bankrupt, or Creditor, or others may have in Case of
Misdemeaner against the Commissioners.
IF the Commissioners do not pursue the Acts of their Commission, in such Case
the party has no other Remedy but to put in a Traverse contrary Traverse.
to the finding of the Commissioners, that he is a Bankrupt, and say he is not
a Bankrupt, 8 Rep. 121. For a Certificate of the Commissioners, that a man is a
Bankrupt, is no Estopple to the Party; but that he may aver against this, and
Traverse that he is not a Bankrupt: The Commissioners are not Judges, but have
only an Authority, and the Party grieved has no other Remedy, not by Writ of
Error or otherwise.

If the Commissioners will not pay a Creditor his rateable part, he shall have
his Action of Debt, per Stone. Chancery I conceive will relieve more properly.

A Decree was made 4 Jac. inter Wood and Hayes, to relieve one which had double
taken from him (as a Concealer)* by virtue of the Statute of Bankrupts, upon
indirect dealing by Commissioners in the execution of the Commission.

Note, By the Statute 1 Jac. c. 15. It is Enacted, that after any Commission of
Bankrupts sued out, and dealt in by the Commissioners; if the Offender happen
to die before Distribution, Death of the Bankrupt.
yet nevertheless the Commissioners shall, and may in that Case proceed in
Execution in, and upon the said Commission for, and concerning the Offenders
Goods, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Debts, in such sort as they might
have done, if the Party Offender were living.

Allens Case in Chancery.
EEwards, a Citizen of York, that had April 1 Jac. R.
born the Office of Sheriff there, being indebted to Allen, Habersley and
others of London, for Wares, became Bankrupt, because he suffered himself to be
outlawed at the Suit of Mistress Young of York, for Debt.

Allen and Habersly, and some other October. 1 Jac. R.
Creditors of London, by a Petition to Lord Chancellor, procured a Commission
upon the Statute of Bankrupts against Edwards to Sir Thomas Bennet, Sir William
Rumney, Mr. Nicholas Fuller and Mr. Richard Aldworth.

The Commissioners did sell by Deed Dece^^b. 3 Jac.
of Bargain* and sale enrolled, all the Bankrupts Lands to Allen and Habersley
for 400 l. the Land being then worth 2400 l. but sold it so cheap as 400 l. in
Lands sold by the Commissioners with Encumbrances before he became a Bankrupt.
respect of Encumbrances, being Mortgaged to Alderman Boles his Son, and with a
Statute of 2000 l. to Alderman Boles himself, defeazanced to pay the Mortgage
Money, and two Hundred Last Certificate of the Commissioners proved this.
pounds more lent by the Alderman; and all such other Sums as Edwards then owed
to Alderman Boles or Smith, or should owe for Wares delivered, or to be
delivered within three years following; and it stood also encumbered with a
Statute of 1500 l. to Alderman Boles himself defeazible, first for 800 l. and
after upon 200 l. more lent for 1080 l. (the 80 l. being interest) and it stood
also encumbered with a Lease for 80 years of part made to one Cheney; all which
Encumbrances were made long before he was Bankrupt and before he became
indebted to Allen or any of the Londoners which sued out the Commission.

After this Sale the Commissioners, and May 4. Jac.
Allen, and all the other Creditors that First Certificate.
sued out the Commission upon full consideration had of the Estate of the
Bankrupt, how it stood encumbered with the Mortgage, Statutes and Lease, made
agreement with the Bankrupt and his Agreement by the Commissioners with the
Bankrupt to take 10 s. in pound. 2. Of the Creditors bound for the payment of
it.
Friends, to this effect, that the Crediditors would take ten shillings in the
pound for their due Debts, and Smith and Wood (Wood only being a Creditor that
joined not in the Commission) undertook on the behalf of the Bankrupt, to be
bound for payment thereof to the Creditors; And it was agreed that Allen and
Abersley should convey the Bankrupts Lands to them for their Security, which
And the Bankrupts Lands conveyed to them for security. The Agreement certified
by the Commissioners. Refusal to perform the Agreement.
agreement was certified by the Commissioners; and they did also certify that
Allen after this agreement (being so Godly and Charitable) refused the
agreement, and sought the advantage of Law to the great loss and hindrance of
the rest of the Creditors, and to the utter undoing of Edwards the Bankrupt,
his Wife and Children for ever.

In execution of this Agreement 12 l. Depositions prove this.
10 s. was paid to one of the Creditors, and Books drawn by Mr. Fuller, and
engrossed ready for perfecting of the assurances.

All which notwithstanding Allen refusing the Agreement with Habersley,
preferred 1. One Creditor prefers his Bill, suggesting that the Encumbrances
were fraudulent.
a Bill in Chancery against Edwards, Alderman Boles, Smith, Cheney, Wood and
Edwards his Father (a man 80 years old) complaining that the Mortgage, Statutes
and Lease were all fraudulent, and the Money being paid, were kept on foot by
practice to prejudice the Creditors, and the sale made by the Commissioners.

Edwards, the Bankrupt, Smith and Wood preferred a ^ross Bill against Allen The
other Creditors prefer a Cross Bill to perform the Agreement.
and Habersley* for the performance of the Agreement of ten Shillings in the
pound, and to convey the Land to Smith and Wood, according to that agreement.

At the hearing of the Cause, upon Allens October. 20. 16 Jac.
Bill the Lord Chancellor finding it confessed, that of the Mortgage Money there
was but 30 l. unpaid, ordered that Allen, paying that thirty pound should The
Encumbrances decrced to be discharged, and the Land to be enjoyed by the two
Creditors.
have the same conveyed to him, and Habersley and Alderman Boles his Son, and
the Statute of 2000 l. discharged, which was done accordingly, and a Decree
made, that Allen and Habersley and their Heirs should enjoy the Land according
to the sale of Commissioners, free from these Encumbrances and Charges of
Alderman Boles his Statutes of 1500 l. was left to the Law; howbeit upon
another Ahparent.
motion, his Lordship staid the Liberate, after the Extent upon that Statute,
and so it rested.

Allen having gotten the Encumbrance The Covenant proved in the Bargain and
Sale. Commissioners sell Land for 400 l. which was worth 2400 l. (because of
Encumbrances which were not real) and the Vendee would enjoy it for that
against the other Creditors.
thus cleared by the Court of Chancery, sought to hold the Lands for the 400 l.
only, which was worth 2400 l. albeit he had Covenanted with the Commissioners
in the Bargain and Sale, that if the Lands were sold for more than for 400 l.
within three years, they should pay the overplus which it should be sold for
above that 400 l. toward satisfaction of Creditors; and all the Encumbrances
being cleared within the three years, as aforesaid, yet would he hold the Land
for 400 l. and pay no more for it.

Hillary 7 Jac. Regis.

Allen gets a Commission out of the By Affidavit of Goland 13 April 1610. 6
Jac. Vendee gets possession upon the first Decree.
Chancery to the Sheriffs of York there, to put him in possession of the Land,
upon the first Decree in Chancery made for him; and Allen with the under
Sheriff cast Edwards Children all out of Doors, and although the under Sheriff
with Tears in his Eyes besought Allen to take compassion on them, yet he would
not yield to any thing, but turned them out in Frost and Snow, that they were
enforced to sccour themselves in a Mashfat; and when some of the Tenants of the
Land would have taken them in and relieved ved them, Allen threatened to turn
them Affidavit of weight.
out of their Tenements if they did so, and did turn out one of Tenants out of
his House who entertained them but one Night.

Also Allen took diverse Cattle and Goods that were Edwards Fathers Goods, and
not the Bankrupts, as six Kine, etc. and the Old Man suing for them in the
Kings Bench, Allen procured an Injunction out of the Chancery, and staid all
the Suits so long as the Old Man lived, and who shortly after died.

Edwards and his Wife here at London, following the Suit to be relieved against
Allen in July 8 Jac. died both together of the Plague, leaving seven poor
Children behind, one sucking at Nurse in Yorkshire.

The Lord Chancellor being informed A Petition 17 Aug. 1610. 8 Jac. Bill
revived to perform the agreement of 10 s. in the pound. 8 Jac. 3 Nov.
assignment.
of this extremity by Petition and Affidavit, gave direction that the Bill
which Edwards, Smith and Wood preferred upon the Agreement of ten Shillings in
the pound, should be revived on the behalf of the poor Children; and his
Lordship assigned Wood their Guardian, to prosecute, and Francis Moor he
assigned to be of their Council in Forma Pauperis.

This Cause coming to hearing, and the Agreement appearing confessed by Allens
Answer, and proved by the Certificate of the Commissioners and diverse
Witnesses, and the Covetous and unconscionable dealing of Allen appearing
plainly by the Covenant which they took of Allen, that Allen should pay the
overplus of the value of the Land above the 400 l. if they should be sold for
more, and the Unchristian and Uncharitable usage of Allen toward the poor
Fatherless and Motherless Children of Edwards being all Infants, not able to
help themselves considered.

The Lord Chancellor did Decree, that Agreement Decreed.
Allen and the rest should be satisfied with ten Shillings in the pound for
their Debts, according to their Agreement, certified by the Commissioners, but
no abatement of the 400 l. paid for the Land, nor of the thirty pound paid for
the Mortgage; and withal, that Allen should have allowance for Costs of Suit,
reasonable; and for this purpose his Lordship made a reference to Sir John
Tindal to cast up Reference to a Master to cast up the Estate and Debts.
the Estate of the Bankrupt and the Debts, and to certify what overplus he
found for relief of the poor Children.

Sir John Tindal often heard the Cause, and the Allegations of Allen, and his
Council, and in the end made a certificate The Masters Certificate.
of the Estate Real and Personal of the Bankrupt, and of the Debts, and made
all allowances as by the Order was directed, and gave 200 Marks to Allen for
Cost of Suit, and 100 Marks to Habersley, and 70 l. to all the Creditors that
sued out the Commission of Bankrupt; and for the residue did purpose in his
Opinion to be fit that Allen should keep the Land, and pay the overplus of the
value of the Land above the 400 l. or depart with the Land to Smith and Boles,
who would pay Allen and the other Creditors according to the Report, and yield
the overplus to the Children, amounting to 600 l. or thereabouts.

The Lord Chancellor, upon reading 13 Noc^. 1^ Jac.
the Report, gave time to Allen to make his election, whether he would keep the
Land and pay the Money, or depart with the Land and receive his Money.

For that Allen made no Election, but insisted upon the advantage, to have the
Land for the 400 l. which was worth 2400 l. and would yield nothing to the poor
Children, nor to the Creditors, but dealt so mercilesly with them whose Parents
lost both their lives in following their Suit to be relieved against Allens
Unchristian and Barbarous Dealings.

The Lord Chancellor did make Decree, Decree that the Trustee should receive
his own Money, and depart with the Estate.
that Allen should receive the Money mentioned in the Report, which is much more
than in Equity is any way due unto him, and convey the Lands to Boles and
Smith, two sufficient Men, who would be bound to pay the Creditors, and Allen
also, and yet pay the overplus being 600 l. or thereabouts, amongst the poor
Children.

For not performing the Decree Allen is committed.

The pitiful Cries of the Father and Trustee for not performing the Decree, is
committed.
the Mother dying, as is aforesaid, and of the poor Orphans, do call to God for
relief, and moved the heart of the Chancellor to take compassion upon them, and
to take such order as he has done.

Note, Where Allen in the Bill of Indictment Indictment, for that the Chancery
decreed Lands after Judgment at Law.
sets forth, that he had two Judgments for his Debt in the Common Pleas,
before the Suit in Chancery begun, which Judgments he supposes to be called
into Examination by this Suit and Decree in Chancery against him, contrary to
the Laws and Statutes.

To this it is answered, First, That these Judgments were not alleged by Allen
in his own Bill against Edwards in Chancery, nor in his Answer to Edwards Bill,
nor in any Replication, Rejoinder, Deposition, Report or Motion in Chancery;
neither were they so much as spoken of or informed to any Council or others,
and there is no Order in Chancery concerning those Judgments.

Secondly, That these Judgments to be a year after Edwards became a Bankrupt,
for he was Bankrupt Primo Jacobi, and the Judgments wore Secundo Jacobi.

Note, That these Judgments stand in force against the Bankrupts Body, or any
Lands or Goods which he should afterward obtain, and were not disposed by the
Commissioners.

Allen himself sued out the Commission of Bankrupt with other Creditors, and
was first named in the Petition to the Lord Chancellor for getting the
Commission, and attended in person in execution of that Commission at all
meetings, by which he himself did decline from the strength of his Judgments,
and submitted himself to be ordered by the Commissioners for his Debt before
any Suit in Chancery begun.

Note, Where Allen by his Bill of Indictment supposes his Freehold to be drawn
in question in the Chancery, contrary to the Statute in Magna Charta, it is to
be answered, that albeit Freeholds Freehold Lands ordered in Chancery upon
Equity, where the Common Law cannot relieve the Parties.
have been always ordered in Chancery upon Equity, where the Common Law cannot
help the Parties, yet in this particular Case it is to be observed, that Allen
himself was first Plaintiff in the Chancery, and did draw in question the
Freehold which then was in Alderman Boles his Son by a Mortgage forfeited, for
which Freehold to be conveyed to himself, he obtained the Decree in Chancery,
and had it conveyed accordingly upon matter of Equity ( viz.) because there was
but 30 l. unpaid of the Mortgage Money.

Therefore if the Chancery did well when it dealt with the Freehold for Allen;
why ought not the Chancery upon a new Matter of Equity, make Decree against
Allen to depart with the same Freehold again, when he would have Land worth
2400 l. to the defrauding of Creditors and poor Orphans, and in abuse to the
Commissioners of Bankrupts and Court of Chancery.

Of Bills of Conformity.
Because Petitions for Composition are mentioned in the Statutes, I shall here
add some Orders made in Chancery about the same, and published in open Court,
October. 31. 1620.

THAT no Compulsory Order be granted to Creditors to conform themselves, and
agree unto any Rate or Composition at the Suit and Petition of the Debtor or
insolvent himself, but only at the Suit of the Creditors, in imitation and
according to the Equity of the Statute of Bankrupts.

That where such Suits are exhibited in the behalf of the Creditors, it be not
enough that the Creditors are named in the Bill or Petition; but that there
shall be always affixed to the Bill or Petition the agreements of the Creditors
under the Hands and Marks of so many as have agreed, with a recital of the Sums
and Times of their particular Debts.

That to the end there may be a ground of Information unto the Court, what the
Debts are in truth, which otherwise may be but in show; there shall always be
before any Order is granted, a Reference made to some of the Masters of the
Court, or other Commissioners upon due Examination, to certify the Court what
the Debts are in truth, and of what Nature, and upon what Security; before
which Masters and Commissioners shall also be heard the Informations and
Allegations of such Creditors as have not compounded.

That no release be given upon any Bill or Suits, except the Debts of the
Creditors that have agreed, amount at least to full three parts in four, to be
divided of the total of the Debts; and not in these Cases neither, but
sparingly, by the Discretion of the Court, upon hearing what may be alleged on
both sides.

That no Proceedings at Law, in Case of any such Suits be staid against any
Sureties of the Insolvent, nor against the Lands or Goods of the Insolvent
himself in case of Recognizances or Statutes, but only against the person of
the Insolvent.

It was a Saying of the Lord Chancellor Elsmere, that against Usurers,
Bankrupts, Perjured Persons, Couseners, etc. Quaelibet presumptio crescit in
probationem; and that one Proof, with some presumptions, is sufficient to
induce him to Decree against such.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Scandalous Words relating to a Man's Trade.

I Shall now add some Cases out of our Books, about Actions on the Case, for
calling one Bankrupt, or words to such Effect, by which an honest Tradesman mav
know how, and when to punish a Malicious, Scandalous Calumniator, and one that
thinks it a slight matter to stab the Reputation of his Neighbor.

This Action on the Case will lie, for saying of a Merchant, Mercer, Grocer,
Shoemaker, Dyer, Weaver, Grasier, Cornmaster or Baker in London, a Millener, or
any other Tradesman that gets his Living by Buying and Selling, that he is a
Bankrupt, Noy 158. Hutton 49. Styles 75. 1 Boulst. 267. 4 Rep. 19. Croke Eliz.
268. 1 Roll. Abr. 61, Long and Lane, of a Tanner, quaere 11 Brownl. 16.

But to say of a Tradesman, thou owe more than thou art worth, and art not
able to pay thy Debts, it is not Actionable, Styles 213. Q.

Thou art a Bankruptly Knave, or a Bankrupt Knave, is Actionable, 4 Rep. 19.
Mittons Case. 2 Bulst. 210. Dyer 72. Croke Eliz. 911. 1 Bulst. 110. Hutton 13,
14. dubitatur ibi. Vide Styles 420. Croke Jac. 345, 578.

He is a Bankrupt Rogue, Actionable, Godb. 152. Croke Eliz. 21. Hutton 52.

He is a Bankrupt Scrub, is actionable, Styles Rep. 75.

He is a Bankrupt Slave, is Actionable, Croke Jac. 58. Popham 184. But he must
be a Tradesman, Croke Jac. 424. Loyd and Pearse.

Thou art a Bankrupt Knave, is Actionable. Aliter, Had it been Bankruptly
Knave, Croke Jac. 345. Selbys Case. Q.

To say of a Man he will be a Bankrupt within two days, is Actionable, Dyer 72.
4. Rep. 19.

I will prove that J. S. has been a Bankrupt, and has agreed with his
Creditors for a Noble in the pound, and I will prove it, Hill. 3 Jas. B. R.
Edmonds Case.

I will prove thee a Bankrupt, Action lies. So, I will prove thee a Bankrupt by
such a time, 1 Croke 193.

He is a Bankrupt and fled beyond the Seas for Money, Action lies, Trin. 9 Jac.
B. R. Trulocks Case.

He is not worth a Groat, he is a Hundred Pounds worse than nothing, 1 Croke
193, 231. Hutt. Rep. 152. 2 Bulst. 267. Croke Jac. 578. Act. Case lies. Croke
Car. 265. Goodears Case.

He is a Bankrupt, and I will drive him out of the Country, Action lies.

Who art thou? A Bankrupt? And wast a Bankrupt, Croke Eliz. 273.

To say of a Merchant he is broken, Action lies, H. 17 Jac. B. R. Johnsons Case.

To say of one that does Merchandise for Lead in any County, and get his Living
by it, he is a Bankrupt and Beggarly Gentleman, Action lies, 1 Bulst. 41.
Huttons Rep. 40.

Words spoken of a Cornmaster or Baker in London, Thou art a broken Fellow, and
have cheated me of 200 l. Action lies, Styles 429.

So for this said of a Millener in London, Thou art in a breaking and decayed
Condition, and I will prove it; and if you question me, I will prove it to your
disgrace, Styles 425.

To say of a Merchant that is to have a Trial at Guild Hall, he is broken,
Innuendo, he is not able to pay for the Wares he bought, and I warrant you he
dares not be at the Trial at Guild Hall, Croke Jac. 562. Action lies.

To say of a Grocer, he is a Beggarly Fellow, and not able to pay his Debts,
Action lies, Croke Eliz. 339, 643.

It is said no Action will lie for this, He is a base broken Rascal, and has
broken twice, and I will make him break the third time, Noy 77. B^nd. 170.
Marshall and Allen, Lach. p. 114. Hills Case. To say he will break shortly,
Action lies, by Doderidg, etc.

To say of a Merchant or Tradesman, Trust him not for he will be thy undoing,
no Action lies, 1 Croke 171. Nor for this, I will sue out a Commission of
Bankrupts against J. S. Nor for this, Thou art an Arrant Knave, for thou have
cozened all Coventry, 1 Bulst. 162, 163. Nor for this said of a Merchant, Does
he owe you Money? Get it quickly, and take heed how you trust him, Croke Eliz.
541. Vaspicks Case, 1 Rolls Abr. 61.

If one be a Merchants Apprentice, and he does Merchandise for another man, and
be called Bankrupt; or if one have been a Merchant, and has given it over, and
a man call him Bankrupt; in either of these Cases the Action will not lie, but
1 Rolls Abr. contra, 61. Gray and Weston; and yet if he have resumed his Trade
again, and then be called so, Action lies, Noy 33. 1 Bulst. 267. For he may
trade again, Gardner and Hopland.

E. a Merchant brought Action against W. for these words, He would prove that
Mr. E. had been a Bankrupt, and had agreed with his Creditors for a Noble in
the Pound, it is Actionable, H. 3. Jac. R. B. Rot. 85.

Thou art not worth a Groat, not Actionable, P. 15. Car. B. R.

If a man says to A. who is a Dier, Thou art not worth a Groat, no Action lies
for these words; though it be averred that in Exeter where the words were spoken,
they tantamount to thou art a Bankrupt, 15 Car. B. R. 1 Roll. Abr. 86. Moon and
Axe.

If a man says of a Grocer or other Tradesman, You are a base Beggarly Knave,
and are not able to pay your Debts; and avers that according to the phrase and
understanding of the place where this was spoken, these words are understood
that he was a Bankrupt, Action on the Case lies, P. 11 Car. B. R. Jackson and
Lewis.

Thou art a Cheating Merchant, is Actionable, if a Discourse was of his Trade,
Trin. 17 Car. Lambell and Hancock.

To say of a Scrivener, he is a broken Runnaway, and dares not show his Face,
it is Actionable, Mich. 13 Car. B. R. Best and Loit.

He is a Broken Rascal, and has broken twice already, and I will make him
break the third time, Action lies not: To say he will break shortly, will bear
an Action, but not to say I will make him break, Latch p. 114. Hills Case.

He is gone, and dare not show himself for Debt, and he is a Bankrupt for ought
I know, Action lies, Styles p. 130, 142. Jones and Jacob.

A. is a Foreman in a Shoomakers Shop, and one says of him, It is no matter
who has him, for I warrant whosoever has him, he will cut him out of Doors,
Action lies, 1 Rols Abr. 60. Ellis and Hunt.

In an Action on the Case, if the Plaintiff declare that where he was a Servant
to J. S. and as a Journyman to him, sold diverse Commodities for his Master
truly, and that he gained his Living by his Service; and the Defendant having
communication of his Sellings, said of the Plaintiff, thou have cozened me of 5
l. in a piece of Stuff, and have cozened me of 600 l. more; thou have
maintained thy self and others with my Money, and thou did take four or five
pound out of the Box, Action lies upon this Declaration, 1 Rolls Abr. 60.
Phillips and Ellaker.

In Action on the Case, if the Plaintiff declares he was a Merchant, etc. the
Defendant intending to defame him in his Trade, having communication of his
Trade, and of a Partnership between the Plaintiff and J. S. before had in a
certain Ship, called B. spoke these scandalous words of the Plaintiff, He is a
Base Cheating Knave, and has cheated J. S. (the said J. S. innuendo) and I
will prove it; for he received of C. in Partnership 20 l. and gave an account
unto J. S. pred' J. S. innuendo) but of 5 l. received of the said C. Action
lies, for it digraceth him in his Partnership, which is a part of his Trade as
a Merchant, Trin. 15 Car. B. R. Arundel and Masey.

One said of a Tradesman, He is a broken Bankrupt, and a declined man, not able
to pay his Debts, and therefore is run the Country; although he does not allege
he used any certain Trade, yet Action lies if he used to Buy and Sell and live
by it, 1 Rolls Abr. 60. Boyer and Shale.

One says of Tradesman, He is a Base Beggarly Fellow, and if he had not had my
help, he had not had a bit of Bread to put in his Head, and I have exactly cast
up his Estate, he is not able to pay 2 s. 6 d. in the Pound to his Creditors;
Action lies without averring any particular damage, P. 1651. Rooks and Rooks.

These words were spoken of a Merchant, He is a Beggarly Fellow and not worth a
Groat, and not able to pay his Debts, and goes abroad with his Man double armed
for fear of the Bailiffs; but it is not laid, that he continued Merchant at the
time of the speaking; but the Court inclined that the words were Actionable,
and the Profession shall be intended to continue in him till the contrary be
shown, Siderfin, p. 424. Drake and Hill.

The Plaintiff declares he was a Merchant by the space of twenty years, without
saying (last past) and that 24 Jac. he goes beyond Sea, and 25 Jac. he returns
here from Hamborough, and the Defendant said of him, He came from Hamborough a
Broken Merchant; the words were Actionable, and his Profession shall be
intended to continue. Locroft and Durnfords Case, cited in Drake and Hills Case.

To say of one, He is a Cheat, is not Actionable; but if the Plaintiff was a
Merchant, and the Defendant says of him, He is a Cheating Merchant, it is
Actionable, cited in Sidersin, 433. in Kirle and Osgoods Case.

Per Twisden, cited in Sidersin, p. 434. Lord Peterboroughs Case, it was
adjudged 5 Car. that to say, I do not know but that J. S. is a Bankrupt, is
Actionable.

The Court conceived these words (Bankruptly Knave) to be Actionable, 1 Keb.
439. Booth and Leech.

Action on the Case was brought for calling one Bankrupt, and upon General
Issue, found pro Querente, and 150 l. Damages; the Court mitigated it to 50 l.
Damages.
but after upon great Advice, they Revoke this, and resolved to leave such
Matters of Fact to the finding of the Jury, who know the quality of the Persons
and their Estates, and Damages sustained by the Disgrace. Aliter, In an Action
which is grounded upon a Cause that may appear to the view of the Court,
Palmer, p. 314. Hawkins and Sciet.

If in Trespass, the Defendant justifies Pl^z.
that the Plaintiff was a Bankrupt, whereby he had a Commission upon the
Statute, and those goods were delivered unto him, whereas the Plaintiff was not
any Bankrupt, nor any Commission issued, yet the Plaintiff for the words
contained in the Plea, shall not maintain any Action, Croke Jac. 432. in Weston
and Dobniets Case.

Plaintiff Declares, Whereas 1 April 17 Jac. and for diverse years before he was
a Merchant, that the Defendant the said 1 April 17 Jac. spoke these words of
the Plaintiff, He is a Bankrupt Slave; the Defendant justifies, because the
Defendant Justification.
1 April 15 Jac. became Bankrupt, and therefore he spoke these words; Plaintiff
demurred, and adjudged pro Querente: the Ba^ was insufficient, because he does
not allege that he continued still a Bankrupt, and without Averment, it shall
not be intended that he continued so; for it may be that he afterward recovered
himself, and became a Good Merchant and no Bankrupt, Croke Jac. 578. Upsheer
and Betts. By this Case understand the Maxim, Once a Bankrupt, etc.

Action was brought for calling the Plaintiff Bankrupt, and he Declares by
Declaration.
the Name of J. E. Mercator, and that he by his Good Name had the Good Will of
his Neighbors, ac etiam Emendo and Vendendo he acquired diversa Lucra; Verdict
pro Quer' and Judgment was arrested, because it does not appear by the
Declaration, that he got his Living by Buying and Selling, Sidersin, p. 299.
Emersons Case.

The difference was well taken in Dottings Case Noy 33. If a Merchant
relinquish his Trade to live in the Country, in the nature of a Gentleman or a
Farmer; to call him Bankrupt is not Actionable; but if afterward he exercises
that again, and then is called Bankrupt, an Action then lies.

It is not needful in the Declaration Declaration.
to say he was a Merchant, but to say he was Tradesman is sufficient, Noy 158.
Courtney and Tompson.

Words spoken of a Drover, that he is a Bankrupt, is Actionable, for a Drover
is within the Statute of Bankrupts; but because it was not averred, that he was
a Drover at the time of the speaking the words, it was held to be ill in
Collins and Malins Case, Jones Rep. 304 2 Keb. 274. Amersam and Fairfax.

Declaration is, That he got his Living by Buying and Selling, albeit no
certain Trade is mentioned, yet the Action for calling him Bankrupt, lay,
Bowyers Case cited, 2. Keb. 274. Amersham and Fairfax.

If one says of a Man (who by his Trade may become a Bankrupt within the
Statutes) that he is a Bankrupt, an Action lies.

Thou art a Bankrupt Rogue, spoken of a Woollwinder, Action lies not, M. 2 Car.
B. R. Barker and Ringrose.

By Mr. Justice Wild, in Amson and Blofeilds Case, Carters Rep. p. 214. To say
of a Merchant, He has eaten a Spider; with an Averment what the meaning is, as
much as to say he is ready to burst, is Actionable. Q.

Here I shall add some Special Presidents of Actions and Suits at Common Law
and in Chancery, by which the Industrious Student may Form and Model his
Draughts in Parallel Cases.

Plea to an Indebitatus Assumpsit that it was Assigned by the Commissioners of
Bankrupts.
ACtia non, quia dicit protestando quod ipse non assumplit super le modo and
forma prout p^d (Que) versus ^um quernes protestando etiam Protestation.
quod idem H. non suit in^evitat p^fa^ querenti in aliqna denariorum summa
ultra december and ^^^o Libras pront p Billam p^d superius supponites pro plito
idem H. di^it quoth sd I^ existen stivdites natus hujus ^egni Anglie p diversos
Annos pro^ ante Fes^um Sed Michis Archi Anno negni, etc. 14 fuit communis
pandoxa^or ac p rotum idem tempus victum and facultatem suam vivendi quesivit
Et idem Iac sic negotians and victum suum querens infra tempus illud apud D.
p^d in Com K. sd devenit indebitates quibusdam I. H. and I. B. and alijs
Creditoribus suis existen subditis natis hujus Regni Anglie in diversis
denariorum su^is attingen in toto ad sum^am 200 l. legalis, etc. and amplius
qdque idem Iac sic idebitates existen infra tempus p^d selt 1 Die Maij Anno,
etc. xiij incepit eustodire Domum suam Mansional apud D. p^d and Latitare pro
timore Arrestac^onis pro debis p ipsum Iac p^far I. D. and alijs Creditoribus
suis debi^ Et similit Act of Bankrupts denial.
adtunc dedit mandatum servien suis negare Creditoribus suis ipsum p^d I. esse
in ead Domo sua quando fuit intus in ead ad proerastinand debirores suos de
veris and justis Debis suis eis p p^d I. adtune debit and insolu^ Ac ratione
pmissorrum idem I. pd ^ die Maij Anno, etc. xiij supradict apud I. p^d in poch
and warda p^d debitis suis pdc^is tunc minime solut existen manifest devenit
and adhuc existit decoctor Ipso^ I. sic decoctor^ existen postea scilt 28 die
October Anno Regni, etc. xiij. supradicto apud Wes^m in Com Midd and ad
Petitionem p^dic^orum I. H. and I. Petition.
D. E. Com^it C. tum and adhuc Dom Cancellario Anglie facc and exhibit pro
remedijs suis verlus p^fat I. tunc existen decoctor^ in hac part habend ijsdem
I. I. and ceteris Creditoribus p^d I. de debis suis p^d tunc minime satisfact
quedam Commissio dicti Dom Commission.
Regis super Statur contra Decoctores edit and provis sub Magno Sigilla dict
Dom Regis sigillat and hic in Curia prolac geren dat apud Westminster p^d eijsdem die
and Anno quivusdam I. P. R. A. Ar^ R. B. W. B. and N. S. direct fuit p quam
quidem Com^issionem dictus Dominus Rex tunc dedit plenam potestatem and
authoritatem p^d Commissionar^ quatuor vel tribus little quorum idem Dominus Rex
p^d I. P. vel R. A. unum esse voluit juxta s^palia Statuta de Decoctoribus in
hujusmodi Casu edit and provis in dicta Com^issione menc^onat non solum
concernen, etc. prout supra (omitta) tantum hec verba, and alterius eorum)
usque prout p eandem Commission before apparet Virtute cujus quidem
^ommissionis Et vigore Statutorum p^dictorum p^d, I. etc. tres Com^issionar de
Com^issionar p^d accept super se onere execucon Commissionis p^d super maturam
deliberationem inde capt pro remedio Creditorum p^d postea sclt 10 die Nov.
Anno Regni, etc. xjv supradict apud London p^d in poch and warda p^d inven^runt
p^d Iac ante emanac^onem Com^issionis pd devenisse and fuisse decoctorem
Commissioners find him a Bankrupt.
ad omnia intentiones and proposita infra provision and intencon Statutorum
pdict ac diversa deba and denariorum summas fore tune debita and ptinen Statuti
p^d Iacobi a sepalibus psonis Et postea selt eisdem die and Anno apud London
p^d in poch p^d ijdem tres Commissionarij p quandam Indenturam suam
assignationis inter ipsos Assignment of Debts.
I. etc. ex una part and pd I. H. and I. O. ex altera pte fact cujus alteram
ptem Sigillis p^d I. P. etc. sigillat idem H. hic in Curia p^fert cujus dat est
ijsdem die and Anno quantum in ipsis fuit and Legitime potuerunt assignaverunt
and transposuerunt p^d I. H. and I. B. omnia and singula separalia debita and
denar^ summas pticulariter and experss^ menc^onar in quadam Schedula sive
Inventorio indentat eid Indentur^ annex' and onerabi^ debit p psonas in dicta
Schedula nominat vel aliquam eorum tunc debit p^dicto I. habend and tenend
(Anglice sue forth) recuperand recipiend possidend and gaudend omnia and
singula debita and denariorum summas in dicta Schedula expressa Ac omnia alia
debita per cand Indenturam assignat and quamlibet ptem inde ipsis dictis I. H.
and I. D. Executoribus Administratoribus and Assignat suis and cuilibet eorum
ut eorum proprium statum imppetuum In qua quidem Schedula inter alia continetur
quod december and Octo Libre fuer^ debit and ptinen status p^d Iac p ipsum H.
prout p candem Indenturam and Schedulam p^d hic in Curia prolar before apparet
Quorum p^textu idem H. onerabilis devenit and adhuc existit ad solvend p^fat I.
G. and I. D. omnia debita and denariorum sum^as p ipsum at debit Statui p^dicti
Iacobi. Et hoc, etc. unde, etc.

Plea to Bond for performance of Covenants (or Articles) for payment of Rent,
that the Plaintiff was a Bankrupt, and that the Defendant paid the Money to the
Assignees of the Commissioners of Bankrupts.
QUibus l^ct and auditis idem Det' ^^cit quoth p^d Quer^ Actionem suam p^d inde
versus eum habere seu manutenere non debet quia dicit quod Articuli p^dc^ in
Condic^one p^d ( reciting the Articles) prout per Articulos pdictos inter alia
before liquet and apparet Et quoad p^d xxijl. in Articulis p^d menc^onat fore
solvend p ipsum H. p^fat R. ad finem p^dc^ termin sex Annorum Idem H. ulterius
dicit quod post confection script obligatorij p^d and Articulorum p^d and ante
p^d finem and expirationem p^d termin sex Annorum sclt decimo septimo die Iulij
Anno Regni p^d nuper Dom Regis sex to decimo apud Civitar Exon p^d p^d R.
indebitatus fuisset euidam M. B. ac diversis alijs psonis Creditoribus p^d R. (
existen subdit nar infra hoc Regnum Anglie) in diversis seperalibus denariorum
summis in toto se Attingen ad Mill Libras Legalis Monete Anglie ipsoque S. sic
indebitat existen idem R. postea sclt 17 die Iulij Anno Regni dict Dom Regis
nunc 16 sup^dicto ijsdem Creditoribus de debitis suis minime satisfact existen
apud Civitat Exon p^d pro debito Arrestat ^uit Et super Arrestationem p^d ad
prisonam dicti nuper Regis apud Civitat Exon p^d ductus fuisset Et ibidem Act
of Bankrupcy remaining two Months in Pri^on.
in Prisona p spatium duorum mensium tunc prox' sequen and amplius remansit ad
intentionem defraudand Creditores suos p^d de debitis suis p^d per ipsum R. sic
ut p^fertur debit Et superinde postea sclt 1 die Octo^ An^o 16 supradict apud
Civitar Exon p^d Idem R. devenit decoctor (Anglice became a Bankrupt) infra
Statut concernen decoctores nuper edit and provis^ Quodque p^d R. p^dicto
tempore quo ut p^fertur de^enit decoctor fuisset subditus p^d nuper Dom Regis
natus infra hoc Regnum Anglie videlt apud Civitat Exon p^d Et adtunc and ibid
and p multos Annos tunc ulterius elapsos querebat victum suum p viam Emendi and
Merchandizandi Et ulterius idem H. dicit quod superinde post^a sclt 17 die
Febr^ Anno 16 supradict apud Westminster in Com Midd ad Petitionem p^d M. and aliorum
Creditorum p^d R. E. D. Mil adtunc Dom Custodi Magni Sigill Anglie ante tunc
exhibit and fac^ pro remedijs suis versus p^d R. tunc existen decoctorem
(Anglice became a Bankrupt) in hac part habend p^fat M. and ceteris
Creditoribus p^d R. de debitis suis p^d tum minime solut sive satisfact existen
quedam Commissio p^d Commission.
nuper Dom Regis super Statut contra decoctores (Anglice Bankrupts) Edit and
provis^ sub Magno Sigillo dicti nuper Domini Regis Angli^ sigillat geren da^
apud Westminster p^d p^d 17 die Febr^ Anno 16 supradict dilectis and fidelibus dict
nuper Dom Regis I. N. R. S. etc. direct fuit p quam quidem Commissionem dictus
nuper Dom Rex perpendens debitam executionem tam Statut tangen ordines pro
decoctoribus (Anglice Bankrupts) in Parliamento incept tent apud Westminster p^d
scdo^ die Aprilis Anno Regni p^charissime Sororis ^d^^ nuper Dom Regis Dn^
Elizabethe nuper Regine Anglie 13 edit and probis^ quam etiam Statut edit in
Parliamento incept and tent apud Westminster p^d 19 die Marcij Anno Regni Dom Ia^obi
nuper Regis Anglie primo ^^oti^ 37 Intitulat Actus pro meliori relevamine
Creditorum versus tales qui deven deco^tores dedit plenam potestatem and
authoritatem ijsdem quinque Commissionar^ quatuo^ vel tribus eorum quorum p^d'
I. N. vel p^d' W. R. unus esse voluit juxta eadem Statuta and utrumque eorum
non solum concernen p^d' decoctorem corpus ejus terras liberas (Anglice
Freehold) and cus^um^^ (Anglice Copyhold) bona debita and alia quecunque sed
eciam concernen omnes alias personas que per concelamentum clameum vel alteri
offenderent tangen p^miss^ vel aliquam partem inde contra intenc^onem and
proposit p^dictorum Statutorum vel alterius eorum ad faciend' and exequend*
omnes and quas^ibet rem and res quascunque tam erga and pro satisfactione and
soluc^one p^dictorum Creditorum quam erga and pro omnibus alijs intentionibus
and propositis secundum ordinationem and provisionem eorundem Statutorum vel
alterius ^orum p quam quidem Commissionem dictus nuper Dominus Rex voluit and
dedit in mandatis p^dictis Commissiona^ quatuor vel tribus ^orum quorum p^d' I.
N. and Quorum.
W. R. unum esse voluit ad procedend' ad executionem and accomplement pdict
Commissionis secundum veram intentionem and proposit eorundem Statutorum and
alterius eorum ^um omni diligentia and effectu secundum specialem fiduciam
dicti nuper Dom Regis in ijsdem Commissionar^ r^posit prout p eandem
Commissionem before apparet Virtute ^ujus quidem Commissionis a^ vigore
Statutorum p^dictorum p^d' I. N. etc. tres Commissionarij p^d' postea sclt 9
die Nov. Anno Regni nuper Regis Caroli 17 apud Civitat Exon p^d' in debita
juris forma adjudicaverunt and declaraverunt ipsum Commissioners adjudge him a
Bankrupt.
st. esse decoctorem infra Statut p^d' Et adtunc and ibidem concesserunt
assignaverunt Assign the Debts.
and posuerunt p^dictam summam xx l. in Articulis p^dictis superius menc^onat
fore solvend' p^fat R. p p^d' H. inter alia p^fat M. tunc un Creditorum p^d' R.
existen scdm formam Statut p^d' Et idem H. ulterius dicit quod ipse idem H.
omnes alias convenc^ones in Articulis p^dict menc^onat ex part ipsius H.
performand' and custodiend' a tempore confectionis scripti obligatori j and
Articulorum p^dictorum hucusque been and fidelit perimplevit and custodivit
scdm formam and effectum scripti obligatorij Et Articulorum p^dictorum Et hoc,
etc. unde, etc. Cum hoc qd' idem H. veri^icare vult quod p^d. P. W. adhuc
superstes and in plena vita exis^it videlt apud Averment.
Com Exon pd', etc.

Scire Fac' pro Creditoribus sur Stat' de Bankrupts sur Judgment recuper' per
le Bankrupt envers Executrix.
CArolus, etc. Vic ^anc salutem Cum T. S. alias scilt Termino Sct Mich An^o
Reg^ nostri scdo^ coram R. H. Mil F. H. Mil. G. C. Mil and H. Y. Mil tunc
Iusticiarijs nostris de Banco apud Westminster per Iudici^ ejusdem Curie re^uperass
versus A. B. Vid per nomen A. B de C. in Com p^d Executricis Testamenti R. B.
Mil Judgment.
nuper, etc. tam quoddam debitum 400 l. quam 50 s. que eid T. S. in ead Curia
nostra adjudicat fuer^ pro damnis suis que huit occasion detentionis debiti
illius si ead A. tanta Bona and Catalla que fuer^ p^d R. tempore mortis sue in
Manibus suis Administrand habuisset and si non huisset tunc damna pdca de Bonis
and Catallis p^d A. proprijs levand unde convict fuit prout per record and
process^ inde in ead Curia nostra residen liqu^t manifest Cumque superinde
postea scilt Termino Sc^ M. Anno Regni nostri quarto in p^dict Curia nostra de
Banco per tunc Ius^iciarios nostros ibid conc fuisse quod p^d T. S. heret
executionem ver^us p^fat (...)
A. de de^o and damn p^dict de Bonis and Catallis p^d in forma p^dict levand p
ipsius A. defalt prout per record Et pro^^s^ in ead Curia nostra re^den siliter
liquet manifest Cumque etiam p^d T. S. pro citiore executione judicij pd hend
in p^dict Termino Sc^ M. Anno quarto supradict scilt 9 die Oc^ob isto eod
Termino prosecut fuiss and impetrasset extra p^d Curiam nostram de B. p^d apud
Westminster p^d quoddam breve nostrum de Fi. Fa. tunc Vic K. direct per Fi. Fa.
quod quidem bre nos precepimus quod ipse de Bonis and Catallis que fucr^ p^d
R. B. etc. in manibus p^fat A. B. etc. fieri faceret tam p^d debitum 400 l. (
ut in Fi. Fa. usque unde convict' fuit) Ad quem diem coram disdem tunc
Iusdiciarijs apud Westminster venit p^d T. S. per I. H. tunc Attornat suum Et tunc
Retorn*
Vic (videlt) C. C. Mil tunc mand Iusticiarijs nostris apud Westminster p^d quoth p^d A.
nulla huit Bona seu Catalla in Balliva sua que fuer^ p^d R. tempore mortis sue
in manibus suis Administr^ unde debitum and damna p^dca sive aliquam inde pcel
ullo modo fieri facere potuit Et quoth p^d A. nulla huit Bona seu Catalla sua
propria in Ballia sua unde damna p^d seu aliquam inde pcell fieri facere potuit
Super quo Testatum fuit in ead Curia nostra ex^te ipsius T. S. quod p^d A.
satis ha^uit de Bonis and Catallis que fucr^ p^d R. tempore mortis sue in
manibus ipsius* A. Administrand infra libertat quinque portuum unde debitum and
damna p^dca fieri and levare potuit super quo p^d T. S. p^dco^ Termino Sc^ M.
scilt 6 die N. Anno quarto supradict prosecut fuit extra p^dcam Curiam nostram
de Banco p^d quoddam bre nostrum de Testat' Testatum Fi. Fa. al' cinque Port*
Fi. Fa. tunc Constabulario ( ut supra usque direct') per quod quidem breve nos
p^fat Constabulario, etc. p^c^pimus quod ipse de Bonis and Catallis que fuer^
p^fat R. B. nuper dict* etc. in manibus p^fat A. per nomen, etc. Executricis
Testamenti p^fat R. existen infra libertates quinque portuum fieri facerent tam
p^d dibitum 400 l. ( ut in communi Fi. Fa. usque unde convict fuit) Quod quidem
breve postea and ante retorn br^vis illius scilt 10 die p^d Mensis Novembris
Anno Regni nostri quarto p^nobili Theophilo Comiti Suff. tunc and Retorn del
Constable de Dover Castle.
adhuc Constabulario p^d Castri Dov^r^ ac custod quinque portuum p^d and
membrorum eorundem in forma juris exequend deliberat fuisset Ad quem diem scilt
a die Sc^ Martini, etc. coram ijsdem tunc Iusticiarijs nostris apud Westminster p^d
venit p^d T. S. per Attornat suum p^dcum Idemque T. Comes S. tunc Iusticiarijs
nostris p^dict apud Westminster p^d ad diem il^ mand quod p^d A. B. nulla huit Bona
seu Catalla que fuer^ p^d R. B. tempore mortis ( ut supra usque facere potuit)
quodque ead A. ante adventum brevis istius sibi direct quedam Bona and Catalla
que ^uer^ p^d ^. tempore mortis sue ad valentiam Devastavit.
100 l. devastasset Et in usum suum proprium convertisset Et ulterius
Iusticiarijs nostris certificat quod p^d A. nulla huit Bona seu Catalla sua
propria unde damna p^d seu aliquam inde pcel^ fieri facere potuit prout p breve
and retorn inde in dicta Curia nostra de Banco pd residen liquet manifest
Cumque p^d T. S. iij die Maij Anno Regni nostri sexto indebitat fuisset cuidam
W. N. Gen in summa 88 l. and 7 s. solvend eid W. cum inde requisitus fuisset Ac
etiam cum p^d T. S. adtune indebitat fuisset cuidam W. M. Gen in summa 34 l.
solvend eid W. M. cum inde requisitus fuisset Ac eciam cum pd T. S. p^^ iij die
Maij Anno Regni nostri sexto supradict indebit fuisset cuidam R. S. in summa 45
l. solvend eid' R. S. siliter cum inde requisitus fuisset eisdem W. N. W. M.
and R. S. tunc existen subditis natis Regni nostri Anglie Ac eciam cum p^d' T.
S. adtunc indebitat fuisset diversis alijs psonis Creditoribus ipsius T.
siliter existen subditis natis Regni nostri Anglie in diversis alijs denariorum
summis in toto se attingen and 5013 l. and 12 s. Legalis Monete Anglie Ipsoque
T. S. sic indebitat existen ac p^dict 100 l. pro valor Bonorum and Catallorum
que fuer^ ^fat R. B. tempore mortis sue p pd' A. ut p^fertur devastar dicto T.
S. minime solut sive levat existen Idem T. S. postea scilt ij die Iunij Anno
Regni nostri sexto supradicto apud Maidstone p^fat W. N. W. M. and ^. S. ac
ceteris Creditoribus ^dc^ T. S. de debitis suis p^^' minime solut existen Act
del Bankrupcy.
incepisset custedire Domum suam ibid' existen ad intentionem defraudare
Creditores suos p^dictos de debitis suis eis ut p^fertur p p^d' T. S. d^bit Et
superinde eod' ij die Iunij Anno sexto supradict apud M. pd' manifest devenit
Decoctor (Anglice a Bankrupt) Qui quidem T. S. ^dco^ tempore qu^ ipse devenit
Decoctor fuit and adhuc est subditus natus hujus Regni A. apud M. p^d' and
adtunc and p nonnullos Annos ante tunc apud M. p^d' usus fuit Art seu Misterio
Brasiatoris and querebat facultatem suam Divendi p viam Emendi and Dendendi Ac
cum postea scilt xjx die Aug^ Anno Regni nostri septimo apud M. pd' ad
Petitionem Petitio.
p^dictorum W. M. W. N. and R. S. and aliorum Creditorum p^d' T. S. Thome Dno^
Coventry Dno^ Custod' Magni Sigilli Anglie exhibit and fact pro remedijs luis
versus p^fat I. S. tunc existen Decoctorem in ea pte hend' eisdem W. N. W. P.
and R. S. tunc minime solut aut satisfact existen quedam Commissio nostra super
Statut contra Commiss^^*
Decoctores edit and provi^ sub Magno Sigillo nostro Anglie sigillat in Curia
nostra ^d' coram p^fat Iusticiarijs nostris apud Wes^^ de B. p^d' prolat geren
dat apud C. in Com p^d' Midd' p^d' xix die Au^ Anno septimo supradict ^ui^^sdam
E. D. Mil P. P. Armig^ T. B. Arm W. H. Gen and A. P. Gen spial Commissionar^
nostris and dedimus plenam potestatem and authoritat eisdem Commissionarijs
quatuor vel tribus eorum quorum p^d' P. P. aut p^d' T. B. unum esse volumus
juxta ^eperal Statut de Decoctoribus in hujusmodi casu cdit and provi^ in dicta
Commissione men^onat and quodlibet vel ullum eorrum non solum concernen corpus
ipsius T. S. Decoctoris Terras Tenementa libera and custumaria Bona Debita and
alias Res quascunque verum eciam concernen omnes alias psonas quascunque que p
concealamenta vel aliter offenderent tangen pdca p^missa vel aliquam ptem inde
contra veram intentionem and proposit p^dictorum Statutorum and eorum
cujus^ibet vel alicujus little ad faciend' and exigend' omnes and quas^ibet r^m
and r^s quascunque tam erga and pro soluc^one and satisfactione p^dictorrum
Creditorum quam erga and pro omnibus alijs intentionibus and propositis scdm
provisionem and ordinationem eorundem Statutorum p quam quidem Commission nos
volumus and dedimus in mandatis qd' p^dict Quorum.
Commissionarij vel quatuor vel t^e^ eorum quorum pd' P. P. aut p^d' T. B. unum
esse volumus ad procedend' ad executionem and perimpletion Commissionis p^d'
cum omni diligentia and effectu scd^ fiduciam nos^ram in ^is reposit prout p
eandem Commissionem pl^nius liquet and apparet Divtute cujus quidem
Commissionis ac vigore Statutorum p^dictorum ^dict P. P. T. B. W. H. and A. P.
juxta Officia sua obliga^ cum omni diligentia ad optima^ Scientiam Artem and
Industriam eorum Commission p^d' ex^qui pformare and perimplere diversis
sepera^ temporibus in ead' procedebant a^ Testes ead' tangen diligen^ and
intent examinavcr^ ac p easdem examinationes iij die M. Anno Regni nostri
septimo apud M. p^d' invener^ p^d' T. S. fore Decoctorem infra proposit and
intentionem Statut ^d' and sic fore and devenire ratione evitationis and
absentionis ipsius T. S. ab Arrest Creditorum suorum and custoditionis Domus
ipsius T. ob metu Arrestac^onis ad s^cta diversorum Creditorum suorum pro veris
and justis debitis per ipsum debit Ac c^iam pro ^o qd' Absentin^
p^dict T. S. occulte and s^cre^^ a D^mo sua Mantionali decessit p secret
fugationem in ptes ultra Mare and absentationem sui ipsius extra hoc signum pro
debitis ipsius T. S. p ipsum tunc and p^d' iij die M. Anno septimo sup^dict
verment.
dibit Ipsi p^d' T. B. W. H. and A. P. virtute Statut and Commission p^d' de
and pro Causis supradictis p^d' iij Die M. Anno septimo supradict apud M. p^d'
declaraverunt and adjudicaverunt p^d' T. S. fore Decoctorem a primo die I. Anno
Dom 1630. supradict and sic fuisse and semper ab e^d' primo die I. continuasse
eciam ubi p examinationis apparuisse p^d' T. B. W. H. and A. P. Commissar^ p^d'
^d' p^d' T. ante p^dice diem I. and continue postea fuit p^d' iij die M. Anno
septimo supradict extitit vere indebitat p^d' seperalibus psonis and a^iqui
querebant relevac^onem p Commission p^d' and contribuere erga custagia
prosecutionis and executionis ejusdem Commissionis in sepera^ denariorum summis
in toto se attingen ad 5013 l. and 12 s. ultra 40 l. expendit p easdem ^sonas
in custag^ circa prosecution and execution Commissionis p^d' Ac eciam ubi p
examinationem p^d' apparebat p^d' T. B. W. H. and A. P. quod p^d' T. S. p^dict
primo die Iunij Anno Dom 1630. supradict and diu ante and postea fuit and p^d'
iij die M. Anno septimo supradic^ existit seisitus in Dominico suo de Statu
Hereditario de and in uno Mesuagio, etc. Ac eciam ubi apparebat p^fat T. B. W*
H. and A. P. Commissionarijs p^d' qd' p^d' summa 100 l. pro valor Bonorum and
Catallorum p^d' p p^fat A. sic ut pfertur devastat tunc debit fuit p^fat T. S.
a p^fat A. B. p^dc^ T. B. W. H. and A. P. pro dand' satisfactionem p^dictis
seperalibus personis Creditoribus p^fat T. S. pro debitis suis pdictis and pro
ulteriori executione Assignment Enrolled.
Statut and Commission p^d' pro and in consideratione sum 360 l. Legalis
Monete Anglie ipsis p^fat T. B. W. H. and A. P. per p^fat T. G. solut iij die
Maij Anno ^egni nostri septimo supradict apud M. pd' inter ipsos T. B. W. H.
and A. P. p nomina, etc. ex una ^te and pfat T. G. p nomen, etc. ex altera
part factam cujus alteram partem sigillis pd' T. B. W. H. and A. P. signat and
in Cancellaria nostra infra sex Menses tunc postea de recordo irrotulat geren
dat eisdem die and Anno idem T. G. hic in Curia nostra pd' coram Ius^iciarijs
pd' p^fert dederunt and concesserunt pfat T. G. totum Statum jus titulum and
interesse, etc. Ac ec^am ^dc^ T. B. W. H. and A. P. Commissionarij pd' p
Indentur^ suam pd' assignaverunt and trans^ulerunt pfat T. G. Executoribus and
Administratoribus suis pd' debitum sive summam 100 ^. pd' T. S. p pfat A. B. ut
p^fertur invent esse debit ac omne legale pro^icun (Anglice Interest Money) and
alia beneficium and pro^ic^um proveni^n vel surgen ex inde au^ superinde debit
prout p Indenturam pd' inter alia before liquet and apparet Et idem T. G. in
facto Devastatio.
dicit ^d' pd' debitum sive sum^am 100 l. per Commissionarios pdict ut pfertur
invent esse debit and insolut p pfat A. B ^^d' and p eosdem Commissionarios
pd^ct ^. ^. ut pfertur assignat and pd' 100 l. pro valor Bonorum and
Catallorum pd' ^. B. tempore mortis sue que pfat Constabular^ Castri Dover^ and
Custos quinque Port^um pd' ut pfertur retornavit super p^dco^ brevi de Fi. Fac.
quod p^dict A. B. ut pfertes sunt unum and idem deb^^um and non aliud neque
diver^ ^uodque idem debitum sive sum^a 100 l. adhuc totaliter^ insolut existit
and assigna^ fuit in forma pdict pdco^ T. G. Et ulte^ius quod pd' Dna Bingly
Did' in pd' Indentura Assignac^onis mentionat A verment.
and pd' A. B. in p^dco^ brevi de testat Fi. Fa. and retorn inde nominat modo
defende^s sunt una and ead' psona and non ali^ ^^c diversa prout ex
insinuac^one pd' T. G. assignat debi^ p^d' T. S. Decoctoris s^dm formam Statut
de Decocto^^^us (Anglice Bankrupts) in ea part prove. ^ accepimus Et quia
volumus, etc. ^ pro^os, etc. si quid, etc. quare pd' T. G. ex^^utionem verlus
eam de pd' 100 l. pro valor Bonorum and Cattalorum que fuere R. B. tempore
mortis sue p pd' A. ut p^fertur devastat p^fat T. G. p pd' Commissionarios in
forma p^d' assign here non debeat juxta formam Leges and Stat ^dict si, etc. Et
habeas, etc.

An Indenture of Assignment by the Commissioners of Bankrupts.
THIS Indenture made, etc. in the Third Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
and Lady William and Mary, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland King and Queen, Defenders of the Faith, etc. Between A. B. Esquire; C. D.
Gent. and E. F. Gent. of the one part, and T. R. of London Stationer, of the
other part. Whereas the King and Queens Majesty's Commission, under the Great
Seal of England, grounded upon the several Statutes made concerning Bankrupts,
bearing date at Westminster the, etc. day of, etc. last past, has been awarded
against Elizabeth K. of, etc. in the County of, etc. Chapwoman, and directed to
the said A. B. C. D. E. F. together with W. B. Esquire; and J. G. Gent. thereby
giving full Power and Authority unto the said Commissioners, four or three of
them, Commission.
whereof the said A. B. or W. B. to be one to execute the same; As by the said
Commission, relation being thereunto had, the same does, and may more fully and
at large appear. And Whereas the said Commissioners, Parties to these Presents,
or the major part of the Commissioners by the said Commission authorized,
having begun to put the said recited Commission in Execution, upon due
examination of Witnesses, and other good proof upon Oath before them taken, do
find that the said E. K. has for the space of six years last past, or
thereabouts, used and exercised the Trade and Profession of a Milliner or
Country Mercer, in Buying and Selling of Silks, Stuffs and other Wares and
Commodities belonging to her said Trade, at her House and Shop in C. aforesaid;
and sought and endeavored to get her Living by Buying and Selling, and that
she the said E. K. so seeking and endeavoring to get her living by Buying and
Selling, during the time of her said Trading and Dealing, did become justly and
truly indebted, and still does owe and stand indebted unto the above named T.
R. and others her Creditors in the sum of Three Hundred Pounds of Lawful Money
of England, and upwards; Become Bankrupt.
and being so indebted, she the said E. K. did in the judgment of the said
Commissioners, Parties to these Presents become Bankrupt to all intents and
purposes, within the Compass, true intent and meaning of the several Statutes
made concerning Bankrupts, or within some, or one of them, before the date and
suing forth the said Commission. And Whereas also the said Commissioners,
Parties to these Presents, or the major part of the Commissioners, by the said
Commission authorized, having also found out and discovered, that the said E.
K. at the time, and since she became a Bankrupt, as aforesaid, was possessed
of, and interested in diverse Goods, Wares and Merchandises, Household Stuff and
Implements of Household, Bedding, Linen, Brass, Pewter and other Commodities;
and that other Goods of hers were Goods.
removed and come to the Hands, Custody and Possession of diverse and sundry
Persons, since the time as she the said E. K. became a Bankrupt, as aforesaid,
and such Goods being returned, and the same, and all other the Goods, Wares and
Merchandises Household Stuff and Implements of Household, and other Commodities
remaining in the House and Shop of the said E. K. were seized Seized.
by virtue of the Commissioners Warrant, and the same being so seized, the
Commissioners, Parties to these Presents, or the major part of the
Commissioners, by the said Commission authorized, caused such Goods, Wares,
Merchandises and Commodities to be inventoried and duly appraised by honest Men
of Skill and Appraised.
Judgment, who did value and apprise such Goods, Wares and Merchandises,
Hushold-stuff and Commodities, at the full values as by the particular
Inventory and Appraisment sent unto the Commissioners may appear. The value
whereof in the total amounted unto the sum of 248 l. 17 s. of Lawful Money of
England. And Whereas the said T. K. has since sold and disposed of all the
beforementioned Goods, Wares and Commodities, at the full values mentioned and
expressed in such Appraisment, unto several persons, some whereof are paid for,
and others as yet unpaid for, and owing upon Securities. And they the said
Commissioners, Parties to these Presents, do further find, that there are
diverse Debts, sum and sums of Money due and owing unto the said E. K. and her
Estate by, and from diverse and sundry persons, the particulars of which said
Debts, and the several and respective Bankrupts Debts.
persons names that do severally and respectively owe the same, are mentioned,
set down and expressed in a Schedule, indented to these Presents annexed. Now
this Indenture witnesses, That the said Commissioners, Parties to these
Presents, by form and virtue of the said Commission, and the several Acts of
Parliament therein mentioned and expressed, and also for, and in consideration
of the Covenants herein, after on the part and behalf of the said T. R. his
Heirs Executors and Administrators covenanted to be performed and done, Have
Ordered, Assigned and set over, and by these Presents do as much as in them the
said Commissioners lies, and they lawfully may, Order, Assign and set over
unto the The Assignment.
said T. R. the beforementioned sum of 248 l. 17 s. and every part and parcel
thereof, being the same Moneys raised and advanced by sale of the
aforementioned Goods, Wares and Merchandises so belonging and appertaining to
the said E. K. and her Estate, as before is expressed, and also all the Debts,
sum and sums of Money mentioned and expressed in the said Schedule annexed; and
all other Debts due and owing unto the said E. K. by, and from the persons
therein named as Debtors. To have and to hold the said sum of 248 l. 17 s. and
every part thereof; and also the said Debts, sum and sums of Money so mentioned,
set down and expressed in the said Schedule annexed, and all other Debts, sum
and sums of Money whasoever, due and owing to the said E. K. and her said
Estate, by, and from the respective persons therein named and mentioned as
Debtors unto the said T. R. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns for
evermore. In trust nevertheless, to, and for the use and behoof herein after
mentioned and expressed (that is to say) in trust to, and for the use, benefit,
behoof and advantage of the said T. R. and all other the Creditors of the said
E. K. who have already sought, or shall hereafter in due time come in as
Creditors into the said Commission, and seek relief thereby, and contribute to
the Charges thereof, according to the Direction and Limitation of the several
Statutes in that behalf made and provided, and to, and for none other use,
intent or purpose whatsoever. And the said T. R. for himself, his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does Covenant, Promise, Grant Covenant
to sue for the Debts.
and Agree to, and with the said Commissioners, Parties to these Presents, and
to, and with every and each of them, in Manner and Form following (that is to
say) that he the said T. R. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, or some, or
one of them, shall and will with all convenient speed, and by all lawful ways
and means sue for, and recover the Debts mentioned in the said Schedule
hereunto annexed; and from, and after recovery and receipt thereof shall, and
will upon reasonable request, or notice in writing to him for that purpose
made, or given by the Commissioners, Parties to these Presents, or the major
part of the Commissioners, by the said Commission authorized, make and give a
just, true and perfect Account unto And make Account.
the said Commissioners of the said sum of 248 l. 17 s. before mentioned, as
soon as he shall have received the same, and also of all such sums of Money as
he the said T. R. shall have had raised or received out of the Debts hereby
assigned by force and virtue of these Presents, and shall pay over the said sum
of 248 l. 17 s. and such other Moneys as he shall have received on Account of
the Debts, so by these Presents Assigned unto the said Commissioners, Parties
to these Presents, or the major part of the Commissioners, by the said
Commission authorized, or dispose thereof as they shall Order, Direct and
Appoint in some convenient time from, and after he the said T. R. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns shall have had, and received the same, or
any part thereof, to the end the said Commissioners may Order, Distribute,
Divide and Dispose thereof for, and toward the Payment and Satisfaction of the
Debts due and owing by the said E. K. to such of her Creditors, who have
already sought, or shall hereafter come in and seek relief by virtue of the
said Commission, and contribute toward the Charges thereof, as aforesaid. And
moreover, That the said T. R. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators shall and
will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, well and sufficiently
Covenant to save the Commissioners Harmless.
Save, Defend, keep Harmless and Indempnified the said Commissioners, Parties
to these Presents, and every and each of them, their, and every of their
Executors and Administrators, and his and their Bodies, Lands and Tenements,
Goods and Chattels, of and from all manner of Actions, Costs, Suits, Arrests,
Losses, Damages and Expenses whatsoever, which they or any of them shall, or
may suffer, sustain, or be put unto, for, or by reason of this present Deed of
Assignment, or any other matter or thing whatsoever, lawfully done or executed
by virtue of the said Commission, or their, or any of their lawful
intermedlings or dealings in any of the Estate of the said E. K. by Force,
Virtue or Color thereof. In Witness, etc.

The Schedule whereunto the Deed or Indenture annexed, refer. Debts due and
owing to the said E. K. and her Estate. Imprimis, Due and owing from, etc.
Item.
Another Form of an Assignment.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. of, etc. Esquire; C. D. of, etc. and E. F.
of, etc. of the one part, and J. S. of, etc. of the other part. Whereas the
King and Queens Commission, under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at
Westminster the day of last past, grounded upon several Statutes made
concerning Bankrupts, has been awarded against P. R. of, etc. directed to the
said A. B. C. D. and E. F. and unto G. H. and J. K. Gent. thereby giving full
Power and Authority unto the said Commissioners, four or three of them, whereof
the said A. B. and G. H. to be one to execute the same. As by the said
Commission, relation being thereunto had, it may more at large appear. And
whereas the said Commissioners, or the major part of them, having begun to put
the said Commission in execution, upon due examination of Witnesses, and other
good proof upon Oath before them, or the major part of them, according to the
Form and Prescipt of the said Commission, and the said Statutes taken, and
otherwise, the said Commissioners, Parties to these Presents, have found, and
do find that the said P. R. did for the space of seven years and upwards
together, last past, before the suing forth the said Commission, use and
exercise the Trade of -- etc. at his or ( her) Shop in W. aforesaid, in the
said County of, etc. and in particular in that his Trade did buy and sell Iron
Wares, and several other sorts of Wares and Merchandises, and other Commodities
relating to that Trade whereby he did seek his Trade of Living (that is to say)
by Buying and Selling; and that he the said P. R. in the time of such his
Trading, and by reason thereof did become indebted unto the said J. S. and
other his Creditors, in the sum of One Hundred Pounds and upwards, and for
which the said J. S. on the behalf of himself and other Creditors of the said
P. R. has prayed the aid and relief of the said Commission and Statutes before
the said Commissioners, Parties to this Indenture, the said sum of One Hundred
Pounds and upwards, being yet unpaid, and owing to the said J. S. etc. And the
said Commissioners have also found, and do find, that the said P. R. being so
indebted, as aforesaid, did next before the date and suing forth the said
Commission (in the judgment of the said Commissioners, Parties to these
Presents) become a Bankrupt to all intents and purposes, within the Compass,
true Intent and meaning of the several Statutes made concerning Bankrupts, or
some, or one of them. And whereas the said Commissioners, Parties to these
Presents, in further execution of the said Commission, upon like due
examination of Witnesses, and other good proof upon Oath before them, or the
major part of the Commissioners before named, have found, and do find, or it
otherwise appears to them, that since such time that the said P. R. became a
Bankrupt, as aforesaid, he the said P. R. was lawfully possessed of and
interested in a certain Leaf, and Goods, Wares, etc. in the Schedule, etc. Now
this Indenture Witnesses, that the said Commissioners, Parties to these
Presents, being the major part of the Commissioners, in the said Commission
named, in furher execution of the said Commission, and of the Statutes therein
mentioned, and by Force and Virtue of the same, and of the Authority to them,
or the major part of them given thereby; in consideration, etc. Have as much as
in them lies, Bargained, Sold, Assigned, Transferred and Set over: And by
these Presents (as much as in them lies) do Bargain, Sell, Assign, Transfer
and Set over unto the said J. S. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all
and singular the said aforementioned term of Years, etc. To have and to hold,
ask, demand, sue for, recover and receive all, and singular the said Lease and
Term of Years, Goods, Wares, etc. Here should be two Habendums, one of the Term
and the other of Goods, etc.
mentioned and expressed in a Schedule hereof hereunto annexed, and all, and
every other Debt and Debts, Sum and Sums of Money whatsoever, by these Presents
Ordered, Assigned and Set over, or in any wise due, or owing, or belonging to
the said P. R. or his Estate, by or from all, or any the persons named as
Debtors in the same Schedule, or otherwise unto him the said J. S. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, Upon Trust nevertheless, and to and for
the intents and purposes following (that is to say) to, and for the use,
behoof, benefit and advantage of them the said J. S. etc. and all such other
Creditors of the said P. R. as have already sought, or shall hereafter in due
time come in and seek relief by virtue of the said Commission, and contribute
toward the Charge thereof, according to the direction and limitations of the
said Statutes, as to so much of the said Estate, both Real and Personal of the
said P. R. and other the Premises, Ordered, Directed, Bargained, Sold,
Assigned and Set over to the said J. S. as aforesaid; and of the Moneys which
shall, or may be had or raised by, or for the same, as the Debts of the said
Creditors do, and shall amount unto; And as to the residue and surplusage of
the said Estate, if any such shall be, the same shall be in trust for the said
P. R. his Executors and Assigns, according to the said Statutes, and the true
intent and meaning thereof, and to, and for none other use, intent or purpose
whatsoever. And to, and with the said Commissioners, Parties to these
Indentures, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, the said P. R. for
himself, his Executors and Administrators, does Covenant, Promise and Covenant
to get in the Debts.
Grant in Manner and Form following (that is to say) that he shall, and will
from time to time, and at all times hereafter, with all convenient speed use
his best means and endeavor by Suit in Law or otherwise to sue for, recover,
receive and get into his and their possession, all, and singular the aforesaid
Goods, Wares, Merchandises, Household Stuff, Debts and Sums of Money, by these
Presents Assigned and Set over, as aforesaid, and after Possession had and
obtained of the said Goods, Wares, Merchandises, Housholdstuff, Debt, Sum and
Sums of Money, and other things, or any part thereof, shall, and will with like
convenient speed make Sale and Disposition thereof to, and for the most and
best value and advantage he and they may or can bonafide. And further, that he,
his Executors and Administrators shall, and will from time to time, and at all
times hereafter upon any reasonable request and notice, account to, and with
the To Account.
said Commissioners, Parties to these Presents, or any of them, their, or any
of their Executors or Administrators, what, and how much Money, or other
satisfaction they shall then have received, raised or recovered by Force,
Virtue or means of this present Deed or otherwise, out of the Estate of the
said P. R. and such Money or other satisfaction as upon such Account or Accounts
shall appear to be so had, raised, obained or received, shall, and will upon
like reasonable request and notice, well and truly pay, or cause the same to be
paid unto them the Commissioners, Parties to these Presents, or some, or one of
them, to the end the same may be by them Ordered, Disposed, Distributed,
Divided and Set over unto them, the aforementioned Creditors, and such others of
the Creditors of the said P. R. as have alreay fought relief, or shall
hereafter in due time come in, and seek relief by the said Commission, and
contribute toward the Charge thereof, according to the Limitations and
Directions of the said Statutes, as aforesaid. And to, and with the said
Commissioners, Parties to this Indenture, and the said J. S. his Executors and
Administrators, and every one of them, the said R. B. etc. (the Creditors) do
hereby Covenant and grant for Covenant from the Creditors.
themselves, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, that they, and every of
them from time to time, for ever hereafter, according to, and after the share
and proportion of his or their particular Debt or Debts to him or them now due
and owing from the said P. R. with, and in respect to the several Debts of all
such Creditors as hereafter in due time shall come in and seek relief by the
said Commission, shall, and will pay, bear, perform and do his and their share
and proportion of all Charges and Expenses, Trouble and Travel which already
has been, or hereafter shall be meet, requisite or convenient, or shall happen
in or for the suing forth, prosecuting or executing of the said Commission, or
in, or for the maintaining, justifying or defending the same, or all, or any
proceedings which already have been, or hereafter shall be thereupon, or for
the securing and keeping Harmless or Indempnified the said Commissioners,
Parties to these Presents, and the said J. S. and every, or any of them, or any
of their Executors or Administrators of, and from all Actions, Suits, Arrests,
Trouble, Damages, Charges, Travel and Expenses whatsoever which may arise,
happen or be occasioned to every or any of them, by reason of the said
Commission, or the suing out, prosecuting or executing thereof, or of any
matter or thing already done, or which hereafter shall be done in prosecution
of the said Commission, or by reason of this present Indenture, or the Trust,
or any other matter or thing therein comprised, specified or mentioned, or any
thing which is, or shall be done in pursuance thereof. In Witness, etc.

Memorandum. It were better to have in this two Habendum's, one of the Term,
and another of the Goods.

A Deed of Distribution from Commissioners of Bankrupts to the Creditors.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between J. C. P. B. Esquires and W. F. Gent. of the
one part, G. H. J. K. etc. of the other part. Whereas the Kings Majesty's
Commission under the Great The Commission.
Seal of England, grounded upon the several Statutes made concerning Bankrupts,
bearing Date at Westminster, etc. has been awarded against the said R. G.
directed unto R. A. P. C. Esquires, the said J. C. P. B. and W. F. Gent. as by
the said Commission, whereunto Relation being had, more fully and at large it
may and does appear. And Whereas at the Humble Petition of the said H. N.
exhibited to the Right Honorable, George Lord Jeoffreys, Baron of Wemm, Lord
High Chancellor of England, the said Commission was renewed, and the said A. B.
and C. D. therein named, instead of them the said R. A. etc. together with them
the said J. C. P. B. etc. thereby giving full Power and Authority unto them the
said A. B. and C. D. etc. four or three of them, whereof the said A. B. or C.
D. to be one to execute the same Commission, as in and by the same renewed
Commission under the Great Seal of England, bearing Date at Westminster, etc.
whereunto relation being had, more fully at large it may and does appear. And
Whereas the said Commissioners, Parties to these Presents, having begun to put
the said Commissions in Execution upon due examination of Witnesses and other
good proof upon Oath before them taken, have found that the said R. G. for the
space of, etc. past before the Date and Suing forth of the said Commissions,
used and exercised the Trade or Profession of, etc. and did receive and take to
Pawn upon Credit, Rings, Plate, Jewels, Houshold-Goods, Wearing Apparel, and
other Goods, and did Buy, Sell and Utter several, great quantities of the like
Goods, and other Wares and Merchandises, and had and kept an House, Shop and
Warehouse for that intent and purpose in, etc. in the Parish of, etc. and did
seek and endeavor to get his Living by Buying and Selling as other Broakers
and Traders use to do. And that he the said R. G. so seeking and endeavoring
to get his Living by Buying and Selling, Trading and Dealing, as aforesaid is
mentioned, did during that time of his said Trading and Dealing become justly
and truly indebted, and still does owe and stands justly and truly indebted
unto the abovenamed A. B. C. D. M. L. and J. B. in the sum of Fifteen Hundred
Pounds of Lawful Money of England, and unto diverse other persons his Creditors
above also named, diverse and sundry other Sum and Sums of Money, amounting in
the whole to the Sum of, etc. of like Lawful Money, and being so indebted, he
the said R. G. did in the judgments of the said Commissioners, Parties to these
Presents, become Bankrupt to all intents and purposes, within the Compass, True
intent and Meaning of the several Statutes made concerning Bankrupts, or within
some or one of them, before the date and suing forth of the said first recited
Commission. And Whereas the said Commissioners, Parties to these Presents, in
further execution upon like due examination of Witnesses, and other good proof
upon Oath before them taken, having also found that at such time as he the said
R. G. became Bankrupt, as aforesaid, there were diverse Good Wares and
Merchandises, as well of and belonging to him the said R. G. as what were
Pawned unto him as Securities for Moneys by him lent, and also several Sum and
Sums of Ready Moneys and other Commodities of and belonging to the said R. G.
and his Estate in his said late Dwelling House, situate and being in, etc. Did
by their Deed or Indenture of Assignment, under their Hands and Seals, and duly
executed, bearing Date, etc. for and upon Considerations, and to and for the
Uses, Intents and purposes therein mentioned, Assign and Set Over unto the said
T. P. H. N. M. L. and J. B. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, All
and Singular the said Goods, Wares, Merchandises, Ready Moneys and other
Commodities, the particulars whereof are mentioned, set down and expressed in
the Schedule or Inventory thereof to the said Deed or Indenture of Assignment
annexed, as by the same Indenture of Assignment relation being thereunto had,
may more at large appear. And Whereas the said Commissioners, Parties to these
Presents, in further execution* of the said Commission, upon sufficient proof
upon Oath of several Witnesses, have also found, that he the said R. G. at the
time he became Bankrupt, as aforesaid, stood justly and truly indebted, and
still does owe and stands justly and truly indebted unto the said T. P. in
the Sum of, etc. Principal Money, also to the several persons his Creditors
abovenamed, in several Sums of Money, amounting in the whole to the Sum of,
etc. of Lawful Money of England, the particulars whereof, together with the
several and respective persons, that as well have sufficiently proved, as such
of them that have not well proved their several and respective Debts (who are
not hereby to have or receive any benefit or advantage by this present Deed of
Dividend, until such time as they shall so have respectively sufficiently
proved their Debts and Demands) are mentioned, set down and expressed in the
Schedule, indented to these Presents annexed. And Whereas the full space of
four Months since the Date and Suing forth of the said Commissions is fully
elapsed and expired, and no other Creditors of the said R. G. other than the
persons abovenamed have as yet come in, and sought Relief by the said
Commissions, or paid, or contributed toward the Charges thereof, according to
the direction of the said Statutes for Debt or Debts due, or claimed to be due
and owing by and from the said R. G. And Whereas the said Assignees T. P. H. N.
M. L. and J. B. have actually raised and received by virtue of the said
Assignment out of the Goods and other things thereby assigned, the Sum of, etc.
of Lawful Money of England, the particulars whereof, and how the same has been
received, are mentioned, set down and expressed in the said Schedule* indented
to these Presents, likewise* annexed. And Whereas the said Creditors
abovenamed parties hereunto, have made already, and by these Presents do make
it their Request unto us the said Commissioners, Parties to these Presents, to
Order, Distribute, Divide and Set Over unto, and amongst the said Creditors,
Parties to the Presents, (or at least such of them as either have, or shall in
due time make good and sufficient proof of their several respective Debt and
Debts) the said Sum of, etc. for and toward payment and satisfaction of their
respective Debts, in the said Schedule hereunto annexed, mentioned and
expressed, ratably and proportionably, according to their several and
respective Debt and Debts, at and after the rate of Three Shillings and Eight
Pence in the Pound of their respective Debts. Now this Indenture witnesses,
That the said Commissioners, Parties to these Presents, in further execution of
the said Commissions and Statutes therein mentioned, and by Force and Virtue
thereof, and for and in consideration that a Due and Legal Distribution may be
effected Distribution.
and made as to the said Sum of, etc. beforementioned, Have Ordered,
Distributed, Disposed, Divided and Set Over, and by these Presents, do as much
as in them, the said Commissioners, Parties to these Presents, lies, and they
lawfully may Order, Distribute, Dispose, Divide and Set Over, unto and amongst
them the said Creditors abovenamed, one of the Parties to these Presents, the
said Sum of, etc. in Manner and Form following (that is to say) to each, and
every one of them the said Creditors, as have well and sufficiently made proof
of their several and respective Debt and Debts, or shall in due time make such
proof, a part and proportion of the same share and share-like, according to the
quantity and proportion of their said Debts, in the said Schedule indented
hereunto annexed, mentioned and expressed, at, and after the rate of 3 s. and 8
d. in the Pound of their said respective Debts; To have and to hold, and enjoy
the said Sum of, etc. and every part and parcel thereof unto them the said
Creditors, Parties to these Presents, their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, as their, and every of their own proper Moneys and Estate, toward
payment and satisfaction of their said several and respective Debts, so
farforth as the same will amount unto the same, to be ratably and
proportionably distributed and divided, as herein before is mentioned. And the
said T. P. H. N. M. L. and J. B. and the rest of the Creditors abovenamed, one
of the Parties to these Presents, for themselves severally, and for their
several and respective Executors and Administrators, and not jointly one for
the other, do Covenant, Promise and Grant to, and with the said Commissioners,
Parties to these Presents, their respective Executors and Administrators, and
to, and with every of them by those Presents, That they the said T. P. H. N. M.
L. and J. B. and the rest of the Creditors abovenamed, one of the Parties to
these Presents, their respective Executors and Administrators, shall and will
so farforth as concerns his or their particular Debt and Interest herein,
well and sufficiently save harmless and keep indempnified all the said
Commissioners, by the said Commission Authorized, and every of them, their and
every of their Bodies, Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels, and every part
thereof, of, from touching and concerning, All, and all manner of Actions,
Suits, Arrests, Costs, Damages and Expenses whatsoever, which they, or any of
them may suffer, sustain, or be put unto for, or by reason of this present Deed
of Distribution, or any other Act, matter or thing whatsoever lawfully done or
executed by virtue of the said Commissions, or their, or any of their lawful
intermedlings in any of the Estate of the said R. G. by Force, Virtue or Color
thereof. In Witness whereof the Parties to these Presents, first abovenamed,
have interchangeably, etc.

Bill by a Principal Creditor to call the Assignees to Account, and discover
what of the Bankrupts Estate came to their hands.
IN humble manner complaining, shows unto your Lordships your Orator C. J. of
London, Merchant. Whereas in the year 1658. and some few years afterward your
Orator had dealings with one J. Robinson of, etc. in the way of Merchandise,
whereby he became Debtor unto your Orator, for Goods and Merchandises sold and
delivered to him the said J. R. and for several sums of Money which he the said
J. R. had of your Orator, and were paid for him by your Orator upon Bills of
Exchange and otherwise, in the sum of Four and Twenty Hundred Pounds Sterling;
and he the said J. R. being so indebted to your Orator in such a great sum of
Money; and sometime in the year 1661* he the said J. R. failing in his Estate,
and becoming Bankrupt, your Orator for the recovery and gaining his said Debt
out of the Estate of the said J. R. he himself being gone beyond the Seas, your
Orator did sue forth his Majesty's Commission, grounded upon the several
Statutes made concerning Bankrupts, against him the said J. R. and accordingly
the same was granted and issued forth against him at the sole Instance and
Petition of your Orator on the 24th of May, in the 13th year of, etc. Anno Dom.
1661. directed to J. P. R. A. Esquires, J. L. H. N. and R. H. Gent. the major
part of which said Commissioners did put the said Commission in Execution, and
sat several times in the said year 1661. And after for the discovering and
finding out of the Estate of the said J. R. And having so done, did agree by,
and with the consent of the other Creditors of him the said J. R. that came
into the said Commission, that your Orator, and one E. M. of, etc. another of
the said R.'s Creditors that was come into the said Commission, should be
Assignees of the Estate of the said J. R. and should be empowered by them the
said Commissioners by Deed of Assignment under their Hands and Seals, to gather
in and receive the same Estate in trust, and for the use of themselves and all
other the Creditors of the said J. R. that should duly seek relief by the said
Commission, and toward satisfaction of their several Debts; but
notwithstanding such Agreement and Consent of the Commissioners and Creditors,
the said Commissioners sometime afterward, at the instigation of the said E.
M. and of P. S. another of the Creditors who was come into the said Commission,
and had before consented to your Orators being one of the Assignees, as is
aforementioned, did make their Deed or Deeds of Assignment of the said J. R.'s
whole Estate, of a very considerable value in Goods, Debts and Moneys,
amounting to 3000 l. and upwards, to them the said P. S. and E. M. to both whom
the said R. was indebted 100 l. or thereabouts, your Orator being a Creditor
for 2400 l. as before is mentioned; part of which said Estate was inserted in a
Schedule, annexed to one part of the said Assignments; a Copy whereof is also
hereunto affixed. And your Orator further shows to your Lordship, that the
said P. S. and E. M. being so constituted and made Assignees of the Estate of
the said J. R. by the major part of the said Commissioners, by one or more Deed
or Deeds of Assignment under their Hands and Seals, and empowered to recover,
gather in and receive the same Estate in trust for the use of your Orator, and
other the general Creditors of the said J. R. that should duly seek relief by
the said Commission; they the said P. S. and E. W. did enter into a Covenant
under their Hands and Seals, to, and with the said Commissioners to give and
render unto them upon reasonable request, an account of whatsoever Moneys they,
or either of them should receive and gain in of the said J. S. and relating to
his Estate, and pay and satisfy the said Moneys to them the said
Commissioners, to the end the same might be by them divided equally amongst all
the Creditors of the said J. R. that should come into the said Commission,
proportionable to their several Debts. And your Orator further shows, that
they the said P. S. and E. M. being so entrusted, as aforesaid, did recover and
gain in several great sums of Money which belonged to the Estate of the said J.
R. and did keep the same in their own hands for several years, amounting to
2000 l. or more, for which hitherto they, or either of them have not given any
account, the said Commissioners themselves, who might have called them to such
account, according to their Covenants, being deceased. Whereby they the said
Assignees have for several years kept all the said Moneys, and intend still so
to do, and to pay no proportion of the same to your Orator for his said great
Debt of 2400 l. or to the other Creditors, to your Orators knowledge, without
they be compelled thereunto by order of this Honorable Court, contrary to all
Equity and Good Conscience. And for that your Orator is no ways relievable
herein, but in Equity before your Lordship, or to have any discovery of the
said matters, save in this Honorable Court. And for that also your Orators
Witnesses are either dead or in places remote and unknown: To the end
therefore, that your Orator may receive his due and equal proportion of all
Moneys come to the hands of the said P. S. and E. M. relating to the said J.
R.'s Estate, for, and in respect of his said Debt of 2400 l. and proportionable
thereunto* And to that purpose, that the said P. S. and E. M. may bring in a
true and particular account upon their Oaths, of all the Estate that has been
heretofore assigned to them by the said Commissioners, the same being in trust,
as aforementioned, and declare whether they have had one or more Assignments
made to them of the same, together with the Dates thereof, and the Covenants
therein contained, and whether they sealed the Counterpart of such Assignment,
and may set forth a true particular of how much of the said Estate has been
received by them, or either of them, or under them, and of, and from whom, and
when, and may declare upon their Oaths, what other Creditors of the said J. R.
did in due time come into the said Commission, and did pay their
Contribution-Mony as your Orator has done; and to the end that the Moneys
found to be received by them the said P. S. and E. M. or either of them, may be
by Order or Decree of this Honorable Court so divided, that your Orator may
have his proportion thereof, and your Orator have relief in the premises,
according to Equity and Good Conscience (the same to go to, and to be applied
toward the satisfaction of a certain Debt due from your Orator to W. R. Esquire;
according to a Proviso in a certain Act of Parliament made in the 30th year of
his now Majesty's Reign, entitled An Act for the further relief and discharge
of poor distressed Prisoners for Debt) And that the said S. and M. may true
answer make to all, and every the matters aforesaid, May it please your
Lordship, etc.

As for the Schedule sixth to the Bill, Entitle it thus. The Schedule or
Inventory, whereof mention is made in the Deed, whereunto the same is annexed,
and whereunto the Bill annexed does relate, as follows, ( viz.) Moneys come
to the Hands and Possession of several persons of the said J. R.'s and
belonging to his Estate. Imprimis, In ready Money which came to the Hands and
Possession of -- 100 l. Item, etc. Debts owing to the said J. R. and his
Estate. Imprimis, Owing by James West. -- In toto, etc.
Bond from the Assignees to the Principal Creditor in 2000 l. to pay his
proportionable share.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, Whereas a Commission under the Great
Seal of England, grounded upon the several Statutes made concerning Bankrupts,
has been awarded against J. R. late of the City of London, Mercer, directed to
certain Commissioners therein named, to execute the same: And whereas the major
part of the Commissioners, by the said Commission authorized, in Execution of
their said Commission, have by their Deed Indented of Distribution, bearing
Date with these Presents, distributed and divided diverse Debts and sums of
Money, mentioned and expressed in a Schedule to the said Deed annexed unto, and
amongst the above bounden P. S. and E. M. and other the Creditors of the said
J. R. duly seeking relief by the said Commission, according to the limitation
of the several Statutes, whereupon the same was grounded (to wit) according to
the quantity and proportion of their several and respective Debts, in the said
Deed also expressed; wherein the Debt owing to the abovenamed C. J. is
mentioned, to be the sum of 1144 l. 8 s. 5 d. And whereas the said C. J. has
formerly given consent, that the major part of the Commissioners should by
their Deed of Assignment Assign and Set Over unto the said P. S. and E. M.
amongst other things, All, and singular the said Debts and sums of Money
mentioned in the said Schedule, which the said Commissioners have done
accordingly; if therefore the said P. S. and E. M. shall from henceforth, and
at all times hereafter, upon reasonable demand, and sufficient Acquittance and
Acquittances, given in writing to them, or any of them respectively in that
behalf well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said C. J. his
Executors or Administrators, or to his or their Assignee or Assignces, lawfully
authorized by writing under his and their Hands and Seals, witnessed before two
or more persons of Credit, to receive the same (that is to say) of all such
Quanties and Proportions of Moneys of the said sum of 1144 l. 8 s. 5 d.
mentioned in the said Deed to be owing to the said C. J. as they the said P. S.
and E. M. or either of them, their, or either of their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns should receive of any person or persons, by means or
virtue of the said Indenture of Assignment, according to the Quantity and
Proportion of the said sum of 1144 l. 8 s. 5 d. in reference to the Debts of
other Creditors in such Deed mentioned, or according to the Quantity or
Proportion of so much thereof, as shall stand, and be duly proved before the
major part of the Commissioners, by the said Commission authorized, and by them
signified under their Hands, so to be proved according to a Proviso in the said
Deed of Dividend mentioned, and that also in proportion with the sums of Money
mentioned in the said Schedule to be owing unto other the Creditors of the said
J. R. then this present Obligation to be void, or else to remain in full Force
and Virtue.

Plea and Demurrer to a Bill brought by the Complainants as Creditors and
Assignees under a Statute of Bankrupt, to avoid Leases, and redemise for
security of Money made to the Defendant by the Bankrupt, on pretense the
Commissioners had Assigned the Creditors to pay the Money to the Defendant, and
he to Assign his Estate; Whereas the Commissioners had no power to do the same,
and the Estate in Law made to the Defendant was two Years and six Months before
the pretended Bankrupcy; and for Plea, the Defendant offers the Indentures, and
a Fine levied to him, long before the Bankrupcy.
THE said Defendant, for Demurrer to the said Bill, says, that if all the said
Bill were true, as it is not; yet the said Complainants of their own showing,
as they themselves have made their Case, ought not to be relieved thereupon
either in Law or Equity: For this Defendant says, that if it were true, that
J. E. in the Bill named, and F. his Wife in the Month of, etc. in the 22th year
of the Reign, etc. were lawfully seized of a good, perfect and indefeasible
Estate to them, and to the Heirs of the said J. E. of the Mesuage or Tenements
in the Bill mentioned; and that the said J. and F. being so seized by agreement
had and made by and between them the said J. E. and F. his Wife and this
Defendant, did by their Indenture of Lease under their Hands and Seals, bearing
date the twelfth day of J. which was in the said 22th. year, etc. Demise,
Grant, and to Farm, let unto this Defendant the said Mesuages or Tenements for
the Term of 21 Years and 28 Days, from the Feast, etc. rendering a Penny Rent
yearly at the Feast of, etc. if the same were lawfully demanded: And that this
Lease was made in Consideration of 240 l. paid, or lent by this Defendant to
the said J. E. and F. his Wife. And if it be likewise true, that this Defendant
in, and upon the 14th. Day of the said Month of, etc. in the said 22th Year,
etc. did Redemise the said Mesuages on Tenements to the said J. E. and F. his
said Wife, for the Term of 21 Years from the six and twentieth day of J. in the
said 22th. Year, etc. yielding and paying therefore yearly, during the said
Term, unto this Defendant the sum of 30 l. at the Feast of, etc. and the first
payment thereof to begin at the, etc. Anno Dom. 1625. etc. with a Proviso, That
if the said Rent of 30 l. should be behind and unpaid in part, or in all, over
or after any of the days of payment limited for the payment thereof, that then,
and from thenceforth it should, and might be lawful to and for this Defendant
into the said Mesuages or Tenements to re-enter. And if it be likewise true,
That the said J. E. did become bound unto this Defendant in a Bond of 300 l.
conditioned for the performance of the Covenants and Agreements contained in
these Indentures: And that afterward the said F. died, and the said J. E. her
Husband survived, and did truly pay to this Defendant the sum of 30 l. upon the
Feast day of the Nativity of St. John Baptist, which was in the said Year of
our Lord God 1625. for a Years Rent then due upon the said last mentioned
Lease. And if it be likewise true, That the said J. E. upon the Feast of the
Nativity of St. John Baptist 1626. did fail to pay the said sum of 30 l. then
due for the said Rent, and did after condescend to make, and did make unto this
Defendant one other Lease of the said Messuages or Tenements, by Indenture,
bearing Date the 28th. day of December, 1626. and in the second Year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord the King's most Excellent Majesty that now is, for
the Term of 21 Years, to begin from the expiration of the said first recited
Lease, for the Yearly Rent of one Pepper-Corn, upon Condition, That if the said
J. E. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them did, or should
from time to time, and at all times then after, during the residue of the said
Term of 21 Years then to come and expired, well and truly pay, or cause to be
paid unto this Defendant, his Executors, Administratos or Assigns the said Rent
of 30 l. at such days, times and place, and in such Manner and Form as in the
said recited Indenture of Lease is limited and appointed, then the said last
mentioned Lease should Cease, Determine and be utterly Void. And if it be
likewise true, That the said J. E. did afterward pay unto this Defendant the
30 l. which was then formerly due to have been paid at the Feast of St. John
Baptist, which was in the said Year of our Lord God, 1626. and did after pay
unto this Defendant the Rent of 30 l. due at the Feast of St. John Baptist,
Anno Dom. 1627. And did pay unto this Defendant the like Rent of 30 l. at the
Feast of St. John Baptist, Anno. Dom. 1628. And if it be likewise true, That
afterwardas the said Rent of 30 l. due at the Feast of St. John Baptist, 1629.
was behind and unpaid, and that this Defendant for non-payment thereof did
enter upon the said Demised Premises, and has received, or might have
received of the Under-Tenants thereof all the Rents or Profits thereof, as well
those that were behind at the Feast of St. John Baptist, 1629. as such as have
grown due ever since, the value of the same Tenements being 30 l. per Annum.
And if it be likewise true, That the said J. E. were a Man that did seek or get
his Living by Buying and Selling, and that the said J. E. were indebted to the
Complainants and others in the sum of 500 l. and did in December, Anno Dom.
1626. begin to keep his House in St. Albans, to the intent to delay his
Creditors from the Recovery of their just and true Debts, and has since
absented himself, and thereby is become a Bankrupt. And if it be likewise true,
That the said Complainants, and others of the Creditors of the said J. E. did
the 28th day of J. last, being the 28th day of J. Anno Dom. 1631. become
Suitors to the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper, etc. for a Commission upon the
Statutes of Bankrupts, to be awarded against the said J. E. and that thereupon
a Commission was awarded the 29th Day of J. now last past, directed to the
Commissioners in the Bill named, or to any four or three of them. And if it be
true, That the said Commissioners have begun to put the said Commission in
Execution, and have found that the said J. E. being indebted to the said
Complainant and others, did in the Month of December, Anno Dom. 1626. begin to
keep his House, and absent himself from his Creditors, and that the said J. E.
did thereby become a Bankrupt, as by the said Bill is set forth. This Defendant
for Demurrer to the said Bill sath, that if all the said Surmises and
Allegations were true, yet the said Complainants, of their own showing, ought
not thereupon to be relieved either in Law or Equity; for this Defendant says,
that the said Commissioners, by virtue of the said Commission, had not any
thing to do with any of this Defendants said Leases, neither were the same
Leases any way subject to the said Commission, for that it appears of the
Complainants own showing, that the said Leases were made for good consideration
of Money, paid long before the said J. E. did become a Bankrupt (that is to say)
the said first Lease made by the said J. E. unto this said Defendant, and the
Redemise thereupon made by this Defendant to the said J. E. were both made in
consideration of 240 l. paid by this Defendant to the said J. E. to secure unto
him this Defendant, the sum of 30 l. per Annum out of the Mesuages or Tenements
thereby Demised for 21 years. And the said later Leases, as it appears of the
Complainants own showing, was made after a forfeiture of the Redemise made by
this Defendant to the said J. E. and after a forfeiture of a Bond of 300 l. and
the same was only made to secure the subsequent payments of the said Rent of 30
l. per Annum. And this Defendant says, that the said first Lease, and the said
Redemise, being so as aforesaid, made in June, Anno Dom. 1624. and in the 22th
Year, etc. this Defendant then could not prognosticate that the said J. E.
would become a Bankrupt in December 1626. which was two Years and six Months
after the making of the said Lease and Redemise; for which cause, and because
it appears of the Complainants own showing, that the said Lease and Redemise
were made for the consideration of 240 l. and to secure to this Defendant 30 l.
per Annum for 21 Years, and were made two Years and six Months before the said
J. E. did become a Bankrupt: And because the Complainants by their Bill do set
forth a good Title both in Law and Equity to this Defendant, of, and in the
Mesuages, Lands and Tenements in question, but do not show nor derive to
themselves any Title at all thereunto, either in Law or Equity, neither by
Grant nor Assignment from the Commissioners, nor otherwise; therefore this
Defendant does Demur, and abide in Law upon the insufficiency of the said Bill,
and does humbly demand Judgment of this Honorable Court, if he, this
Defendant, shall be compelled to make any answer thereunto. And for further
Cause of Demurrer to the said Insufficient Bill, this Defendant says, That the
Title set forth by the Complainant by their said Bill to the Leases in
question, or to the Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments thereby Demised, is no
good Title in Law or Equity. For if it be true, That the Commissioners, upon
these Statutes of Bankrupts, did Assign and Appoint the Complainants to pay and
tender unto this Defendant the sum of 240 l. with Interest, and in such manner
as by the said Bill is suggested; and Assign and Appoint them to take from this
Defendant an Assignment or Conveyance of the Leases made to this Defendant of
the Lands in the Bill mentioned, to the benefit and behoof of the Complainants,
and of the other Creditors of the said J. E. yet the said Commissioners had no
power by any the Statute or Statutes of Bankrupts, or by their Commission,
either to Assign or Appoint the Complainants to pay or tender unto this
Defendant any sum or sums of Money, or to Assign or Appoint this Defendant to
Assign or Convey the said Leases or Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments thereby
Demised. For which Cause also, and because there is no matter of Equity
contained in the said Bill, but the said Commissioners do thereby endeavor to
a^oid a plain, honest and lawful contract made for just and valuable
consideration two Years and six Months before the said J. E. became a Bankrupt,
this Defendant does Demur in Law upon the insufficiency of the said Bill, and
does humbly demand the Judgment of this Honorable Court, if he, this
Defendant, shall be compelled to make any answer thereunto. And for Plea in Bar
to this said Bill, this Defendant says, That the said J. E. and F. his said
Wife in the Term of the Holy Trinity, which was in the 22th Year, etc. by one
Fine acknowledged, and Levied before his then Majesty's Justices of his Court
of Common Pleas at Westminster, did grant unto this Defendant all, and singular
the Mesuages, etc. in the said Indenture of the 12th and 14th days of June, in
the said 22th Year, etc. mentioned by the names of three Mesuages, etc. with
the Appurtenances in the Town of St. Albans, and in the Parish of St. Michaels:
To have, and to hold to this Defendant, from the Feast of St. John Baptist then
next following, for the Term of 21 Years and 28 Days then next following, and
fully to be complete and ended, as by the said Fine remaining upon Record in
his Majesty's said Court of Common Pleas appears. And therefore this
Defendant demands the Judgment of this Honorable Court, if against the
Indenture of the said J. E. under his Hand and Seal, made for the consideration
of 240 l. confessed by the Complainants to be paid, and the same Indenture
acknowledged by the said Complainants to be made two Years and six Months
before the said J. E. did become a Bankrupt; and if against the said Fine, the
said Complainants, as Creditors to the said J. E. upon a bare surmise, that the
Commissioners upon the Statute of Bankrupts, have appointed them the said
Complainants to pay 240 l. and this Defendant to Assign or Convey his Interest
to the said Complainants; the said Complainants shall be received to Complain
in this Honorable Court. All which Matters this Defendant is ready to maintain
as this Honorable Court shall award, and humbly prays to be dismissed forth of
the same, with his reasonable Costs and Charges in this behalf most wrongfully
sustained.

Mr. Ben. Hintons Case in Chancery.
Hillary 1687.

John Butcher Plaintiff, exhibited his Bill against Ben. Hinton, John Hill,
Obadiab Sedgwick and George Sittwell, Assignees of the Commissioners of
Bankrupcy awarded against Hinton of London Goldsmith, George Parker, Parson
Parks, Rosomond Wattson and Elizabeth and William Short, Defendants.

THAT Butcher and Short were The Bill.
Partners in 1669. in the Norway Trade for Timber used in Rebuilding London for
seven years, two years of which Butcher was in Norway. And having occasion for
Money to pay Bills before the Goods could be disposed of, Short employed Hinton
as Banker, who paid and received several sums on the joint Account* and not
suspecting any unjust dealing two years after accepted the Account Hinton gave,
without examining the Items.

That Butcher and Short being forced to trust great quantites of Goods,
sustained great Losses; Hinton finding them in sudden Exigences to pay Bills,
took advantage and prepared Accounts of Money paid and received, in which Hinton
made them Debtors 4000 l. and pretended there was no Error or Overcharges,
desired Bonds for the said balance, declared it should be no prejudice, and if
any Errors, it should be rectified, and the Security should be for no more than
should appear to be due: They signed the Account and gave Bonds.

That after Hinton received and paid diverse sums on Account on the Partnership,
and perceiving they were forced to give great Credit, and being in great
Exigences to pay Bills of Exchange and other occasions in Trade, took advantage
and drew up another Account, and Bonds, and required them to execute the same,
which they were forced to do, else he threatened to ruin them by bringing
Actions on the Penalties; and being Conscious he had wronged them, contrived to
avoid a re-examination, Dec. 4. 1675. pretending there was above 6000 l. due,
and that he was pressed by his Creditors, and could not pacify them unless he
and his other Creditors would become bound; but Butcher alleging there was not
so much due, and the Partnership being ended, and their Debts divided, was
unwilling to enter into new Bonds for more than his own part, and be discharged
of Shorts part, and have the Bonds and Securities delivered up, and the new
Bonds to be subject to the same examination the old ones were, and to make good
no more than a moiety, which Hinton agreed to; and agreed that he and Short
should be bound for 2000 l. And Hinton promised to deliver up the old Bonds,
and Butcher should be discharged of all former Bonds, and Hinton executed two
Receipts on the 4th of December. 1675. one of 4000 l. and the other of 2500 l.
being the sum demanded to be due on the old Bonds, and they sealed new Bonds
for 6300 l. with Hinton to his Creditors.

That Hinton took Counterbonds of Butcher and Short to save him harmless, and
they having paid above 3000 l. and Hinton delaying to deliver up the old Bonds,
or to come to a fair Account, Butcher brought a Bill to compel him thereto, but
Hinton threatened to ruin him unless he would execute a General Release, and
give new Bonds, which he was compelled to do on Hinton's promise, that he would
come to a fair Account, and no use should be made thereof, but to secure what
was justly due: And thereupon he executed such Release and new Bonds.

That Hinton failing, a Commission of Bankrupcy was awarded against him, and he
declared a Bankrupt: And all the Bonds were assigned to Sedgwick, Sittwell and
Hill, to whom Butcher applied himself to have the old Bonds, Release and
Security delivered up and cancelled, and that the Accounts might be examined,
being willing to pay what should appear to be due (if any thing due on his
Account,) which the Assignees refused to do, and threatened to sue the old and
new Bonds, and recover the Penalties, though he had paid much on the new Bonds.
And in looking over the Accounts found diverse Errors, Omissions and
Miscomputations, and made his Accounts to carry 12 l. per Cent. Interest, and
had charged near 3000 l. for Interest at 12 l. per Cent. and that thrown into
several Balances, Interest was again charged at 12 l. per Cent. which was
Interest upon Interest at 12 l. per Cent. and Hinton had several sums of Money
in his Hands which he received, so that he charged the Plantiff with Interest
in effect for his own Money 12 l. per Cent. and Interest for that Interest at 12
l. per Cent. and had overcharged for Prises of Dollers: And no allowance made
for Money the Partners paid on Hinton's Account, nor of Money paid the Assignees;
so that the Plaintiff was wronged 5000 l. the Plaintiff hoped the Account
should be unravelled, being willing to pay what is due on a fair Account, if
any thing on his part due. And the old and new Bonds ought to be delivered up.

That Hinton and Short would lay the whole on the Plaintiff, and refused to
produce the Books of Accounts and Bonds; That the same might be produced, and
old and new Bonds delivered up, and satisfaction on Judgments acknowledged, if
any be, and the Accounts examined and liquidated, and the Plaintiff on paying
his part of what (if any thing) be due on his part, and that the Defendants
might answer, and the Plaintiff be relieved, Is the substance of the Bill.

They believed Butcher and Short were Hill, Sedgwick and Sitwell for Answer, say
Partners, and Hinton their Banker, who received and paid Money on the joint
Account. And as to the Account from July 1680. they referred to Hinton's Books,
but as to all before, they pleaded the Bonds, and the 9th of July 1680. a
General Release given Hinton.

It was ordered the Plea should stand 17 July. 4 Jac. II.
for an Answer, with liberty for the Plaintiff to except, who excepted, and the
Defendants Answered. As to all Errors, Overcharges and Usurious Interest they
referred to Hinton's Books.

That the Plaintiff and Short were Hinton Answers, and say^
bound with him to several persons, and that the Plaintiff had paid several
sums to the Assignees: That the Plaintiff exhibited a Bill against him to
Account, and an Account was ordered, but they Accounted between themselves, and
the Plaintiff was greatly indebted to him, and 1 July 1680. he entered into 42
several Bonds for payment of 100 l. a-piece at 100 l. a Month; and the 9th of
July the Plaintiff gave a General Release, since which he had several dealings
with him, and was willing to Account for the same. And by his further Answer,

That the Plaintiff and Short was indebted to him on the Plaintiffs coming to
England, 6000 l. that the Accounts were fairly stated without any abuse. And
about December. 1675. they were bound with him to several Creditors, and they
gave him Counter-security. As to Errors referred to his Books, and that the
4000 l. was brought on the Balance of the last Account.

Believes the Matters prout Bill, and that Short being dead, his Wife and
Adminstratrix answered.
the Plaintiff and her Husband were great sufferers, and that on a fair
Account, little, if any thing was due to Hinton.

That Short in 1680 exhibited a Bill against Hinton, Parker, Parks, Robinson,
Watson and Butcher, 12 Nov. 1. W. M. Sedgwick, Sitwell and Hill were made
Parties.

And Short dying, his Administratix brought her Bill of Revivor against all the
said Defendants, which to the purpose, as Butcher's Bill, to have a fair
Account, and be relieved.

On reading the Process and view of 11 D^cemb. 2 W. and M.
Hinton's Accounts, whereby many Errors, Overcharges and Miscomputations
appeared, The Court declared, the Defendants, the Assignees ought to stand in
place of the Creditors of Hinton, to whom the Bonds of 6300 l. was given, and
referred it to Sir John Francklin to look into the whole matter, beginning with
the Account distinguished by the name of the 4000 l. Account, made up about
1670. and so downwards into the several Accounts, and to state how he finds the
same, and Errors, Overcharges and Miscomputations and Allowances of Interest
not allowed by Law appeared to be in any of Hinton's Books of Accounts, and
what Money Butcher and Short, and which of them paid toward discharge of the
Bonds in December. 1675. or any other Bonds, and which of them, when, and to
whom. And Hinton's Books, Accounts and Bonds were to be left with the Master on
Oath.

The Master made his Report, and 22 Jan. 1690.
shows the Errors, Overcharges and Miscomputations, and Interest carried from
one Balance to another at 12 l. per Cent.

It appeared that in the 4000 l. Account* 3 Nov. 2 W and M. on hearing on the
Report.
there was an Error of 500 l. besides 224 l. 14 s. 6 d. charged for Interest
above lawful Interest, which were made part of the next Balance, and carried
Interest upon Interest at 12 l. per Cent. And the 4th of December. 1675. the 500
l. between November. 1670. and the said 4th of December. 1675. the Plaintiffs were
overcharged in unlawful Interest 1789 l. 1 s. 7 d. So then there was due for
Money and Lawful Interest but 3986 l. 3 s. 11 d. which with 1056 l. 10 s. Lawful
Interest to the 4th of May 1680. made 8042 l. 4 s. 9 d.

Toward discharge whereof the Plaintiff paid Hinton's Creditors, by his order,
4627 l. 18 s. So there remained due the 4th of May 1680. on the joint Account
414 l. 6 s. 9 d. which with 266 l. 6 s. 9 d. Interest to the 23d of Jan. last,
made 680 l. 15 s. 9 d.

And on the Plaintiff, Butcher's particular Account 19 l. 4 s. 3 d. which makes
in all 700 l. on payment of which the Plaintiffs Council prayed the Releases,
and all Securities might be delivered up.

On hearing the Defendants Council on reading the Report, his Defendants
Receipts for 4300 l. given on executing the Bonds in December. 1675. to the
Creditors, The Court declared the Account ought to be opened, and the
Plaintiffs not to be charged with more than appeared by the Books to be
advanced, nor with more than Lawful Interest. And Decreed.

That the Repo^t be confirmed, and the Plaintiff paying the Assignees 700 l.
before the last day of Easter Term next, the Assignees to deliver up the
Releases to be Cancelled, and all Bonds, Counterbonds and Notes before entered
into by the Plaintiffs to Hinton, or to any other person for him, and
acknowledge satisfaction on any Judgment or Judgments had by Hinton, or any his
Creditors against the Plaintiffs. And a perpetual Injunction awarded for stay
of all proceedings at Law against Butcher, for any the matters in question, or
demand in these Causes. And the Parties to give Mutual Releases to each other.

THE INDEX.
A.
WHAT Absenting brings a Man within the Statutes, and what not. Of absenting a
man's self on a Decree to pay Money page 24, 25, 26. Vide Departure. On Accounts
between Merchants, and one becomes Bankrupt, the other shall pay what appears
to be due to the Bankrupt upon the Foot of the Account, and no more, p. 177. Of
the Commissioners accounting with the Bankrupt, p. 180 Lands extended upon
pretense of being the King's Accountant, to be sold by the Commissioners, p.
124. Covenant to give Account to the Creditors, and Bond, and Debt brought, and
Pleadings, p. 163, 164 Vide Pleadings. What Acts make one a Bankrupt, p. 21
Actions. Of Actions brought by Commissioners, p. 139 Of Actions brought by the
Bankrupt himself. p. 144 Of Actions brought by the Assignee, and what Actions,
p. 142, 143, 144 Stat. 1. Jac. gives an Action to the Assignee in his own name,
but he must declare specially, p. 146 Where the Action brought by the Assignee
to be laid, p. 168 Vide Assignee and Assignment. Where feigned Actions make one
a Bankrupt, p. 27 Action on the Case by Assignee upon Indeb. Assump. p. 143
Action on the Case against the Jailer for suffering one Committed by the
Commissioners, to Escape, p. 77 Vide Escape. Of Adventurers in Company. Vide
Company. Admittance into Copyhold-Land sold by Commissioners. Vide Copyhold. If
the Bankrupt purchases Copyhold, and refuses to be admitted, Commissioners
may sell, and the Vendee shall pay the admittance, p. 113 Advowsons sold by
Commissioners, p. 134 The Form of the Affidavit to be made upon suing out the
Commission, p. 1 Agreement with the Bankrupt to take 10 s. in the pound, and
refused. A Bill brought to perform it. Decreed, and other Proceedings, p. 184
Aliens shall be Creditors relievable, and shall be Bankrupt, p. 12, 43 Who is
an Alien, per Stat. 13 Eliz. p. 40 Amerciaments sold by Commissioners p. 135,
140. What sort of Arrest or detention make one a Bankrupt, p. 27, 28, 30
Assignment. Monys levied in the Sheriffs hand on Execution, is not Assignable
by the Commissioners, p. 119, 120 Assignees upon distribution may sue
severally, p. 171 The Assignment is traversable, p. 162 The place of the
Assignment ought to be alleged in the Declaration, p. 145 What Remedy the
Assignee shall have for the recovery of the Debts of the Bankrupt, p. 125, 126,
132 Assignment of a Bond in Trust, p. 126 Of Assignment of the Bankrups Debts,
p. 128 Vide Distribution. Obligation. Tho an Executor releaseth, yet the Debt
Assignable, p. 131 Damages recovered may be Assigned, p. 131 What Goods or
other Estate of the Bankrupt may be Assigned by the Commissioners, as Debt in
Trust, Goods in Ireland, Judgments, Leases, etc. p. 133, 134 Vide under their
proper Titles. Obligee before the Bankrupcy of the Obligor Assigns the Bond,
this is liable to the after Bankrupcy of the Obligor, p. 130 Commissioners may
Assign Corn to one, and Money to another, p. 136 What is now the practice as to
the Commissioners making the Assignment, ibid. Assignment a Bar against the
Parties, though it appear not it was proportionable, ibid. What Assignment shall
be good by the Commissioners, and what not, ibid. One of the Creditors an
Assignee, accepted a part of his Debt in Audita Querela, he need not show what
were the Debts of the Creditors, p. 137 Assignment of a Debt inter alia is
good, because other Debts shall be intended, ibid. If in the Assignment there
be more assigned to the Plaintiff than his proper Debt, the assignment is not
good: If it be inter alia it is good, ibid. If the Assignment be a different
sum from what the Verdict finds, yet in an Action the Case the Plaintiff shall
recover, p. 139 Assignee shall have the same remedy as the Bankrupt himself
might have had, p. 142, 143 Trover lies of a Conversion between the Bankrupcy
and the Assignment, p. 143 The nature of the Assignment, and what privity is
transferred by it; privity of Estate, or privity of Contract, p. 144 Debts
certain are Assignable, ibid. Vide Bargain and Sale. The form of an Indenture
of Assignment, p. 225, 233 Debts of the Bankrupt not to be attached by foreign
Attachment, p. 91, 104 The reason of the Clause about foreign Attachments, in
Stat. 21 Jac. p. 124 Foreign Attachers to come in as Creditors, p. 45
B.
WHat Trades or Occupations make a Man liable to Bankrupcy, p. 10, 104 As to
Buying and Selling, p. 13 Particular Employments p. 13, 18 Vide under each
proper Title. Of ones becoming twice a Bankrupt, p. 38 When Bankrupcy shall be
said to Commence, p. 39, 41. Whether Commissioners may let a Bankrupt go at
Large (after Warrant of Commitment) to treat about his Debts, p. 68 When there
are several Acts of Bankrupcy, from what Act a Man shall be accounted a
Bankrupt; and where it shall not relate; p. 110 To the first Act: How, and when
one is a Bankrupt by relation, p. 42 If a Bankrupt dies, the Commissioners may
proceed, p. 182 If one be a Bankrupt before the date of the Commission, the
time in the Petition is not material, p. 5 Bargain and Sale by Commissioners.
Of the Bankrupts real Estate, and how to be made p. 85, 86 Of his Copyhold
Estate, p. 86 Of Lands Intailed, p. 91 Of Lands in Reversion after Estate Tail,
etc. p. 101 Of Offices, ibid. Of Lands devised, ibid. Bargain and Sale of
Lands, of which the Bankrupt is jointly seized. p. 103 Bargain and Sale of the
Estate which the Bankrupt purchases, or after descends to him, p. 87 Vide
Estate. Bargain and Sale, and the Bargainor becomes a Bankrupt before
Inrollment, the Land may not be sold, p. 98 Difference between a Bargain and
Sale, and a Feoffment as to a Man's becoming a Bankrupt before the Estate
executed, p. 98 Vide Conveyances. Settlements. Lands sold by Commissioners with
Encumbrances, p. 183 In what Cases the Sale of the Commissioners shall be
defeated, and in what not, p. 94 Baron and Feme. Two Women Jointenants of a
Term of Years, one takes Husband who becomes Bankrupt; Commissioners may
dispose of a moiety, p. 104 Chattels real are given to the Husband, if he
survive; if Husband dies before the Wise, she shall have them, ibid. A Bankrupt
has Land jure Uxoris, it may be sold during the Coverture; ibid. If she be a
Feme Sole Merchant, the whole shall be sold, ibid. The Dower of a Bankrupts
Wife shall never be sold, ibid. The Bail pays the Money, he may come in as a
Creditor, p. 44, 45 Plaintiff Bankrupt bring Indebit' Assumpsit, Defendant is
discharged on reasonable Bail, because the Debts are assigned, and Assignee
ought to bring the Action, p. 144, 145 Common or Hired Bail makes one a
Bankrupt, and how, p. 31, 32 Bond, to be entered into, to the Lord Chancellor,
before suing out Commission, and the form of it, p. 6 Vide Pluis Tit.
Obligations. Brewer, a Trade within the Statutes, p. 14
C.
CLothier, a Trade within the Statute, p. 13 Carpenter, a Trade within the
Statute, p. 14. Colemerchants, their custom to Repair upon the Credit of the
Bottom p. 17 Chancery, in what cases it relieves after a Judgment at Law, and
for Freehold, p. 191, 192 Commission. Commissioners. Commissioners, how many,
p. 5 One Credito may sue out a Commission, ibid. The form of a Commission, p. 7
Death of the Commissioners, p. 9 Charge of the Cmmission, who to pay it, ibid.
What time limited for taking out the Commission, p. 48 Notice of the
Commission, p. 48 Commissioners accounting with the Bankrupt. Vide Account. If
all the Commissioners die, who shall account for the Bankrupts Estate, p. 181
Commissioners Power in breaking up Houses, p. 65 Commissioners Power in
reference to the Bankrupt himself, p. 61 And about his Estate. Vide Estate.
Commissioners Authority, and how to be relieved against them for misdemeanor,
p. 182 As in judging a person a Bankrupt, when he is not so; or in not paving a
Ratable part, p. 181, 182 Pleadings to Actions brought against Commissioners,
p. 165, 166 Commissioners Power concerning the Bankrupts Body, p. 66 What
Remedy the Bankrupt has for the Misdemeanor of the Commissioners, p. 181
Conveyance. What Conveyance of the Lands and Goods of a Bankrupt is good, and
what not, p. 123 Where the Purchaser of a Bankrupts Lands is safe, or not, p.
108, 109, 110 Of Conveyances made bona fide, before he comes to be a Bankrupt,
p. 88 What is a valuable Consideration, p. 106, 107 Consideration of
Settlements, p. 107 What shall be said a voluntary Conveyance, p. 108 Vide
Settlements. Purchases. Of Bills of Conformity, p. 192 What Common shall not be
sold by Commissioners, p. 135 Concealing the Bankrupts Estate and Goods, and
Penalty, p. 62, 81 Of Estates on Condition, whith are made to the Bankrupt, how
to be disposed of, how the Condition to be performed, and by whom, p. 102, 103
Vide Mortgages. Contract to Victual a Fleet, no Trade within the Statutes, p.
17 Owing Money, and not compounding for the same, p. 29 Company Adventurers in
the East India or Guinea Trade, or the Royal Fishing, no Trade within the
Statutes, p. 19, 20 Contingent Estates, Vide Estates. Contribution. Must be
toward the Charge before relief, p. 48 The form of an Authority to receive
Contribution Money, p. 49 Copyhold. Copyhold Lands to be sold, and how p. 111
Fines how, and to whom to be paid, ibid. Of admittances to Purchasers, ibid.
Title to Copyhold Lands cannot be made by the Commissioners, without Surrender
or Admittance, p. 112 Copyhold Estate is vested in the Purchaser before
admittance, and to what purposes, and to what not, p. 112, 113 Copyholders
Wife barred of her Widows Estates, and how, p. 113 Bargain and Sale of the
Bankrupts Copyhold Estate by the Commissioners, and how, p. 86 Counterbond,
Vide Surety. Creditors. Who are Creditors within the Statute, and who not, p.
42, 43, 44, 45. One Creditor not to be preferred before another, p. 46 How the
King (a Creditor) to be preferred before others, and how not, ibid. When
Creditors may come in, and what they must do to be relieved, p. 47 Remedies for
the Creditors for the remainder of their Debts, p. 178 Creditors that have
notice of the Commission sued out against a Man, who has made agreement with
his Creditors, and breaks it, not relievable in Equity to have the Agreement
performed, nor to a Dividend after the Assignment of the Estate, p. 48
Creditors, when to be excluded from coming in, p. 171 Covenant to give account
to other Creditors; and Bond to perform; and Declarations and Pleadings, p. 163
D.
DAmages recovered shall be sold by the Commissioners. p. 131 Damages assigned
upon erroneous Judgment, and the Judgment reversed, Assignee shall make
restitution, p. 141 If Recoveror of Damages shall come in as Creditor, p. 44
Declaration. The form of a Declaration by Assignees of the Commissioners of
Bankrupcy upon Emisset, p. 147 The like upon Obligation, p. 156 The place of
the Assignment ought to be laid in the Declaration, p. 145 Plaintiff in his
Declaration need not mention the several Creditors, but only to set out his own
Debt, ibid. The Plaintiff in his Declaration need not express upon what Statute
the Action is brought, p. 145 Of the Commissioners declaring one to be a
Bankrupt, p. 53, 54 One has received part of the Debt by Assignment, how he
shall sue and declare for the residue, p. 179 Debt. Disposition of Debts due to
the Bankrupt, and how, p. 90 The Bankrupts Debts transferred in other Men's
Names, Vide Trust. Assignment of the Bankrupts Debts, and what shall be good,
and what not, p. 128. Payment of Debts, Vide Payment. Distribution, Vide
Assignment. How to be made by Commissioners, Vide Assignment. Debt on Bond may
be divided to every Creditor a portion, p. 130 No Creditors to be admitted
after distribution, p. 48, 171 Form of Notice to Creditors of making a
Dividend, p. 172 A President of Deed of Distribution from the Commissioners to
the Creditors, p. 240 Of the Style of Depositions, p. 53 Where Depositions may
be read as Evidence, Vide Evidence. What Departing of the Realm makes Bankrupt,
and what not, p. 23 What is such a Departure from a Man's House as makes him a
Bankrupt, p. 24 Of ones Denying himself to be at home, p. 24, 25 Bargain and
Sale of Lands Devised, may be sold by the Commissioners, and the Bankrupt shall
not wave the Devise, p. 101 Two Jointenants are Disseised, one becomes a
Bankrupt, Q. if it can be sold, p. 103, 104 Disseisee Copyholder, becomes a
Bankrupt, Commissioners may sell the Copyhold, p. 113 Drover is a Trade within
the Statute, p. 15 Dower of a Bankrupts Wife shall never be sold. Aliter, If
she marry one that is a Bankrupt. p. 104
E.
EState. Disposal of the Bankrupts real and personal Estate by the
Commissioners, and how to be sold, p. 84, to 90 Contingent Estates, what, and
how disposed of, p. 96, 97, 107. What Goods and Chattels may be sold, and what
not, p. 115, 119 Vide Assignment. Sale. Bankrupt commits Felony, the Lands
shall be sold, p. 98 Escape makes a Bankrupt, p. 31, 42 Examination of the
Bankrupt, his Wife, of Witnesses and Concealers, Debtors, and the Penalty for
obstinate refusal, and how made, p. 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 76 Joint Commitment
where two refuse to be examined, ill. Execution. He that has the Defendants
Body in Execution, not relievable as a Creditor. Aliter, on a Statute Merchant,
p. 44 How, and where the Goods of a Bankrupt liable to Execution, shall be sold
by Commissioners, and how* and where not, p. 118 Goods of a Bankrupt extended
before he became a Bankrupt, and delivered by the Liberate after he became
Bankrupt, cannot be sold, p. 119 From what time the Goods are liable to
Execution, p. 121 After Judgment, and before Execution, one becomes a Bankrupt,
and the Creditors assign this, and after the Judgment is reversed, Q. who shall
make restitution, p. 122 What shall be accounted the Executing of an Extent, p.
123 Lands extended under Color of being the Kings Accountant, when, and how to
be sold, p. 116, 124 Depositions taken before the Commissioners, where they
shall be good Evidences, and where not, p. 168 Defendant not accepted to be a
Witness, because he was a Creditor, p. 169 Vide Witness, Executor of the
Bankrupt shall have an Action against the Commissioners to account, p. 181
F.
AMeer Farmer not within the Statute, p. 15 A Feme Covert Merchant, Vide Feme,
Baron and Feme. What fraudulent dealing, as to Goods, makes one a Bankrupt, p.
33 What fraud, as to Lands, makes one a Bankrupt, p. 34 What Sales are
fraudulent within the Statute, ibid. Voluntary Settlements, what shall be
accounted fraudulent, or not, p. 36, 37, 38 Circumstances of fraud, p. 37 The
Bankrupts fraudulent Conveyance of his Goods and Lands, and the Penalty, p. 69,
70 What shall be accounted a fraudulent settlement, to be avoided by Sale of
the Commissioners, p. 105, 107, 108, 109 Vide Conveyance. Consideration. Vide
Trust. Wife joins with her Husband in selling part of her former Jointure, and
a new Settlement is made of other Lands, in which she is Tenant for Life,
remainder to the first Son: This is not fraudulent, p. 107 Disposition of the
Freehold Estate of the Bankrupt, and how, p. 84, 85, 86, 87, 95 Forfeitures on
the Statutes of Bankrupcy, how to be disposed of, p. 81 How to be recovered, p.
82 Forfeiture of a Bond, Vide Obligation.
G.
GRrazier is a Trade within the Sta-Statute, p. 14 Goods of the Bankrupt sold
by Commissioners, Vide Estate. Sale. Of the Goods of a Bankrupt taken in
Execution, Vide Execution.
H.
HUsbandman, qua such, is not a Profession within the Statute, unless he be a
Drover, p. 15 What is such keeping the House, as makes a Man a Bankrupt, p. 25
Harriots, Reliefs sold by Commissioners, p. 135
I.
INdictment upon the Statute for the Bankrupts fraudulent Conveyance of Land or
Goods, p. 69, 70 Inrollment of a Deed, how it shall relate, p. 98 Of
Interrogatories, p. 83 Inholder, qua such, is not within the Statutes, p. 14
Inhibition to the Debtors of the Bankrupt not to pay Money, p. 54 Imprisonment,
Vide Prison. Bargain and Sale of Lands whereof the Bankrupt is jointly seized,
a moiety may be sold; and if one die, no survivorship shall take place, p. 103.
105 Two Women Jointenants of a Lease for years, and one takes Husband, who
becomes a Bankrupt, Commissioners may dispose an Interest in a moiety, p. 104
Of Bankrupts in relation to joint Stocks and Partnership, separate Creditors,
p. 174, 175, 176 Vide Stock. One has a joint Stock in the hands of another,
though he has left off his Trade, yet he may be a Bankrupt, p. 173 The
Consideration of the Wives joining with her Husband in selling her former
Jointure, a good Consideration, p. 106, 107 Ironmokger is a Trade within the
Statute, p. 13 Commissioners may assign a Judgment, p. 134 Judgmentees must
take their proportion, p. 171 Plaintiff is a Bankrupt since the Judgment, and
Judgment is affirmed before the Commission sued out; Execution not to be stopped,
but the Bankrupcy to be tried by a special Sci. Fac. p. 122
K.
WHether the Kings Title be prefered before a Subjects, p. 139, 140 Kings right
not given away by Act of Parliament, but werein he is mentioned, p 140
L.
Laborers are not within the Statutes of Bankrupts, p. 1 O^ Leases being sold
by the Commissioners, p. 134 Lease, with a Proviso, not to alien, the
Commissioners may sell, ibid. Lease demised to A. if he live so long, remainder
to B. the Commissioners shall not sell this possibility, p. 134 Wager of Law
may be made by the Defendant in Action brought by Assignee, p. 143 Letter of
License makes no Bankrupt, p. 33 Legatee is relievable as a Creditor, Statute
of Limitations pleaded, and how, p. 162, 163
M.
COle Merchants, Vide C. Merchant imports Goods in his own name, he must issue
out the proceed so imported, to make him a Bankrupt, p. 17 Maxims of Bankrupcy,
p. 169 Monstre les faits, p. 146 Mortgagee need not come in as Creditor, p. 43
Disposition of Mortgaged Estates by the Commissioners, and how, p. 102, 103 Who
is to tender the Money upon a Condition, p. 103 Disposition of Goods Mortgaged
or Pawned, p. 117
N.
NOtice. Payment by a Debtor of a Bankrupt, before notice of the Bankrupcy, and
before Commission sued out, is a Discharge against the Commissioners, or their
Assignee* p. 133, 165 Payment to a Bankrupt after notice, is void. Aliter, If
there be no notice, or the Party be compelled to pay it before the Commission
sued out, p. 133 The Form of Notice to Creditors of making a Dividend, p. 172
O.
THE Form of the Oath administered to Witnesses, p. 52 The Oath for proof of
Debts, p. 55 Obligation. Of Bonds taken in Trust for the Bankrupt, p. 126 Bond
assigned by the Obligee before his Bankrupcy, this is liable to the
After-Bankrupcy of the Obligee, being only suable in his Name, p. 126 Bond in
Trust assigned, and good, p. 131 Obligation assigned before day of payment by
the Commissioners, though the Obligation becomes forfeited afterward, the
Bankrupt shall never take advantage by this, and this Assignment saves the
forfeiture, p. 130 The Bankrupt and his Debtor are bound to L. in Trust for the
Bankrupt; the Executor of L. releaseth, yet this Debt is assignable, p. 131
Debt or Obligation assigned by the Commissioners, Plaintiff need not show the
Obligation, p. 146 Counterbond, Vide Surety. What Offices are within the
Statute, and may be sold by the Commissioners, and what not, p. 100, 101
Outlawry makes a Bankrupt, p. 27, 109, p. 104 Outlawry in Ireland, ibid.
Outlawry reversed for want of Proclamations, all done by the Commissioners is
void, p. 28 If the Jury find a Bankrupt Outlawed, how they must find it, ibid.
Whether the King, or the Creditors shall have the Goods of a person Outlawed as
a Bankrupt, p. 140 Of Commissioners accounting for the overplus of the Estate,
p. 180
P.
PArtners, Vide Joint Stock. Assignee of one Partner shall have an Action of
Trover against the other, p. 173, 144 If one Partner become a Bankrupt, how is
the other chargable, and how far, p. 173 Two Partners, and one is a Bankrupt
and dies, no Survivor, p. 173 How, and wherein Bankrupcy affects Partners, p.
16 Perjury by the Bankrupt: Witnesses, Concealers, etc. how punishable, p. 78,
79 Disposition of Goods Pawned, by the Commissioners, p. 126 Petition to the
Lord Chancellor to grant a Commission, p. 20 Petition to the Kings Courts to
compound, maks a Bankrupt, p. 32 Prison. Imprisonment, Vide Goal. What
Imprisonment, and how long lying, and for how much, makes a Man a Bankrupt, p.
29, 30, 31 The Form of the Proclamation, commanding the Bankrupt to render
himself, p. 62 How Proclamation to be made, Pleadings. That the Obligation was
made to the Plaintiff* to the use of him and other Creditors of O. and that one
of the others released it: Its ill plea, p. 125 That such a day the Plaintiff
became a Bankrupt, it is an ill plea, p. 161, 164 That the Defendant paid the
Money to the Assignees of the Commission of Bank^urcy, p. 162 Double Pleading,
or not, ibid. Statute of Limitations pleaded in bar, and how, ibid. In Action
against the Commissioners, the Plea is, not Guilty; but to the breaking of the
House, it must be special, and why, p. 168 Recovery in Tresspass, no bar to an
Action on the Case for impairing ones Credit, brought against Commissioners for
breaking open an House, p. 167 Bankrupcy traversable as well as the Assignment,
p. 162 Plea to an Indeb. Assumpt. that it was assigned by the Commissioners of
Bankrupcy, p. 206 The same Plea to a Bond for performance of Covenants, p. 210
Whether possibilities may be sold by the Creditors, and what, p* 97 Of Proof of
Debts* p. 55 Payment of Debts before Notice, Vide Notice. Or Commission sued
out, p. 161, 165 Purchases, Vide Conveyances. Settlement. Purchasers, for good
and valuable Consideration, not to be impeached, unless the Statute be sued out
in five years time, p. 41
R.
REfusal of the Wife to be examined, and the Penalty, p. 67, 68 Refusal by
Witnesses, Concealers, etc. to answer or discover, and the Penalties, p. 75,
76, 77 Bankrupt cannot Release or discharge a Debt due to him, p. 91 Decree for
Money against a Man's own Release, p. 179 Disposition and Sale of the Bankrupts
Rents, p. 127 Disposal of the Bankrupts Reversions or Remainders, p. 91, 92, 96
Where a Release shall be good, and where not, p. 131, 91 Bankrupt is a Recusant
convict, p. 140
S.
SAle, Vide Bargain and Sale. Sale by a Bankrupt after a Commission awarded, is
void, though the Commissioners were never seized of them, p. 118 Sale of Goods by
a Deed not Indented, and before View, is Good, ibid. though the Bankrupt sells
the Goods in Market-overt, yet the Sale is not good, and may be avoided, ibid.
Where the Commissioners have power of the Money only on sale of Goods, p. 130
Settlement, Vide Conveyances. Frauds. Trusts. Of Settlements made before he
becomes a Bankrupt. p. 87 What shall be good, and what not, ibid. Voluntary
Settlements, p. 97 Fraudulent Settlements, Vide Fraud. Lands settled in other
Men's Names, Vide Trust. Of taking Sanctuary, p. 26 Salesman within the
Statutes, p. 13 A Trading Smith within the Statutes. A Working Smith not. Scire
Facias pro Creditoribu sur Statut' de Bankrupts sur Judgmet' recuper' per le
Bankrupt versus Executrix. Vendee of the Commissioners shall have a Scire
Facias to revive a former Execution against Terretenants and Jurors upon
Extent, p. 140, 141 Judgment against a person who is after a Bankrupt, the
Judgment being before the day of the Commission sued out; the Money shall not be
stopped in Court, on motion that he is a Bankrupt; but by a special Scire Facias
it may be tried whether he be a Bankrupt or not, p. 122 Statutes of Bankrupcy
to be construed favorably for Creditors, p. 39 Statutes of Bankrupcy are
general Statutes, and therefore notice must be taken of them, p. 146 Conisee of
a Statute, or Recognisance, relievable as a Creditor, p. 43 Statute extended
upon the Bankrupts Lands before Liberate filed: Ordered to take as other
Creditors, p. 45 Vigore Statuti predict' in a Declaration is good in general,
p. 145 Stocks in Companies, Vide Companies. Stocks-Joint, Vide Joint-Stocks.
Partners. Stwards of Inns of Courts, no Trade within the Statutes. Of a
Merchant or Tradesman turning Soldier, p. 26 Surety may com in as Creditor, p.
44 Two Jointenants, one becomes a Bankrupt and dies, Survivorship shall not
take place, p. 103 If there be surplusage, the Party has remedy in Chancery,
p. 137
T.
Tailor, a Trade not within the Statute, p. 14 Tail, Sale by Commissioners of
Entailed Lands, p. 96 Trade. Leaving off a Trade, and Trading again,
discontinuing of Trade, p. 15 Selling the surplus of a Commodity, is no Trading
within the Statute, p. 18 A Gentleman Trader may be a Bankrupt, p. 19 Trover
and Conversion, where it lies, p. 143, 144 Traverse. The Bankrupcy is
traversable as well as the Assignment, p. 162 The reason of the Traversing that
he is a Bankrupt, p. 181 Trust. Of Lands settled in other Men's Names in Trust
for the Bankrupt, Vide Fraud. Personal Estate in other Men's Names in Trust for
the Bankrupt, shall be sold, p. 99 A Merchant not in Debt, purchases ^or for
another, or gives Land to another, and there be no fraud in it to deceive
Creditors, is good, ibid. Bankrupts Debts transferred in other Men's Names,
Commissioners may dispose of them, and how, p. 115 Decree, That a Trustee shall
receive his own Money, and part with the Estate, d. 190 Goods transferred, and
yet Ownership kept on Foot, may be sold, p. 125 Bonds taken in Trust of a
Bankrupt, p. 125, 126 Trustee of a Bankrupt, after he becomes a Bankrupt, not
relievable as a Creditor, p. 45 Time is not material in the Petition, if he
were a Bankrupt before the suing out the Commission, p. 5
V.
VIntner is a Trade within the Statute, p. 14 In a Trial of Assignee by
Commissioners, the Venire may be in Middlesex, or where the Cause of Action
arises, p. 168 In consideration of Love to his Son, a Man Bargains, Sels,
Grants and confirms Lands to him and his Heirs, which was enrolled; the Land
shall not pass unless the Money had been paid, or the use executed, p. 107
W.
DEfendant on nil Debet pleaded; wageth his Law; how, and where good, p. 164,
165 Vide Law. Det on Contract assigned over, Defendant may wage his Law, p. 146
Warning to be left at the Bankrupts House, p. 63 Form of the Warrant from the
Commissioners for the Witnesses. p. 55 A Warrant to commit one to the Goal who
refuses to be sworn, or to answer Interrogaties, p. 58 Warrant to apprehend
the Bankrupt, p. 63 Warrant to the Warden of the Fleet to receive a Bankrupt,
committed by the Commissioners, p. 68 Wife. Refusal of the Wife to be examined,
and the penalty, p. 66, 67, 68 Vide Baron and Feme. Providing for the Wife, is
within the Stat. 1 Jac. p. 106 Copyholders Wife, how barred of her Widows
Estate, p. 113 Witness, Vide Evidence. Witnesses charges, how to be born, p. 76
A Merchant sells Lands bona fide, to J. S. and after becomes a Bankrupt, J. S.
may choose to show his Writings. p. 111 What is said an Original Writ within the
Statute, p. 31 Original Writ, and notice, make one a Bankrupt, if he compound
not in six Months, p. 31 Scandalous Words in disparagement of a Tradesman, p.
195
FINIS.

