CHRIST lifted up, OR, The heads of the chief Controverted Points, Preached By
Mr. John Goodwin, Pastor of Colman-street London.

Which has bin the pretended grounds of the opposition that he has had, by
some other Ministers,

Printed from a Coppie written with his own hand, for the use of some who live
under his own Charge.

And now Published by a Friend of his, for the general view of all men.

1 Cor. 4. 5. Judge nothing before the time.

Printed in the year, 1641.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Good READER,
I Thought it not amiss to give a short account, wherefore I present to the
world this extract. I have met with two sorts of men that have bin contrary in
opinions concerning these points Controverted: yet in this they both agree, to
Calumniate the Author: But they are upon trial continually found (as I
conceive) such as in true account neither know him, nor yet what has bin
affirmed or denied in the points Controverted; the one sort of Men (and the
most learned of the two in some kind of learning) peremptorily affirm, that in
some (or all) of these points there is at the least Error; others say Heresy:
nay that which is yet worse, no less then Blasphemy: but how they do to make
this appear I will not determine, but leave to those that know how to judge.
The other sort of men on the contrary, they say and affirm with no less
confidence, that in deed and in truth, there is no such difference between M r.
Goodwin, and other men in the points Controverted, but say, that he might have
delivered his mind in the language of other Ministers, and so have prevented
all differences: They affirm that he has said nothing but what has bin
generally said by all others before him for substance, only he has taken to
himself some new way of expression, out of an affectation (as they conceive)
of singularity, or vain glory. Now that the first sort of these may appear to
have laid their foundation no otherwhere but in the Sands; and the latter to
have no foundation at all; I have presented these heads to the view of
Considering men, which may be as so many rules to try and prove them by, or
lights to judge and discern which is in the right, whether either or neither,
which is the thing I aim at: God-willing in time the world may enjoy the sum
of the several discourses at large in their several Tracts, and in the mean
time by this taste I hope wise men will be so wise, as not to be found Judges of
the things they know not: which is the desire

Of thy well-wishing Friend.

CHRIST lifted up.
1. CHRIST rejects no man that comes unto him by Faith, for want of
preceding Legal Preparations, by way of terror or humiliation for sin, Joh.
6. 37. Revel. 22. 17, etc. Neither is there any absolute necessity of such
preparation, in respect of God, in that work of his whereby he infuseth Faith,
or enableth a man to come unto Christ: but he who justifies the ungodly, is
able to come upon a man in the midst of the greatest and deepest
unpreparednesse, and to bring him to Christ immediately. Neither has he any
where in Scripture, confined or limited the execution of this his power, so as
to engage or bind himself, never to make Believers, but of the lump or mass
prepared by the Law. Neither has he imposed any Commandment upon unbeleevers,
to prepare, dispose, or qualify themselves for the gift or receiving of Christ
by Faith, by procuring their hearts to be smitten or wounded by the Law.
Neither does any such smiting or wounding by the Law, give any man any more
right or title of believing in Christ, then others have, who have not bin so
smitten. But the grace of the Gospel is every ways absolutely, and entirely
free and open, to whosoever is willing to receive it, Rev. 22. 17. Joh. 3. 16.
yea and every man is bound to believe, in what estate or condition soever the
Gospel finds him: and not to reject the Grace of God therein, or put off the
work of believing, upon any pretense or conceit of unworthiness, through want
of Legal humiliation. Neither is there any humiliation for sin, truly
acceptable unto God, or necessarily accompanied with salvation, but that which
is wrought in a man, upon, or after his believing, Heb. 11. 6. Ioh. 15. 5.
which is the fittest time for such humiliation, (Zach. 12. 10.) how soever the
Commandment of being humbled for sin, lies upon unregenerate men also at all
times, though not in relation to their future believing.

2. Faith in Christ justifies the Believer, neither as it is an habit, neither
as an act, neither as it is the work of Man, neither as it is the work or
gift of God; nor in regard of any intrinsecall virtue, native property,
quality or dignity whatsoever, whether absolute or relative, but by virtue of
that will, good pleasure, ordination, or Covenant of God with his Creature,
whereby he has settled this great Prerogative upon Faith, rather then upon any
other Grace, or act whatsoever, Joh. 6. 40. Joh. 1. 12. Joh. 3. 16. Ephesians. 2. 8,
etc. And is truly said to justify instrumentally in this sense, as it is means
chosen and sanctified by God, to bring men into communion, part and fellowship
of that Justification and Redemption, which Christ has purchased: But to say,
that Faith justifies, in relation to its object Christ, or (which is the same)
because it lays hold on Christ, is to ascribe a meritorious efficiency to it
in the work of justification, and to seat the justifying nature or power of it,
in a property which is most natural, intrinsecall, and essential to it: yea
and besides, makes the love of Christ, and every other Grace that has relation
to Christ as its object, to be justifying as well as it.

3. There is no Moral, Legal, or positive righteousness, consisting either
in habits, or acts, (or both) conformable to the Moral Law, that is formally
imputed from Christ, or derived upon a Believer, in his justification. But that
righteousness or justification, which Christ has purchased by his active and
passive obedience together, for those that believe in him, consists wholly in
forgiveness of sins, Romans 4. v. 5, 6, 7, 8. Act. 13. 38, 39, etc. which is
therefore called an imputed righteousness, or a righteousness without works,
Romans 4. 6, etc. because it is freely given, conferred, or cast upon a believer,
by God. And because Faith is anointed or set apart by God to this office or
service of bringing in the Believer into communion and fellowship of this
imputed righteousness or justification purchased by Christ, is therefore it
self said to be imputed for, or unto righteousness, Genesis 15. 6. Romans 4. 5,
etc. that is, to be all that God now requires of any man, for, or toward his
justification, or the forgiveness of his sins. Neither is the observation of
the Moral Law, either by a man's self, or by surety, any part of any man's
justification: which is complete and entire, in the nature and substance of it,
without works, i. e. the merit of works, Romans 4. 6. though the purchase and
procurement of it, on Christ's part, was by merit of works.

4. That Faith which precisely justifies a sinner in the sight of God, is not
the believing any thing more, or any thing besides, what God himself has
plainly revealed in his Gospel. Therefore truly and soundly to believe the
Gospel, as it comes from God, or as it is delivered by the Holy Ghost in the
Scripture, is that Faith which justifies. The sum or substance whereof, is
usually comprised in these or the like Propositions, That Jesus Christ is that
Son of God, that whosoever believes on him, shall be saved, etc. Which
Evangelical Oracles, whosoever rightly understands, and in a cordial,
firm, and sincere manner, and with his whole heart believes, is justified
before God, Joh. 20. 31. Act. 8 37. 1 John 5. 1. 5, etc. and has undoubted
grounds to believe his particular or personal salvation, in as full and
satisfying a manner, as he believes the Gospel it self. Neither is it
possible that any man, who thus believes the Gospel, and withal knows and
considers what he believes therein, but that he should make particular
application of Christ to himself, and believe his own salvation, because all
fears, doubts, and questions whatsoever may be conceived or moved in the
soul, touching his salvation, are fully answered and taken away by such a
Faith; As he that knows and considers what a Rock is, as touching the strength,
firmness, and stability of it, unpossible it is, that he should refuse to
stand upon it for fear of sinking, because all grounds and reasons of this
fear, are fully taken away by such a knowledge and consideration.

FINIS.

