A full SURVEY OF SION and BABYLON, And A clear Vindication of the
Parish-Churches and Parochial-Ministers of England, from the uncharitable
Censure, the infamous Title, and the injurious Nickname of Babylonish. Or, A
Scripture Disproof, and Syllogistical Conviction of M. Charles Nichols, of
Kent, his Erroneous Assertions, Justifying his Separated Congregation for the
true House of God; and branding all the Parochial Churches, and the Parish
Officiating Ministers in England, with the infamous Title of Babylonish.

Delivered in three Sabbath-dayes Sermons, in the Parish Church of Deal, in
Kent, after a Public Dispute in the same Church with the said Mr. Charles
Nichols, upon the 20. day of October 1653.

By Thomas Gage, Preacher of the Word, to the Church within the Bounds and
Limits of Deal, in Kent.

2 Timothy 3. verse. 9. They shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be
manifest to all men.

Genesis 49. verse 6. O my Soul, Come not thou unto their secret; unto their
Assembly mine honor be not thou united.

Ex Augustino Con. Epist. Pelag. Lib. 1. Cap. 1. Cum non desinant fremere ad
Dominici gregis caulas, atque ad diripundas tanto pretio redemptas oves, aditum
undique rimari commune nobis est, and pestilentibus and insidiantibus eorum
scriptis medentia and munientia scripta praetendere; quibus rabies, qua furunt,
aut etiam ipsa sanetur, aut a loedendis aliis repellatur.

London, Printed by W. Bentley, and are to be sold by Ioshuah Kirton, at the
Kings Arms in St. Paul's Church yard. 1654.

To the Worshipful, his ever Honored Friend, Captain JOHN LIMBERY, Esquire,
Justice of the Peace for Middlesex, and of the Admiralty for Oyer and Terminer.
SIR,
OF all things, which the Lord has made in this great World, Man is the most
noble; for whose sake other Creatures were created; to whose feet the things
below are subjected. Of all the Essentials, which Man (the little World) does
consist of, the Soul is the most excellent; It is infused by God, which notes
out the Dignity of it; It has command of the body, which notes out the
Authority of it; It is a work (as one calls it) both great, Divine, and
admirable. Of all the powers in the Soul, none is comparable to the Reason. Of
all the Branches in the Reasonable part, none is equal to the Mind, none
excels the understanding. Of all the virtues in the Mind, Wisdom gives the
greatest light, Wisdom swayeth with chiefest might. Oh the breadth, that Wisdom
spanneth! Oh the length, that Wisdom reaches! Oh the height, that Wisdom
climbeth? Oh the depth, that Wisdom gageth, when once it comes into a Soul,
cleared by Gods Spirit, in some good measure, from those duskish Clouds of
Ignorance and Error, with which before it was obscured. Without this, how can
men discern of things that differ? how can they see what is good and what is
evil, and so exercise the power of their reason in ensuing the one, in
eschewing the other? When dangers are imminent and coming against us, Wisdom
foreseeth them, forecasteth against them; When troubles are incumbent and lying
upon us, it does either remove them, or preserve us in them. In a word, what
Walls are to Cities, what skins are to beasts, scales to fishes, feathers to
birds, and shells to some creeping and baser Creatures, the same is wisdom to (
that naked born Creature) Man, even a Covering a defense. Yea, Wisdom (says
the Preacher) strengthens the wise, more than ten mighty men, which are in
the City. And they are truly endowed with wisdom, who by the light of it do
distinguish Gospel Truths from errors, and keep their Souls pure and undefiled
from the infection of false and time-poysoning Doctrines. Wisdom truly is in
them, who by the light and guidance of it have found out and continue in the
true Church of Christ, the true Zion of God, where salvation is truly placed,
where pardon of sin is only obtained, where Soul-feastings and Divine
teachings are truly enjoyed, where are protections on every dwelling place,
where are true Ministers clothed with salvation, where the Saints do shout
aloud for joy, where all afflictions are sanctified, where all good news are to
be heard, and where God has commanded the blessing and life for evermore.

And such a gift of wisdom (Worthy Sir) have I admired in you; by which light
in your far and foreign travails you have always discerned good from evil,
Truth from Error, Religion from Superstition, Zion from Rome and Babylon. It
is true in you, that wisdom has preserved you from many snares to folly. If
Riches be snares; the Riches of the West-India's, even those Treasures amongst
the Spaniards, never ensnared your conscience; If honor entice; who of our
English Nation was ever more honored by Spaniards in the West-India's than
your self? as the ^ime of your abode in Hispaniola, and at the Court of Santo
Domingo does sufficiently witness. If favor of Great men and Princes does
allure, and often obscure the light of true wisdom; who ever of our English
Nation enjoyed such a favor from that Great Don of Spain, the Duke of Medina
Sidonia, as your self? as also from the Duke of Nacara, the Duke of Maqueda;
the King of Spains Chief favorite, that great Conde Dugue, Earl of Olivares;
and the Count of Castilia, then President of the India's, being trusted by the
first to go and view the Silver and Golden Treasures of America (a favor
denied unto others) and fully empowered by him to make choice of what Ports you
pleased, and there to lade your Ships with what Commodities might seem most
advantageous unto your self. If pleasures and vanities do tickle; where do they
abound more than in the India's, and in that place especially, where with so
much honor from the best and Noblest in Santo Domingo you did sometime abide?
Yet in the midst of all these snares, with wisdoms light you eyed Zion still,
you kept your self free from errors, you were never defiled with Babylons
superstitions; Yea, when troubles and evils were incumbent, and lying upon you,
even the loss of ship and of Riches at your return into England, wisdom
preserved you in the midst of evils, and as a true Member of Zion you found
your losses and afflictions sanctified unto you. Zion and Babylon, Truth and
Error, are the subject of these my weak endeavors, which must be known by the
light of wisdom. With which light, as you have hitherto discerned good from
evil, so I desire you may with the same take notice of Zion, and of Zions true
Ambassadors, pointed out unto you in this my Treatise, and eschew those
Errors of Babylon and Antichristian fallacies, which, as Rocks and Sands under
the waters, are here discovered to be amongst us under a pretense of Christian
and Gospel Truths.

I must confess that when I called to mind that Proverb, (...), know thy self,
I was not without some ^nwillingness drawn to a public Dispute, and afterward
to preach in public upon this subject, not being ignorant either of mine own
weakness, or of the weightiness of so great a Task; and with more unwillingness
was I overcome to commit it to the Press, from whence to be scanned by the
judgments of all, (for Comes calami calumnia) and I am sure the^e will be many
Censurers of this my work; that of the Apostle may be applied, Vnus sic, alter
autem sic, one judgeing after this manner, another after that, one speaking
well, another ill. But as a Commanding Authority of the Spirit within me for a
just defense of the Parochial Churches and Ministers of England, both cried
down with scandal by an opposing Adversary, was the cause of the former, so
overruling importunity of some friends well-wishers to Zion has effected the
latter; and now like an Infant new born, my Book and Dispute is come naked into
the World, subject unto the nippings and bitings of the times. It was the
saying of the Spouse in the Canticles, We have a little sister, and she has no
breasts; And I may say the like of this; I have a little Bird and she wants
wings; yet fly she must into the open air, and shift for her self. But, Alas!
what can she do, before her wings be grown, or her weak feathers come to
ripeness? It is impossible that she should escape, and not be torn in pieces by
the sharp eyed vultures (the time-consuming Critics) of our time, except some
Eagle shall in pity to so poor a wanderer, shadow her with the wings of
protection. Your ever known disposition (Worthy Sir) in giving encouragement to
the Ministers of Christ, in doing Justice and Right to such as suffer
wrongfully, has imboldned this little Bird to shroud herself under the roof of
your Protection and favor, and my self to Dedicate this small fruit of my
Studies unto you; whom (with a most thankful heart) I must ever acknowledge my
chief incourager in my work, since, after my Conversion from Babylon to Zion, I
have been a poor and unworthy labourer in the Vineyard of Christ. And if at
this time I may obtain your Love in accepting this small token of my
thankfulness for those many and undeserved favors conferred by you upon me, I
shall receive a most comfortable incitement to go on forwards in my Studies,
and be for ever bound to pray for a blessed increase of all Graces spiritual
and temporal, both for this life and the life to come, unto your self, with
your most virtuous and truly Godly and Religious consort, unto all yours both
at home and abroad, and their succeeding posterity for ever; And so I commend
you to God, and to the word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to
give you an inheritance amongst all them that are sanctified. And the Lord of
Peace himself, give you peace always by all means. So prays he who is

Sir, Your constant Orator before the Throne of Grace, and faithful servant
in the Lord Jesus Christ. Thomas Gage.

To my beloved Parishioners, and approved Friends, the Inhabitants of upper and
lower Deal, in Kent, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
My dearly beloved in the Lord,
ARistotle, in penning his moral instructions of Philosophy, thought all his
endeavors well bestowed, if he might profit (as he says) any one thereby,
much more if Towns and Cities. How happy then may I think my labors employed,
if by these small pains I may rightly instruct you all, not in moral virtues,
but in Divine and Gospel-verities; not in precepts of manners only, but in
Mysteries of true Religion; On which, I will not say the Civil Nurture, or gay
Deportment of the outward Man, but the life of your Souls, and hope of all
eternity depends. With which if you covet to enrich your Souls, two things I
request at your hands; The one is, not to frame an overweening conceit, or bear
too partial affection to such as are of contrary judgment unto me; the other,
to peruse this Treatise with an indifferent and single eye, and with a greedy
zeal of embracing truth, from whose mouth soever. I know the subtilty of Satan
and snare of Schismatics has ever been, as the Apostle says, By good words,
and fair speeches to deceive the hearts of the simple. By feigned words to make
merchandise of you. Their chiefest project, and principal study is, with
meretricious and painted Eloquence to entertain their followers; and whilst
they fill their ears with delight, to instill into their Souls most poisoned
Doctrine. But the great Orator Demosthenes can tell you, that the riches of
Greece consist not in words; And the Apostle pronounces, Not in lo^tiness and
sublimity of speech; not in the perswasible words of humane wisdom, are the
Mysteries of Christ; but in the power of God, and Doctrine of the spirit. Be
not therefore, be not (I beseech you) inveagled with the smooth tongue, or
filed speech and style of our new Novations, but consider the matter, weigh the
Reasons, examine the proofs they all allege, and you shall find such silly
Arguments, such slender stuff, as Augustine espied in the eloquent and lofty
discourses of Faustus Manichaeus, and the rest of his crew; when not regarding
(as he says) what gallant dish, or vessel of speech, but what food of
knowledge he propounded unto him; not hearkening to the sound of words, but to
the pith of matter. Albeit they bragged much, and promised nothing more than
Truth, Truth, yet he is discovered, as he witnesses, No truth amongst them;
nothing but lies, vanities, and vile superstitions. The like shall you discern
in some new upstart Professors of these times. For although they vaunt of the
word of God, vaunt of Scriptures, and Scriptures only seem to follow; yet
because, as Ambrose teaches, By the word of the Law they impugn the Law,
framing their private sense, and construction to countenance the perversity of
their minds, by the Authority of the Law, It is more than evident they follow
not the Oracles of God, but rather the fancies of their own brain, the
suggestion of Satan. For, by perverse interpretation ( as Hierome testifies)
of the Gospel of Christ, is made the Gospel of man, or, which is worse, the
Gospel of the Devil. And Martial the Poet speaks to this purpose. Quem
recitas meus est, Offidentine, libellus;
Sed male cum recitas, incipit esse tuus.
The Book thou do recite, Offidentine, is mine
Reciting it amiss, it grows to be thine.


Secondly, they boast of their pure preaching of the word; whereas in this my
small Treatise, and disproof of Mr. Nichols his errors, you shall discover,
that some of them have no Authority to preach, no laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, no Mission, no Vocation; much less to Administer the Sacraments,
which requires the power of the Keys. They are Thieves (says Christ) who
enter not by the door, but climb another way to steal, kill, and destroy your
Souls. They are the false Prophets, who cry, Thus says our Lord, when our Lord
said it not, nor sent them, nor gave them Commission to speak. And the purity,
of which they crack, is (as Hieremy declares) A lying Vision, and Divination,
and deceit, and beguiling of their heart, which they prophecy unto you.
Thirdly, They glory to have purged and Reformed the Church of many errors; but
you shall see their Reformations have been but abuses and innovations; they
have broken the peace, departed from the unity of the flock of Christ. You
shall find their ancient Faith a new Belief, as Gregory Nazianzen said of the
Arrians; their refined Doctrines mere Novelties, new broached Errors; Which I
pray God, both you, and all others may have grace to discern in time, least you
open your eyes, and begin to lament these things too late, as Constantius the
Emperor did, of whom the same Gregory Nazianzen writes; That lying on his
Deathbed, he repented him of three things; First, that he had commanded his
Son in Law to be slain; the other, that he had nominated Julian the Apostate to
succeed him in his Imperial Throne; the third, that he had given ear to new
devised Doctrines. And with these words, he yielded up the Ghost.

The place ye live in (my beloved) has formerly been the subject of Learned
Authors pens, among whom Mr. William Lambard of Lincolns Inn Gentleman, in his
book entitled A Perambulation of Kent, and published in the year 1576. was not
unmindefull of you. Mr. Camden out of Learned Nennius, forgot you not, when he
derived the very name of the place wherein ye live, not so much from the Saxon
Pylle, which is a plain floor, or Level, as from the British Dole, signifying a
lower place, or Dale. Julius Caesar's arriving at this place (being repulsed
from Dover) with his Trenches upon your Coast (called Romes work) and his own
report of you in his Commentaries has made you known abroad. Henry the Eight
having shaken off the intolerable yoke of the Popish Tyranny, and espying that
the Emperor was offended for the Divorce of Queen Catharine his wife, and that
the French King had coupled the Dolphine his Son to the Popes Niece, and
married his Daughter to the King of Scots, so that he might more justly suspect
them all, than safely trust any one; and fearing least the ease and advantage
of descending on Land at this part, should give occasion and hardiness to his
enemies to invade him, amongst other Castles, Plat-forms, and Block-houses,
which he builded in all needful places; more especially gave strength to your
place, and fame abroad by erecting near together the three Fortifications of
Sandown, Deal, and Walmer, which might at all times keep and beat the landing
place. Yea, this special matter of Deal, John Leland in Cygnea Cantione
comprehends featly in these two verses. Iactat Dela novas Celebris Arces
Notus Caesareis locus Trophaeis.
Renowned Deal does vaunt it self
With Turrets newly raised
For Monuments of Caesar's host
A place in Story praised.


And soon after the building those Castles, which make you strong and renowned
in the Authors verses, your place was further honored with the landing of the
Lady Anne of Cleve. Oh since then Antiquity has blazed abroad your Name,
Writers of Fame have made your place the subject of their Pens, Princes have
strengthened you with Turrets and Castles; Live you so in this your place of
Fame, that for your godly lives you may be yet more famous; for your strength
and greater renown: To your three Fortifications and Castles add yet one Tower
more, and let it be that which wise Solomon suggesteth unto you, The name of
the Lord is a strong Tower; the righteous run unto it, and are safe. Oh, Let
this Name be sanctified, be glorious among you; Let this Name be called upon by
you with reverence, whilst too much irreverently it is spoken against, and
reviled by others. Let this Name be your strength against all temptations, Let
it be your strong Tower to run unto in all your fears and assaults of Satan;
and when Satan's Emissaries and Agents study the ruin of your Souls, be ye
strong and safe under this holy and reverend Name, Psalm. 111. verse. 9. And
since Errors are rise, and begin to weaken our strength, and bonds of Love and
Unity, and some begin to creep in amongst you, to draw you from the public
Ordinances, let me persuade you unto these things here following.

First then, be real Christians; and think it not sufficient that you are
Christians in name, and that you have a form of Godliness, but let Christ's Name
be great and glorious among you, be ye Christians indeed, and walk in the power
of Godliness, be ye true Nathanaels, Israelites indeed; then, and never till
then you are worth beholding and admiring, Behold, an Israelite indeed, Ioh.
1.47.

Secondly, Get your judgments rightly informed; the understanding is the eye
and guide of the Soul; if that be corrupt, and do mislead you, you must needs
fall into the ditch; If a disease get the brain, it is hardly cured; And hence
the Learned observe, that Corruption in Judgment is worse than Corruption in
Manners, especially, when the mind has been enlightened with the Truth.
Leprosy in the head was of all other Leprosies the most dangerous. He was
unclean that had the Leprosy in his hands, or feet; but if it were in his
head, then he was utterly unclean.

Thirdly, Get meek and humble Spirits; To these the Lord has promised that he
will teach them his way, when spiritual pride is punished with a fall. Hunt not
after novelties, neither be wise above that which is written.

Fourthly, Let your principal care be about practical fundamental points, such
as Faith, Obedience, a good Conscience, how you may mortify your special
Corruptions, and crucify the flesh with its affections and lusts. Live soberly
in the use of the creature, religiously toward God, righteously and justly in
all your dealings with the Sons of men.

And finally I beseech you by all the tender mercies of Jesus Christ, that you
all mind the same things; Let there be no divisions, no Sects, no Schisms
found amongst you; but labor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace. Paul's farewell to his Corinthians shall be mine to you, Finally,
brethren, farewell; be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in
peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you. Which peace that ye may
enjoy, it has been the endeavor for above these five years, and shall be the
constant prayer of him, who is the weakest of all his brethren, and the meanest
in his Fathers house, even

Your Faithful and ever ready servant in the Lords great work of the Ministry
of the Gospel. THOMAS GAGE.
From my Study in upper Deal, March the 10. 1653.
To the Christian Reader, and all those, that truly mind and seek the true
Zion of God, Grace, Peace and Zions blessings be ever multiplied.
Christian Reader,
I Am not ignorant what uncharitable censures will be east upon these innocent
Meditations and the Penner of them by some turbulent spirits. When first I took
upon me to encounter with Mr. Nichols in a public Dispute, The poison of Asps
was presently perceived under the lips of some, whose mouths were full of
cursing and bitterness. Others, since the Dispute, have spoken high, and
threatened much, in case I should commit to the Press and to the view of the
World what on the day of the Dispute was by Arguments strongly controverted,
and weakly answered. And these later wait still to catch me in some false
relation, either of Arguments, or Answers. Of both these I may say truly with
the Poet. Et si non aliqua noouisses, mortuus esses.


Iannes and Iambres are so full of the spirit of contradiction, that they
cannot contain themselves. Ambitious Diotrephes (that looks for the
pre-eminence) will be prating, and darting out malicious words against those
Disciples, that Preach, Teach, and stand up for the Truth. That Nickname,
which the Philosophers gave to Paul at Athens, must be his Livery, that
teaches, defends and upholdeth any thing dissonant from these men's fancies,
(...), what will this Babbler say? And among many such Bablers (as they count
us) I doubt not but they will place me, and even slight what here I propound to
thy view (Courteous Reader) from the Scriptures themselves, and from such
Syllogistical Demonstrations, as in the School of Logic I have been taught to
frame. All which their slightings and unjust Censures I weigh them not, nor any
more than I deserve them. Male de me loquutus es, quiabene loqui nescis. Some
speak evil of their Neighbors, because they know not how to speak well of any
man; Hoc facis, non quod mercar, sed quod soleas; This they do, not because
their Neighbor deserves it at their hands, but because it is their custom so
to do. I have much observed in my far travails abroad, and of late at home,
that commonly Authors of new devices are self-pleasing, and like only their
own inventions. I perceive it is in vain to persuade such. Easier it is to draw
a profane person from Hell-gates, than to remove an Opinion from a wilful
mind. Schism (as a Learned man very well observed) is the ship whereon go
aboard Malcontents, the winds, that set it foreward, are violent passions,
Will is the Rudder, Obstinacy the Anchor. Schismatics are headstrong, they
will not see evident conviction; Self-love makes them judge the best of
themselves, but their want of Charity very badly of others. They beguile
themselves with a show of piety, heat of affection, and with a strong
apprehension of things greatly amiss in others. These can they see with both
eyes, themselves with neither. No Church can pass them, wherein they cannot see
a Rock of offense, and a stone to stumble at. The common Road of the best
Reformed Churches is too foul for their sincerity. Our Arguments against them
are paper shot, as they hold; but their weakest Reasons against us (if
themselves may judge) are shot of Canon. They despise every man's endeavor
against them, and are in admiration with their own works. Let any man confer
with them, and they shall hear it; I my self have sufficient experience of it.
By this might I be moved to cease this labor; but I am not hopeless to hold
some men back, and to gain some also, though I cannot recover what is wholly
already lost. If I might speed in both, I would be glad; if but in one, I am
content; in both to loose my labor I cannot doubt. But from my Adversaries
mouths I have been warned by some other friends, to take heed of printing, and
that they doubt not but that with the help of one, or two of their Scribes (who
nimbly penned my Arguments and the Answers to them upon the day of Dispute
before many hundred more) they shall have occasion to accuse me of false-hood
in relating my Arguments and the Answers to them; a mere policy (as I conceive)
to stop my proceedings to the Press, which in truth must witness, what
Authority of Scripture has been produced (hitherto to little purpose, for
Conviction of a self-conceited people) and what slight Answers have been
returned, to keep self conceitedness yet still on foot. But this threat and
policy has no whit daunted me from appearing in public. True it is, I must
confess, I have observed, that it has always been the usual trade and
inveterate guile of Schismatics in former times to corrupt, falsify, and
deprave, not only the books and writings, but the words, sayings, and other
conferences, which they have held with the Professors of the true Reformed
Churches. Origin of old complained, how his books were thus abused by the
enemies of God, and sowers of Cockle, even in his own days. Augustine writes,
that the Donatists being convicted of falsehood in a conference he had with
them, and did after maliciously calumniate and traduce the sentence given
against them, as falsely pronounced. The Arrians and Pelagians were attainted of
the like Crime. Of this fraud and deceit were guilty also those Popish
Confederates, who being vanquished in the meeting at Ratisbone, divulged
notwithstanding many false reports of their Triumph and Victory against
Hunnius, Hailbronner, and the rest of their Reformed Society. Thus of late was
Mr. Heart guilty, who after his Conference with Doctor Reynolds, having
acknowledged and confessed to be true, what the said Dr. Reynolds was
committing to the Press concerning the said Conference, yet when it came to the
light, M. Heart falsely and maliciously forged diverse things to the credit of his
own, and disadvantage of Dr. Reynolds Cause, of which he never so much as
dreamed. In which kind, most notable and most fresh in memory is the pride and
arrogance of Mr. Fisher and M. Sweet, who impudently boasted of their supposed
conquest in a meeting which they had with Dr. Featly and Dr. White; from which
nevertheless they cowardly fled, wholly discomfited and blotted with the
ignominy of a desperate retreat. No less shameful is the vanity of Mr. Smith,
alias, Norrice, in bragging of the conference between him and Mr. Walker, which
himself caused to be printed, Anno Domini 1624. beyond the Seas, and (as he
says) permissu Superiorum, which he stuffeth with such a heap of false and
guilefull Relations, as he may seem (according to the Prophet) to have made
lying to be protected, and his Superiors to yield unto it. Of these and such
like Gregory truly averreth, that, by their labors and disquisitions, they
endeavor not so much to attain the truth, as to seem victorious; they more
eagerly thirst after the applause of men, than the glory of God; they seek such
things as appertain to themselves, not such as belong to Jesus Christ. Such
boastings and beggings of a victory against me having already been spread
abroad by a wilful and self-conceited people, and threats divulged of accusing
me of falsehood in my Relation of my Conference with Mr. Nichols; I have (Gentle
Reader) thought fit to give thee notice of the Subject of our Dispute, which
were these three Propositions sent unto me by Mr. Nichols, viz.

1. Parochial-Churches are Babylonish-Churches. 2. We (i.e. The Church I serve
in Christ) are the house of God. 3. Officiating Parish-Ministers are
Babylonish.
Against the two first I propounded those Arguments, which in my Sermon thou
may peruse; the answers were such as I do there also faithfully relate. True
it is, I confess I have added more, than was spoken upon the day of our
Dispute, yea, more Reasons and Arguments than that day were handled (the time
being short) for the better enlarging my judgment, and for the better
instructing my people in points of so high a nature. Of the Dispute I shall
give thee no further account, than what I give in my Sermon, which took up
three Sabbath-dayes work; and I have conceived it might seem too much pressing
the Press with the same Relation twice. What in my Sermons I relate concerning
the Arguments Objected, and the Answers of Mr. Nichols, I have endeavored to
relate with a clear Conscience, as to the full substance, judging my self not
bound to relate in particular every flying word in heat of Argument from him
and from my self (which would be hard to perform, or remember) and to this
purpose, that my Arguments may see the light, and the World may judge whither
the Answers be satisfactory, or not; so that, in case they shall appear too
slight and light, Mr. Nichols may reply again in public to all the particulars
objected in my Sermon against him. All which that I might perform more
faithfully, I have entreated the Censures of three, or four able Divines, who
were present at the Dispute; who having perused my writings, before I sent them
to the Press, have judged them to contain nothing false, as contrary to the
reality and truth of the Arguments and Answers upon the day of our public
meeting and Dispute.

I leave thee therefore (Gentle Reader) to peruse this my small labor; I
commend the Cause, as of great moment, to thy consideration; Weigh well the
matter, judge of our Reasons, Answers and the Replies without partiality. Let
thine upright heart affect, as thy right knowledge in every thing shall settle
thy judgment and convince thy conscience. I leave every one to their own
liking, approve, or disallow, do their own will (so will men in these days) I
am one in my self, to them indifferent. Let truth prevail, and God receive
glory, and his Zion prosper. Amen. Farewell.

From my study at upper Deal, in Kent, March 12. 1653.
Upon the occasion of this Work, and the Author, my Reverend Friend, Mr.
THOMAS GAGE.
THe World grown old and sick sleeps ill; her head
With dreams and fancies is disquieted,
Whom busy Satan restlesly does ply
With meats corrupt to f^ed her malady.
Her maker means her good, and still does raise
Physicians wife and learned in his ways
To cure her sad distemper; At whose Art
Hell frowns, and Lucifer, to take his part
Spawns forth a brood of Empericks, whose skill
Labor's to stop the Cure, and keep her ill;
To which intent they study to disgrace
Those Reverend Artists, and their work deface
With Obloquies; to whom, as may appear,
The Crazie World give's too attentive ear.
The great I^hovah heare's, and see's their drift,
And how they thrive, and seasonably does lift
His servants hearts, and Spirits up withal
To give the cunning Cheats a fatal fall
In their discovery. Here Is one ^a's cased
A subtle Fox, and, that we may distaste
His gilded Cates (which outwardly seem fair
But opened offer naught but wind and air)
With Arguments of solid worth and weight
Has Gagged the hidden depths of his deceit.
William Stanley.
ZECHARIAH. 2. Verse 7. Deliver thy self, O Zion, that dwell with the
Daughter of Babylon.


PRovidence (dearly Beloved in the Lord) has fitly pointed out unto me this
portion of Holy Writ in a seasonable time; you having seen and beheld this week
past in this very place a great difference, and struggling of Judgments
concerning Babylon and Zion. Behold therefore two Nations, two manner of people
struggling in the bowels of this Text, Jacob and Esau, Zion, and Babylon; Yea,
further behold how this strife and struggling disquiets the bowels of this
Nation, which now lies groaning in its throws and pangs, in its agony and
bloody sweat, while two differing parties, pretending both to be the Zion of
God, cry to be delivered from both practices, and errors of wicked and cursed
Babylon. Oh that we might fall into a devout agony and penitent sweat! Oh if we
cannot sweat blood, that we might sweat tears! Oh that every pore of our body
might be a weeping eye, a crying, a praying mouth, to beg a safe delivery for
our laboring Mother, who travails in the anguish of her spirit! God formerly
comforted Rebekah in the like case to ours at present, when Genes. 25. verse.
23. The Lord said unto her, two manner of people shall be separated from thy
bowels. Oh that the like comfort may be afforded unto us from the God of all
comfort! Let it be our hearty and earnest prayer, that either Babylon may be
separated and expelled out of the bowels of Zion; or Zion delivered out of
Babylon. Oh let us blow off the ashes from our Zeal, let us inflame our hearts
with sad, but fervent devotion. Sure if (as Heraclitus dreamed) our Soul were
but an exhalation, the heat of our devotion would melt it into one indivisible
tear; Our Soul would be its own tear, and we might well weep out our eyes and
Souls together in these days of strife and struggling.

In the words you may observe Zions bondage, and Zions deliverance. She was yet
in the house of bondage, like Galba's wit, as ^uetonius well notes* Ingenium
Galbae male habitat; She had but a foul habitation, an ill fea^, and worse
Neighbors, Zion that dwell with the Daughter of Babylon; She sits down by
the Rivers of Babylon, by the waters of strife, by the Rivers of confusion, as
Bartholdus describes well Bab^lon, Civitas ista statum peccati significat, ex
qua est omnis confusio, enough to make her weep, as David says, Psalm. 13^.
verse. 1. By the Rivers of Babylon there we sat down, yea we wept. But secondly
we have here Gods Alarm to Zion for her deliverance; the Prophet cries out, Ho,
Ho, in the verse before my Text, Heus, H^us, Divinum (...), Hea^k, Hark, God
himself sounds an Alarm, So Ho O Zion, Awake, Awake, Rouse up thy self out of
thy secure pleasing dream; Quicken thy Spirits, Put on strength, O Zion, put
forth thy strength, use all possible means and diligence for thy deliverance,
Deliver thy self, O Zion.

The words of the Prophet present unto our serious consideration two things
very observeable.

First, That it is sometimes the hard Lot of Zion and the people of God, to
dwell with the Daughter of Babylon, and among such whose Practices and
Principles are Babylonish and Antichristian. This point is so clear by our own
experience, that I shall not need to explain, or confirm it. So I will let that
pass and hasten to the second.

2. Obs. Secondly, That Zion must take all fair opportunities, and use all
lawful means to deliver her self from Babylon, and from those practices and
errors, which are Babylonish, or any way Antichristian.

For the better opening the point, I shall speedily (having in other occasions
more largely cleared unto you the extents of Zion) now again walk the Rounds,
and survey the Bounds of Zion and Babylon. By Zion the Prophet means the people
of God, whose hearts were set on Zion (as Bernard observes, Anima est ubi amat,
non ubi animat) because God had of old set ^p his Ordinances there, and made
them a gracious promise, that they should return thither again, and enjoy him
once more in the beauty, the glory of holiness. There were two Mounts which
did belong unto Jerusalem, Mount Moriah and Mount Zion; Though the Temple was
built upon Mount Moriah, yet till that time the Ark of God was placed in Zion,
2 Samuel 6. verse. 12. compared with 1 King. 8. verse. 1. and there was said to
dwell; And therefore Zion was the Mount of Holiness, and as it were the Throne
of God here below; Thither did the people flock, Micah. 4. verse. 2. Come and
let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, for the Law shall go forth of Zion;
where you may plainly see that Zion is the Mountain of the Lord. But further we
must consider, that besides the Jewish Zion, there is a Christian Zion spoken
of in the Prophets. Yea, this very place of Micah now cited points at the
Christian Zion, a Church consisting of all Nations, Gentiles as well as Jews,
if you please to peruse and well consider the words, which are these.

In the last days it shall come to pass, that the Mountain of the house of the
Lord shall be established in the top of the Mountains, and it shall be exalted
above the Hills, and people shall flow unto it; and many Nations shall come and
say, Let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, verses 1.2. That this is me^nt
of the Christian Zion, the 12. verse of the third Chapter of this Prophet Micah
does sufficiently declare in these words, Therefore shall Zion for your sake be
plow^d as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the Mountains of the
house as the high places of the forest. Which being spoken of Zion in the
Letter, was to be fulfilled in the last days, Micah 4. verse. 1. And whereas in
the second verse he says: The Law shall go forth of Zion, he must be
understood of the Christian Zion (for to the Jews the Law came forth of Sinai)
when the Spirit was plentifully powered down upon some of all Nations at
Jerusalem, Act. 2. verse. 4.5. So Paul also writes unto the Hebrews, Chap. 12.
verse.18. You are not come unto the Mount that burned with fire, and verse 22.
But ye are come unto Mount Zion; which the Apostle expounds yet more fully,
Galat. Chap. 4. verse. 24. compared with the 26. and 31. verses. And these are
briefly the Bounds of Zion.

As for a shorter view of Babylon; Omitting to speak of Babylon in Egypt, my
Text points to Babylon in Assyri^. The Scripture mentions a third Babylon, 1
Pet. 5. verse. 13. The Church that is at Babylon, elected together with you,
saluteth you. And in the Revelations of John we read much of a Mystical
Babylon, a Whore of Babylon sitting in Scarlet, decked with purple, which
Hierom himself understands to be Rome in these words, Ora autem ut de
Babylone ad Hierosolyman regrediar. Cum in Babylone versarer, and purpuratae
meretricis essem Colonus, ac Iure Quiritium viverem, etc. Nay, we need not
travail so far as Rome to find out Babylon. Is there not an English Babylon
here at home? Are there not among us untruths taught, and practiced expressly
against the Rule of the Scriptures, against the word of Christ, against the
examples of the best Reformed Churches that ever were Reformed from Babylonish
and Antichristian Rites, Ceremonies, Principles, and Practices? But finally if
we will be impartial in the search of all the Bounds of Babylon, we shall
certainly find nearer yet within our selves somewhat of Babylon. Oh are there
not some malignant lusts, some Brats of Babylons in our bosoms, for the which
we are unhappy, because we have not taken them and dashed them against the
stones, Psalm. 137. verse. 9. Are there not within our hearts hid some Babylonish
garments, though they be the rotten rags of our own righteousness, Isai 64.
verse. 6. Are there not hid within us some Golden wedges, some Golden sins, some
dilecta delicta, some beloved ones, from the which we are loath to be
dissolved, that we may be with Christ? Thus you see the Bounds of Babylon, with
the Bounds of Zion.

Now what reasons might move the Jewish Zion to deliver herself from the
Assyrian Babylon; you shall find the same calling upon the Christian Zion to
deliver herself from all those ways, and practices, which may be found
Babylonish or Antichristian.

1. Reas. Should not Zion separate from Babylon having so many Calls of God to
that purpose; Were not the people sufficiently awakened by Ieremiah's Prophecy?
Were they not encouraged by C^rus his Proclamation? See both together in Ezra,
1 Chap. 1. verse. Now in the first year of Cyrus King of Persia (that the word
of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled) the Lord stirred up
the Spirit of Cyrus King of Persia, that he made Proclamation. Behold a call
from God, a call from the Prophet, and a call from the King; whereby doubtless
the Lord did also stir up the Spirit of his people to answer this Call, and
depart from Babylon, as you may see in those of the Captivity, who immediately
went up to Jerusalem under the conduct of their General Zerubbabel, Ezra 2.
Chap. 1. verse. 2. Had not they the like call by the Ministry of the Prophet
Haggai, and the Prophet Z^chariah, Ezra 5. Chap. verse. 1. Haggai 1. verse. 1.
and Zechar. 1. Chap. verse. 1. God gave them yet another Call in the seventh
year of the reign of Artaxerxes, and then many went up from Babylon upon the
motion of Ezra the Scribe, as you may read Ezra 7. Chap. verses 6, 7, 8. And
yet further in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, Nehemiah began to stir and
call those lingerers behind, Ne^em. 2. Chap. verse. 1. compared with verse. 5.
And so you see call upon call, Which has not been wanting to the Christian
Zion of God, especially in England, where since so many new opinions have been
broached amongst us with such difference and Antipathy of Judgments as is well
known unto you, the true Orthodox, faithful and zealous Ministers of the
Gospel have most earnestly, both from the Press and the Pulpit, called upon the
people to deliver themselves from Babylonish, Antichristian untruths and
practices, which have no warrant from any word of God.

2. Reas. But secondly Gods people have great reason to separate from Babylon,
if the dwelling in Babylon were well considered by them. Barthold^s (as I have
showed you before) calls it the State of sin, and confusion; and in the
language of Augustine it is termed the City of the Devil. And was it fit that
the people of God should lie loytering in the City of the Devil? Babylon was a
place of slavery, the sink of sin, the stall of beasts, the Throne of Idols,
the Temple of Devils, and Mother of confusion. No place more ^nfamous for their
pride and Tyranny, their cruelty and idolatry. Well might Gods people be weary
of such a loathsome prison, and noisome dungeon, which could not but be offensive
by its stench and darkness. And the like should move the Christian people of
God to forsake whatsoever may relish, or favor of Mystical and Antichristian
Babylon, which by John is called, The hold of every foul Spirit, and a Cage of
every unclean and hateful Bird, Revel. 18. verse. 2. Where all inventions of
wicked men swerving from the Rule and pure word of Christ, all Heresie^,
Schisms, errors, profaneness, uncleanness, Hypocrisy, and Superstition, as
into a filthy, loathsome, and stinking sink have emptied themselves for many
years.

3. Reas. But thirdly. If the place from whence Gods people should move and
separate, being so loathsome, should be sufficient motive unto them. Much more
the place to which they are called, should stir them up and quicken them with
speed to deliver themselves from Babylon. To Zion they must move, and therefore
they are called Zion, Deliver thy self O Zion. Every motion takes its
denomination from its terminus ad quem. And here even the Travailers
themselves, who were to move, take their Title from tha^ place unto which they
moved. Oh! why should not a people willingly forsake Babylon for Zion? The Lord
loves the gates of Zion, more than all the dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. 87. verse.
2. God chose that place for his Seat of special Residence; and by a special
Institution Recorded his Name, and set up his Ordinances there. Some parts of
public worship were so appropriated to that place, that they were to be
performed there, and no where else, Deuteronomy. 12.13, 14. Take heed to thy self thou
offer not thy burnt offerings in every place that thou see, but in the place
which the Lord shall choose in one of the Tribes; there thou shall offer thy
burnt offerings; and there thou shall do all that I command thee. God promised
a blessing to all them who came up to Zion to worship the Lord in the Beauty of
Holiness. At first there was a general promise given, Exodus 20. verse. 24. In
all places where I record my name, I will come unto thee and I will bless thee.
But when God had chosen Jerusalem for the Seat of Royalty, the place of
Justice, and Zion as the mountain of Holiness and place of public worship,
then all the Tribes were to go up to Jerusalem for justice, and to Zion to
sacrifice Psalm. 122. verse. 4, 5. Whither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the
Lord unto the Testimony of Israel, to g^ve thanks unto the name of the Lord;
for there are s^t thrones of judgment, the thrones of the house of David. The
poor people had long been deprived of the benefit of justice, and the liberty
of Religion; but now God had Promised by his Prophet Zechariah, that their
Commonwealth should be settled, their Church established, their City and Temple
both new builded, Zechariah 1. verse. 16, 17. Thus says the Lord, I am returned
to Jerusalem with mercies; my house shall be built in it, my Cities through
prosperity shall yet be spread abroad, and the Lord shall yet comfort Zion,
and shall yet choose Jerusalem. You see then the Prophet had good reason to
invite them to new Jerusalem here below, a kind of heaven upon earth, to Zion
the habitation of justice, and mount of Holiness, the praise of the Jews, the
glory of the Gentiles, the house of God, and Type of heaven. Oh* then what a
motive should this be also to Christian people to forsake all Babylonish
practices and Antichristian untruths for Christian Zion, for the true Church of
Christ, where are also those comforts Zechariah speaks of, The Lord shall yet
comfort Zion; whose foundations are strong and sure, and unmovable in the
greatest storms; for here is his election and Praescience, which will always
stand, The foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal; The Lord knows
them that are his; And let everyone that knows the name of Christ, depart
from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. verse. 19. And Jeremiah says, Chap. 31. verse. 3. I
have loved thee with an everlasting love; therefore with loving kindeness have
I drawn thee. Secondly here is this love of God actually adopting, Psalm, 87.
verse. 1, 2. Thirdly here is Jesus Christ, the offspring indeed as man, but the
root also of David, as he is God, as he is God-man, Revel. 22. verse. 16. He is
laid in his Church a sure foundation stone, Isai. 28. verse. 16. Behold I lay in
Zion for a foundation a stone, a sure foundation, a tried stone, a precious
corner stone. Fourthly here is Gods Covenant in Christ, which is as fast, and
as firm, as the well rooted mountains, Isai 54. verse. 10.11. The mountains
shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindeness shall not depart from
thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord of
hosts, that has mercy on thee. Oh thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and
not comforted! Behold I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy
foundations with Saphirs. Fifthly here is Gods presence of Grace, which gives
his Zion unmoveableness, when all the earth is moved, and the foundations are
destroyed, God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved, God shall help
her and that right early Psalm. 46. verse. 5. Sixthly here are the Apostles and
Prophets, I mean their Doctrine foundation-truths, Ye are fellow Citizens with
theSaints, and of the household of God; and are built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone,
Ephesians. 2. verse. 19, 20. Seventhly here are Christian Magistrates (if they
answer their office and calling) and faithful Zealous Ministers, and true
godly Christians, as strong pillars subservient in this work of support under
Christ, The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved, I bear up the
pillars of it, Psalm. 75. verse. 3. And Galat. 2. verse. 9. James, Cephas and
John, who seemed to be pillars, And, Prove, 10. verse. 25. The righteous is an
everlasting foundation. Eighthly, here Gods peoples hope and trust is sure, The
Lord has founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it, Isai. 14.
verse. 32. Ninthly, here is Surely Salvation placed for Gods people, I will
place Salvation in Zion for Israel my Glory, Isai. 46. verse. 13. Tenthly, here
God will be a sure, unfailing, and known Refuge, God is known to her Palaces
for a re^uge, Psalm. 48. verse. 3. Eleventhly, here the Lord is our safety, There
the Lord will be unto us a place of broad rivers and streams, Isai. 33. verse.
21. Twelfthly, here the Lord is to his people a strength of Walls and bulworks,
In that day shall this song be sung in the Land of Judah; We have a strong
City; Salvation will God appoint for Walls and Bulworks; Open ye the gates,
that the righteous Nation which keeps the truth may enter in. Thou will keep
him in a perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in
thee. Isai. 26. verse. 1, 2, 3. Thirtenthly, here are omnimode Salutes, all
manner of Salutations* O that the Salvation of Israel were come out of Zion,
Psalm. 14. verse. 7. Fourteenthly, here are incomparable favors, privileges,
comforts, blessings, the like no where else to be enjoyed. For first, here is
pardon of sin and iniquity, And the Inhabitant shall not say, I am sick; the
people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity, Isai. 33. verse.
24. Secondly, here is the blessed and holy spirit of God always guiding and
assisting, And the Rede^mer shall come to Zion and unto them that turn from
transgression in Jacob, says the Lord. As for me this is my Covenant with
them, says the Lord, My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have
put in thy mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy
seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed from henceforth and for ever,
Isai, 59. verse. 20, 21. Thirdly, here is true teaching, divine instructing,
Many people shall go and say, Come ye and let us go up to the mountain of the
Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and
we will walk in his paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the word
of the Lord from Jerusalem, Isai. 2. verse. 3. Fourthly, here only is a true,
holy teaching Ministry, I will cloth her Priests with salvation, and her
Saints shall shout aloud for joy Psalm. 132. verse. 16 Fifthly, here are true
Soul-feastings and Soul-banquetings, In this mountain shall the Lord of hosts
make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the Lees, of
fat things full of marrow, of wines on the Lees well refined. And he will
destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast over all people, and the
vail that is spread over all Nations, Isai. 25. verse. 6.7. Sixthly here are
protections on every dwelling place, mavelous preservations, the Bramble bush
on a light fire, yet not burnt up. The Lord will create upon every dwelling
place of mount Zion, and upon her Assemblies a Cloud and smoke by day, and the
shining of a flameing fire by night; for upon all the glory shall be a
defense, Isai. 4. verse. 5. Seventhly, here all afflictions are sanctified, in
so much as her exactors shall be righteousness, and her oppressors peace,
poison a Triacle, and if the enemy be established, it is but for correction.
Eighthly, here all good news are to be had; here is to be heard all good news
from heaven or earth, that may concern either this life, or the life to come.
Finally there God has commanded not only his blessing (as I said before) but
especially life for evermore, As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that
descended upon the mountains of Zion; for there the Lord commanded the
blessing, even life for evermore, Psalm. 133. verse. 3. Behold (beloved) the
place to which Gods people are called from Babylon. Oh what Prisoner in
Babylon, what Bond-slave to sin and Satan, what wretch lying in Antichristian
darkness would not willingly shake off his shackles, and with Peter Acts 12.
Chap. Come out of a Prisons darkness to enjoy such liberty, such light, such
comforts, such security, such blessings, such salvation, such Amnesty and
general pardon, such tidings and news from heaven, such protections, such sorts
of salvation, such presence of Grace, such Soul-feastings, Soul-banquetings, as
out of Scripture I have presented unto you from Zion? Who would be any longer a
loytering Jew in Babylon? Who would hanker after any Antichristian practices,
dote any longer upon any Anti-scripture untruths, serve man, serve times, serve
self ends to endanger his Soul, to be wedded to ignorance, to forfeit Zions
Jewels, riches, blessings, yea life for evermore?

4. Reas. But fourthly, The Prophet stirs up the people to deliver themselves
from Babylon upon this ground and reason. God had now removed all rubs, he had
opened the Kings heart, and the prison doors. If they would be active, it was
in their own power to deliver themselves; and therefore the Prophet calls upon
them to use their power, and to take that fair opportunity which was offered
for their deliverance, and their glory, Deliver thy self O Zion. As if he
should say, thy shackles are knocked off, the Ports are open, the Commission is
now sealed, Come out, be not cruel to thy self. What will thou be thine own
tormentour, thine own prisoner? Before the seventy years were expired, thou
wast detained in Babylon, thou wast a prisoner there, but now thy time is out,
and therefore if thou stayest longer yet, thou art not a prisoner, but a
dweller in Babylon, Deliver thy self, O Zio, that dwell in Babylon; In which
word the Prophet seems to put the Emphasis, and strength of his exhortation.
And so indeed all Christians may be said to dwell willingly in sin and
ignorance, when truth being cleared unto them, all scruples removed,
Adversaries objections answered, fallacious shadows under a pretense of
substantial truths discovered, yet, to please men, to maintain faction, to
uphold Schism, to carry on further their spite and malice against the
Ministry, they will live in errors, grope in darkness, follow blind leaders,
dwell in Antichristiau practices, and continue Members of such societies (under
a pretense of the house of God) whose foundation is not unmovable like Zions,
nor of materials taken out of the Scripture word, or example of Christ, or the
next builders the Apostles. And thus (beloved) having cleared my Doctrine, and
by four reasons showed unto you, why Zion must take all fair opportunities, and
use all lawful means to deliver her self from Babylon, and from those
practices and errors which are Babylonish, or any way Antichristian, I come to
use and Application, wherein I shall spend more time than in the explication,
and enlarge my poor and weak endeavors for your better instruction and
information concerning these two chief terms in my text Zion and Babylon.

1. Use. Is it so that Zion must separate and deliver her self from Babylon?
Then my first use shall be of search and inquiry into Zion and into Babylon.
For how can Gods people deliver themselves from Babylon, if they be ignorant of
the true Zion, and of the errors and Antichristian practices of Babylon? Oh
what a grief is it to think how in these times the true Zion is mistaken,
unknown, yea by seducing spirits even termed Babylon! Oh (beloved) if so many
blessings, comforts, Soul-feastings (as I have showed unto you) belong to Zion,
what enquiry, what search ought we all then to make to find out this true
Zion, that our Souls may not be deprived of the blessing and life for evermore,
which God has en^ailed unto his Zion? I beseech you, judge it not passion then
in me, if I shall yet pursue what the other day was by way of dispute but begun
in this place, and for want of time could not then be finished. My conscience
leads me to this work, the spirit commands me to clear this point unto you; and
though some Adversaries do threaten me with stones as the Jews did Christ, and
to heave me out of this place, to deprive me and mine of the livelihood I here
enjoy, because with Scripture and reasons I oppose their contrary judgments;
yet I must not be unfaithful to that trust and charge, which from my Master
Jesus Christ I have over your Souls. I may say with Paul, I have kept back
nothing that was profitable unto you, but have showed you, and have taught you
publicly, Acts 20. verse. 20. and verse. 27. I have not shunned to declare unto
you all the Counsel of God these five years together; and therefore, though
now so much threatened by some, I resolve to say with Paul in the worst trial
of my Adversaries spite and malice, None of these things move me, neither
count I my life dear unto my self, so that I might finish my work w^^h j^y, and
the Ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testifies Gospel
of the grace of God, Acts 20. verse. 24. But not for my trust over your Souls
only shall I make a large search into Zion and Babylon, but also for mine own
Souls sake, so dear unto me, that I must ingenuously confess before you, that
for the saving of it I have hitherto forsaken the pleasures of sin and Egypt,
which for twelve years I enjoyed in the parts of America, from whence the Lord
in mercy has brought me to his mavelous light, unto Mount Zion, and unto the
City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company
of angels to the general assembly and Church of the first born, Heb. 12. verse.
22, 23. For the which Zion I have forsaken all kindred after the flesh; and in
the which Zion I acknowledge to have enjoyed these fourteen years many sweet
comforts, many Soul-feasts and banquets. And now to hear from Mr. Charles
Nichols, that neither you nor I belong to this Zion, but rather unto Babylon,
has so much troubled me, that I could not in conscience shun a public dispute
with him about it, resolving with my self, that (after so many steps as may be
in nine thousand miles, which through Gods mercy I have travailed to find out
Zion in England) if he could show me by the word on step further out of
Babylon, cheerfully to go out of her, and according to my present observation
from Zechariahs Counsel, to loyter no longer about Babylon, but to take so fair
an opportunity to deliver my self and you also from whatsoever he might prove
to be Babylonish in our Church and worship. Let us therefore (beloved) with
care and diligence for our Souls good, search the Scripture, and in them search
out Zion and Babylon; and what the last Thursday want of time allowed us not;
let us again examine Mr. Charles Nichols his three Propositions, as stated by
him against us, against our Parochial Churches, and against ours and all
Parish officiating Ministers; affirming further his Congregation separated from
us and our Parochial meetings to be the true house of God; which in these
words he thus lays down.

1. Proposition. Parochial Churches are Babylonish. 2. Proposition. We ( i. e.
the Church I serve in Christ) are the house of God. 3. Parish officiating
Ministers are Babylonish.
I shall to these give my answer in order, as they lie, and faithfully lay down
my Arguments with his answers, as far as on the twentienth day of this month
we proceeded; and then go on to prove by reason and Scripture how falsely and
erreneously these Propositions are asserted by him; for that neither our
Parochial Churches are B^bylonish; neither his Congregation, or Church wherein
he serves, is Gods house; Nor the Parish Officiating Ministers justly to be
termed Babylonish.

My first Argument against his first Proposition was framed thus, a definitime
ad defi^itum from the parts defi^ing, or describing a thing, to the thing
defined, or described; which is a most sure and infallible kind of Argument to
convince and prove any thing that is doub^ed of, or denied.

As for example, A man is defined and described essentially by these parts, to
wit, that he is a living Creature, Risible and Rational; if then I prove these
parts to be in Peter, I shall evidently conclude Peter to be man; and if these
essential parts be not in him, I shall on the contrary conclude that he is no
man. You may then remember, that my first Syllogi^me was from the essential
parts constituting and describing a Parochial Babylonish, or Romish Church, in
the Major, or first Proposition; And in the Minor, or second Proposition,
showing that those parts were not to be found in our Parochial Churches, and
then concluding our Parochial Churches not to be Babylonish, thus:

1. Argument. A Parochial Babylonish Romish Church is a people living under
obedience to the Pope; gathered together under the Advocation, or Patronage of
some particular Popish Saint; for whose greater glory on his day yearly they
enjoy from Rome pardon of sins and Indulgences; Congregated under a Popish
Priest, whose Mass they hear, to whom au^icularly they confess, and from whose
h^nds they once a year at least receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
under transubstantiated Bread and Wine.

But our Parochial Churches are not a people living under obedience to the
Pope, nor gathered together under the Advocation, or Patronage of any
particular Popish Saint, nor for any such Saints greater glory on his day
enjoying from Rome pardon of sins and Indulgences; nor congregated under any
Popish Priests, whose Mass they hear, to whom Auricularly they confess, and
from whose hands they once a year at least receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper under transubstantiated Bread and Wine.

E^go, Our Parochial Churches are not Babylonish. This Argumen^ (Beloved) was
so convincing, that indeed it was never in order answered; but rather complaint
made by Mr. Nichols, that it was so long that he could nor well repeat it nor
remember it: for the helping of whose memory I propounded one by one the
contents of the Major; and desired him then like a Scholar to grant, deny, or
distinguish; which by no means I could get him to do. But at last as to the
Major he answered, that for his part he could not certainly tell, whether the
particulars in it were true, or no. To which I replied, that he could not
safely call us Babylonish, if he knew not what was practiced in Babylon; And
further that if as a Pasto^^ and Teacher he had taken upon him the charge of
Souls, he was bound to know so much of the Romish errors, as to preserve his
flock from such infections; and particularly I demanded of him, whether he knew
not that all the Popish party did live under obedience to the Pope? and that
their Churches were dedicated to Saints? What else mean those Titles from old
to our meeting places at C^^terburie, London, and elsewhere, as S. Georges
Church, S Clements Church, S. Brides Church, S. Andrews Church, St. Dunstans
Church, and the like? And thirdly I told him, he could not be so ignorant as
not to know that the people there were congregated under Mass-mongers and
Popish Priests, and that by them Mass was said before the people, and that they
did hear the peoples Confessions of their sins and did absolve them; And
lastly, that it was by all known, and therefore could not be unknown to him,
that Transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ
was one of the gross errors of Rome. And thus helping Mr. Nichols his memory
with a rehearsal of the particulars in my Argument, I brought him with much ado
to grant my Major, or first Proposition defining a Parochial Romish Church. But
when I drove on to the second Proposition, the Minor, his Conscience began to
be troubled for calling us Babylonish; and finding those parts describing a
Romish Babylonish Church not to agree truly with our Parochial Churches;
without any formal granting, denying, or distinguishing, he confessed he did
not intend to call us Babylonish in such a sense as my Major Proposition did
describe.

At this his Confession squeezed from him by the rack of my Syllogism, you may
remember (beloved) my expression to you (for indeed I desire in truth to lay
before you the substance of our dispute, till I come to add a further Comentary
unto it) I turning my face and body to you and to the rest of the people,
wished you not to be dejected in spirit; for now by M. Nichols his Confession,
it appears we are not so Babylonish as we though he judged us to be; and
bending my speech to him again, I told him it appeared then that he did falsely
term and denominate us Babylonish, which I proved thus:

2. Argument. Whatsoever is completely denominated such, is denominated from
the essential, differential, constitutive part and form of such.

But our Parochial Churches are not denominated from the essential,
differential, Constitutive part and form of a Babylonish, Romish, Parochial
Church.

Ergo. Our Parochial Churches are not by you completely denominated, termed,
and called Babylonish.

The Major being clear from the example of every man, who is completely man
from that form of R^si^ili^ie and Rationalitie, whereby he differs from other
living Creatures. The Minor again troubled him so, that neither here could I
get a Scholars answer, but an abrupt speech out of form, that in some things
we were Babylonish, though not Babylonians; to which difference of terms by
him, (^hus to evade my Argument) being invented but not explained, I replied
thirdly.

3. Argument. A Lion cannot completely be called a man, although he agree with
man in some Generical part of Animality, because he agrees not with man in his
essential, differential, Const^^utive part of Ri^ibilit^ and Rationality.

But our Parochial Chu^ches, if they do agree with Parochial Babylonish Romish
Churches in some General, or Generical parts, agree not with them in their
essential, differential, Constitutive part and form.

Ergo. Our Parochial Churches are no more completely to be called Babylonish,
than a L^on completely to be named a man.

This Lion (if you well remember beloved) pulled Mr. Nichols upon his back, and
so tore and tormented him, that he knew not well how to be rid of him; in so
much that I, perceiving he intended again to make long Orations his refuge
(wherewith indeed he much takes the people and Triumphs before them) cried out
for a formal answer, and to disprove (if he could) my first, or second
Proposition, that so the stream of my Syllogismes (as had been agreed on before
our dispute) might run forward. But when I saw no answer would be given in
form, I wished you and the rest of the people to take notice, that no
satisfaction was given to the strong Lions Argument. For indeed hitherto Mr.
Nichols never discovered himself for what reason, or upon what ground he so
publicly had asserted our Parochial Churches to be Baby^onish. And thus
finding that by Syllogism I had convinced him that we were not Babylonish
through, or by any essential part, or form constituting a Parochial Babylonish
Romish Church, and desirous to know wherein we were Babylonish; I asked him, if
he held us Babylonish, qua Parishes, as divided into Parishes? To which he
replied affirmatively, that as Parishes we were Babylonish. Against which reply
of his, I formed this following Syllogism.

4. Argument. If qua Parishes we are Babylonish, then the Constitution of
Parishes must needs be Babylon^sh.

But the Constitution of Parishes is not Babylonish.

Ergo. Qua Parishes we are not Babylonish.

Here like a Scholar (without Orations) he answered me in form, granting my
Major Proposition, and denied my Minor, which I immediately proved thus:

5. Argument. That which was not first constituted by Antichrist, is not to be
called Babylonish.

But Parishes, qua Parishes were not first constituted by Antichrist.

Ergo. The Constitution of Parishes, qua Parishes, is not Babylonish.

The Major being granted, and the Minor denied, I replied thus:

6. Argument. Whatsoever was constituted before Antichrist came to his S^a^,
could not be truly constituted by Antichrist.

But Parishes, qua Parishes, were constituted before Antichrist came to his
S^at.

Ergo. Parishes, qua Parishes, were not first constituted by Antichrist.

The Minor Proposition being to be proved; I produced here a Book (which indeed
I had brought with me to the same purpose) named Summa Con^iti^^um; and out of
it I proved my Minor, showing the Antiquity of Parishes from the second Roman
Council, held the nineteenth year of the Reign of Constantine the Great, the
first Christian Emperor immediately after his conversion to Christianity, in
the year of our Lord three hundred twenty four, as appears in the Sixth Canon
of that council, where the Christians in Rome were divided into seven Parishes,
and seven Pastors allowed unto them; which constitution was one thousand,
three hundred, twenty nine years ago, before ever Antichrist was in his seat,
whereby it appears that Parishes, qua Parishes, were not first constituted by
Antichrist. Nay (beloved) I might have showed unto Mr. Nichols a further fetched
Antiquity of Parishes (had not this been sufficient) even from the year of our
Lod one hundred and twenty in the time of Evaristus and the heathen Emperor
Trajan; yea others affirm their Antiquity from Cletus, near after the time of
the Apostles, as an ancient writer Onuphrius observes in these words (which I
shall English unto your capacity) Gletus test Bibliothecario ex Damaso,
Presbyteros Romae ad viginti quinque numerum auxit. Evaristus vero Apostolorum
instituto, ad sept^narium numerum in Ecclesia Romana Diaconos red^git, and
Titulos in urbe Presbyteris divisit, ut unusquisue suae Paroeciae terminus and
limitibus distingueretur. To the first of these proofs Mr. Nichols answered,
that though he did confess that Antichrist at that time was not known nor
discovered yet as sitting in his Seat, yet that Antichrist came in by degrees
working cunningly and subtly against Christ; and so might be working then for
ought he knew even in that Council three hundred and twenty four years after
Christ. The same he might have answered to the time of Cletus and Evaristus,
whom therefore I omitted to produce, yea, the like answer he might have given,
if such a division of Parishes had been made in the time of the Apostles by
reason of the increase of Christianity. But because every man's private
invention to evade the force of an Argument is no warrant to term an Action or
constitution (like this) Babylonish, and from the private shop of their own
fantasy to deliver to the people for Babylonish, that which in reality is not
such, I replied against him thus.

7. A^g. Order and convenience for the better doing a good work, which does not
cross, neither is against any word, command or example of Christ, is not
Babylonish, nor from Antichrist But this constitution of Parishes, so long
since, was but order and coveniency for the better doing a good work, which did
not cross, neither wa^ against word, command or example of Christ.

Ergo. This Act or constitution of Parishes so many years ago, was not
Babylonish, nor from Antichrist.

The Major being granted, I proved the Minor Propsition thus.

8. Arg. This constitution of Parishes so long since was but order and
convenience for the better feeding Souls with the word of God. But order and
convenience for the better feeding Souls with the word of God does not cross,
neither is against any word, command or example of Christ.

Ergo. This constitution of Parishes so long since, was but order and
convenience, for the better doing a good work, which did not cross, neither was
against any word, command or example of Christ. The Major or first Proposition
being denied, I replied thus.

9. Arg. This constitution of Parishes so long since was upon this ground, that
whereas one Pastor could not conveniently feed ten thousand or more Souls with
the word of God; three, four, five, or more Pastors should feed them.

But this order and and convenience was for the better feeding Souls with the
word of God.

Ergo. This constitution of Parishes, so long since was but order and
convenience for the better feeding Souls with the word of God.

I beseech you (beloved) take notice of the Succession of these several
Syllogismes; and as you tender your consciences, and desire truly to continue
in Zion, judge impartially whether these Arguments do not clearly free our
Parishes, qua Parishes, in the constitution of them from the beginning of
christianity, from any Babylonish corruption, by Mr. Nichols scandalously and
erroneously imputed to us.

Having thus with undeniable Arguments pursued him, driven him from hedge to
hedge, discovered his false refuges, and as yet not discovered in our
Parochial Churches any thing that might justly deserve that infamous Brand of
Babylonish, finding yet no satisfaction given to my Syllogismes, and
challenging the impartial judgment of the people, whether or no upon such
slight answers the ignominious title of Babylonish were to be fixed upon our
Churches. But at last out of School-form he breaks out into his usual
Orations, declaring his meaning thus, that we were Babylonish, qua mixed, as
consisting of all sorts, wicked and good together. And this was his last
refuge, and a pretty one indeed, for to unchurch a people, because some wicked
are among them. I must needs acknowledge that from Mr. Nichols his acute wit, I
expected some deeper and wittier reason to prove our Parochial Churches
Babylonish beyond a mixture of good and bad together. Alas! Is it such a
property to Babylon and Rome only to have mixed congregations, that
wheresoever such are, they must need be known by this name Babylonish, and no
other? If upon no other ground we are to be called Babylonish, but because we
have some wicked amongst us, he might as well have said, our Parochial Churches
are Danish Churches, Swedish Churches, Polandish Churches, Dutch, German
C^urches, Nichols-like Churches also, for doubtless in all these visible
Churches there are good and bad; nay he might as well upon that ground have
termed us Corinthian, Ephesian, Ga^^^^^n, Thessalonian Churches, as I shall
show hereafter. This is (as I said before) to name us by somewhat general to
many, as much as to call a Lion a Man, or a dog, or a horse, because of
animalitie in him, which is common to a man, a dog, and a horse. I expected to
hear that we are Babylonish from somewhat particular, proper, essential to
Rome or Baby^on alone; and not from a mixture of good and bad, which is common
to all v^sible Churches, as distinguished from Invisible, so common, ^s in a
dragner, to find good and bad ^^shes together, in a field to find good corn
and rares and weeds together, yea, so common, that to find the coutrary, we
must not go to Mr. Nichols his visible Church (if a Church) but rather we must
go out of the world, 1 Cor. 5. verse. 10. But before I rehearse unto you my
Arguments against this refuge, I pray take notice from hence, that if we are
Babylonish because mixed, good, wicked and bad together; it follows from this
Mr. Nichols his Assertion, that Babylon then and Rome is mixed of good, bad and
wicked together, and so he grants some good in Babylon as well as among us, or
else we cannot be like to them in our mixture, without they also be mixed. But
to this I shall speak hereafter. Thus then having taken away the covering from
the face of Mr. Nichols his intention and meaning, and fully discovered upon
what ground we are Babylonish, I told him, I would prove by Scripture that a
people under corruption may yet be called truly a people and Church of God;
and so the corruptions of the wicked amongst us to be no lawful Plea against
our Parochial Churches; which Mr. Nichols denying, I proceeded forward to a
Syllogism, thus:

10. Argument In the 1 Samuel 2. Chap. verse. 29. God calls Israel his people and
so his Church. But in the 12 verse they are not noted to live under
corruptions, and under corrupt Priests called Sons of Belial.

In the 32. of Exodus, verse 11. Moses calls the Israelites the people of God.
But in the 1 and 6 verses they are observed to be a people not separated from
the wickedness of the World, but at that time were in the height of corruption,
in ^he act of Idolatry.

In the 1 Samuel Chap. 12. verse. 22. Samuel calls the people Gods people, and so
a Church. But at the same time they were under corrup^ions, and had grievously
rebelled against the Lord their God.

Ergo. A people under corruption may yet be called truly a people and Church
of God.

I doubt not (beloved) but you well remember, and have taken notice of this
Argument; and I hope you have also l^id up in your memories the slight and
f^ivolous answer, no^ any way ^ati^factory to a troubled and doubting
Conscience in so weigh^y a controv^rsie* qu^stioning Gods true people and
Church. Mr. Nichols forsooth (as if he had to deal with Babes, or silly women
to be led captiv^) thought to stop our mouths here with any an^^er ^h^ugh but
an invention of his own brain; and not considering that he st^o^ in the
presence of a grave and learned Assembly; Yet (as I pe^c^^ved) troubled with
the Authority of Scripture, answered, acknowledging that at those times there
was much and gross corruption in the people; but yet, God having then but one
people, was loath to cast them off. A pretty evasion; as if God were bound to a
people never so corrupt; as if love to one people must make him wink at their
corruptions, and notwithstanding their gross corruptions, to own them and call
them his people. And why may not we plead as much love to us since Christ
exhibited? Why must we be cast off from being a people and Church of Christ,
because some corruptions and corrupt Members are amongst us? Is God an accepter
of persons, or of one people more than of another? Are these the privileges of
the Gospel? Are fire and sword, cutting and casting off for some men's
corruptions, and altogether unchurching a people, the happy times of the Gospel
of Christ? But before I could go f orward to second my Argument begun in the
Jews with an instance of the Church of Corinth, of the Churches of Asia, and
all the Chu^ches to whom Paul directed his Epistles; my learned Moderatour,
taking notice of Mr. Nichols his answer, and speaking a word to the purpose of
my Argument, upholding with me that a people under corruptions of some might
yet be called Gods Church and people, Mr. Nichols his spirit began to rise
against my Moderatour, telling him, he wondered that he would seem so profane
as to maintain such an error; which my Moderatour taking for a kind of
challenge, you may remember he answered Mr. Nichols, that what he had said, he
would maintain either with his pen, or in public dispute. Whereupon Mr.
Nichols thought fit to breath a little after my hot pursuing him, and turning
his coat of a Defendant into an Opponent (though against the practice of all
School Disputants) propounded a few Arguments of little worth to my Moderator,
all to that purpose of Paul, 2 Cor. 6. verse. 15, 16. What concord has Christ
with Belial? Or what part has he that believes with an Infidel? and what
agreement has the temple of God with Idols? To which my Moderator answered
both learnedly and convincingly, insisting upon the same Epistle of Paul unto
the Church at Corinth, and to the Saints at Corinth; and yet (as he showed)
there were amongst them many wicked and corrupt persons, as I shall hereafter
show from some particulars. I confess (besides much froth and shadows of truth)
the most that I could observe in Mr. Nichols his Arguments to my Moderator, was
a kind of wondering exclamations against wickedness and against corruptions in
a Church, as if he knew not any difference between a visible, and an invisible
Church, nor would take any notice of the corruptions showed unto him in the
visible Church of Corinth, to the very last end of his Argunents wondering at
our profaneness in affirming corruptions and wickedness possible in a Church
and people of God. Whose wanderings and ungrounded exclamations call to my
Remembrance a strong controversy in the Church of Rome between the Jesuits,
and the Dominican Friars, concerning the Conception of Mary the mother of
Christ; whom the Dominican^ affirm to have been conceived in Original sin, as
all that have descended from the loins of Adam, and prove it both by reason
and Scripture. To which the Jesuits not being able to give any Satisfactory
answer, yet draw most of the common people to side with them, yea, to make vows
to die rather than to forsake that pious and Godly opinion (so they term it)
that Marie was conceived without any spot of Original sin, though common to all
others that even descended from Adam. And though they can produce no Scripture
to prove it, nor any solid reason; yet they work upon the people, and answer
the Scriptures alleged by the Dominicans with wonders and exclamations,
saying; What? the Mother of Christ a sinner? what? A spot of sin in her, who
bare the Lamb without spot in her womb? what? Defilement of sin in the Temple
of Christ? and in her, whose womb was as a Temple to harbor God and man? Such
like exclamations were Mr. Nichols his Arguments (yea, and answers to apparent
Scriptures) to draw silly people to his seemingly pious opinion. What?
profaneness? wickedness? drunkenness? corruptions in the house, in the Church,
and among the people of God? what concord has Christ with Belial? But no
answer to the Church of Corinth all this while. At last he replied to my
Moderatour; Show me where ever the Apostles received wicked and corrupt persons
into their Churches, as into your Churches they are received. To which demand
he answered, that neither the Apostles nor we receive wicked and profane
persons into our Churches and Church Communions qua profane and wicked, as
profane, but qua, as Prosessours and Converts. Thus my Worthy and Learned
Moderatour and Reverend Pastor of the Church at Word, having repulsed Mr.
Nichols his darts, and blunted the edge of all his Weapons, without any ^oyl,
but rather with great credit (as was after confessed by some well-affected to
Mr. Nichols himself) ended his single Combat; and Mr. Nichols made use of that
liberty granted him to oppose against me also, falling once more upon the word
Parishes, saying, he would prove them not to be Churches; which he would
endeavor to prove from Queen Mary's days. But I desiring him to look back
further to the beginning and fountain of Parishes and Parochial Churches long
before Queen Mary's days, he would not frame his Argument from that time of
the height of Popery in England, as I desired him, aiming (as I conceived) at
the abominable corruptions brought into Rome by the Council of Trent convocated
in the year 1547. when our Reformation began, as Sleiden observes de Stat.
Relig. page 909. lin. 1. Remembering also what before I had showed him of some
dissenting parties to many Councels before, as the Popes Supremacy denied and
decreed against by the Council of Calcedon, Africa, Milevi, Constantinople* and
Basil; The second Council of Ethesus approving Eutyches, and the Council of
Calcedon condemning him; The second Council of Nice maintaining the worshipping
of Images; and that of Franck Ford assembled about the same time by CHARLES the
Great pulling them down; The first Council of Nice permitting the marriage of
Ministers according to the use of the Primitive Church; and the Council of
Neocesa^ea and Mentz, and the second of Carthage forbidding it; and
particularly in England, having showed a party dissenting from the Pope almost
three hundred years ago in the very height of Popery here in the Reign of
Edward the third, in whose time God raised up John Wickliff a Professor at
Ox^ord to hold out the light of the Gospel, so as many in those days were much
enlightened thereby. For among other Principles wherein he instructed the people
then, these were some directly against the Church of Rome.

1. The Eucharist after Consecration is not the very body of Christ, but
figuratively. 2. The Church of Rome is not the head of all Churches, more than
any Church is. Nor has Peter any more power given of Christ, than any other
Apostle has. 3. The Pope of Rome has no more in the Keys of the Church, than
any other within the order of Priesthood. 4. The Gospel is a rule sufficient
of it self to rule the life of every Christian here without any other rule. 5.
All other rules, under whose observances diverse Religious persons be governed,
do add no more perfection to the Gospel, than does the white color to the
wall.
Having (I say) thus showed him the height of Popery in, and out of England,
and still a party dissenting from the gross errors of Rome, and in them a
light of a Church and people of God, he aiming at those abominations brought in
and settled (as he imagined) without any party dissenting from the Council of
Trent, as from other Councels, would needs frame his Argument from Queen Mary's
days, thus:

1. Object. In Queen Mary's days there were no Churches in England. Ergo: Now
Parochial Churches are Babylonish.

The Argument (beloved) concludes nothing in the consequence; for suppose there
had been no Church, or people professing the truth, does it therefore follow;
Ergo, now there can be no Parochial Churches. He might as well have argued
thus. People in Queen Mary's days believed not; Ergo, People now do not
believe; Or, People then were Papists in England, Ergo, now they are not
Protestants, and then what shall we say of Mr. Nichols his believing people?
Even such is this Argument; In Queen Mary's days there were no Churches; Ergo,
now Parochial Churches are Babylonish. But, to let my Opponent go on with more
such Enthymema's; I denied his Antecedent, showing him that in Queen Mary's
days there was a glorious Church of believers, who witnessed their Faith with
the blood of Martyrdom, as the Stories tell us of Cranmer, Brad-ford, Tailor;
Yea, some tell us of eight hundred innocents, whose lives in the space of less
than four years, that cruel Popish Queen sacrificed unto her idols. Yea, such
was the abundance of true believers and Protestants in those days, that as a
fruitful Vine they were spread abroad also into Germany, Sweden, Denmark, and
a Church of English true believers was apparent at Frankford, from whence came
Godly Bishops that settled our Churches in Queen Elizabeth's time. But then he
went on a little more Scholar like in suiting his consequent with his
Antecedent, though still fallaciously, thus:

2. Object. In Queen Mary's days Parochial Churches were Babylonish; Ergo, Now
Parochial Churches are Babylonish. I might well have granted here his
Antecedent, for ought any true illation from it to these times; it proving
nothing, but that we must needs be now as our Fathers were in those days;
which is a false illation; for though there were no Churches then, there may be
Churches now; and though Parochial Churches then were Babylonish, yet Parochial
Churches now may not be Babylonish, neither qua, as Churches, neither qua, as
Parochial; As Churches, the people being converted; As Parochial, it having
been already showed, that Parishes as Parishes were no invention of Antichrist;
which distinction Mr. Nichols all along his Arguments and answers seems much to
mistake, or forget, varying these terms as he pleases, sometimes insisting
upon the word Churches, as when the Argument of the ancient Coustitution of
Parishes before Antichrist convinced him, he then falls to the word Churches,
qua as mixed Congregations. So here from Churches in Queen Mary's days, he
falls to Parishes in Queen Mary's days. But to try further what this Monster
would bring forth, In Queen Mary's days Parochial Churches were Babylonish;
Ergo, now Parochial Churches are Babylonish. I distinguished the Antecedent, to
that word Churches (supposing what was left behind, as Parishes they were not
Babylonish.) They were Babylonish, or Popish generally, I denied the
Antecedent; They were Babylonish, or Popish, as the whole Land (wherein were
some Protestants in all corners dissenting from Babylonish and Popish
principles) I granted the Antecedent. And this (beloved) I doubt not but it
will appear unto you most true, that where eight hundred in less than four
years suffered Martyrdom, they were not all taken out of one Parish, but out of
several Parishes in the Land; and secondly that where so much blood of holy
Protestant Martyrs was shed, it would prove as Cyprian says, Sanguis Martyrum,
semen Ecclesiae, The blood of Martyrs is the seed of the Church; by whose
sufferings the Professors of the true Gospel grew and increased more and more;
and so not the whole Parishes, or Parochial Churches would be infected with
Papacy, but as was the Land and Kingdom. not generally, or in all, but in the
major part at most. Thus I can further prove unto you Protestants to have been
then in Parishes from the instance of a Parish not far from us in this part of
Kent, where I am informed by a Neighbor of this Parish, that he often heard
his own Father relate from his Grand Fathers mouth, that in Queen Mary's days
there lived in that Parish a Priest named Stacie; and that many times his
Father and his Fathers Brothers going to Church and observing M. Stacy his
superstitious ceremonies in the Church and at the Altar, would go home to their
Father telling, and relating to him; Father, Mr. Stacie in the Church does
sprinkle his face with water, makes crosses with his fingers upon his
forehead, knocks his breast, and prays kneeling before the pictures, and
the like. To whom his Gran^-father would reply; My Children, though Mr. St^cie
do such things, you must beware of them, you must not do the like; you must not
pray to images, but to God, neither must you learn such Ceremonies and
Superstitions of Mr. Staci^. Whereby (beloved) you may perceive, that in those
Marian days all were not infected with Papacy, but that even in Country
Parishes there was a seed and remnant left of Godly people, who would not with
Baals Priests bow their knees unto idols. But as if this known truth were not
satisfactory, Mr. Nichols following his usual way of Arguments (as I have
observed in him) either changing new terms, or not minding what has been
granted, denied, or distinguished, gives a sudden leap from England to Rome,
and from thence fetches a reply thus:

3. Object. In those days Parochial Churches were subject to Rome. Ergo, In
those days Parochial Churches were Babylonish. All this being answered before
in substance, carried not his Argument one step further than it was gone
before, though he went so many steps to fetch it. Who doubts, but then the
major part were subject to Rome, and so were Babylonish? But here is no reply
to what had been distinguished of the Martyrs, of the holy remnant in those
days, who would not be subject to Rome. But perceiving what a formal Disputant
I had to deal with, I granted all (according to my former distinction) and let
him run on to this ensuing Enthymema.

4. Object. Rome then was no Church. Ergo, England then was no Church. Here you
see again, how Parishes are laid aside, and the word Church (as if his terms
were now altered from Parochial Churches to a National Church) is revived.

But here though I might again have answered with my former distinction of the
Godly remnant in England, and showed him that though Rome was not a Church
then, yet there was a Church and people of God in E^^land then. Yet purposely
for Arguments sake, I resolved to turn his Bias from England to Rome (himself
i^clining by Arguments that way) to try if yet he knew more of Rome, than he
had showed to know in his answer to my first Argument concerning Parochial
Babylonish Romish Churches, and to try further whether he could as yet tell,
how like a Scholar to reply with a formal Argument to the several heads of a
distinction; and therefore I distinguished his Antecedent thus.

Rome then was no Church; Q^oad substantiam, or in some substantials, as
Ordination, Baptism, the Scriptures, a confession of Christ's Birth, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension, and the like, I denied his Antecedent: But in
corruptions of Rites and Ceremonies, in Superstitions, and in some Scripture
opposing Doctrines, I granted his Antecedent. Here Mr. Nichols began to
Triumph, hoping now to regain what he had formerly lost by his slight answers
to my Arguments, and called out with a great exclamation, and wonder to the
people, to take notice, that I granted that Rome then was a Church. But
remember (beloved how cunningly and craftily he concealed my distinction, and
never bad the people take notice that I had granted that it was a Church only
quoad substantiam, or in some substantials yet remaining, as Ordination,
Baptism, and the like. Neither pursued he ^is advantage (if any against me)
like unto Sc^ollars. who in Schools are taught to reply against that part of
the distinction, which denies; and so whereas his Antecedent was this; Rome
then was not a Church, and the negative or denying part of my distinction was
this, Rome th^n was not a Church, quoad substantiam, or in some substantials,
as Ordination, Baptism, the Scriptures, a confession of Christ, his bi^th,
d^a^h, resurrection and ascension, and the like, I deny it, he should have
replied against this, and proved it was not a Church quoad substantiam, or in
any substantials, neither in maintaining Ordination by Imposi^ion of hands by
the Presbytery, as from Christ; neither in upholding B^ptisme, as also an
ordinance of Christ; neither in acknowledging the Gospel to be from Christ, and
not a fable of man's inven^ing, and the like. But as one that had quite
forgotten his school and University lessons, and Rules for arguing, and hoping
that the generality of the people understood not the words, quoad substantiam,
he waves them, and goes on thus.

5. Object. Rome then in those days was no true Church. Ergo, Rome then in
those days was no Church. If he had argued thus, Rome then in those days was
no true Church in any substantials, Ergo, your denial is false, I should have
liked my Cambridge Scholar better, But to change his term in the former
Antecedent, Church, in this Antecedent, into true Church, having had denial to
Church only, is a way of arguing I have never yet found out.

Surely Mr. Nichols cannot be ignorant of a false Church, and a true Church,
and that a false Church in some sense is usually called a Church; or else why
does he call our Parochial Churches (being Babylonish, and false in his
opinion) yet Churches? I might therefore here have stopped his further
proceeding by granting his Antecedent, and denying his consequent, but to try
how far he would run upon new terms, I told him that if he argued ^ill
midnight, I would answer with the same denying part of my former distinction,
till he replied against it; and so again I distinguished his An^ecedent, quoad
substantiam, or in some substantials, it was no true Church, ^ denied it; In
many corruptions, ceremonies, superstitions, and some Scripture opp^sing
doctrines, I granted it. And here Mr. Nic^ols like the Ie^uites spoken of
before, not being able to prove by arguments or Scripture that M^ry was
conceived without Original sin, falling yet into e^clamations and wondering; so
he not being able to prove by any strong Argument, or Scripture Authority, that
our Parochial Churches, are Bab^lonish, ^ell into exclamations, into both
wondering and forgetting himself; wondering that I should grant Rome to be a
Church, and forgetting my distinction, and in what sense I granted it, to wit,
in some substantials only; forgetting also that in the other branch of my
distinction I denied Rome to be a Church, to wit, in her corruptions,
superstitions and many Scripture-opposing doctrines. But here Mr. Nichols
having pumped his brain dry, and finding the stream of his Enthymema's to flow
no more from him, being not able to prove our Parochial Churches to be now
Babylonish from any instance of Romes being or not being a Church; without any
further reply to my denial, quoad substantiam, or in some substantials (which I
long expected) left off. And so ended (beloved) our dispute and Arguments upon
the first Proposition, affirming Parochial Churches to be Babylonish. As for
his second Proposition concerning his own Church and Congregation, and what was
by Argument objected against it; I shall speak of that after I have more fully
cleared my judgment unto you yet concerning our Parochial Churches, and to what
has been already said, added such strong reasons and Arguments, as want of
time upon the day of dispute suffered not to come forth to light. But before I
satisfy your expectations and desires herein, I must first clear my self from
the harsh judgment and censure of Mr. Nichols his party against me, for
granting Rome to be a Church in some substantials; which distinction they
waving, I am informed that some have said that my heart is still at Rome; whose
mouths* must be stopped, and those b^ats of spite and envy coming forth from
thence, like the frogs that came out of the mouth of the Dragon, of the Beast,
and of the false Prophet, Revel. 16. verse. 13. must be crushed, least from
c^oaking at the first, they proceed further to poison and envenome that good
name and reputation, which I hope I have purchased unto my self both by a known
affection to the state affairs and Governors, and by soundness of Doctrine
these ten years that I have lived in Kent, where my Teaching has had the
Approbation of all sorts of people of sound judgment, who far and near have
resorted to me, and acknowledged from me the comfortable work of the Ministry
upon their Souls. And as for any inclination or bending of my heart or
affection to Rome, I doubt not but that all England has taken notice of my
writings and actings against that Triple crowned man of sin, and his Emissaries
the Priests and Jesuits here in England, against whom I have been often by
Authority commanded up to London to the Sessions held at the old Bailey, and
without any competent satisfaction from the State have spent and wasted much of
my poor estate, which should have been my Wives and poor childrens portion and
comfort hereafter, In which Bell, the Franciscan Friar, Sanderson, alias
Holland, and Wright, both Jesuits and some others (whose names are at present
out of my memory) have been discovered, and according to the Laws of the Land
brought to condign punishment at Ty^urn. For which service I have been often
assaulted and threatened with murder by my blood thirs^y enemies the Romish
Papists (to whom Mr. Nichols his party rashly judges my heart inclines as unto
friends) but especially by one Burke an I^ish Gentleman in Alders-gate street,
and in Shoo-lane by one Captain Vincent Burton, who came from Flanders
purposely to kill me, and had glutted his malice with blood in my very ch^mber
where I lodged, had not the ever watching Providence of heaven prevented his
murtherous intentions. Which dangers threatening my life were well seen and
credited by the Right Honorable my Lord chi^f Justice Rowls, when at the
execution of Wright the Jesuit he charged one Mr. Thomas Mayo an Officer of
the State to guard me during my abode in London, and offered me more strength
to secure me would I have accepted of it, which I refused having constantly
about me a Trooper also at my charge, well known unto you of this Parish. But
can my heart be at Rome, where if my body were, it would be burnt to ashes for
my good services to England, as were the bones of the Bishop of Spalato, after
that upon fair promises he returned from England unto the Pope? But these somes
of malice are against me, because I durst dispute with Mr. Nichols a private
man, and contend (as the Saints have formerly done) for the truth; and because
as a Scholar by way of Argument I have granted that, the contrary whereof he
could not prove, nor so much as offered to reply against it, to wit, that Rome
is a Church, and true in some substantials, though not in her corruptions of
Rites; foolish ceremonies, superstitions and some false Doctrines contrary to
the Scriptures. Which opinion (Beloved) I shall never hold tenaciously, no^
heretically by inhering to it, if by sounder judgments I may be convinced of
the contrary, to whom I shall willingly submit, and not disturb (as too many
do) the tender flocks of Jesus Christ.

The ground therefore whereon at present I say this Opinion may be grounded,
and by me was truly intended when I answered Mr. Nichols, saying that Rome
was, and was not a Church, in several respects, was this.

First. Although it be true that the Council of Trent convocated in the year
1547. did desperately wound the Church of Rome; first, in that it did heighten
and multiply her damnable errors. Secondly, in that it did draw all the poison
into one entire monster and body of error, and presented it all to the world
as the Doctrine of the Church. Yet as the dissenting parties from other
councels, settling the Popes Supremacy, communicating in one kind, of
worshipping of images, disallowing the use of the Bible to the people,
forbidding Priests to marry, and in England Mr. John Wickliffs Tenants (as I
have showed before) were ground sufficient to discover a party, a people, a
Church in Rome and in England (which Mr. Nichols himself opposed not, but
rather seem to grant it) then the like may be said since the council of Trent;
for if any have opposed, or dissented from, or disallowed that council, they
must be said to disallow those damnable errors, that poison drawn into one
entire monster and body of error. But many there are who have opposed,
dissented from, and disallowed that council. Ergo, They must be said 'to
disallow those damnable errors, that poison drawn into one entire monster, and
body of error. The Minor is known to such as have travailed beyond the Seas,
and no doubt to all learned Divines, who have perused such Books, as do lay
down the State of Rome since the council; Wherein they shall find, that the
whole Kingdom of France to this day has opposed that council; besides many
other learned Divines, and among them the whole University of the Sorbonites at
Paris, who unanimously and strongly maintain the Oath of Allegiance to Kings,
Princes, Governors of Nations against the Pope, and so vigorously have opposed
the Popes supremacy voted in the council of Trent, that had not Urban the Eight
complied with the Court of Paris when Cardinal Richlieu was in his height of
command and prosperity, either he himself, or one Friar Joseph a Capuchin had
been made Antipope for France, and all Addresses to the Pope of Rome had been
forbidden to the people of France in general; at which they have been aiming
these many years, and I believe will ere long effect it, if this Cardinal at
present Mazarini continue in favor, and keep close Prisoner that Popes great
favorite Cardinal de Retz; such is the regard that Kingdom has to the council
of Trent, and to the Popes supremacy ^etled by it. The same Oath of Allegiance
has been vigorously maintained and the Popes supremacy strongly denied these
many years in England by some also of the Popish Religion, as by Mr. Roger
Widrington in his Apology, but especially by the order of the Bendictines,
amongst whom Price the superior of that family in England, and before him
Doctor Preston a Prisoner formerly in the Clinke, who being excommunicated by
the Pope for his opinion, was by King James protected against the Pope, the
like Sir William Howard, otherwise a Papist, has opposed in print all these,
slighting the council of Trents determination as a point of faith, and
disregarding the Popes thundering out excommunications against them. Besides
these, what dissenting parties must needs be there, whereas many confess among
them, that were it not for that rack of the Inquisition, they would oppose many
practices among them, and many Canous of Trent (as truly I have heard many of
their Priests and Divines say) which now for fear they dare not do.

But secondly does not Mr. Nichols say the like? when first he calls B^bylonish
Churches, Churches. And why not rather Confused Synagogues (Mr. Nichols) if
there were no substantials of a Church amongst us? Secondly, when he says that
we are Babylonish, because mixed, good and bad together. But we cannot thus be
called Babylonish, except there be amongst us in this respect, what is also in
Babylon, or Rome, to wit, good and bad together. Ergo, he acknowledges that in
Romish Babylon there are good and bad together. Then further, thus I reason;
Good people are Gods people, and Gods Church. But by him in Rome there are good
people. Ergo, By his own Assertion, in Rome, or Babylon there is a people and
Church of God. Then further yet thus; if there be good people amongst them, as
he implies in his Assertion, I argue then from the Philosopher, Verum and bonum
convertun^ur, True and good are Convertible, and mutually predicable one of the
other; so that where true is, good is also. But good people are ^ound among
them; Ergo, True people found also among them. Then thus; Good people are a
good Church in that respect wherein they are good, and true people are a true
Church in that respect wherein they are true. Ergo, In Rome the good and true
people in that respect wherein they are good and true, are in that same respect
a good and true Church of God. Then further in my judgment (laying aside Mr.
Nichols his ground for their goodness) they are good and true in no other
respect, but in respect of some substantials of truth, in respect they believe
in Christ born, dead, risen, and ascended into Heaven, in respect they
acknowledge the Gospel as from him, Baptism as his Ordinance, Ordination by
imposition of hands by the Pr^sbytery as his institution. Ergo, in respect of
some substantials they are a good, and true Church.

But thirdly, I confess I cannot tell how to uphold a lawful succession of
Ordination from the ^imes of Popery in England, and a lawful Ministry at
present in England, except it be by acknowledging in the height of Popery in
England a Church, and a true Church in some substantials of truth, especially
of Ordination and Baptism. For had not Ordination then been held in i^s
substance as from Christ, and Baptism in its substance as an Ordinance from
Christ; neither our former Ministers had been rightly ordained, neither had our
Forefathers been rightly and lawfully Baptized. For a true and lawful and
right effect must proceed from a true, lawful, and right cause. E^go, if your
Ministers ordination, and our Forefathers baptism were a true, lawful, and
right effect, it proceeded from a true, lawful and right cause. Then thus; But
such as were formerly the immediate cause of the effect of our Reformed
Ministers Ordination, and the immediate cause of our first reforming
Forefathers Baptism, were such as lived before them in Popery; Ergo, in time
of Popery there was a true, lawful, and right cause of the effect of
Ordination and Baptism. Then further; The Bishops and Priests in time of Popery
were not true, lawful, and right in the superstitions of Oy^, Chrisme,
Unction, Spittle and other Rites and Ceremonies, which against the word of God
they had added to Ordination and Baptism. Ergo, They were true, lawful, and
right only in substantials in the substance of Ordination and Baptism. E^go,
Then there was a Church quoad substantiam or in some substantial, mai^taining
for substan^ials such Ordinances, as were left by Christ unto his Church,
thoug^ in ^ites and Superstitions false and erroneous.

Object. But if it be objected that all this might be before the Council of
Trent; but since that cursed Council Rome having heigh^ened and multiplied her
damnable errors, and drawn all the poison into one entire monster and body of
sin and error, the l^ke c^nnot be said now that Rome is a true Church, or
Church at a^l in any su^stantial^.

I answer that Antichrist has been working these many years by degrees; and
although in the Council of Trent he wrought more than in any Council ever
before; Yet still he may (if God will permit him to t^y his Elect further) work
more i^iquity than hitherto he has done. It would yet be a worse work, i^ he
should prevail with all dissenting parties to yield to his supremacy, and to
his Arbitrary power and Command; and worser yet, if he should deny that Jesus
Christ is come in the ^lesh or if he should deny the words and Gospel to be
from Christ, and to be a means for the working of Faith; or if he should ruin
all substantials, from which as yet he has not wholly apostatized. Secondly, If
now there be no Church in Rome quoad substantiam, or in any substantials, since
the Council of Trent, I demand then of Mr. Nichols, whether if ever he
converted any Papist to his Church, he did baptize him again, or no? Or,
whether in case he should convert any such, he would baptize him again, or no?
If he say, he would baptize him again; I say that others far more learned and
wiser than he, whom in these latter days, long since the Council of Trent,
have converted from Popery more Souls than ever he has converted, neither
would nor have baptized such again. That most Reverend Divine, Doctor in
Divinity, and Cantabrigian Light and Luster, Bishop formerly of Exeter, a Star
to me at my first coming out of the darkness of Popery, my first Father in this
Religion, my Ananias, who ^oundly and faithfully instructed me and guided me in
the way of my salvation, wherein I walk at present, even Doctor Brounrigge,
one of our Churches pillars, a strong supporter of Truth, never baptized me
again, when I opened unto him my ^all from God to the Reformed Church of
England. But if Mr. Nichols do say with the wiser and more learned, that he
would not baptize such an one again; I demand then of Mr. Nichols, why he is
baptized already, or not baptized. If not baptized, he ought to baptize him
again; if baptiz^d; then his baptism is a true effect of some true cause. But
this cause was no true cause in the use of superstitious Oils, Unctions, and
other unlawful Ceremonies; Ergo, he was a true cause of the effect of that
man's bap^isme only in the substantials. Ergo, There are in Rome such as by
virtue of the substantials in Ordination, do* truly administer some Ordinances
in their substantials.

But fourthly. Yet in Rome the name of Christ and Ch^istians is set forth and
held up in despite of Ie^s, Turks, and In^idels; and for the name of Christ
they are hated and ensl^ved by ^urks as well as we. Ergo, in a substantial
acknowledgement of Christ they are true; Or, Comparatively in respect of Jews
and Turks they are good and true. Or else surely the Title of Learned Mr.
Fuller his book, called The holy War, and the holy State, is false; wherein he
treats of the Christians Wars against the ^u^ks, and against Jerusalem, and of
their State-Government in the City of Jerusalem, and other places subdued by
them. But the Christians then were most such as lived under Popery; and as
Christians, they joined together against the enemies of Christ, that the name
of Christ might be propagated and confessed, where it was most hated and
blasphemed; and this work by all Writers is called a holy work. Then I infer;
that where such holy endeavors are for Christ's name, and the propagation of
it, there Christ in substantials is acknowledged; and to confess and
acknowledge Christ is some part and Character of a people and Church of God.
Ergo, They are a Church in some part, and in some substantials of a Church.

But fifthly, I answer that this my opinion is no such strange Doctrine, as Mr.
Nichols and some others would judge it to be. It has been held by many sound
and Orthodox Divines, both at home and abroad. Learned Morneu^ Du Plessis who
wrote against Rome, and has been held always a ^ound Protestant, in his book
de Ecclesia, page 343.350. holds Rome to be a Church; and his chief Argument is
indeed the same, that has always moved me to this opinion, before ever I read
it in him, which is this, (...), or Antichrist must in full height sit in
Templo Dei, in the Temple of God; What then is that, or where is that but in
the Church? from whence I form this Syllogism; If the Pope be Antichrist he
must sit in the Temple and Church; But the Pope is Antichrist; Ergo, He si^s in
the Temple and Church. Then further; But the Pope as Antichrist sits in no
Temple, or Church, except it be in the Church of Rome; Ergo, The Pope either is
not Antichrist, or Rome is a Church; But the Pope is Antichrist, and must sit
in a Temple, or Church; Ergo, Rome is a Church; But Rome is not a Church in her
corruptions, Supersttions and Idolatries; Ergo, Rome, the seat of Antichrist,
is a Church in some substantials. So Morn^y also discourses in his book de
Ecclesia, page 349.350. with these words which I have faithfully transcribed;
In that we affi^^ that Antichrist rul^th there, we consequently hold that it is
the Church, in as much as he cannot sit any where but in the Church. But it is
one thing to separate our selves from the Church of Rome defiled by Antichrist,
and another thing to depart from the Communion of the universal Church. Again,
we depart not from the Temple, but from the Idolatry committed in the Temple,
nor from the Commonwealth, but from the Tyranny which oppresses the
Commonwealth, nor from the City, but from the p^stil^nce which in^ecteth the
City, nor from the Communion and fellowship of the people, but from the
conspiracy of Antichrist, and of his maintainers; We therefore renounce not
their baptism, but we ratify it. And further for this point of baptism, that
for substance it is true in Rome, he ^aith thus, page 147. It is not the
Heretic that baptizeth, as long as baptism remains sound, but Christ by the
hand of the Heretic; wherein we follow the practice of the Primitive Church,
and the determination of the first Council of Nice, that they which were
baptized by Heretics, renouncing their Here^ie, they shall not be rebaptized,
except those that have been baptized by the Samo^arens, who keep not the
essential words of baptism^. And Doctor Reynolds speaking warily of the Church
of Rome, denies it not to be a Church; but says, Ecclesia Romana nec est
Ecclesia Catholic^, nec s^num mem^^um Ecclesiae Ca^holicae; It is neither the
Catholic Church, not a sound Member of the Catholic Church; In which words he
seems to acknowledge it a diseased Member, or a sick Member.

Which indeed puts me in mind of what I have read of a Commencing Doctor long
since in Oxford, whose question was, Ecclesia Roma^a non (...) Ecclesia v^^a,
The Church of Rome is not a true Church. And in his P^^ition, or (to speak
properly in Oxford style) in his supposite he showed the many co^^^ptions and
spiritual diseases of the Church of Rome. A Doctou^ replying on him used this
Argument, Ecclesia viv^ est Ecclesia vera; Ecclesia Romana est Ecclesia viva,
ergo, vera. The Minor being denied; the Opponent proceeded thus; Ecclesia aegra
est Ecclesia viva; Ecclesia Romana est Ecclesia aegra; Ergo, viva. Thus you see
that by other sound Divines, the Church of Rome has been held a Church, though
sick, diseased, unsound in her corruptions, which argues that under those
diseases and corruptions there is some life yet in her, and some truth of
substantials, as C rist, Baptism, the Scriptures, Ordination and the like.

1. Object. But it may he Objected, that I speak things contradictory, and do
aver two contradictories in the same subject, simul and semel, at once and the
same time, saying, They are a true Church, and yet again saying, that in their
corruptions, superstitions, and some Doctrines they are a false Church. But
true and false are contradictories, not Predicable of the same subject at the
same time; Ergo, I seem to speak things contradictorie.

Answ. To which I answer, that contradictories are not predicable of the same
subject at the same time, if taken in one and the same respect; but in several
respects they may be predicable. As I may say, Peter is a man, and Peter is not
a man, and in several respects both may be truly verified. Peter truly is a
man in respect of the substantials, and essentials of a man in him; and Peter
is not a man, but a beast in respect of his madness and beastly conversation.
Rome likewise is and may be said a Church, and not a Church; A Church in
respect of some substantials in it belonging to a Church; and not a Church in
respect of the filthy corruptions, Idolatry and Superstitions in it, and
Doctrines contrary to the ^^uth of the word of God.

2. Object. Secondly, it may be objected; If in some substantials Rome be a
true Church; why then did I separate, and does all England separate from Rom^?
Where is our Warrant to separate from a true Church?

Ans. To which I answer that we have warrant sufficient to separate from Rome,
though not for the substantials, which they yet maintain. Their Idolatries,
their ^superstitions, their false doctrines are warrant sufficient to us out of
the word of God to separate from them, True it is, every disease must not keep
a man from his Neighbors society, a man being Animal sociabile, a sociable
creature, born into the world among other ends for comerce and society with his
Neighbors. Yet so infectious and contagious, so filthy and loathsome may the
disease be (as is the plague, or spotted fever) that a Neighbor may
warrantably separate from such a Neighbor, though under that infection he have
still the true substance and essence of a man. Even so, though in Rome there be
some true substantials of a Church, yet they lie under such filthy, such
contagious corruptions, such loathsome and abominable Idolatries, that we are
bound and sufficiently warranted from the word to separate from them, in the
sense of Du Plessis above quoted; we d^part not from the Temple, but from the
Idolatry committed in the Temple, nor from the Commonwealth, but from the
tyranny which oppresses the Commonwealth, nor from the City, but from the
pestilence which infecteth the City, nor from the Communion and fellowship of
the people, but from the conspiracy of Antichrist and of his maintainers.

3. Objest. But thirdly, Mr. Nichols may Object. Why then may not I and my
people separate from your Churches, if we find in them corruptions sufficient
to warrant our separation.

Ans. To whom I answer, that as every disease must not keep us from our
Neighbors society, but infectious ones, such as the plague. No more must every
corruption in a peoples manners make us separate from a true Church; Only
gross and general errors at least must warrant such a separation.

If Mr. Nichols can show that infectious plague, those botches of the Whore of
Babylon upon ou^ Churches, that ab^minable Idolatry of worshipping of Saints and
images and a Bread God, that unbloudy, yet daily Sacrifice of Christ's body and
blood upon the Al^ar, against that Sacrifice once offered by Christ himself,
that base Doctrine o^ Purgatory derogating from the full sa^^sf^ction of Christ
for our Souls, and making null and void the abundant me^i^s of his sufferings
and Passions, those filthy rotten rags of man's own Righteousness, stripping the
Soul of the white and precious Robe and garment of Christ his Righteousness (All
which with many more do warrant our separation from that Church) If Mr. Nichols
can show the like or any of these infections amongst us, well and warrantably
may he keep himself and his from such a plague. But where no such infections
are, but rather a new face of Reformation from what has been found to be
corruption formerly, now to separate from our Churches; Oh how unwarrantable
will Mr. Ni^hols find it, if he search the inwards of his heart with the light
and candle of the word of God? Oh when God is coming toward a Church, then to
run from it! when God is turning his face toward it, ^hen to turn our back
upon it! when God is building it up, then to be ^ct^ve in pulling it down* When
a Church professes willingness and readiness to be conformed to the Rule of
the word, then to separate from a Reforming Church! This is a sad thing, and
surely, if rightly apprehended, must sit sadly upon the spirits of some. Now
when our Churches are coming up out of the wilderness, now that they begin to
boil out their scum! now that they begin to be more refined and reformed, now
to forsake them! truly this is no small aggravation to this desertion. For
Mariners at sea to forsake their ship, when she is ready to sink (though it
may be an error, possibly an oversight in them so to do) yet it is
pardonable. But if the ship shall begin to rise and float again, so as they see
apparent hopes that with a little pumping she may be saved, now to leave her
(much more to cut holes in her sides) their owners will give there little
thanks for it. Some years since the Church of God amongst us seemed to be in a
sinking condition, then to leave her might be pardonable; but now that through
the mercy of God she begins to be somewhat floatsome and boyant, so as a little
industry and pains in the pumping and purging may free her and save her, now
to desert her, or (which is worse) to cut holes in her Surely, surely never was
separation from a Church so unwarrantable. Can our separation from Rome so
warrantable (it being from a Church growing worse and worse, more and more
corrupt) be a president to separate from a Church reforming, growing better and
better?

4. Object. But Mr. Nichols replies and Objects that we are mixed with many
wicked and corrupt livers, we exclude none from our communions; therefore he
and his people cannot sit down with us; for what concord has Christ with
Belial? Though otherwise the Doctrine be good and sound, and much corruption
have been purged out, yet we cannot join with the wicked.

1. Ans. This is not only Mr. Nichols his Plea, but now in this County begins
to be a Plea of others, who will by no means be thought to favor a
separation, even while they do separate from their Parishes, some with their
Ministers, some from their Ministers, for a purer Communion among themselves.

But to all such I answer, first acknowledging that indeed it was never my
practice or judgment freely without any discretion to admit to the Communion of
the Lords supper any scandalous person, or notoriously wicked liver in a
Parish; but have always judged it fit for a time to suspend such an one till
some amendment be observed, some reformation publicly seen in his life and
conversation. But to deny the Seals to a whole Parish, who are not so
notoriously wicked, or to a sinner in particular not pro phanely scandalous,
but one frailly sinful, showing sign^^ of conversion, and thirsting after a
nearer Communion with Christ, I dare not, nay I am loath to frown upon him, over
whom the Angels rejoice, Luke 15. verse. 10.

2. Ans. But S^condly, I answer them with what Morneus de Eccl^sia notes
(though I will forbear to term them as he does) Those (who otherwise seem nev^r
so godly) that separate from true Churches like Novatus for a stricter course
of Discipline, like Donatus from some bad ones in the Church, as they suposed,
like Andius from some lesser corruptions and abuses, are Schismatics. This is
the judgment of this learned man; And I doubt not but those of judgment in
learning and Antiquity, who separate from us, will acknowledge that Novatus,
and the Novatians. Donatus and the Donatists, Andius and his followers were
anciently by the Churches justly condemned for Schismatics. I leave it then to
the Novations of our times to judge what may be concluded against them, who
build upon th^se Schismatics own grounds to separate from us some lesser
corruptions and abuses, for some bad ones in the Church, or for some stricter
course of Discipline? Of such Augustine says, that under the color of faith,
they break in sunder the bond of fellowship. And Zanchie expressly calls such a
schism, as one should say a cutting off (...); for that they cut in sunder the
unity of the Church by this their departing. And in the same place he
absolutely affirms, that neither difference in doctrine, vices of the
Mininisters, lewd life of them that live in the Church, the coming of all sorts
hand over head to the Supper of the Lord, and further proves all these to be no
lawful causes to forsake the Church of Christ. And least any should Object the
want of Ecclesiastical Discipline in a Church to be a sufficient cause to make
a separation, in page 224. he he says, Though Princes and Magistrates will not
let Ecclesiastical Discipline to be restored into the Churches under them, yet
may we forsake that Church for that cause. Thus in the judgment of learned
Divines I have delivered my judgment, and answer to our Separatists
Objections; and do further add, that if the corruptions of some of our Members
affright them from our Churches, I wonder the same corruptions drive them not
from all civil commerce with such corrupt men, and from eating and drinking and
conversing familiarly with them, least their Souls by them be endangered, which
may as soon happen to them out of the Church meetings and societi^s (where is
more freedom for sin, and no actual preaching cu^bi^g sin) as ^n our Church
meetings and societies, where pra^er and praise to God is offered, and the word
preached, which is powerful in casting down imaginations, and every high thing
that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. verse. 5.

And thus (beloved) having brought you to the main Objection, the great
stumbling block of those that separate from our Churches, to wit, some
wickedness, some corruptions in manners, some profaneness in life and
conversation (which was also Mr. Nichols his chief Objection against our
Parochial Churches) I shall now go on to clear my judgment further upon this
point, and to show you, that such corruptions of some wicked amongst us do not
null our Churches, nor unchurch us, as no people of God; but that we may truly
(notwithstanding corruptions and corrupt ones amongst us) be called a true
Church and people of God. Which work, that I may the better and more plainly
perform it, according to your capacities and understandings, I shall first
pr^mise that known and true distinction of Churches into visible and Invisible,
denied bv no judicious Divines that I can hear of; and for a sure truth
delivered by Reverend V^sinus in his Catechism, Psalm. 348. The Militant
Church, which in this world fights under Ch^ists B^nn^r against the world,
the flesh and the D^vil, is either visible or invisible.

The visi^le Church is a company among men, embracing and profes^ing the true
and incorrupt Doctrine of the Law and the Gospel, and using ^he Sacramen^s
aright, according to Christ his institution, and professing obedience unto the
Doctrine. In which company are many unregene^ated, or Hypoc^ites, consenting
notwi^hs^anding and agree^ng to the Doctrine; In which also the Son of God is
forcible to regenerate ^ome by virtue of his spirit unto eve^lasting life. Or,
It is a company of such as consent in the true doctrine they profess, wherein
notwithstanding are many de^d and unregenerate Members, Not every one that
says unto m^, Lord, Lord shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Math. 7.
verse. 21. Hither pertain the Parables of the seed and tares; likewise of the
net gathering both good and bad fishes, Math 13. verse. 24, 25, 26, and 47. The
invisible Church is a comp^ny of those which are elected to eternal life, in
whom a new life is begun here by the holy Ghost, and is perfected in the life
to come. This Church, as long as it war^ar^th and sojou^neth on earth, always
lies hid in the visible Church. They which are in this invisible Church, never
perish; therefore neither are any hypocrites therein, but the elect only, of
whom it is said, No man shall pluck my sheep out of mine hands, John 10. verse.
28. And again, The foundation of the Lord remains sure and h^th this seal,
The Lord knows who ar^ hispunc; 2 Timothy 2 verse. 19. It is called invisible,
not that the men therein are invisible, bu^ because their faith and godliness
is invisible, neither is known of any but of themselves, in whom it is; and
because we are not able certainly to distinguish or discern in the visible
Church the true godly from the hypocrites. There is the same difference between
the visible and invisible Church, which is between the whole and part: For the
invisible ^^th hid in the visible, as a part in the whole; which appears out
of this place of Paul, Whom the Lord predestined, them also he called, Romans
8. verse. 30. This calling, whereby the Lord calls us, is of two sorts, inward
and outward. The inward, Saint Paul says, was wrought according to the purpose
of saving men; and the elect are called by both. Hypocrites are called only by
the outward calling: and in resp^ct of this outward calling is the Church
called visible; and the Church of the called* where are hypocrites also. But
the invisible is called the company or Church of the elect and chosen. This
being premised, I say that corruptions or corrupt Members in a visible Church
there a^e, and yet* they make not the Church, no Church, but still it is a true
Church, both from the pro^ession of faith in it, as also from the right use of
the Sacraments administered in it. Which is ma^ifest from that place, where our
Savior sends his Disciples to convert people, and to ga^her them into
Churches* Go and teach all nations, Ba^tizing t^^m in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, teac^ing them to obse^ve all things
whatsoever I have commanded you, Math. 28. verse. 19.20. In the words, Go and
teach, is implied the true and sound Doctrine to be professed; In the words,
baptizing them, is implied the right use of the Sacraments; In the words,
teaching them to observe all things, is implied the profession of obedience to
the Doctrine and Ministry; In the words, whatsoever I have commanded, is
implied faith in Jesus Christ, commanding the word and Doctrine to be preached
and observed; which word, though it be not actually nor exactly obeyed, nor
observed by all, yet it is taught to be observed, and acknowledged, that it
ought and must be observed; which are the marks and tokens of a true visible
Church; and where these ma^ks and tokens are, there is a true Church.

Now I shall clearly prove unto you, that the corruptions of wicked men in a
Church do not make that Church no Church, or no people of God. First, from the
old Testament, besides those places already in my Argument against Mr. Ni^hols
urged from the 1 Samuel 2. verse. 29. compared with the 12. verse; and from Exodus
32. Chap. verse 11. compared with the 1. and 6. verses, and from 1 Samuel 12.
verse. 22. Further yet the Prophet Isaiah calls the people of his time Gods
people, Isai 1. verse. 3. yet exceeding great wickedness was then amongst them;
Magistrates were wicked, Chap. 1. verse. 23. and Chap. 3. verse. 14.15. and Chap.
5. verse. 7. The state of the Church was very bad and evil, Chap. 1. verse.
21.22. The teachers were corrupt, Chap. 3. verse. 12. The women were exceeding
vain, proud, haughty and corrupt, Chap. 3. verse. 16. compared with the 18. and
23. verse. Rich men and chief men they also were very corrupt, as you may see in
Chap. 5. verse. 8. and in Chap. 10. verse. 1.2. compared with Chap. 36. verse. 3.
And all the people in general are complained of, Chap. 24. verse. 5. and Chap.
48.4 and 8. verses, and in the 1 Chap. 2. and 6. verses; Yea, they were sunk
deep in rebellion, Chap. 31. verse. 6. Yet they were called Gods Church and
people. But leaving the old Policy (as no^ suting with Mr. Nichols policy in
undermining our Churches) because he says, God having but that one people, he
was loath to cast them off; I come to the new policy and new Testament, to try
whether God did then cast off his people and unchurch them for the corruptions
of the wicked among them, and first I make my instance in the Church of the
Corinthians thus:

If the Church of Corinth, when Paul calls them a Church and Saints, 1 Cor.
1. verse. 2. and 2 Cor. 1. verse. 1. were as bad, and in some things worse than
our Pa^ishes, then ours are true Churches, or theirs were none, and so Paul
should ^ely them; Verum prius; The first part of this Proposition is true, that
they were a Church and Saints, for so he styles them; And secondly that they
were as bad, and in some things worse than our Parishes, I prove thus from many
evil things reported of them by Paul's Epistles to them.

First, They had persons as ignorant, e^se why says he to them, Awake to
righteousness, and sin not; for some have not the knowledge of God. I speak
this to your shame, 1 Cor. 15. verse. 34. Secondly, They had persons as
contious, and so he tells them, It ha^h been declared to me of you, my
brethren, by them which are of the house of Cloe, that th^re are con^entions
among you, 1 Cor. 1. verse. 11. Thirdly, They were as carnal, and such he calls
them, saying, Ye are yet carnal; for wher^as there is among you envying and
stri^e and division, are ye not carnal and walk as men? 1 Cor. 3. verse. 3.
Fourthly, They were more scandalous, than we dare be, yea, in such a sin as was
not so much as named among the Gentiles, witness these his words unto them, It
is reported commonly that there is fornication among you, and such fornication
as is not so much as named among the Gentiles, that one should have his Fathers
wife, 1 Cor. 5. verse. 1. Fifthly, They were more erroneous than we, denying the
Resurrection, as Paul reproves them thus: If christ be preached that he rose
from the de^d; how say some among you that there is no Resurrection of the
dead? 1 Cor. 15. verse. 12. and making Preaching and Faith vain, as Paul
complains of them, saying, If Christ be not risen, then i^ our preaching vain,
and your Faith is also vain, 1 Cor. 15. verse. 14. Sixthly* They were so corrupt
and sinful* that they bec^me even obstinate in sin, and delighted to continue
in uncleanness, fornication, and lasciviousness, as Paul tells them, when he
gives them warning of his coming unto them, I fear least when I come, I shall
not find you such as I would, and that I shall be found unto you such as ye
would not, least there be debates, envyings, w^ath, strifes, backslidings,
whisperings, swellings, tumults; And least when I come again, my God will
humble me among you; and that I shall bewail many that have sinned already, and
have not repented of the uncleanness, and fornication, and lasciviousness which
they have committed, 2 Cor. 12. verse. 20.21. From all these places you may
evidently perceive the truth of the first part of my proposition, that the
Corinthians were as bad, and in some things worse than our Parishes, Ergo,
verum est posterius, what follows is true also, that if they for all these
corruptions among them were a Church and called Saints; we also notwithstanding
corruptions and corrupt ones in our Parishes are a Church, and to be called
Saints.

But what do I instance in Corinth only, to prove a truth so clear? In all the
Churches through Paul's Epistles I may easily instance the like. A Learned and
Godly Divine handling this very point in a discourse, brings in an unsettled
Roman, and carries him quite through Paul's Epistles; He first brings him to the
Romans, What, say they, will you continue in our Church? No, says he, ye are a
mixed multitude, you have amongst you many that cause division and offenses, and
such as serve their own bellies, Romans 16. verse. 17.18. Well, say the
Corinthians, will you join with us? No, says he, ye have contentious persons,
1 Cor. 1. verse. 11. Incestuous, 1 Cor. 5. verse. 1. denying the Resurrection, 1
Cor. 15. verse. 12. The Galatians come in, will you be of our Church? No, ye are
gone to another Gospel, Galat. 1. verse. 6. ye are bewitched, and obey not the
truth, Gal. 3. verse. 1. The Ephesians say* will you come to us? No, ye have
liars, stealers, robbers amongst you, Ephesians. 4. verse. 25.28, 29. and Chap. 5.
verse. 3, 4, 6. ye have that teach other Doctrine, and give heed to Fables, 1 Timothy 1. verse. 3.4. some that sin openly, 1 Timothy 5. verse. 20. The Philippians
come next, will you be of our number? No, ye have some preach Christ out of
contention to add affliction to Paul's hands, Phil. 1. verse. 16. you have many
that are enemies to the Cros^ of Christ, and whose God is their belly, Phil. 3.
verse. 18.19. What say you to us Colossians? No, ye are subject to Ordinances,
Touch not, Taste not, handle not, Colos. 2. verse. 20.21. Why will you not join
with us Thessalonians? Ye have some brethren that walk disorderly, 2 These. 3.
verse. 6. Will you come to C^eet then? No; The Cretians are always liars, evil
beasts, slow bellies, and to be rebi^ed sharply, Titus 1. verse. 12, 13. Yet we
hope we H^brews may please you. No, ye are an ignorant people, and had need to
be taught the first p^inciples of religion, Hebr. 5. verse. 12. The poor man at
a stand, and weary of his journey asks a friend what he should do? You had
best, says he, go back again, and join with the Romans as before. So may Mr.
Nichols and his separate Congregation, when they have gone through many
Churches to find out one without corruptions and corrupt persons return to our
Godly Ministers and Parishes again. I confess, I know not what disparity may be
given, nor what can truly be answered to this Argument to make it of no force,
unless Mr. Nichols will invent somewhat of his own fantasy, and say again,
that God was unwilling and loath to cast off the Corinthians and all those
Churches to whom Paul wrote; but as for us he cares not for us, which would be
absurd. The instance also in the Churches of Asia is unanswerable; which,
though corrupt, are called Golden Candlesticks, Revel. 1. verse. 20. What
corruptions were in Ephesus? What in the Church of Pergamos, where (if not
Nicholaitans) yet Nicholaitans, whom God hated, were followed, Revel. 2. verse.
15. What in Thyatira? Where a Iezabel was suffered to preach, Revel. 2. verse.
20. What in Sardis, that had a name to live, but was dead? Revel. 3. verse. 1.
What in lukewarm Laodicea, that is commended for nothing good in her? Yet all
these are called Churches by John, for the patience of some, the good works of
others, and doubtless for the profession and Godliness of many that lived among
them. It is the principal p^rt that gives the denomination to a thing, and not
that which is more base and vile in it. A Princely Palace is named a stately
Palace and building, from those stately and capacious banqueting Rooms,
Galleries, Walks, Halls, Parlours, Balconies, Chapels, Towers, and Turrets
about it, though in it there may be also some dark and dismal Entries and
passages, some slovenly, greazie, disordered Kitchins and Cook-Rooms, and about
it some outward stinking S^able Rooms and Dunghils. Even so the Churches of God
take their denomination and are called even Saints, a principa^iori part, from
the more principal part, of the wholesome and sound Doctrine preached in it, of
the true Faith con^^ssed, of the right use of the Sacraments ministered, of the
obedience to the word acknowledged in it, and finally of those who turn not to
riot and excess with the wicked, of which sort commonly there are some; Ergo,
Our Churches are true, and not Babylonish. But further, that a Parochial people
meeting and gathering together for the true worship of God (there being nothing
in such our meetings, qua, as meetings, Babylonish) are not to be called
Babylonish, but that they are true Churches, I shall prove by these strong
reasons and following Arguments out of Scripture.

1* Argument. Apostolical constitution is a true constitution. But such an one
is ours. Ergo, The Minor I prove thus:

First, The people of this Nation was converted to Christ, as true Histories do
witness, by either Apostles, or Apostolical men; neither is it to be doubted,
but that in their days the Gospel was far spread, as may appear by Paul's
Testimony, Romans 10. verse. 18. and Colos. 1. verse. 6.

Secondly, Because we hold and maintain the same things Apostolical, whereby we
and other Churches were made Christians, and Christian Assemblies, to wit, the
word, external profession of Jesus Christ, and the holy Sacraments, by which
and for which the people in the Apostles days were accounted Christians. As
for the word, who doubts of the excellency of it, and what an excellent people
it fashioneth, where preached and received, as I shall in these places show. In
the 2 Epistle of John, verse. 9. 10. we have this commendation of the word and
Doctrine, and of them that receive it, He that abides in the Doctrine of
Christ, he has the Father and the Son. And if there come any unto you, and
bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him, God
speed. Secondly, The word is said to make Disciples to Christ, Matthew. 28. verse.
18. Mark. 16. verse. 15. Thirdly, The word it is that reconciles men to God; so
Paul says, God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, and has
committed unto us the word of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. verse. 19. Fourthly, By
this word the Apostles wrought and converted many, as may appear from Peter
standing up and lifting up his voice and saying to the people, Hearken to my
words, Act. 2. verse. 14. compared with verses 37, 38. and Paul and Silas by the
word converted the Jaylour and his Family, as is clear in these words, They
speak unto him the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his house; and he
took them the same hour of the night and washed their stripes, and was
baptized, he and all his straightway, Act. 16. verse. 32, 33. Fifthly, This word
given to a people is Gods covenanting with them; for so his Declaration of his
will by his word is called his Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29. verse. 9. compared with the
12. verse. And the people receiving this word, and professing their Faith to
God, is their taking of God to be their God, and covenanting with him, Deuteronomy.
16. verse. 17. He loved the people; all his Saints are in thine hand; and they
sat down at thy feet; every one shall receive of thy words, Deuteronomy. 33. verse. 3.
Of such has he received a reconciliation, Job 33. verse. 23, 24. Sixthly, Such
professors the Apostles admitted into the Church, as those that had covenanted
with God, and were not to be denied the Seal of the Covenant, Act. 8. verse. 12.
compared with the 37, 38. verses. And as for the Sacraments, they combine and
knit us together, Matthew. 28. verse. 19. 1 Cor. 10. verse. 16, 17. Therefore
unless Mr. Nichols deny all this unto us, he cannot deny us Apostolical
constitution. Oh then we having the Father and the Son by the Doctrine and word
of Christ, we being discipled by the word, we being reconciled by the word to
God, we findeing daily upon our Souls a powerful working of the word of the
Ministry, God having covenanted with us to be our God, and we by this word
having taken him for our God, shall the Seals of this Covenant be denied unto
us, which the Apostles denied to none that professed the word, no not to Simon
Magus? Act. 8. verse. 13. and though strongly knit and united together in
Christ, and made one body and partakers of that one bread, shall we be
unchurched, unreconciled, uncovenanted, unknit and separated from Christ, as
Babylonish? Surely this Assertion of M. Nichols will seem to the World not
only uncharitable, but most absurd and Antichristian, contradicting so much of
Scripture as it does.

2. Argument. Those that profess the Name of Christ without superstitious
inventions of man are a true Church. But a Parochial people, meeting and
gathering together here in England for the true worship of Christ, profess the
Name of Christ without superstitious inventions of man; Ergo, They are a true
Church. The Major is proved thus; for Churches planted by others are only thus
described by their terms, where Christ was named, as you may read, Romans 15.
verse. 20. So have I strived to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named,
least I should build upon another man's foundation, which words Learned Mr.
John Diodati expounds thus: that it was the Apostles meaning to make it his
only glory to plant new Churches, not standing to manure those which were
already planted by the Ministry of others. Which cannot be understood well to
be the sense of the Apostle, if by these terms, where Christ is named, he
understand not true Churches planted and erected. So it appears, that where
Christ's name is named, called upon and professed (and that without
superstitious inventions of man) there is a true Church. But our Parochial
meeting and gathering together is to name the Name of Christ, to call upon it,
and profess it; Ergo, Our Parochial people here in England, so meeting and
gathering together, are true Churches, and not Babylonish.

3. Argument. We be either the Church of Christ, and so a true Church, or the
Church of Antichrist. But we are not the Church of Antichrist; Ergo, we are the
Church of Christ, and so not Babylonish, but a true Church. The Minor is clear;
we have forsaken Rome, the Pope, his Doctrine, his Sacraments; Yea, every year
upon the Friday before Easter day we are excommunicated by the Pope with this
Ceremony, which my self have seen, and was present at it, Ann. Dom. 1640. The
Pope standing in a high Balcony in Peter's Palace before thousands of people
gathered beneath in an open, wide, and capacious place, takes in his hand a
lighted Torch, declaring that light to represent the light and brightness of
the true Militant Church, and the light and glory of the Triumphant Church
above; and then one of his Chaplains putting out the light, The Pope casts
the Torch out of his hand from on high down to the ground, declaring by that
Ceremony that so he excommunicates and deprives of all light of mercy, favor,
comfort in the Militant Church, and also excludes from the light of glory in
the Triumphant Church, all Heretics in England (as such he looks upon us) who
acknowledge him no^ by their obedience to him to be the supreme head of the
universal Church, and condemns their Souls to the pits of Hell, where is no
light of mercy and redemption, but darkness for ever (exc^pt they repent and
turn to him) using in this action of casting down the Torch the words of Christ
to the wicked on the le^t hand, D^part from me ye cursed into everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25. verse. 41. Thus are we
disowned, cast out, anathematized, and for ever cursed by the Pope; and shall
we yet be said by Mr. N^^hols to be Babylonish, to be his, or any ways to
belong to him? No, surely we may rather say as our Savior said of the World
and his Disciples, If ye were of the World, the World would love his own; but
because ye are not of the World, but I have chosen you out of the World,
therefore the World hates you, John 15. verse. 19. So if we were of Rome, of
Babylon, Rome would love us as her own; but because we are not of Rome, but the
Lord has chosen us out of Rome, and out of Babylon, therefore she hates us,
and her Triple Crowned Head and Governor bids us depart, casts us out and
curses us. So it appears that we are no Church nor people of Antichrist; Ergo,
we are a Church of Christ. And if there be any further doubt of this in Mr.
Nichols, I must tell him plainly that the difference is between him and the
Pope. The Pope says, we are no Church of Christ, because not belonging to him;
Mr. Nichols says, we are no Church of Christ, because we are Babylonish, and
so belonging to the Pope and to Antichrist. As Paul set the Pharisees and
Sadducees at variance to help himself, Act. 23. verse. 6, 7. So I shall leave
the Pope and Mr. Nichols to reason this case, whilst I step forth to my fourth
Argument thus:

4. Argument. A company having no false nor Babylonish head, but having Jesus
Christ for their true head, can be no false nor Babylonish Church, or body. But
we are a company having no false nor Babylonish head, but having Jesus Christ
for our true head. Ergo, we can be no false, nor Babylonish Church, or body.
The Minor is clear thus; because we do all profess him, which is a token of
Faith in the heart, Romans 10. verse. 9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the
Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the
dead, thou shall be saved. And the Apostles judged such worthy to be of the
Church in their time, and thereupon did admit men, as Act. 16. verse. 31, 32.
Yea, Simon Magus thereupon was admitted, Act. 8. verse. 13. though otherwise a
dissembling Hypocrite, whose example is a sufficient answer to Mr. Nichols his
Objection, saying, she^ me ^here the Apostles admitted wicked men into their
Churches as you do; To which with this example of Simon Magus we answer, as
also with Demas, Hymenaeus, and Alexander, that they admitted wicked
dissembling Hypocrites, as we may do some, not qua, and as wicked and
dissemblers, but qua, and as Pro^essours professing with their mouth the Lord
Jesus, as a token of Faith in their hearts, Romans 10. verse. 9. Yea, secondly
such is this confession, or profession of the name of Christ, that it is a
token laid down in Scripture, that such as confess Jesus Christ have the Spirit
of God, Hereby know ye the Spirit of God; every Spirit that confesses that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God, 1 John 4. verse. 2. And thirdly,
the confession of his name is a part of our praise, so Paul says, By him let
us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our
lips, giving thanks to his name, Hebr. 13. verse. 15. Thus we hold Christ for
our head, we profess and confess him and his name. ^rgo, we are no Babylonish,
^or false Body.

5. Argument. A company having Jesus Christ for their Mediator and Advocate,
are a true Church; But we are a company having Jesus Christ for our Mediator
and Advocate; Ergo, we are a true Church. The Minor is proved thus; First by
our prayers which are only made to God, and in the name of Jesus Christ only.
Secondly, in that we do condemn the Papists, for making the Virgin Marie,
Saints and Angels Mediators to God, and we do reject it as idola^rous.
Thirdly, because we do partake of the Covenant made unto us by God through
Jesus Christ; which I thus make good. First, because many of us both in Church
and Commonwealth, of both higher and lower degree, have true knowledge of Gods
word, which is one part of the promise and Covenant, as you may read in these
words of Jeremiah, This shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house
of Israel, says the Lord. I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write
it in their hearts; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And
further, They shall all know me, from the lowest of them unto the greatest of
them, says the Lord, Jerem. 31. verse. 33, 34. and the like, Hebr. 8. verse. 10.
and Chap. 10. verse. 16. Secondly, the fear of God possesses the hearts of
many, which is another part thereof, as the same Prophet written, I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them
good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from
me, Jerem. 32.40. Thirdly, God has brought us out of the Egyptian bondage of
that Roman Antichrist, which is another part, I have heard the groaning of the
Children of Israel, whom the Egyptians kept in bondage, and I have remembered my
Covenant, Exodus 6. verse. 5. Fourthly, because we have the book of the Covenant,
which is read to us as formerly by Moses to the people, who took the book of
the Covenant, and read in the audience of all the people; and they said, All
that the Lord has said, will we do and be obedient, Exodus 24. verse. 7. We have
the holy Commandments and the Gospel, the words of the Covenant, Exodus 34.
verse. 28. And it is a special prerogative to Gods people to have the word of
God, as Paul observes in the Jews prerogative and advantage, what advantage
then has the Jew? Much every way, chiefly because unto them were committed the
Oracles of God, Romans 3. verse. ^.2. Which David also sets down as a great
privilege and prerogative, He shew^^h his word unto Jacob, his statutes and
his judgments unto Israel; he has not dealt so with any Nation, Ps. 14. v. 7,
19, 20. All which bound up in one bundle of an impartial judgment and true
consideration, will make it to appear unto the world, that surely Mr. Nichols
his Assertion is most erroneous and false, affirming as much as this, that a
people offering their prayers to God in the name of Jesus Christ, taking the
same Jesus Christ only for their Mediator and Advocate, condemning as
Babylonish the Mediation and Advocation of all Saints and Angels, partaking of
the Covenant made by God to his people through Jesus Christ, having true
knowledge of Gods word, and his Law written in their inward parts, having the
fear of God possessing their hearts, having been brought out of Babylonish and
Antichristian bondage, having the book of the Covenant read unto them, having
the holy commandments, the Gospel, the words of the Covenant, and acknowledging
obedience due unto them, and enjoying that peculiar privilege and prerogative
of Jacob, and Israel in the word; Yet notwithstanding all these particulars and
sure truths out of Scripture; that such a people is no true Church, but
Babylonish and Antichristian? Mr. Nichols may say so; but I am sure the
Scriptures say the contrary, which must be yours and my guide; to the which I
beseech you to lean, as you tender your Souls. For my part I am so convinced
out of the word of the contrary to Mr. Nichols his Assertion, that I hope I
shall never be so seduced nor blinded, as to incline to so gross and false an
opinion. And I hope my good God, my true guide, my Prophet and only Teacher
will not hereafter judge, or condemn me for the ligh^, which in this
particular point of controversy I am resolved till death to follow.

All these Arguments upon the day of dispute should have been objected against
Mr. Nichols, had he answered like a Scholar Categorically to every
Proposition, and not so much endeavored with Speeches and Orations to stop the
stream of them. Many more I could propound unto you, were it not that I have
already found the work to increase like the Widows Oil much in my hands, and
nothing yet spoken of the second Proposition, which I know you expect to have
it further cleared unto you, than it was the other day by a few Objections
against it. But before I come unto it, I must briefly answer the scruple of
one, or two of the Clergy, my fellow laborers, whose impatient mutterings
against Parochial Churches (wherein they serve, and can willingly enjoy the
milk of such flocks) were taken notice off by some; who seem not to deny
Parochial Churches in Mr. Nichols his sense, counselling, or Preaching a
separation from them; but in another sense (Presbyterial they would fain call
it, but unjustly) as disagreeing with the Classical way, and with Provincial
Churches; which one of them told me, were to be called only Churches, and
Parishes not truly Churches, but only integral parts of such Classical, or
Provincial Churches. So that the whole County being divided into Classes, the
Parishes also are to be divided so, as that a competent number are to belong to
such and such a Classes, as formerly to such and such a Cathedral, and all that
number of Parishes to make up but one Church, to be ruled by Officers and
Elders according to the word, but singly every Parish taken by it self not to
be called a Church. Which Opinion being but a Cavil (as I suppose) against my
self by the party insisting on it, I shall wave as unwilling to disturb, and as
willing to submit for peace and quietness sake; especially in this, which well
understood does not cross my Opinion and judgment of holding Parish Societies
to be true Churches, nor my Opinion cross the judgment of the Learned and
Reverend Divines of the Presbyterial way, who affirm the Presbyterial
Government, by Preaching, and Ruling Presbyters, in Congregational, Classical,
and Synodal Assemblies, to lay the truest claim to a Divine Right according to
the Scriptures; with whose own Doctrine I shall confirm this truth, that
Parochial Congregations are to be called truly Churches. The aforesaid Divines
in their book of the Divine right of Church Government take notice of the whole
Church, the whole Body of Christ, and of larger particular Members of that Body
of Christ, and thirdly of smaller single Congregations. Which threefold
distinction of Churches is truly grounded upon the Scripture. Thus Paul calls
the whole Body of Christ, Church, Now ye are the Body of Christ, and Members in
particular. And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily
Prophets, thirdly Teachers, 1 Cor. 12. verse. 27.28. So Mat^h. 16. v. 18. and
often elsewhere. So likewise larger particular Members of that body of Christ
(such as Provincial Churches) are in Scripture called Churches; as the Church
of Jerusalem, Act 8. verse. 1. the Church of Antioch, Act. 13. v. 1. the Church
of Co^inth, 2 Cor. 1. verse. 1. and the Church of Ephesus, unto the Angel of the
Church of Ephesus write these things, Revel. 2. verse. 1. In which places there
were no doubt, many single Churches and Congregations, as appears plainly in
Corinth, where Paul taught, Apollo taught, and Cephas taught, and in Ephesus,
where Eusebius Emissenus reckons up above threescore several Churches and
Congregations, all which in Scripture are called one Church. And I cannot here
but declare my judgment upon those words of John, Rev. 2. verse. 1. Unto the
Angel of the Church of Ephesus, that certainly if there were in Ephesus many
single Congregations and particular Churches, and yet called but Church, as if
but one Church were there; then it appears evidently, that those many single
Churches made up one Provincial Church, as integral parts of the whole, which I
will not deny to my Caviller, though he in his private discourse brought no
such Scripture to prove somewhat, though nothing denied by me, while I asse^t
single Parishes to be true Churches; and herein I hope I dissent not from the
Reverend Presbyters, whose Zeal in these troublous days I admire, whose
Godliness and profund Learning I cordially acknowledge and with reverence
respect. But secondly, what from the word, Angel, I observe, is, that not many
Angels are written unto in so many single Congregations, but one only Angel is
named, to one only Angel the writing was directed, though in several Churches
of that City according to the number of them, there were several Pastors
also; from whence I gather that the Discipline in that City was so
Presbyterial, that over all the single Congregations there was some one
over^seeing power, whether by the name of Bishop, or Superintendent (as to this
day in Swedland and Denmark) or some chief Provincial Classis, wherein was some
chief Moderatour governing with Presbyters, Officers, Teaching and Ruling
Elders, to whom in particular John is commanded to write concerning all the
other Churches making up as integral parts that one Church of Ephesus.

But thirdly, the holy Spirit of Christ is pleased to style also single
Congregations, Churches (which my Caviller seems to deny) as you may observe in
these places, Let your Women keep silence in the Churches, 1 Cor. 14. verse. 34.
where note that several single meetings, Societies and Congregations making up
one Church of Corinth, are called Churches; and oftentimes mention is made of
the Church that is in such, or such a House, as Romans 16. verse. 5. 1 Cor. 16.
verse. 19. Coloss. 4. verse. 15. Philem. verse. 2. whether this be interpreted of
the Church made up only of the Members of that Family; or of the Church that
ordinarily did meet in such houses with a particular Teacher in that place, it
implies however a single Congregation; and, to my purpose, such a single
Congregation is called Church; which it seems is the main point that my
Caviller stumbles at, who further told me that I could not maintain Parishes to
be Churches, nor any single Congregations to be Churches, but in an Independent
way; the contrary whereof I shall prove thus briefly in a Presbyterial way. The
Presbytery grants that many single Congregations, as parts, make up one
Classis, or one Provincial Church; Ergo, Those many single Congregations are
true Churches; which thus I prove. If any thing oppose their true being of
Churches, it must be (according to my Caviller) because they are but parts of a
Church, or body made up by them. But their being parts of a Church, or body
made up by them; does not oppose their true being of Churches; Ergo, single
Congregations are true Churches. The Minor proposition I prove thus. They are
such parts of the whole Church, or body, made up by them, as do partake the
nature of the whole. But the whole body made up by them is a true Church; Ergo,
The parts and single Congregations, making up that whole body, are also true
Churches. The Major, or first Proposition I prove thus. They are not
Heterogeneal parts, but Homogeneal parts, making up the whole, partake the
nature of the whole. Ergo, They are such parts of the whole, as do partake the
nature of the whole. And then; But the whole is a true Church. Ergo, Parishes
and single Congregations, as Homogeneal parts, partaking of the nature of the
whole (which is a true Church) are also true Churches. Which (beloved) that you
may the better understand, I shall clear it with an instance of Heterogeneal
and Homogeneal parts. First, In man's body the parts making up a complete body
of man are the Head, the Shoulders, the Arms, Hands, Legs, and the like. Of
these parts we cannot say, The head is truly the body, the Arm is the body,
the Leg is the body, because they are Heterogeneal parts of several natures,
not partaking the nature of the whole nor of the body. But secondly, in the
Sea, or Ocean, the parts making up the whole Sea, or Ocean are many drops of
water, which are called Homogeneal parts, parting the nature of the whole,
whose nature is water, and every drop of water is as true water as the whole
Ocean, and of every part, or drop it may be said, It is water, as of the whole
it may be said, It is water; For Homogeneal parts are parts of the same kind
and nature. But such parts are single Congregations, or single Churches and
Parishes, making up a Classis, or Provincial Church; for it cannot be said of
many of them, that the one is a part as the Head, the other as the Arm, the
other as the Hand, or Leg making up that body, as Heterogeneal parts of
several and distinct natures; Ergo, They are Homogeneal parts; and as the
nature of the whole is to be a Church, so likewise the true being and nature of
these is to be Churches. But further; This whole Church, or Provincial body
made up of many single Congregations is Predicable of many inferiors, it being
as Generical, or Specifical in respect of many particulars. But such Generical,
or Specifical Predicates are predicable of inferiors of their own kind; Ergo,
The inferior and subordinate Congregations to to this Provincial body, are of
the same kind and nature of the whole, and of the superior; which being a
true Church, the inferiors are also true Churches; As Man Specificable is
Predicable of this Individual, of that Individual Man, and the other
Individual; all which Individuals and particular Inferiors agree with the
Superior and common Species in the kind, nature and self-same being of Man.

Thus having answered this scruple, and having fully laid down my judgment
against Mr. Nichols his first erroneous Assertion, That Parochial Churches are
Babylonish, and having proved that they are neither Babylonish in their
Constitution, as Parishes, nor in the end of their Constitution, or division
into Parishes, nor in their mixture of good and bad; nor to be denied to be
true Churches as subordinate to higher Classes, I shall hereafter commit to the
Press, and public vieu of the World this my judgment delivered here unto you,
as not ashamed of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, nor of any truth belonging unto
it. And I shall desire Mr Nichols, if in case he shall reply, that he will
answer positively first to my grounds and Arguments in form, as I have here
laid them down by Syllogismes, granting, denying, distinguishing, taking notice
of the Authority of the Scriptures, expounding them (if he can) better than my
self have done; and then to make use of his fair Speeches and Orations, by
adding what he can to disprove my judgment, and to clear his own better, than
upon the day of our Dispute he did; otherwise to expect no second reply from me.

In the mean while I shall pass on to his second Assertion, in the which he
affirms that his Congregation is the house of God. First I shall lay down and
repeat unto you my Arguments (as upon the day of Dispute they were Objected
against him) with his answers to them; and then I shall further enlarge my
discourse to prove his Congregation to be no true Church, nor house of God, but
to practice things Babylonish, Antichristian, and against the word of God.

You may (beloved) call to mind, that after his first Proposition had been
awhile canvassed, and, as I complained (which to many seemed Passion in me)
little satisfaction given by his answers, why he should term our Parochial
Churches Babylonish, I told him, it was time to come to his house, he having
been so long in ours; and I desired him to hear me an Argument, or two against
his pretended Church; which at first he was unwilling to grant, unless he might
first argue against this Parish of Deal in particular, which neither my
Moderatour nor my self would yield unto; First, because it was not a
Proposition stated nor agreed upon to be disputed, Secondly, to avoid tumults
and quarrels that might have been caused, in case, before your faces and upon
your own ground, his Arguments should tend to the affronting of any of you in
particular, particularizing any particular misdemeanour, miscarriage, or sin of
any, or making use of Nickname, or aspersion unjustly laid upon you, as he
seemed to intimate he would do, saying, he would speak of you but as you were
characterized abroad. But being stopped from casting any affront in particular
upon you, with much unwillingness he yielded at last that I should Object
somewhat against his second Proposition. And having against his first Assertion
begun my Argument from the description, or definition of a Babylonish, Romish
Parochial Church, I thought it would prove my best way of objecting against his
second Proposition also, to begin with a true definition, or description of the
true house of God; which I performed thus:

1. Argument. The house of God is the Church of the living God, the pillar and
ground of the truth, 1 Timothy 3. verse. 15. But your Congregation is not the
Church of the living God, nor the pillar and ground of the truth; Ergo your
Congregation is not the house of God. The Major being granted, and the Minor
denied, I proved it thus:

Where many things are practiced against the truth, there is not the Church of
the living God, nor the pillar and ground of the truth. But in your
Congregation many things are practiced against the truth; Ergo, your
Congregation is not the Church of the living God, nor the pillar and ground of
the truth. The Major was granted and the Minor denied; which I proved thus. The
truth of the Word orders to a true Church a true Pastor. But in your Church
and Congregation there is no true Pastor. Ergo, In your Congregation things
are practiced against the truth. The Minor, or second Proposition being denied,
I proceeded thus: In your Church and Congregation there is no known Pastor but
your self. But you are no true Pastor. Ergo, In your Church and Congregation
there is no true Pastor. The Minor still I proved. A true Pastor comes in ^o
his flock by the true door of Christ and his word. But you came not in to your
flock by the true door of Christ and his word; E^go, you are no true Pastor.
The Minor I cleared thus. The true door of Christ and his word for a Pastor to
come in to his flock is by true Ordination. But you came not in to your flock
by true Ordination. Ergo, you came not in to your flock by the true door of
Christ and his word. The Minor appeared thus. True Ordination according to
Christ's word is by imposition of hands by the Presbytery. But your Ordination
is not by imposition of hands by the Presbytery; Ergo, you came not in to your
flock by true Ordination.

Here Mr. Nichols denying the Major, that true Ordination, according to Christ's
word, is by Imposition of hands by the Presbytery, said, that he came in to his
flock by the Election of the people; which he said was true Ordination
according to Christ's word. Against which answer I framed thus my second
Argument.

2. Argument. That which is most warrantable for Ordination from the word of
God, is truest Ordination. But Ordination by Imposition of hands by the
Presbytery is more warrantable for true Ordination, than the Election of the
people; Ergo, Imposition of hands by the Presbytery is truer Ordination, than
the Election of the people. The Major he could not deny, but the Minor he
denied, which I thus proved. Ordination by Imposition of hands by the
Presbytery is clear and warrantable from the word of God in these eight places
of Scripture at the least, Act. 6. verse. 6. Act. 13. verse. 3. Hebr. 6. verse. 2.
1 ^im. 4. verse. 14. 1 Timothy 5. verse. 22. Titus 1. verse. 5. Romans 10. verse. 15.
Hebr. 5. verse. 4. compared with verse 1* But you can show me no such places of
Scripture, nor so many to warrant Ordination by Election of the people; Ergo,
Ordination by Imposition of hands by the Presbytery is more warrantable for
true Ordination from the word of God, than the Election of the people.

Here the light of Scripture dazzled Mr. Nichols his eyes, the Authority of so
many places wrapped up in one Proposition startled him so, that fain he would
have ridded himself of so much Scripture against him; And he began to cavil and
to question me, how I knew that he was not ordained by Imposition of hands by
the Presbytery, having through some trouble of mind forgot that he had granted
it before unto me, and confessed his Ordination by the Election of the people,
as I told him, I knew his Ordination by his own confession. Then fain would he
ou^ of order, form, and Syllogism, know how and where I was ordained. A thing
(beloved) not very pertinent to the force of my Argument against him; neither
needed I to have given him in public such an account of my self, till some
Argument from him against me had questioned my Ordination, as mine did his; yet
to ease his mind I told him by whom I had been lawfully Ordained; and forcing
him on again to my Argument, he began ^o say somewhat; First, that indeed he
acknowledged that Imposition of hands by the Presbytery was used in the
Apostles time, as a Ceremony, which now might be left off, and so was now by
many Godly men omitted. To which slight answer I replied thus:

3. Argument. That which is a Principle of the Doctrine of Jesus Christ ought
never by any Churches to the end of the World be omitted, or laid aside. But
Imposition of hands by the Presbytery is a Principle of the Doctrine of Jesus
Christ. Ergo, Imposition of hands by the Presbytery in Ordination ought never
by any Churches to the end of the World be omitted, or laid aside.

Here Mr. Nichols showed himself yet more troubled, and quite to have forgotten
the Scriptures, or else he would not have granted my Major and have denied my
Minor, which immediately I proved thus from St. Paul to the Hebrews.

4. Argument. St. Paul in Hebr. 6. Chap. verse. 1, 2. sets down with Baptism
Imposition of hands to be a Principle of the Doctrine of Christ. But Baptism,
because it is a Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, ^ught never by any
Churches to be omitted to the end of the World. Ergo, Imposition of hands by
the Presbytery in Ordination also, ought never by any Churches to be omitted to
the end of the World.

Here Mr. Nichols began to perceive his error, and want of knowledge in the
Scriptures, when he denied the Minor, and that Imposition of hands by the
Presbytery was a Doctrine of the Principles of Christ; which being made clear
unto him, he could give no answer to it; and so my Syllogism was in the
discretion and sound judgment unanswerable and unanswered. But Mr. Nichols his
Moderatour perceiving the unresistible force of the Arment, and seeing his
friends mouth almost shut up, spoke a word to this purpose, that it was doubted
by some Authors, whether that place of Paul, H^br. 6. verse. 1, 2. did intend
Imposition of hands by the Presbytery in Ordination, or some other end in
Imposition of hands in that place. To whom I ^ad replied, had not Mr. Nichols
his mouth begun to open again; for (my beloved) some of the Authors which
understand that place of Paul, not of Imposition of hands in Ordination, but to
some other end, intend that end to be Imposition of hands by the Bishop in
Confirmation; whose judgment I cannot follow, neither will Mr. Nichols, or his
Moderatour dare to follow that Opinion, unless they will acknowledge Bishops
again amongst us to Confirm and Bishop our Children, that such a Principle of
the Doctrine of Christ in that sense may not be omitted in our Churches. Which
I am sure Mr. Nichols his Moderatour (whom I respect as a Divine of sound
judgment) does not allow; but only to strengthen his friend in his weakness,
and that in the mean time he might recollect himself for some better answer,
was pleased to make such a motion, and put in such a Ca^^at. Some other
Authors understand that place of Paul, Hebr. 6. verse. 1.2. to mean laying on
of hands on the sick; which the Church of Rome continues to this day,
superstitiously maintaining extreme Unction and anointing the sick with Oil
hallowed by their Bishops. Either of which Opinions had Mr. Ni^h^^^ insisted
on, I should soon have showed him his error, and such a second trouble to have
befallen him, as the Poet speaks off, saying, Incidit in Scyllam, cupiens
vitare Charybdin, and as the Jews spoke to Pilate, So the last error shall be
worse than the first, Matthew. 27. verse. 64. This (beloved) I do mention, but to
call you to mind to remember it, that you may take notice how with the
strength, yea, evidence of my Argument (which truly to me is undeniable) Mr.
Nichols was put to his shifts. And so indeed after a while he betook himself to
another shift, saying, that Imposition of hands by the Presbytery in
Ordination, had been so abused and corrupted by the Bishops and by the Church
of Rome, that now by the Godly it was thought fit to be omitted and laid aside.
Ah (beloved) and can this answer persuade any sound Conscience to slight a
Principle of the Doctrine of Christ? Must Bishops, or Romes corruptions make us
more corrupt? Must their corruptions make us deny our Principles? Might not Mr.
Nichols as well have answered, that because the Church of Rome has corrupted
baptism with Rites and Superstitious Ceremonies, therefore we ought utterly to
forsake, to forget, slight and omit baptism, which also is a Principle of the
Doctrine of Christ? Surely, for all this his answer you will be unwilling to
deprive your Children of baptism so purely and rightly administered in England,
because in Rome it is corrupted. And so shall I, for all this poor shift of Mr.
Nichols, be as unwilling to deny Imposition of hands by the Presbytery in
Ordination, as a Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, because in Rome it is
corrupted with anointing with Oil the thumbs and fore-fingers of the Priests,
and with other foolish, superstitious, needless Rites and Ceremonies never
practiced by the Apostles. But yet to show Mr. Nichols his folly in this
answer, I demanded of him, why then, if he made such scruple of us Ministers,
who had been ordained by Bishops formerly with their Presbyters, and of those
Reverend Presbyters who in some places of this Land did still ordain without
Bishops, why then had he not the Imposition of hands by some Ministers nearer
in judgment unto himself, who had been beyond the Seas in Holland, and
doubtless there were ordained by some purer Presbyters who never succeeded
Bishops? These at least might better have ordained him, than the people who
have no power to ordain, nor any power of the Keys? But this last Mr. Nichols
denying, and affirming the power of the Keys to be in the people, I replied
against it thus:

5. Argument. The power of the Keys, wheresoever it is, must be in that
Subject, which Christ has ordained. But Christ ordained not the people to be
the Subject of the Keys; Ergo, The people are not the Subject of the power of
the Keys. The Major Proposition he granted, and the Minor without any
distinction at all he denied. To which I replied. If Christ ordained the people
to be the subject of the power of the Keys, then the people must needs be the
proper subject of the power of the Keys; But the people are not the proper
subject of the power of the Keys; Ergo, Christ ordained not the people to be
the subject of the power of the Keys. The Major was granted, and the Minor was
yet denied; to the which I replied with another Syllogism. If the people are
the proper subject of the power of the Keys, than they are the first subject
of the power of the Keys. But the people ^re not the first subject of the
power of the Keys; Ergo, The people are not the proper subject of the power of
the Keys. This Minor also he denied, that the people were not the first
subject of the power of t^^ Keys, till a friend whispering him in the ear made
him to see and ^^flect upon his oversight, and better to consider what he had
denied. But I forthwith replied against him thus; If the people were the first
subject of the power of the Keys, then the power of the Keys was in them
first, and before it was in the Apostles converting and baptizing them. But the
power of the Keys was not in the people first, and before it was in the
Apostles converting and baptizing them, Ergo, The people are not the first
subject of the power of the Keys. Here (beloved) Mr. Nichols finding himself
by this Syllogism quite cast upon his back, followed his whispering friends
(as is supposed) good counsel, and, though too late in the judgment of the
most Judicious Auditors (who took special notice of it) retracted what he had
before said; and whereas he had denied that the people were not the first
subject of the power of the Keys, now he granted it, that they were not the
first subject. And so being wearied with my Arguments, that had so by degrees
stole upon him to his disadvantage, he would needs fall to reasons to show that
Ordination consisted chiefly in the Election of the people; But I said to Mr.
Nichols, Sir, give me no reasons, but show me Scripture for what you say, as I
have showed you. I am sure, for the peoples Election to be true Ordination, you
can show me but three places, which I will name unto you; the first is, Act. 1.
verse. 23. the second is, Act. 6. verse. 3. the third is, Act. 14. verse. 23. and
these do speak but darkly for your purpose; but I have showed you eight places
for Ordination by Imposition of hands by the Presbytery, which are more in
number and far more clear. But yet Mr. Nichols presuming to make somewhat of
it, or to please somebody at the latter end of our dispute, waving the two
first places offered to him by my self for his advantage, made choice of the
third place, Act. 14. verse 23. where from the Greek word he presumed the people
are said to stretch out their hands, whilst the Apostles ordained them Elders
in every City* which was no Imposition of hands, but (if spoken of the people)
an allowing only of, and a consenting to what the Apostles did; which I told
him was a common action in people to lift up their hands by way of consent; and
hereupon I told him he should find that I had the consent of the people of
Deal to be their Minister, which I desired you to show by lifting up your
hands, which I thank you, you did cheerfully and unanimously perform. But
observe (I beseech you beloved) this place of Act. 14. v. 23. whereon Mr.
Nichols would so fain build popular Election, as the essential part of
Ordination. In that place you may observe, that it is plainly spoken of Paul
and of Barnabas, two Apostles ordaining Elders with prayer and fasting, which
commonly accompanied the Act of Ordination by Imposition of hands, as you may
see Act. 13. verse. 3. Now if this place tells us that the two Apostles
ordained, what can Mr. Nichols prove from hence for his popular Election? But
he says from the Greek word, that the people stretched out their hands; Ergo,
They ordained.

I answer first, that the peoples action here (if he will have it to be
understood of the people, which I absolutely deny) is expressed only by this
word, (...), which signifies a stretching out the hands, but it is not said to
be (...), which is a laying on of the hands, used in many more places than
this, as I have showed him from Act. 6. verse. 6. Act. 13. verse. 3. Hebr. 6.
verse. 2. 1 Timothy 4. verse. 14. and 1 Timothy 5. verse. 22. ^itus 1. verse. ^. in all
which places laying on of hands is expressed, and not stretching out of hands.
And therefore if from this place he will conclude any thing for the people, he
must not from hence prove a popular and people, fancying Ministe^, making this
place to preponderate more, and weigh down Imposition of hands by the
Presbytery, because (as much as he can make of this place, though I understand
it not so, as I shall show presently) here the people joyed in, allowed off,
consented to those Elders ordained by the Apostles, by the action of stretching
out their hands. Upon which place Reverend Mr. Diodati of Geneva speaks thus:
When they had ordained, The Italian reads, when they had by common votes
ordained, with the approbation and consent of the Churches, to whom this right
was anciently preserved, even from the Apostles time, for the Government of the
Church was not founded upon constraint, nor violence, but upon a voluntary
obedience. These are the very true expressions of Mr. Diodati, which agree with
what we read in Act. 6. verse. ^. Look ye out among you s^ven men of honest
report, full of the holy Ghost, and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this
business. There the Apostles allow the people their consent and approbation for
choosing Deacons; but this is not enough; The Apostles they must appoint them,
and lay hands on them to ordain them, as you may read in the 6. verse, whom
t^^y set before the Apostles, and when they had pr^^ed, they laid their hands
on them. Whence I conclude, that the chief and ^ssential part to ordination
r^quired, is the laying on of hands by the Presby^ery, till which be done, the
peoples consent and approbation conferreth nothing. And so Mr. Nichols can
truly glory of no Orders with his poor peoples consent, till he bow his neck
to this Principle of the Doctri^e of Christ, Imposition of hands by the
Presbytery, ^ill which time he can be no true Minister of Jesus Christ, nor
lawfully administer (as he does) the Sacrament of the Lords supper and
baptism; For, no Minister, no Sacrament, and where Sacraments are thus with
Vzzahs impure hands touched and administered, the high crying sin of Sacrilege
abounds, for which I fear the Lord will yet have a controversy with this Land.

But secondly, Having given to Mr. Nichols (though as I said before, it is not
my judgment upon the place) as much as the Greek word (...) in this place of
the 14. of Acts can allow him for a popular consent, which neither in England
is denied, for commonly Ministers, before they be first ordained, have the
consent of the people for such, or such a Parish. I must now further let Mr.
Nichols know from this place, that the best Divines do not understand the word
here in the Greek to belong to the people, but to the Apostle^, whose laying on
of hands is expressed by a word more commonly signifying, a stretching out of
the hands. I may well stretch out my hands, and yet not lay them upon any
bodies head; but I cannot lay my hands upon any bodies head, without I stretch
them out. So the Apostles, whilst they laid their hands upon those whom they
ordained, did truly stretch out their hands; and (...) being of (...),
signifies, extensio manuum not elevatio manuum, a lifting up of the hands,
which is the common action used to express a peoples free consent. But it is
plain from the whole context, that the Greek word (...), was no Act of the
people at all, who did not in that place so much as lift up their hands for
consent. The whole context is of Paul and Barnabas, They strengthened the Souls
of the Disciples, verse. 22. They ordained, they prayed, they commended the
people to the Lord, verse. 23. Besides had it been any Act of the people, the
Text would ^av^ declared it thus unto us, (...), and when they had ordained to
themselves Elders, and not, as it is, (...), when they had ordained them
Elders, as speaking of others. Mr. Seldom has a large discourse in his book de
Syned^iis veterum Hebraeorum, showing that the word signifies to Elect, Decree,
Ordain, and is to be understood of the Apostles Act in this place, and not of
the peoples. What comfort then can Mr. Nichols have from this place, especially
(if he understand Greek and the whole context) and from those many more
produced by me and unanswered by him, to satisfy his conscience, when thus by
Scripture he is fully convinced to be no lawfully ordained Minister of Jesus
Christ? Which was the first thing I discovered by Argument against his Church,
or Congregation, that it was not the house of God, not being the pillar and
ground of the Truth, where the Truth of Ordination, according to the word of
Christ, and the practice of the Apostles, so much fails and is by him opposed.

Thus far (beloved) my Arguments reached upon the day of our dispute against
Mr. Nichols his second Proposition; And seeing we are come to this main point
of the controversy of these times concerning popular Election and Ordination,
and popular Government in the Church, which popular men (too much affecting
popularity for their ends to draw away our people from our Churches) have
devised, and of late stirred up; I shall yet a little more enlarge my Judgment
and Discourse for the better resolving a doubt so necessary in these times to
be unfolded. This Monstrous opinion can plead no Scripture, except those three
places by me above rehearsed out of the Acts of the Apostles. To that whereon
Mr. Nichols leans, I have answered; as also to that of Act. 6. Chap. where
although the people look out honest men for Deacons, yet the Apostles appoint
them over that business, and to that ordain them by Imposition of hands, which
shows more than a mere looking out for them; and approving* or allowing of
them. The third place is out of Act. 1. verse. 23. They appointed two, Joseph
called Barsabas, who was surnamed Justus, and Mathias. From whence some of the
separation will settle Ordination upon the people, because in this peculiar
work the people were joined with the Apostles. But observe first from this
place, that there the Electours were eleven Apostles to guide the other. But
Mr. Nichols will allow those to choose him, who have no Officer to guide them,
amongst whom no doubt but there are very many weak persons. Secondly, It was
very easy to chose one of these two, Joseph, or Mathias, who had accompanied
with the Apostles all the time that Jesus went in and out among them, verse. 21.
This was easy to know. But to chose a man fit for a Pastor requires more
skill than so. Thirdly, In this Election God was peculiarly seen, the Apostles
not knowing who it should be. Fourthly, in verse. 26. They gave forth their
lots, and their lots fell upon Mathias. They that will make any thing of this
place, may as well make casting of Lots an Essential to Ordination, as give
this power to the people, who were never constituted, appointed, or ordained by
Christ to be either the proper, first, or immediate subject of the power of the
Keys; which I shall endeavor to clear thus unto you.

That which is the first subject is the proper subject. No doubt of this* But
the proper subject is reciprocated and convertible with his Accident; As for
example, A living Creature is the proper subject of sense and feeling* A man is
the proper subject of laughing, or laughter. And from hence we say
reciprocally, Every man is Risible, and, Every thing that is Risible is a man.
Every living Creature has sense and feeling; and so likewise, Every thing that
has sense and feeling is a living Creature. This is called Axioma (...). But
every Axiom, that is (...), does include in it the Rule, (...), where the
Predicate is true of the subject in all place, and at all time; This is true of
a living Creature, and feeling; of a Man and Risibility. And so if the people,
or the Fraternity be the proper subject of the power of the Keys, It must be
true that they are and have been the proper Subject of the power of the Keys
omni tempore and omni loco, in all places and at all times. But if we find the
power of the Keys exercised in time before there was a Christian Fraternity,
then certainly there was some other subject of the power of the Keys, in whom
this power was, as in a proper subject. When Paul came to Corinth, he preached
Authoritative, and with power and Commission; E^go, Then the power o^ the Keys
was in some ^ubject, but the Fraternity at that time was non En^, had no being
in Christianity; How then could they be the subject? And if then they were not
the subject; how can they now be the proper subject of the power of the Keys,
who were not in all place and time the proper subject of it? Yet Mr. Nichols
could grant that the people were the subject, the proper subject, and the first
subject of the power of the Keys. But he ^ruely might as well have granted,
that in these times Man is the proper subject of Risibility, but was not
alw^yes, and that at some time Man was not Risible, nor at some time a living
Creature, the subject of s^nse and feel^ng, though now he be.

Bu^ secondly, This Absurdity will appear thus; Those who are the effect of the
power of the Keys, are not the first subject of it. But the Fraternity is the
effect of the power of the Keys: It was so in all the Churches which the
Apostles gathered, and is indeed to this day. So that, which is primum
Subjectum, the first subject, is Immediatum Subjectum, the immemediate subject.
But how can the Fraternity be the immediate subject of the power of the Keys,
since then mediantibus Apostolis, by means of the Apostles, and now mediantibus
Ministris, by means of the Ministers the Fraternity is made up. I but the
Elector is before the Elected. It is true of Christ, who Elected the Apostles,
and gave to them the Keys, from whom by a continued succession of Ministers
still the Fraternity was made; But had not the power of the Keys had some
effect, there had not been a Fraternity to chose an officer, though they are
now in time before him, whom they now Elect; Yet they were not before him, or
them ( qua Fratres) who by the power of the Keys in the Ministry made them
capable to chose an Officer; Therefore the power of the Keys was in some
subject before them. Besides Election is no power of the Keys; Therefore to
argue, The people Elect, ergo, They are the first subject of the power of the
Keys, is fallacia non causae pro causa. But if what has been spoken, will not
convince Mr. Nichols, that the people, or Fraternity having no true power to
Ordain, he is no true and lawful Minister; Let him answer these Arguments from
Reason, Scripture, and the best Divines that have written upon this p^int.

1. Argument. Whosoever are the first subject, or immediate Receptacle of the
power of the Keys from Christ, they have Divine Warrant actually to exercise
and put in execution the said power; as, if a man be the first and immediate
subject and Receptacle of Risibility, or power of laughing, he has a faculty
in him to exercise and put in execution his Risibility, and so actually to
laugh. But the Multitude, or Community of the Faithful have no Divine Warrant
actually to exercise and put in execution the power of the Keys; Ergo, The
Community of the faithful are not the first subject, or immediate Receptacle
of the power of the Keys from Jesus Christ. The Major Proposition must of
necessity be yielded; because first, power of the Keys contains both Authority
and exercise; power being given to that end that it may be exercised for the
benefit of the Church; It is called the power given us for edification, 2 Cor.
10. verse. 8. Where there is no exercise of power, there can be no edification
by power. S^condly, because both the Authority, and complete exercise ^f all
that Authority were at once and together communicated from Christ to the
Receptacle of the power, I give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven;
and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, etc. There goes together the giving
of power, and, binding, and, loosing, the exercise of that power, Math. 16.
verse. 19. As my Father sent me, so send I you. Whose soever sins ye remit, they
are remitted, John 20. verse. 21, 23. You see here both power and exercise
joined together in the same Commission; Yea, so individual and so inseparable
are power and exercise, that under exercise power and Authority is set forth,
Go, Disciple you all Nations, bap^izing them, Math. 28. verse. 18, 19. Thirdly,
because it would be vain, idle, and impertinent to fancy and dream of such a
power, as should never be drawn into act by them that have it, frustra est
poten^ia quae non reducitur ad actum. Thus the Major being cleared; Let us now
examine well the Minor, by induction of particulars, from whence we shall see
it^is evident, that the Community cannot exercise the power of the Keys by any
Divine Warrant.

First, They may not preach, for how shall they preach except they be sent?
Romans 10. v^rs. 15. But the Community cannot be sent, many of them being
incapable of the Office, either by occasion of their Sex, 1 Cor. 14 verse. 34,
35. 1 Timothy 2. verse. 11, 12. or by reason of their age, as Children; and all, or
most of them by reason of their deficiency in gifts and in Scripture
qualifications, Titus 1. verse. 9. and 1 Timothy 3. verse. 10. For not one Member of
a thousand are so completely furnished, as to be apt to teach, able to convince
Gain sayers, and to divide the word of truth aright. Besides, They may not send
themselves were they capable, for no man takes th^s honor to himself; yea,
Jesus Christ himself did not glorify himself to be made an High Priest, Hebr.
5. verse. 4, 5. Now only Officers are sent to preach, Math. 16, 19. and 28, 19,
20, verse.

2. Secondly, The Community may not administer the Seals, the S^craments under
the new Testament; for who gave the people any such Authority? Has not Christ
conjoined preaching and dispensing of the Sacraments in the same Commission,
that the same Persons only that do the one may do the other? Math. 28. verse.
18, 19.

3. Thirdly, They may not ordain Officers in the Church, and Authoritatively
send them abroad; for ordinarily the Community have not sufficient
qualifications and abilities for proving and examining of men's gifts for the
Ministry. They are no where commanded, or allowed so to do in the whole new
Testament, but other persons distinct from them, 1 Timothy 5. verse. 22. 2 Timothy 2.
verse 2. and Titus 1. verse 5.

4. The Community, without Officers, may not exercise any Office of
Jurisdiction Authoritatively and properly, they may not excommunicate, or
absolve, for we have no precept that they should do it; we have no example in
all the New Testament, that they ever did do it. We have both precept and
example that select Officers both did and ought to do it, Whatsoever you bind
o^ earth (says Christ to his Officers) shall be bound in Heaven, Math. 18.
verse. 18. Whosoever ye remit, etc. John 20. verse. 21, 23. I have decreed to
deliver such an one to Satan, says Paul an Officer, 1 Cor. 5. verse. 4. The
rebuke inflicted by many (not by all) 2 Cor. 2. verse. 6. whom I have delivered
to Satan, 1 Timothy 1. vlt. verse.

5. And lastly, Because the Scriptures no where set the Community over
themselves to be their own Church guides and Governors, but appoint over them
in the Lord Rulers and Officers distinct from the Community. Compare these
places, 1 Timothy 5. verse. 12. Act. 20. verse. 28.29. Hebr. 13. verse. 7, 17, 22.
Salute all them that have the rule over you, and all the Saints. From all these
premises I conclude; Ergo, The Community of the faithful are not the first
subject, or immediate Receptacle of the power of the Keys from Jesus Christ.
And against the Communities power for Church Government, I frame my second
Argument thus:

2. Argument. whomsoever, Christ makes the first subject of the power of Church
Government, to them he promises and give^h a spirit of Ministry and gifts
necessary for that Government. But Christ neither promises, nor gives a
spirit of Ministry, nor necessary gifts for Church Government to the Community
of the faithful; Ergo, Christ makes not the Community of the faithful the
first subject of the power of Church Government. The Major is clearly proved;
For first, As there are diversity of Ecclesiastical Administrations (which is
the foundation of diversity of Officers) and diversity of miraculous
operations, and both for the profit of the Church; So there are conveyed from
the Spirit of Christ diversi^y of gifts, free endowments enabling and
qualifying for the actual discharge of those Administrations and operations, as
you may see 1 Cor. 12. verse. 4, 5, 6. and seq. Secondly, what instance can be
given in the whole New Testament of any persons, whom Christ made the
Receptacle of Church Government, but withal he gifted them, and made his
promises to them, to enable them to such Government? As the Apostles and their
successors: As my Father sent me, even so send I you. And when he had said
this, he breathed on them, and says unto them; Receive ye the Holy Ghost;
Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins
ye retain, they are retained, John 20. verse. 21, 22, 23. And again, Go ye
theresore and Disciple ye all Nations; and lo, I am with ye allway, even to the
end of the World, Math. 28. verse. 19, 20. Thirdly, Christ being the wisdom of
the Father, Colos. 2. verse. 3. and faithful as was Moses in all his house,
yea, more faithful; Moses as a servant over others, he as a Son over his own
house, Hebr. 3. verse. 2, 5, 6. It cannot stand with his exact wisdom and
fidelity to commit the grand affairs of his Church Government to such as are
not duly gifted, and sufficiently qualified by himself to the due discharge
thereof. Thus you have the Major cleared; and the Minor will as easily appear
evident thus:

First, The Scriptures teach that gifts for Ministry and Government are
promised and bestowed not on all, but on some particular persons only in the
visible body of Christ. To one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, to
another the word of knowledge, etc. not to all, 1 Cor 12. verse. 8.9. and seq.
If a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the
Church of God? 1 Timothy 3. verse. 5. The Hypothesis insinuates, that all men have
not gifts and skill rightly to rule their own houses, much less to govern the
Church. Secondly, Experience tells us, that the multitude of the people are
generally destitute of such knowledge, wisdom, prudence, learning and other
necessary qualifications, for the right carrying on of Church Government. Ergo,
Christ makes not the Community of the faithful the first subject of the power
of Church Government.

But this truth will yet more clearly appear by answering the Arguments and
Objections of those, who stand so much for Popular power and Government.

1. Object. First, They Object thus; To whom Christ gave all power, to them it
chiefly and primarily belongs. But Christ gave all power to the body of the
Church, which is the Community of the faithful. Ergo, To the Community of the
faithful, all power belongs chiefly and primarily. The Minor they prove from
the Apostle, Whither Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or
death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, 1 Cor. 3. verse. 22.
from whence they conclude that Paul, Apollo, Cephas, and their successors in
the Ministry belong to them, and are under their power and Order.

Answ. To which I answer, that Christ gave all power to the body of the Church,
finaliter and objective, finally and objectively, that is for their use and
benefit, for their service and salvation. So that if the Ministers preach,
administer the Sacrament, exercise the power of the Keys, it is all for the
good, and benefit of the faithful Community, they are the Object, they are the
end the Ministers aim at in the work of the Ministry. But we are not theirs
so, as to be of their making and Authorizing. Church power is first seated in
Christ the head and Apostle of our profession, and from him committed to his
Apostles, and from them to the Presbytery and Ministers. They commit the same
to others which themselves had first received. (But (according to that known
rule) Nemo dat quod non habet, No man can give to another, that which himself
has not first received. Therefore the people, which never received Orders, nor
power to administer the word, Sacraments and Keys, how can they bestow it on
others? This is besides all Scripture and reason.

2. Object. Christ's Disciples ar^ Christ's Church. But Christ's Ministerial power
is given to Christ's Disciples; Ergo, Christ's Ministerial power is given to his
Church. Proved from Math. 16. verse. 13.20.

Ans. In this Argument is changed the Copulative, which ought not to be in a
true Syllogism; But these Popular men may as well break the rules of art, as
the Faith of truth. Again, This cunning Sophister uses deceit in the word,
Disciples, which he expounds by this Argument to be other than Apostles, or
such as were Disciples sent forth to preach, when the place of Math. 16. verse.
13.18. is evidently against this. For he cannot prove at this time any to be
with Christ but the twelve, as may appe^r by Luke, As he was alone praying, his
Disciples were with him; and ^e asked them saying, whom say the people that I
am? Luke 9. verse. 18. Neither does the place of Matthew, say, that these
Disciples are Christ's Church (as this Sophister makes show) but rather the 18.
verse in that place of Math^w manifests that Christ made himself a difference
between the Disciples in the Person of Peter, and the Church, both which are
there distinctly mentioned; at the most they be but part of Christ's Church, and
not the whole Church; and then so meant, this Argument gains nothing; For the
Copulative, Is given, it is to be taken two ways, Primarily, and Immediately,
or Secondarily, and Mediately. If it be taken in the first sense, and the word,
Disciples also for the Apostles, then it is for us, and against this Sophister.
If in the second sense, and the word Disciples, taken for the whole Church,
then I grant all; for I confess the power of Christ to be given to the Church
Mediately, that is (as I said before) unto others for the Churches b^hoose and
benefit. If the Sophister understand it to be given Primarily to the whole
multitude, I deny it as utterly false, till he can prove, that by Disciples in
Math. 16. verse. 13, 20. is meant the multitude, which he calls the Church, and
not only the Apostles.

3. Object. The wife has power immediately from the husband, and the body has
power immediately from the head. But the visible Church, or a Communion of
fai^hfull people are Christ's Spouse, the wife of the Lamb, and Christ's
mystical body, as appears Ephesians. 5. verse. 30, 32. and Ephesians. 1. verse. 22,
23. and Revel. 21. verse. 2. Ergo, The visible Church, or Communion of faithful
ones have Christ's Ministerial power immediately from him.

Ans. There is more in the C^n^lusion, than in the premises; for there is the
word, Ministerial, which is in neither of the former propositions, as in right
arguing it ought to be. lt is no Syllogism, and the Argument is but a
similitude, which may illustrate an approved truth, but proves not, nor gives
resolution to a doubting mind, much less decides our our Cause in hand.

4. Object. One Relate gives the Essential Constituting cause to another. But
Pastor and People are Relates. Ergo, The People give to the Pa^tor the
Essentia^ Constituting causes of ^ Pastor.

1. Ans. I answer first with Mr. Rutherfo^d, that Ordination does first make a
Minister, and Election after does not make him a Minister, but only does
appropriate him to such a place and to such a People.

2. Ans. Secondly I answer, that in many cases Ordination may go before
Election. The Apostles were Ordained and sent, before they were appropriated by
any peculiar people. So in the India's one gi^ted with the Indian tongues may
be ordained, and sent to preach to the Indians before any Election; for how
shall they Elect, who are not yet baptized?

3. Ans. Thirdly I answer, that Election gives the Essence, as he is their
Minister; but Ordination gives the essence, as he is a Minister; For Ordination
does invest a Minister with power to act beyond those, who have called and
chosen him, giving him an habitual power in actu primo, to exercise and perform
the acts belonging to his office elsewhere upon a call and choice, as the Canon
says, Semel expositus, semper expositus, so likewise semel Ordinatus, semper
Ordinatus, Once set apart to preach, and ordained, always set apart to preach,
and always ordained. Yea, I may say, a Minister bears an habitual relation
to the whole Church visible. So that a Pastor preaches not only as a Pastor
to those who Elected him, and to other Churches as a gifted brother; I dare
boldly affirm that in the Apostles times, and in the purest ages next them this
notion was never heard. So Act. 13. Paul was ordained as a Pastor to preach
any where, and not appropriated by Election to any particular place. In the 68.
Can. Apost. one Presbyter once ordained lawfully, is forbidden to be ordained
again, which shows that he was ordained as a Pastor, and Officer to the whole
Church.

5. Object. What the Ministers are to the people now under the Gospel, the
Levites were formerly to the Jews. But then the people ordained the Levites and
put their hands upon them, as appears Number. 8. verse. 10. Ergo, Now the people
also may ordain the Ministers.

1. Ans. First I answer, If we must stand to the old Policy, why may not we as
well say, that the Civil Magistrate may also ordain, as Moses did Aaron? Levit.
8. verse. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

2. Ans. Secondly, I answer with what is noted in the 11. verse of the 8. of
Numbers quoted, And Aaron shall offer the Levites before the Lord, that they
may execute the service of the Lord. Aaron was to wave those Levites before the
Lord, so that they were not completed to execute the service, till the Priest
had done his Act. So the peoples (...) there, did but answer to the peoples
(...), or stretching out their hands in the new Testament, and Aarons waving
them did answer to our (...), or laying on of hands. Thus (beloved) I have
answered some of the chief Objections for Popular power in the Keys, and by
strong Arguments showed that this power is not in them, but in the Ministers
and Successors of the Apostles, to whom the Keys were delivered first by
Christ. I shall add but one reason* or two more to confirm this my Opinion, and
so conclude with this first error practiced in Mr. Nichols his Church, or
pretended house of God.

3. Argument. If the Election of the people does give the essentials to an
Officer, then may a man elected execute all Official power without ordination,
and that commonly. But no man may execute Official power, and that commonly,
without ordination. Ergo, Election does not give the essentials. By essentials
here I mean the formal cause; for as for the material c^use they cannot give
that; and we have but two causes that do dare essentiam, though all four do
dare esse. The consequence is clear, that they may execute all Official power
without ordination, for forma dat operari; But Election gives the form (say the
Separa^ists) and ordination at most with them is but an Adjunct; effects do not
depend upon Adjuncts; For operation the form gives that. The Minor, That they
may not execute all official power without ordination, is clear. For, the
contrary is cross to Scripture presidents, and we see, if it were but a Deacon,
yet he was ordained, Act. 6. verse. 3, 6. Then surely Election of the people
does not give the essentials to an Officer.

And that ordination is no Adjunct, two remarkable places of Scripture do show
it clearly. The first is from 2 Timothy 2. verse. 2. The things that thou have
heard of me among many witnesses, the same commend thou to faithful men, who
shall be able to teach others also. The 2. place is this from 1 Timothy 5. v. 22.
Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins; keep thy
self pure. From whence I reason thus: Timothy is a Church Officer; here is a
charge given him to take heed, who comes into the Ministry; yea, he may be
partaker of other men's sins, if he have not a special care, whom he admits
into the Ministry. Now these Texts do not belong to the people, but to
Ministers and to Officers, such as was Timothy; which makes me think, that what
the Ministers do in examining, trying, ordaining, is more than the peoples
Election. Where do we find such things spoken to the people? Now then, where
the greatest blame lies for unworthy men's coming into the Ministry, there
surely must ly the greatest power of admitting men into the Ministry, else the
blame is not just. But we see the blame is here laid upon the Ministers. Paul
no where writes to the people, To commit the things they have heard; nor does
he charge them not to lay on hands suddenly. At most they are bid indeed to
look out men for Deacons; but that does not answer these Texts. But if the
great stroke, the formal cause lie in the popular Election, the Ministers may
well say, we do but ordain, we give but an Adjunct, the people did the main
Act, they give the essence; The essence being given, we give the Adjunct; So
that there will be no blame left for the Ministers. I would be glad to see some
Answer from Mr. Nichols, either by private writing, or publicly in print to
these reasons and Arguments; which till I see them answered; I shall resolve to
continue still in this judgment, to blow my Trumpet louder and louder, to cry
down more and more this practice in Mr. Nichols his Congregation, not only as
erroneous, but as Babylonish and Antichristian, it being expressly against the
word of God in many places of Scripture. And thus whilst he seems to affect
Popularity, giving to the people more than to the Ministry for his ordination,
for his examining, for his trying, and for the judging of his gifts and
calling, he plainly crosses that esteem and respect which God in Scripture
allows to Ministers and their approbation, which he has settled in his word
by several examples for the better knowing, and judging of men's gifts, lights
and callings, as I shall show in these remarkable and undeniable place^ of the
holy writ.

The first is from the 1 Samuel 3. Chap. where we read, that, Samuel being yet
young, and not as yet acquainted with any light, or Revelation from Heaven, and
sleeping near unto his Master Eli, in the night God gave him a call, verse. 4.
which young Samuel understanding to have been from Eli, he ran unto him and
said, Here am I, verse. 5. To whom the Priest replying, I called thee not, ly
down again; Samuel had no sooner returned to his rest, and shut his eyes, but
God gives him a second call, And Samuel arose again, and went to Eli, and said,
Here am I, for thou did call me; And he answered, I called not my Son, ly
down again, verse. 6. The third time he went to his rest, and it is observed in
the 7. verse, that Samuel did not know the Lord, neither was the word of the
Lord yet revealed unto him. But in the 8. verse, The Lord called Samuel again
the third time; and he arose and went to Eli, and said, Here am I, for thou
did call me. And Eli perceived that the Lord had called the Child. And then
Eli instructed him what he should do, saying, Go, ly down, and it shall be, if
he call thee, that thou shall say, speak Lord, for thy servant hears, verse.
9. And so he did the fourth time that the Lord called him, then he knew his
call to be from Heaven, and answered unto the Lord as the Priest had instructed
him. Now what from hence I observe, is, that God might the first time have
spoken and revealed unto Samuel what he did after, without three several
returnings to the Priest, telling him at the first, It is not Eli, that calls
thee, but I; but he would not (as ancient Writers observe) because God would
have Samuel go the right way to work, being young, and not yet acquainted with
lights and Revelations, he would have him go to the Priest, that he might
instruct him what to do, and that the Priest might judge of his light and
calling. A good example in Scripture for men in these times, to know that if
any must try and judge their lights, their Revelations, their calls and gifts,
they must not be the people, but the Ministers. And therefore Mr. Nichols
surely is much deceived in giving to the people, and slighting in the Ministers
that which God would have Samuel acknowledge fitter for Eli, (to try and judge
his call from Heaven) than for the people. But least it should be answered that
this was the old Policy, but the New Testament allows no such Doctrine, nor
respect, or duty to Ministers, more than to the Community of the faithful, I
shall with the new Policy under the Gospel prove the like.

In the 8. of Acts, Luke tells us what happened to the Eunuch, who riding in
his Chariot read that part of the Prophecy of Isaiah, He was led as a sheep to
the slaughter, and as a Lamb dumb before the shearers, so opened he not his
mouth. In the mean while, The Angel of the Lord spoke unto Philip, saying,
Arise, and go toward the South unto the way that goes down from Jerusalem
unto Gaza, verse. 26. When Philip was come to the place, Then the Spirit said
unto him, Go near, and join thy self to this Chariot, and Philip came thither
to him, and heard him read the Prophet Isaias, and said, understandest t^ou
what thou read? And he said, How can I, except some m^n should guide me? And
he desired Philip that he would come up and sit with him, verse. 29, 30, 31.
Philip answered his desire, and went up to the Chariot, and taking occasion of
the Prophecy he was reading, instructed him so far i^ the Mysteries belonging
unto Jesus Christ, that he truly believed and was baptized. I observe also
from hence, what hidden Mystery may be here, that the Angel, who instructed
Philip what he should do and observe, is not allowed by Gods permissi^n to
instruct the Eunuch in the points of faith, but Philip a Church Officer must do
it. And the very same may be observed in the History which Luke also relates,
Act. 10. of Cornelius the Centurion, a Religious man, given to prayer and
Alms-deeds, yet wanting more instruction in the Mysteries of the Faith of Jesus
Christ, to whom God sends an Angel, verse. 5, 6. who said unto him, Send men to
Joppa, and call for one Simon a Tanner; he shall tell thee what thou ought
to do. Why might not this Angel also, who spoke to Cornelius, or some of the
Community of the faithful thereabouts (if they had the power of the Keys)
instruct Corne^ius while he stays sor the coming of the Apostle? but Peter an
Officer of the Church must do it, he must instruct, guide and convert him.
Austin his answer is, that God would teach us herein, that he has not
appointed us Angels for our Instructers, Masters, and Leaders, nor any other to
tell us of lights, Rev^lations, gifts and callings, but has left us Officers
of his Church to do this work; and far^her that so far we are to believe Angels
(if they should speak unto us, as here to Cornelius, and such lights as they
should reveal unto us, as they may be examined, tried, judged, whither they be
true ^ights, or strong delusions from Satan (who often times transfigures
himself into an Angel of light) by such as Philip was, as Peter was, by
Officers of the Church, and true Ministers of the Gospel, to whom and to no
other Christ has committed the power of the Keys* Yet further A^stin observes
from Act. 9. what Christ himself answered Saul verse. 6. when he said, Lord,
that will thou have me to do? And the Lord said unto him; Arise and go into the
City, and it shall be told thee what thou must do: Who must tell Saul what he
must do? who must try, examine and judge of his calling? who must instruct him?
who can instruct him better than Christ himself, who is talking with him? Yet
Ananias a Church Officer (in the judgment of many very grave Divines) must do
it; To him he is sent, but not to the whole Community of the faithful to judge
of the light which compassed him about in the way to Damascus, to examine the
Revelation he had there. Nay, Christ would remit him to his Officer in his
Church, to show that this is the ordinary way of Government by himself left to
his Church, that not the people, but his Ministers by virtue of the power of
the Keys shall try and examine gifts and callings, and such, as they find
true by the Touch stone of the word, to allow, and admit such into the Church,
and to (...) belonging to Church Government. And without this trial by Church
Officers and Ministers I cannot safely judge Mr. Nichols a true Pastor of a
Church, while preferring the people before the Ministers, and taking orders
from them, he slights the ordinary way of Christ for Church Government, and
those Officers whom God has showed us to be respected.

And thus (beloved) I have showed unto you the first error and untruth merely
Antichristian practiced in Mr. Nichols his Church, which he calls Gods house,
which cannot be, Gods house being the Pillar and Ground of the Truth, and yet
there the Truth of Ordination, according to the Scripture* is slighted. It is
not my custom in this place to particularize any man's defects and errors,
neither would I have done it now, had not my Text called upon me to surround
the bounds of Zion and Babylon, and to show you what is the truth taught and
professed in Zion, and what is Babylonish and Antichristian, and to answer
those Propositions of Mr. Nichols, affirming our Parochial Churches Babylonish,
and his own to be Zion, and the house of God. And as he has gone about to
brand us with an infamous Babylonish title, thereby thinking to draw yet more
of you to his separation, I cannot in conscience discharge my duty to God and
your Souls, unless I vindicate our Churches, and show yet more Babylonish and
Antichrist^^n practices and untruths in his Congregation, whereby it may be
Charact^rized unto you, not to be the house of God, nor the Pillar and Ground
of Truth.

2. Error. A second error and untruth practiced in Mr. Nichols his
Congregation, is, in the administering the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; at
which Mr. Nichols allows a Layman, or gifted brother, to make a prayer at the
setting apart those empty Elements for a Sacramental use to the Soul. Which how
contrary it is to the truth of the word and the example of Jesus Christ, when
first he instituted that Sacrament under the Elements of Bread and Wine, I
shall leave you to judge from what St. Luke relates of the last Supper in these
words, saying, He took bread, and gave thanks and brake it, and gave unto them,
Luke 22. verse. 19. and from St. Paul, saying, when he had given thanks, he
brake it, 1 Cor. 11. verse. 24. from which places I gather, that though Christ
had present about him his Apostles, Brethren (though then weak) more able and
gifted than are any of Mr. Nichols his Congregation, yet Christ suffered none
of them at that time to pray, or give thanks, but himself did it. Secondly,
that prayer and thanksgiving at that time belongs to him, and ought to be
performed by him, who breaks the bread, and by no other, that has the power of
the Keys by lawful Ordination, which Mr. Nichols his Farme^s and Millers have
not. And thirdly, that without Mr. Nichols can clear his Ordination better than
he has done from the peoples Election of him, the Administration of that
Sacrament belongs to him; but his abuse rather of so sacred a Mystery will one
day lie with the heavy weight of Sacrilege upon his Soul.

3. Error. A third error and untruth practiced by him is, in the manner of
his gatherin^ his Church, and building it up upon other men's foundations, quite
contrary to the practice and example of St. Paul, who says of himself, So have
I strived to preach the Gospel, not where C^^ist was nam^d, least I should
build upon another man's foundation, Romans 15. verse. 20. from whence I observe
that St Paul strived not as Mr. Nichols strives; Paul judged charitably of
other men's preaching, Mr. Nichols judges uncharitably of ours; Paul judged
others able to build up a Spiritual house to Christ; Mr. Nichols judges us
unable; P^ul judged that Christ was named and called upon in other Churches, as
well as in his own, Mr. Nichols judges our Churches Babylonish, and our people
congreg^ted not to name, nor call upon Christ, as if we called upon Angels,
Saints, or some Heathenish Gods; Paul (though there were divisions among the
Corinthians, and some were for him, some for Apollo, and some for Ce^has)
widens not the wound of their division, nor goes about to draw any from Apollo,
or any from Cephas, Mr. Nichols makes our divisions his advantage to draw whom
he can from our Churches; Paul would not build upon another man's foundation,
Mr. Nichols builds upon ours, and admits to his Congregation such as have
acknowledged comfort to their Souls from the work of the public Ministry, as
by experience I can speak of some, who before Mr. Nichols resorted to, or
intruded himself into Deal, acknowledged my Doctrine true, sound, wholesome and
comfortable, who since are become stones in Mr. Nichols his new building. And
thus it appears that his practice is not agreeable to the true and peaceable
practice of the Apostles, especially of Paul.

4. Error. A fourth error practiced by him, is the unsettled place of his
Church, contrary to the Constitution of the first Primitive Churches, which
were known and named by the places, as the Church at Jerusalem, the Church at
Antioch, the Church at Ephesus, the Church at Corinth, and the like, to which
Paul directed his Epistles by the names of the place; but were he to write to
Mr. Nichols his Church, he could not call it by any one place, (as the Church
at Adisham, where Mr. Nichols lives) there being more of his Church many miles
off in other places flying about on the Sabbath days, or Trouping about on
Hors-back on those days to hear him, than there are present with him at
Adisham. But the Letters must be directed to Mr. Nichols his scattered Church
at Adisham, or elsewhere, or to the flying and wandering, or Trouping Church
from one place to another (which is most proper to it) or to the church in
Kent, sometimes here and sometimes there; all which is against the Constitution
of the Primitive Churches settled in, and named by some one certain and
determinate place. This practice is taken from the Church of Rome (and
therefore is Babylonish) where, in my time beyond the Seas, I observed people
for their pretended devotions much flying and wandering about, either to places
of Pilgrimage, or upon the Sabbath days traveling five, or six miles from
their Parishes to such, or such a Chapel, to such, or such a Cloister of
Friars, or College of Jesuits under a pretense of gaining Indulgences by
hearing Mass, or Sermon in such a place, and of such a Father; And this has
been the Common practice of the Jesuits, to draw the people there from the
Parish Priests, to persuade them that their Doctrine is soundest, their lives
purest, whereas the Friars and the Parish Priests (say they) are of lewd and
wicked Conversations, and their Doctrine unprofitable; and to this purpose they
press to the people many Indulgences, which they have obtained from the Pope
for all such as shall hear their Doctrine, and shall resort to their Churches
and Chapels, which now is more particularly practiced by the Jesuits at
Paris. By whsch policy the Parish Churches there are very much deserted, few
people resort unto them, and the Parish Priests are left to preach to the bare
Walls, and to some few old silly Women. This policy (if not under a pretense of
Mass and Indulgences) at least under a pretense of more pure Doctrine, I have
found to be much in Mr. Nichols, whose people it seems have learned to run
after him many miles upon the Sabbath days, forsaking their Parish meetings,
as unprofitable to them, and judging the day ill spent, their Souls unedified,
except they hear him and no other. And therefore his Church may well be called
a flying, a wandering Church, limited to no particular place, as are our Parish
Churches, and were the Churches in the Primitive times. But if he say, his
Church is not to be called by his Name, but by the place, and so will call it
the Church at Adisham; and where in any other place some of his Members live,
they are to be called Limbs to his Church at Adisham, and single congregations
belonging to that Church. I answer two things; First that he must know, whither
a better and abler Pastor that lives at Adisham, and the people, or his Church
will allow that the Church at Adisham shall be known and named by two, or
three, or four at most belonging to Mr. Nichols, and not by the Major part
pertaining to the chief Parish Pastor. But secondly, I answer, if Mr. Nichols
his Church be thus built up with several single Congregations in diverse parts
belonging to one chief building at Adisham, then Mr. Nichols will go beyond us,
and turn Episcopal, and make Adisham his Metropolitan seat, and other places
Limbs of it; Or, then Mr. Nichols will begin to jump with our Ministry, and
will I hope in time turn a Classical man, making Adisham his Classical, or
Provincial Church, and others of his Congregation in diverse places homogeneal
parts of that his Classical Church. Which if he yield not to, I must judge his
building and his house to be contrary to the rule and practice of the Apostles,
and to savor too much the practice of the Jesuits.

5. Error. A fifth error in Doctrine taught by him (which is Popish,
Jesuitical, Jewish, and Turkish) is, that his people, or Congregation must be
bound to hear none other preach but himself, or such as are of his Judgment.
Which error how gross and Antichristian it is, I leave you to judge, when
hereby he limits Gods hand and working to himself (a sin formerly of the Jews
who are said to Limit the holy one of Israel) and he binds God to do good to
those poor Souls by no other means nor instruments save by himself, or such as
are of his judgment. But alas, the poor silly people understand not the depth
of this Popish policy borrowed from the Pope, who excommunicates all such ipso
facto as shall hear any of our Pro^estant Preachers to pre^ch, least by hearing
us, they should hear somewhat against the Popes wicked practices, and so by
means of our preaching they should be drawn from his obedience. The same is Mr.
Nichols his policy in binding his people from hearing us, least we should
undeceive, and take away the vail of ^overing cast upon those poor blinded
Souls, and bring them to the acknowledging of the truth, and detect the
Antichristian practice and untruth in that policy; and so they may recover
themselves out of the snare, who are taken captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy
2. verse. 26. Is not this to be like the Jews limited to Jerusalem only and to
the Temple there? Is this to ^orship God neith^r in this mountain, nor at
Jerusalem, but every where and in any place in spirit and in the truth? John 4.
verse. 21, 23. But this practice is not only the Popes and the Jews in limiting
the peoples spirits to himself and to the place where he teaches; but it is
also the Turks policy, who to continue and maintain the Alcoran and Mahom^ts
laws, upon pain of death keeps the Turkish people from resorting to any
exercise, or Preaching amongst the Christians.

And lastly, this practice is mere Iesuitical, borrowed from the Jesuits, who
bind their Ghostly Children from confessing to any Parish Priest, or Friar,
and in case they find that they have confessed any sin to their Parish Priest,
they make them renew again to them that Confession, and discover to them that
sin, or sins confessed to another, pretending that they cannot guide their
lives well, nor direct them the right way to Heaven, unless they know the whole
state of their lives, and all their sins in the whole course of their life
committed; and for Preaching, they must resort to their Sermons, and to their
Churches, and to no other upon pain of being cast out of their Society, and
incurring their curse and heavy displeasure. But what do I weary you (beloved)
with longer Histories to condemn these Popish and Jesuitical practices in Mr.
Nichols his house of God? (as he calls it) I am confident did but Mr. Nichols
know, that though these be his practices, they are borrowed from the Jesuits
and the like to be practiced by them, he would abhor them, and his people loath
them. Ah (beloved) he thinks his Arguments against us are his own, his practice
in drawing the people from our Parishes is his own light, his grounds to
separate from us are his own; but little thinks he how he pleases the Pope and
Jesuit in what he does; little thinks he that all his Arguments against us,
and all his practices have come from that subtle Serpentine brood of the
Jesuits, who study nothing but to overthrow our Church, to undermine our
Discipline, to root up our Nurseries of learning, to bring under contempt our
Learned Clergy, who have always opposed Rome, and with their Pens discovered
their errors to the World. This the Jesuit considering, and fearing our
Unity, our Uniformity, in Church and Church Discipline, least by it we should
flourish too much, has these many years blown the fire of our discords,
stirring up the people against the true Ministry covertly, committing privily
to the Press those scruples, which Mr. Nichols, and others like him, make their
best advantage against us, little dreaming from what brain they first did
spring. I have often spoken of it in private, and Preached it in public (
Sandwi^h may remember it) that at the beginning of the last Parliament, when
our differences began in Church and State, at what time I had freer access,
ingress and egress to the Spanish Ambassadors house ( Don Alonso de Cardenas
by name) than now I dare enjoy, or do desire to make use of, there were then
harbored in that house at least forty Priests and Jesuits, a List of whose
names I gave to some of our State Rulers; but the Jesuits more peculiarly had
a place by themselves, having bought a Back-house joining to the Glass-house by
London Wall, from the which they made a passage into the Lord Rivers his house,
where the said Ambassador did then live; a full Description whereof I gave to
Sir Henry Mildmay, both of the left hand at the coming in to the house, and of
the Bell at the door of this close College; wherein at that time two Jesuits
were employed in nothing but in Printing daily Pamphlets one against another,
the one egging on the Separation and Independency, the other coldly and weakly
holding up with slight Arguments the Church and Ministry of England, and all
this unknown to us, from whence, or from whom those Pamphlets came, and we
ignorant altogether that they were hatched in the Nest of the secret College
of Jesuits; from which time I have observed more Arguments against our
Churches and Ministry, more proficients in this Jesuitical College, more fire
of division and Schism, more ha^red in the people against the true Clergy,
more tergiversation and backsliding from Order, from Government, from
Discipline than ever before was known in England; Nay, I am persuaded it will
be worse yet, if that cunning, that subtle Crew and Company of Ignatius Loyola
be suffered to lurk in the houses of the foreign Ambassadors; A liberty
denied it is to our Ambassadors in Spain, who indeed may have one Chaplain in
their houses to Preach in private, but are not suffe^ed to let in any of the
Spanish Nation to their exercise, nor to harbor any Spanish Priests that shall
profess any Doctrine contrary to their Church; which if our Ambassadors should
do, such Priests would soon be taken out, and without any respect to our
Ambassador would be translated to their Inquisition dungeon. Yet in England by
twenties and fourties, Priests and Jesuits, enemies to our Church and
Profession, are harbored by Ambassadors; by which policy our Religion is
endangered, divisions are fomented, separation is encouraged, Jesuits
Arguments against us are vented and commonly pleaded, and thus those, who cry
us down for Babylonish, practice themselves what is Antichristian, not knowing
by what subtle Serpent they are let on against us, nor who it is that laughs
and Triumphs, and cries, Up Rome to the spoil, while we mourn and sigh and
grieve to see our divisions daily more and more to increase. And thus (beloved)
having answered Mr. Nichols his second Proposition, and having showed that his
Church is not the house of God, it not being the Pillar and ground of Truth;
having also showed unto you what untruths and Antichristian practices are in
it, and having discovered unto you my judgment and in part knowledge from what
poisoned Jesuitical fountain those practices of his and many others against us
do spring, I shall now come to his third Proposition, wherein he affi^ms
Officiating Parish Ministers to be Babylonish. And because his grounds for this
his error were not in public Dispute discovered, I shall handle it more
briefly, and so conclude wi^h some use of Exhortation unto you.

My Method therefore in handling this point shall be this; First, by reasons
and Arguments of Learned Divines, and by some of my own clearly to show unto
you the contrary to what Mr. Nichols ignorantly and uncharitably affirms of
us; and secondly, to answer some Objections which may seem to countenance Mr.
Nichols his gross error. I thus therefore p^ove that our Parish Officiating
Ministers in England are not (as Mr. Nichols says) Babylonish, Popish, or
Antichristian, which in his sense must be all one.

1. A^gument. Those Ministers, which are Diametrically opposite to Babylonish
Priests and to the Shavelins of Antichrist, cannot be Babylonish nor
Antichristian. But our Parish Officiating Ministers in England are
Diametrically opposite to Babylonish Priests, and to the Shavelins of
Antichrist. Ergo, Our Parish Officiating Ministers in England are not
Babylonish. The Major need not much clearing, Contraria contrariis repugnant,
all know that two contraries are repugnant one to the other, and one cannot be
the other, fire cannot be water, nor dry moist, nor cold hot, nor white black.
The Minor I prove thus; First Babylonish Popish Priests are ordained to
Sacrifice. But our Ministers are sent to Preach, and to Preach against Romes
unbloudy Sacrifice and to pray. Secondly, They teach the Traditions of men. But
ours teach the perfect word of God. Thirdly, They mix the Sacraments, and alter
both their number and their nature. But ours preserve them in their purity both
for number and nature. Fourtthly, They are for Mass. But ours abhor the Mass,
as a filthy idol. Fifthly, They are the Popes s^orn Vassals. But ours have
witnessed with their blood against him and his. Sixthly, Those pervert Souls,
and draw them from Christ. But ours convert Souls, and bring them to Christ, as
Mr. Nichols and his Congregation can witness; for, let them but consider,
whether they did not receive the work of Conversion from sin unto God, which
they presume to be wrought in them, first of all in these our public
Assemblies, from which they now separate. It was but lately the Confession of
one old woman, whom Mr. Nichols received into his Congregation, that upon the
preaching of one Mr. Gardener, a Parish Officiating Minister in Sandwich, she
had been converted; Upon which Confession she was by Mr. Nichols his
Congregation judged to be a true Convert, and to have sufficient calling to
separate from Mr. Gardener his own ways of maintaining public Parish
Assemblies, who had been Gods Instrument for her calling and conversion to a
holy religious course of life, (though much mistaken in her embracing Mr.
Nichols his separation*) You see (beloved) how clearly this first Argument
shows unto you, not only that we are not Babylonish, but that on the
contrary we are Diametrically opposite to Babylonish, Romish and Antichristian
Priests. But further against this Erroneous Assertion of Mr. Nichols I argue
thus:

2. Argument. The Parish Officiating Ministers in England are either Christ's,
or Antichrists. But they are not Antichrists; Ergo, They are Christ's, and so
cannot be truly called Babylonish, or Antichristian. The Major is clear; For
in the new Testament this distinction may comprehend all Ministers, as of, and
under one of these two; and those that be Christ's Ministers, are true
Ministers, and those that be Antichrists, are the false Ministers. The Minor,
or second Proposition is also as clear and evident, as I shall prove thus:
First, because the Parish Officiating Ministers in England are against
Antichrist in Doctrine, and by Oath against his supremacy have renounced him,
and so do con^inue preaching against him. Their Doctrine from Scripture is
their calling from God* to witness their departure from him; their O^th the
best outward trial of truth in man, and their preaching an open publication to
all men of their Faith against Antichrist; what can be further required?

Secondly, Because they do show no obedience unto Antichrist. Obedience is a
mark of a servant, Romans 6. verse. 16. 2 Pet. 2. verse. 19. and John 8. verse. 34.
Now they be not in bondage unto Antichrist, whose Tyrannous Authority with his
Laws, as far as they be judged contrary to Gods Laws, are by our Church
abolished.

Thirdly, It is apparent, They be none of his, because Antichrist himself
disclaimeth them, not only as none of his, but as no Ministers at all,
condemning them as Heretics, forbidding all that belong unto him to hear us;
and if he can get us into his Bearish paw, he is by fire and faggot ready to
devour us, as l^mentable experience of his cruelty does manifest. If we were of
him, he would love us, for the world does love her own, John 15. verse. 19. and
the Devil is more politic than to be divided against himself, for then could
not his Kingdom endure. Therefore I conclude, we being no Ministers of
Antichrist, we then are the Ministers of Christ.

3. A^gument. Where there are men sufficiently qualified by God, orderly called
to the Ministry, and do that work which Christ appointed his Ministers to do,
there are true Gospel Ministers. But such are, for the most part, Parish
Officiating Ministers in England. Ergo, Parish Officiating Ministers are true
Gospel Ministers, and not to be called Babylonish, or Antichristian. The Major
is undeniable, because it contains all the causes, that can be required to
the completing a true Gospel-Minister. First, there is the efficient cause,
God. Secondly, there is the Material cause, A man sufficiently qualified, I
mean according to Paul's phrase, 2 Timothy 2. verse. 2. and 2 Cor. 2. verse. 16.
(...), who is sufficient? Thridly, there is the formal cause, Orderly called.
And fourthly, there is the Final cause, Ephesians. 4. verse. 12. The end of the
Ministry is, for the perf^cting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the body of Christ. The Minor Proposition we shall find it
to be clear also. First, for the efficient cause, there is no controversy
there. Secondly, for the material cause, that they are sufficiently qualified,
who can deny it? their gifts do show it; and their good parts declare them to
have those things, that the Apostle requires to the making of true Ministers,
which I shall show in these particulars.

First, He requires ability to teach others, 2 Timothy 2. verse. 2. 1 Timothy 3.
verse. 2. Ability to exhort; Ability to convince Gainsayers of sound truths,
Titus 1. verse. 9. Now these abilities and gifts, for the Major part, have our
Parish Officiating Ministers, who by word and writing manifest this before God
and man.

Secondly, the Apostle requires a desire in men furnished with gifts, to
bestow their talents that way to the Churches good, 1 Timothy 3. verse. 1. and also
graces, to adorn their profession, 1 Timothy 3. verse. 2. Titus 1. verse. 6.7, 8.
and 2 Chap. verse. 7. And such have we in our Parishes, men who have entered
with desire to bestow the benefit of their gifts upon the Church before any
other calling.

Thirdly, For the formal cause, Orderly called; Who, that is not partial, or
that knows what calling is, can doubt of this, or without cavilling can
maintain, that the Parish Officiating Ministers in England have no true
calling? For, they are called and sent of God; which calling and sending of God
is the preparing of men with gifts and graces to be able to execute in some
measure the Office whereunto he does appoint them. Thus Isaias shows his
Commission from God by the Spirit of the Lord upon him, that is, the gifts and
graces thereof, Isai 61. verse. 1. Thus the Lord declares his sending and
calling of Bezaleel by giving him gifts of his Spirit for the performance of
his charge, Exodus 31. verse. 2.3. So our Savior did call his Apostles and gave
them a power, Math. 10. verse. 1. to accomplish that which he did charge them to
do, verse. 5, 6, 7, 8. In like manner before he sent them upon their universal
Commission, he did speak of those things, which concerned the Kingdom of God,
Act. 1. verse. 2. Luke 24. verse. 44. then he opened their understandings to
understand the Scriptures verse. 45. then he promises them power from above
verse. 49. which was the power of the holy Ghost, Act. 1. verse. 8. for which
they were to wait a time, Luke 24. verse. 49. then he blessed them, verse. 50. he
breathed on them to receive the holy Ghost, John 20. verse. 22. which according
to his promise came upon them visibly, Act. 2. verse. 4. And thus were they
furnished, and did proceed on to execute their great charge imposed upon them.
Thus you see what is Gods calling; I speak not here of extraordinary, though
the instance be from the Apostles, as if all should be so furnished now, and in
that manner; but the purpose of my speech is to show hereby that God does send
none, but he qualifieth them with gifts, extraordinary Persons with
extraordinary gifts, by extraordinary means, or without means; but ordinary men
with ordinary gifts, by common means, giving them natural gifts, by the holy
Scriptures, Grace, and by study and Learning; but he ^ends none, but thus
either the one way, or other he does qualify them for their vocation. Now it
is manifest to all Christendom, that we have Parish Ministers worthily
qualified with gifts, both of Nature, Art, and Grace, and such therefore called
and sent of God. Which furnishing with gifts makes a man fit matter for the
Ministry, and Gods Spirit moving him to desire to employ that way the same
gift, is as it were the internal form of a Minister, or Gods ordination by the
Imposition of the hand of his Spirit upon that party for the Ministry, to whom
nothing is wanting, but the visible calling of the Church; which also our
Parish Ministers have, they being outwardly called and sent of Christ his
Church, examined, tried, approved, set apart for the work of the Ministry by
the Imposition of the hands of Presbyters and Officers of the Church of Christ
in England; And therefore they are true Ministers, not Babylonish; Orderly
called, which is the third formal cause, requisite to the making of a true
Minister.

Object. And if it be Objected, that some of our Parish Ministers have not the
Election of the people, according to the practice of the Primitive Church, Act.
1. Chap. and 6. and 14.

Ans. I answer, These places indeed testify that such examples of practice
were then of Election, but there is no precept for the perpetuity of it. Again,
such Elections of the people were ever, when the Apostles were among them and
not else, as the very places show. Thirdly, the people were very Judicious, and
were able to make a choice then, whereas it is now far otherwise with many.
Fourthly, in all these places we do see indeed an Election among the people,
but the people did not assume it, as a right of themselves, but upon the
Apostles exhortation, and a grant unto them, for the time the people made the
choice. Indeed I confess a double evil to be in the chosing, when either an
ignorant bad people be le^^ to do without wise guides what they list; Or a
muck^wormly Patron is suffered, for hope of greedy gain, to Tyrannize over Gods
people, to set over them at his wicked pleasure, either an ignorant, or a lewd
man, when many of the people being of good understanding do desire a better.
But fifthly and lastly, although in these places we read of the peoples
Election with the Assistance, help, guidance and direction of the Apostles, yet
we read also of some sent to the people before their choice, or Election as
Ty^hicus, and Paul writes to the Philippians, Chap. 2. verse. 19, 20. that he
will send Timotheus to them, for the satisfaction he had of him, that he was a
fit man to take care of their state; and in the mean time he sends unto them
Epaphroditus, verse. 25. and exhorts them to receive him in the Lord with all
gladness and hold such in reputation, verse. 29. and this without the peoples
Election, judging their after-approbation to be sufficient. Even so for our
peoples Election of a Minister, if it be not before the Minister comes to a
place, and he be sent by a Patron; yet sometimes the peoples acceptance and
approbation afterward may supply the want of Election at the first, as Jacobs
after-consent and acceptance of Leah made her to be his wife, though he chose
her not at the first.

Now fourthly, For the final cause requisite for the completing a true
Minister of Christ, it appears in many of us by our profit in converting many
Souls; Yea, those that have separated from us must confess that they also were
at the first awakened by us. We have then Gods ordinary and daily assistance in
our Ministry for the perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of the body of
Christ, Ephesians. 4. verse. 12. which is the end of the Ministry, and not
Babylonish, or Antichristian. This is clearly seen and proved; for Gods
assistance appears in his effectual working men's conversion by the work of
the Ministry, for conversion is by the word, 1 Cor. 4. verse. 15. Romans 1. verse*
16. through the Spirit, and not by the word delivered without the Spirit; and
it is not in man to move the heart to grace, 1 Cor. 3. verse. 5.6. 2 Cor. 3.
verse. 5. But God does take the power of conversion to himself, Deuteronomy. 30. verse.
6. Act. 16. verse. 14. The means indeed is the word, James 1. verse. 18. Examples
hereof we have throughout the Acts of the Apostles. Therefore i^ men be here
converted, God does aid the Ministers, and is with them by the power of his
Spirit in that work, 2 Cor. 3. verse. 3. by which the Apostle proves to have
the power of the Spirit in his Ministry by the conversion of his hearers. All
which considered, and finding the four causes requisite to make up and complete
true Ministers, to be with us; I conclude that the Parish Officiating Ministers
in England, for the most part, are men sufficiently qualified by God, orderly
called to the Ministry, and to do that work which Christ appointed his
Ministers to do, and consequently that they are not Babylonish, but true and
lawful Ministers of Jesus Christ.

4. Argument. They that have the true properties of true Shepherds, are
Christ's true Ministers. But the Parish Officiating Ministers in England have
the true properties of true Shepherds; Ergo, The Parish Officiating Ministers
in England are Christ's true Ministers, and consequently are not Babylonish, or
Antichristian. The Minor I prove thus from the 10. of John; for first, these go
in by the door, verse. 2. that is by Jesus Christ, v. 7. by his call and the
Churches, as I have proved before. Secondly, the Porter opens unto them,
verse. 3. who, invisibly letting men into the Church by Christ the door, is Gods
spirit, who does qualify true Ministers with gifts, and graces, and is
forcible by them to win people* And visibly the Porter is the Authority
committed by the Church unto some for admitting men into the house, the Church
of God. Thirdly, they lead them forth, verse. 3. that is, from pasture to
pasture, from milk (the grounds of Religion) to strong meat, Catechizing, and
otherwise interpreting the holy Scriptures unto them. Which true properties of
a Shepherd being found in the Parish Officiating Ministers here in England, it
appears, that they are true Shepherds, and so true Ministers of Jesus
Christ, and therefore neither Babylonish, nor Antichristian, or Popish. Thus
having with Arguments proved unto you, that our Ministers are true Gospel
Ministers; for the further clearing this truth, it remains that we answer to
what they object against us, who do separate from us, which is chiefly this.

Object. The Ordination of the Ministers, (who a^ this time are Parish
Officiating Ministers) came from the Romish Synagogue; they also were ordained
by Bishops; Ergo, They are not true Ministers; or thus: Those Ministers which
stand by a Romish Institution, are no true Ministers. But the Ministers of
England stand by a Romish Institution; Ergo, They are no true Ministers, but
Babylonish and Antichristian.

1. Answ. The Minor of this Syllogism must be denied; for we stand by no
Romish Institution; for Ordination is none of Romes inventions, but instituted
by the Lord Jesus Christ. So that, the Ministers of England stand by an
Institution of Christ descending to them from the Apostles through the Church
of Rome, must be the meaning of this Argument. To which we answer, that the
passing through Rome nulls not the Institution of Christ. As we cast not away
the Scriptures, Sacraments, and what ever Ordinances we have now, though they
have descended to us from the Apostles through Rome; Which Argument runs as
strong against Baptism, which, though mingled with Romish inventions, is not
therefore nulled. The vessels that were once dedicated to God by his own
Institution, though they were put into the house of Nebuchadnezars Gods, and
those that were fit, very likely used to drink Wine in, when he praised the
Gods, they were not so much as new cast again, but carried to Jerusalem, Ezra
1. verse. 11. Yea, Mr. Johnson a great man of the separation, seeing one that
was a Minister in the Church of England, afterward to be chosen a Teacher to a
separate Congregation without any new imposing of hands, undertakes to justify
the Action thus in five Propositions.

1. Imposition of hands is of God and not an invention of man. It was not a
Post, or a Threshold first brought by Antichrist into the Temple of God, but
had therein before ever Antichrist sat there. 2. Baptism and Imposition of
hands are joined together among the Principles of the foundation spoken of,
Hebr. 6. verse. 2. Therefore they ought to be regarded. 3. Imposition of hands
is in the Church of Rome still given to the Of^^ce of the Ministry, and in the
name of the Lord, as they do also still administer Baptism. 4. We find not
either precept, example, or ground in the Scriptu^e binding to the repetition
of it. 5. The Priests and Levites in Israel becoming unclean, when afterward
they were cleansed, retained still their places of being Priests and Levites;
and the Children of the Priests and Levites, ^ucceeding after them, did
administer without a new anointing, or new Imposition of hands.
Thus Mr. Johnson and with him also Mr. Ainsworth (though in their judgment
both for the Separation) opposed rebaptization, because baptism is an
Ordinance of God, which was had in the Church of Rome, before the sell into
Apostasy, and has been there continued ever since the Apostles times, however
commingled with many inventions of their own. So likewise Mr. Johnson defended
the Ordination of that Ministry, which he had in England, because Imposition
of hands was in the Church of Rome from the times of ^he Apostles, and is there
continued to this day, although much mixed with many pollutions of their own.
Obj. But if those that separate from us will throw away all that comes through
Rome, what course will they take, when they have denied all the Ordinances.
that have been administered for these ninety years in England? for if no
Ministry, then certainly no Authoritative Preaching, no Sacraments; and thus
they have renounced their baptism, which they had by these Ministers. What
Method then will they take in their Reformation?

Ans. How will they come to be rebaptized? They will tell us peradventure, that
they will Covenant together, and then Elect, and ordain a Minister, and he
shall baptize.

1. Reply Will they Covenant together (supposing themselves to be Saints first)
say they so? Are they Saints by a calling? How came they to be so, What did God
call them immediately? No; They must say many (if not all) of them, who have
any truth of grace, by the preaching of the word they were called. What, from
those Ministers, from whom they separate as no Ministers, because of their
Ordination? Has the Lord so far owned his despised Members, as to make them
the instruments to bring these to be visible Saints, fit to imbody, or
Covenant? And are these now no Ministers? Are these the effect of their
Ministerial labors, and they no Ministers?

1. Ans. But they say, They will Elect and Ordain one Minister, and then he
shall rebaptize.

2. Reply. But since he did renounce his own baptism also, who shall baptize
him first? There must be a Minister to do that; to be sure he cannot do it
himself, nor none of them, for they are private persons. To administer the
Lords Supper before they be baptized is contrary to the Scripture-rules, as
Justinius Martyr defends.

But how can they Ordain this Minister, not being themselves baptized? Where
does it appear in Scripture that an unbaptized people did ever Elect, or Ordain
a Minister? These absurdities would necessarily follow such a reformation of
this whole Land, by denying the Ministers to be true Ministers, and by
annulling their Ordination, because it came through the Church of Rome.

2. Ans. But secondly, I answer to the main Objection, of our Ordination
passing through Rome to us. That the Churches of England had not their first
beginning from Rome (as some fondly and ignorantly conceive) but rather from
Jerusalem. Yea, Baronius a great stickler for Romes privileges, yet
acknowledges the Antiquity of the Church of England before Rome it self;
observing the conversion of England to Christianity to have been the five and
thirtieth year after the Ascension of Christ, and the Conversion of Rome to
have been ten years after, in the year 45. So that the Churches of England were
at first rightly gathered and constituted, the instruments of gathering being
from Jerusalem Apostles, or Apostolical men, as is evident from Mr. Fox.
Neither is it to be doubted, but that they did Ordain Officers in the Churches;
for we read of Ministers and Bishops. The Land falling to the possession of the
Saxons, about the year 568. the History says ( p. 147.) that by them all the
Clergy and the Christian Ministers of the Britains were then utterly driven
out, in so much that the Archbishops of London and York went into Wales. Thus
long then it seems that the Ministers of England had no Ordination from Rom^.
This appears also by Austin the Monk, who came in^o England in the year 598 and
it is observed by Mr. Fox, p. 153. that about the year 600. A^st^n assembled
the Bishops and Doctors of Britain (so that still here were Ministers) and
charged them for to preach the Gospel to the English men, and also that they
should among themselves reform certain Rites in their Church, especially for
Easter-tide, and for baptizing after the manner of Rome; to which the Scots and
Bri^tains would not agree; which shows, that they did not, neither would they
depend upon Rome. Since then there were so many Ministers and Bishops in
England, who had their Ordination by Succession from those Apostolical men, and
not from Rome, and opposed Austin the Monk, endeavoring to settle Rites,
Ceremonies and Superstitions according to the practice of Rome; why may not we
suppose that these again might preach the Gospel to the English, maintaining
Baptism and Ordination in that purity wherewith they were Instituted by
IesusChrist? Moreover, It is very observable from Mr. Seldom and Mr. Speeds
History of great Britain, that in the Church of England the corruptions which
the Church of Rome would have introduced about Ordination of Ministers, and
other Ecclesiastical affairs, were withstood and opposed by the Kings of
England; Nor do we read of any Ministers in England that were ordained by any
Agents sent from Rome; but only of some idle Ceremonies of Confirmation of
them, that were ordained by the Pall and the Ring brought thence into England.
So that if the whole be well considered, it will puzzle those of the Separation
to prove, that the Church of England was beholding to the Church of Rome for
either the first plantation, after Reformation, or continuation of the Gospel,
Church and Ministry therein, from the first beginning even to this very day.

3. Ans. But thirdly, I answer, that in case it be granted, that our Ordination
have passed through Rome, so that it have been formerly corrupted with some
Romish Rites and Ceremonies, as Baptism also was; and that stubble have been
built upon Gold, and upon the true Institution of Christ for the ordaining
rightly the Gospel Ministers; Yet neither this scruple, nor the Objection of
Bishops ordaining formerly is sufficient to null our Ordination, and make void
the true Ministry of England, nor any warrantable Plea to separate from us,
and from our Congregations. A stream of water that springs from a clear
Fountain may in the first Reach run like the Fountain clear, in the second
Reach by reason of a muddy and soul bottom it may run also muddy, and in the
third Reach it may come out again clear and run as at the first. And yet none
will deny it in the third Reach to have streamed from a clear Fountain, neither
any loath to drink of it, because immediately before it ran through a muddy
Reach. Even so, our ordination has sprung from a clear Fountain, from Christ
our Head, and in the first Reach of the Primitive times ran very clear without
corruptions, or innovations of sinful men and Prelates; In the second Reach of
corrupt and Popish times it ran more muddy, by reason of pollutions and filthy
inventions, and Ceremonies Superstitiously added to it by the Popes. But now in
the third Reach of Reformation from Popery it runs again clear as at the first.
And therefore who with conscience can deny it to come from a clear Fountain,
and ought to loath it, because more immediately it passed through the mud of
corruptions and corrupt men? The Sun shines one day bright, the next day is
obscured with clouds, and the third day shines bright again. And who, of sound
judgment, will the third day deny that light and brightness to be truly the
Suns, because the day before it was obscured and hid with clouds? Or, who will
refuse the benefit of the Suns light and brightness the third day, because it
was the day before clouded and obscured? Or, who will deny the third days
light truly to be the Suns, because the day before there was not from the Sun
so clear a light? The same I say of our Ordination, that indeed it did shine in
the Primitive times, and when our Churches in England were first constituted,
with a most clear and bright light of Christ's own Institution; but afterward
it was obscured, and hid in a cloud of Superstitions, Popish Rites and
Ceremonies, and now again is clear, and bright, and shines with the light of
the true Institution; Who therefore of sound judgment will refuse the benefit
of it? Who can deny it to be from the Sun of Righteousness, Jesus Christ,
because in Popish times it was obscured with clouds of Superstition? Though by
the Papists we are unjustly called Heretics; Yet some of them deny not to us
what those of the Separation here will not grant us; Some of them do still look
upon our Ordination as true, by reason of the Head and Fountain of Jesus
Christ, from whom it sprang. Dominicus Soto, Bellarmine, Gregorius de Valentia
do teach out of Austin, grounding on the Scripture, that Heretical Bishops may
lawfully ordain, and that it is an Heresy, such as the Donatists was, to deny
it. To this agrees the judgment of our Savior, who teaches that the Scribes
and Pharisees have a lawful Succession (they sit in his Chair, their calling
is of God) though a Race of bad men possessed that Chair, and Christ will have
them acknowledged for their lawful Ministers, Math. 23. verse. 2, 3. So is our
calling and succession, though it passed through corrupt times. The Scriptures
themselves, Baptism, and the Articles of our Creed have all passed through the
Papacy unto us, and yet they cease not to be true Scriptures, nor true
baptism. Much less does Ordination cease to be true and right, it being an Act
of Jurisdiction, which may be legally and lawfully performed by men of corrupt
Faith. We must carefully distinguish the Acts of Office (which have their form
and being from a Root, or Fountain without us) from the qualities of the man,
that performs that Office. The man may be naught, yet his Office be good; and
Acts done by ver^ue of his Office may be good, just and allowable, although the
man and his religion be naught. As for instance in Caiphas and in those Priests
to whom our Savior bad the Lepers go, and show themselves, Luke 17. verse. 14.
A Popish Land Lord makes to his Tenant a Lease of a Farm; The Lease is not
Antichristian, but good in Law, although, he that demised it, be for his
Religion a Papist. A Popish Judge does pass a sentende in Court, which stands
good in Judicature; his sentence is not Popish, though he that pronounced it be
a Papist. The reason is, because the Legal sentence is not of him, nor from him
as a Papist, but as a Judge, who does but deliver that which he has received
from an higher root, the Law. So in this case Ordination is an Act of Office
derived from Christ, and it is not Popish, though executed by a Papist. We do
not rebaptize them that were baptized by a Popish Priest, because the power of
Gods Ordinance depends not on the Person, that does execute the same, but upon
an higher foundation, the Institution of Christ. Ministerial Acts are not
vitiated, or made null, though they pass through the hands of bad men, but
stand good to all intents and purposes to such as receive them aright by virtue
of their Office Authoritatively derived from the first Institution.

Yea, further I say, that if there have been no true Ministers in England, or
else where, no true Ordinances, nor Churches, but where there has been no
humane mixtures, nor wicked Persons, or Officers, then there have been but few
Ministers, Ordinances, or Churches, since there was a Church upon earth; and if
there ought to be separation from such Ministers, and Churches, then we should
have found before these days Separatists enough. How hardly was Superstition
kept out in the Church of the Jews before the Captivity? Afterward when Christ
came, were they clear? What shall we say of corrupt Caiphas then the high
Priest, his corrupt entering into, and his continuing in the place for one
year? So the Pharisees, a generation corrupt that God never Instituted; their
School began, some say, two hundred and forty years, some say more, before
Christ, and for their Superstitious inventions they were not barren in them.
But did Christ so soon as he came to preach, call away the people and bid them
separate? No, we find no such words, but rather we read, that (though here
were corrupt Officers) Christ bids the multitude hear them and observe and do
whatsoever they bid them observe and do, Math. 23. v. 3. After Christ, how long
did the Churches continue without Superstitious mixtures? I believe we shall
find, that the Church has not been long free, but we do not find separation
presently, and nulling of Ministers, as now. Men should do well to give us a
precept, or example out of the word, where Ordinances have been dispensed true
for the substance, (though some humane mixtures have been joined to them) that
therefore they were itera^ed.

4. A^s. Fourthly, I answer, that if the true succession of Ministers of
England, and true Ordination of them have failed, decayed, or been lost,
because of either Bishops, or Popish Prelates, or a Romish Presbytery in the
time of Popery, from whom we have descended; then it must be showed in whom
particularly, or in what Prelates, Bishops, or Presbyters this Ordination first
decayed, died, and was quite lost, and abolished. If we look back to the
beginning of Popish Superstition in England, and to the first Bishops and
Presbyters that then Ap^sta^ized from the purity of the Gospel and of the
Ordinances of Christ to Popery, we shall find that Ordination for substance
died not in them; for before they fall, they were truly and rightly Ordained
to preach and pray; and if to preaching and praying they added Mass mumming,
that their first corruption did not deprive them of that first power which by
true Ordination they received to preach and to pray; for that power was not
given them conditionally, so long as they preserved themselves from
corruptions, and to be forfeited by corruptions, as I showed before, that
corruptions in an Officer do not null, or make void the Acts of Office, which
have their form and being from a root, or foundation without. Ordination
therefore in them was not lost by reason of their corruptions; And if not lost
in them, then in them it still continued; and if it continued in them, then
still in them there was by virtue of their true Ordination for substance
potestas in, and potestas ad, a power in, in themselves to preach and to pray
still, and a power to, or toward, to, or toward others, to communicate this
power, by imposition of hands, to others, to other Ministers and Presbyters; in
whom neither could Ordination for subs^ance be lost; for their superstitions
and corruptions could not make void and null the Acts of Office belonging to
them from a Root and Fountain without, and Authoritatively derived to them from
the first Institution of Christ, and from their Ordination, by imposition of
hands by the former Presbyters still true for substance. And if their
Superstitions, and corruptions could make Ordination void and null, the
Superstitions and corruptions of the former should also have made it void, and
so it must be said to decay in the first, in whom it decayed not, they having
been rightly ordained for substance before their fall and apostasy. Now the
Superstitions and corruptions of those that succeeded the first, were in kind
of the same nature and quality with those that were found in the first, and so
they could not (being the same in kind, and nature) do more then the first,
no^ make void and null that Ordination for substance, which the first
corruptions in the first Apostates never made void and null. So that in those
Presbyters, who succeeded the first back-sliders, there was also potestas in,
and potestas ad, power in themselves, to preach and to pray, and power to, or
toward others, to communicate this power by imposition of hands to others. And
so in them neither could ordination, for substance still right, die, or decay.
And so successively ordination for substance continued true, notwithstanding
the corruptions, and evil qualities of Officers, till the glorious light of
Reformation began again to shine. As in a wall, which on^ day is seen and known
by the color of a white plaistering over it; but the next day is found with
another color, even dawbed over with black, yet still continues in the
substance of the stones and other materials, to be the same wall, the black
dawbing, or any other paintings not being so destructive as to destroy the
substance of the wall. Even so Ordination as a strong wall to the Church of
Christ, though at first in the pure and Primitive times it was observed and
known by the true white color of Imposition of hands by the Presbytery with
fasting and prayer, and without any Oils, or dawbing ointings, and Chrisms, by
praying and preaching only, without that black corruption, and Superstition of
Mass-mumming, or paintings of an unbloudy Sacrifice, yet continues and then
continued true for substance, and was not quite destroyed, or abolished by the
colors of Rites and Superstitious Ceremonies put upon it by corrupt Bishops
and Presbyters, who lived in England in the height of Pope y and Romish
Superstition. And thus as I have looked back to the beginning of Popery, and
there have found no nulling, no destroying of true Ordination for substance,
nor any decay, or loss of it in the succ^ssion of Presbyters following and
succeeding until the Reformation; Let us now take a view of the first
Reformers, who were ashamed of the former corruptions and Apostasies, who left
off Mass-mumming and offering an unbloudy sacrifice in the Mass, and let us now
see whether in them, continuing Preaching and praying, Ordination for substance
were lost and decayed; so that in them there remained not still, potestas in,
and potestas ad, power in, in themselves to Preach and to Pray, and power to,
or toward others, to communicate to other Presbyters by Imposition of hands
the same power to pray, to Preach the word, and to Administer the Sacraments.

Object. It may be Objected and said of them, that they, being Ordained to the
Mass, as well as to Preaching, Praying, and Admistring the Sacraments, could
not Ordain others to Preaching and Praying and Administering the Sacraments
only, unless they Ordained them to what themselves had been Ordained, to wit,
to Sacrifice also, and to the Mass, because their power reached to the latter
as well as to the former. And so the Ministers succeeding them, and yet not
truly Ordained to the same full power of Massing and Sacrificing, to which
they that Ordained them, had been themselves Ordained; but being Ordained to
one part only of their power, to wit, to Preaching and Praying and
Administering the Sacraments, and not to Sacrifice and the Mass, were not truly
Ordained; because the first Reformers had shaken off and renounced their own
full power, which themselves had received by abjuring the Mass and Sacrifice,
to which their power reach^d, and so could communicate no power to others, but
in that fullness of power, for kind and nature, which themselves had formerly
received.

Ans. To the which Objection I answer with this plain and easy instance of a
Justice of the Peace now amongst us; whose former power was only to Administer
Justice, and to act by Law against Delinquents and Offenders, binding them over
to the Sessions, or committing them to the Gaol, or Prison. But now to this his
power is further added by an Act of Parliament another power to join in the
State of Marriage such as shall come before him to be married, and to declare
them Man and Wife, giving them his Certificate that they are truly and
lawfully coupled together in the State of Matrimony. If now a Justice of the
Peace should make a scruple of doing this (as some I hear already do) his
Conscience telling him that Marriages have for many years in all sorts of
Churches, yea in the best Reformed Churches, always belonged to the Ministry,
as an Ordinance of God (though not as a Sacrament, as Rome ^ea^eth) and for
that Matrimony is an honorable estate in its Relation to Christ the husband
and the Church his spouse, Ephesians. 5. Chap. and not rashly to be undertaken, but
with grounds, reasons and Scripture to be laid upon and cleared to the Parties
that are to be Wedded, and that with good counsel, Admonition, and prayer to
God for a blessing upon the Parties to be ma^^ied, for the better knowing their
duties each to the other, better performing those duties, and for the better
guiding their lives in love, peace and unity for the time to come. If, I say,
upon these grounds (acknowledging himself unlearned in the Scriptures unfit for
such good counsel, instruction and Admonition, having not a Spirit of prayer
for such a purpose) he should renounce that power given unto him, to join Man
and Wi^e together, and should absolutely refuse to practice it any longer, as
not belonging to him, according to the Dictate of his Conscience; Yet the other
part of his Power, to Administer Justice against Offenders, would still
continue in force, his Power, Authority, and Commission for that would not be
said to be void and forfeited, because in part he renounceth that which has
troubled his Conscience in the performing of it. Even so the first Reforming
Presbyters, Priests, or Bishops, who had received power by the Commission of
their Ordination to Preach and to Pray, and to administer the Sacraments, and
also to say Mass, and in the Mass to offer up a Sacrifice; when the true light
of the Gospel, and Reformation began to shine upon their Consciences, were by
the Spirit moved to renounce some part of their power, as not belonging to them
(to wit, the Mass and Sacrifi^e) and to continue and keep the other part of
their power and Commission, to wit, Preaching, Praying and Administering the
Sacraments, as belonging to them by their Commission from Christ, when by
Ordination the power of the Keys was committed unto them. And who will say
that because they renounced unlawful power, therefore their lawful power was
forfeited and made void and null, either in themselves to practice it, or
toward others, to communicate it to others by right, true and lawful
imposition of hands, as Christ ordained?

Object. But this Objection against our Ministry and our lawful succession is
much like to that of Rome against us, saying, that the Ministers of the
Reformed Churches had no Commission, or lawful calling (being under the Pope
and Popish Prelates) to reform the Church; and so think, and judge our
Separatists, that our Commission being void) and all power to ordain, and to
Reform the Church is fallen to the people.

Ans. To whom I answer with Morneus his answer to the Papists Objection against
our Reformers at the first beginning of Reformation; That the calling of our
first Ministers, which reformed the Church in these last times, was the same
vocation and succession, w^ereof they themselves do brag; but the same
vocation, which they abused, have our men endeavored to use well, and to that
vain succession, wherewith they decked themselves, they have added the
succession of true Doctrine, which they had corrupted; without which all
succession is nothing else, but a continuing of abuse and error. Wickliff, Ion
Hus, Luther, Zwinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, and others of that School (from
whence the Ministers, which have gathered Churches from under Antichrist are
descended) were Priests (as they call them) and Doctors in Divinity. As Priests
and Pastors they had charge to preach the truth unto the people, and to
Administer the Sacraments unto them according to the Institution of our Lord.
As Doctors, they were called to expound Divinity in their readings and in their
books, and they were bound by the ordinary Oath of all Universities to declare
the truth unto the Church, to confute all Doctrines repugnant against the word
of God, and with all their might to expel it. Now in their time they sound
that the word of God was hid unto the people, that the honor, which was due to
God alone, was turned to men and to images, that the blood of Christ was
trodden under foot, that the Sacrament of the Supper was partly turned into
Idolatry, and partly denied unto the poor people; To be short, that all the
holy Scripture was profaned and poisoned with the Popes gloss and Popish
interpretations. And when they showed these things to the Bishops and
Metropolitans, according to the order of their Church, they made no reckoning
of them, they were the first that persecuted them, because they themselves were
the infected part of the Church. I ask therefore, if their vocation commanded
them not to go farther, to wit, to preach the truth unto the people, and purely
to administer the Sacraments? And if they had done otherwise, whither they had
not been forsakers of their calling, contemners of their Oath made unto God,
and abusers of the people? Both two therefore, our Popish Adversaries, and our
first Ministers had one and the same ordinary and outward calling. But herein
is the difference, that, that which ours have followed, the others have
forsaken; that which ours have done of duty by reason of their charge, the
other have concealed. Ours have led their sheep upon the Mountains of Israel
into good pastures, Ezekiel. 34. the others have devoured them, or else left them
for a prey to the beasts of the field, or else driven them to the Fens and
Marshes, where they have starved. A Magistrate shall be called to the
Government of a Commonwealth, where he shall find the good Laws corrupted by
the negligence, or malice of those that went before, his Courts full of
injustice, the Officers subject to factions, briberies, and corruptions, and he
would reform all this, and bring it to the censure of the Laws. He that will
further now ask him, by what right he does this, should he not make himself a
laughing stock, because he follows step by step his calling? He has not sworn
to maintain abuses, but rather to maintain the Laws, and to provide every way
that he can for the good and preservation of the Commonwealth. But what an
absurdity would it be, to say, that this Magistrate has forfeited his
Commission and power, because he thus reforms the Courts, and the
Commonwealth, to which he is sworn? and to judge his power now lapsed into the
peoples hands, because he reforms abuses? Even so likewise have our first
Ministers done, first requiring reformation, and afterward putting too their
hands according to their duty. And if we could ask the Apostles, who are their
true succ^ssours? They would not tell us, such as have a Triple Crown, or such
a Cope, or such a Miter, but those that preach the word of God after our
example. At the preaching of these first men, the Pastor of the Churches were
awakened in England, in Bohemia, in Germany, in Scotland, in Denmark, in
Swedenland, and afterward many in France, and these were sent to bethink them
of their duty. Consequently some whole Realms were reformed; the very Bishops
themselves, that there had preached lies, preached the truth in the self-same
Church and Pulpit; and they with their reformed Presbyters ordained others to
preach and pray, and to Administer the Sacraments according to Christ his word
truly revealed to these Pastors and first Reformers. And now for their good
and Godly endeavors shall our Separatists, like Papists, question their
calling? Judge their power and Commission void, null our succession from them,
and preach our Ordination down, as lost and ruined either in time of Popery, or
by these our first Reformers? It is an opinion, or error with laughing to be
exploded. But to draw to an end, I shall briefly answer to that part of our
Adversaries Argument and Objection against our Ministers; They were Ordained by
Bishops, say they, Ergo, They are Babylonish. First, by way of answer I desire
to know, what these men think of Mr. Bradford, and the rest of those holy
Ministers and Martyrs ordained by Bishops in those days? Were they
Antichristian and Babylonish Ministers?

But secondly, The Bishops, which ordained our Ministers since the Reformation,
were not Antichristian, or Babylonish, which I prove thus. Those, who by their
life, and Doctrine have witnessed against Antichrist, could not be
Antichristian. But our Bishops, since the Reformation have witnessed against
Antichrist, Ergo, They were not Antichristian. The Minor is clear in Cranmer,
Ridl^y, Hooper, Latimer, Farrar, Jewel, Pilkington, Sands, Babington, Abbot,
Davenant, Hall, Morton, Usher, and Dr. Brownrigge, in his sound and Orthodox
Divinity taught and professed publicly in Trinity College in Cambridge
against the unsound and corrupt Divinity taugh^ and professed in Rome.

But thirdly, I answer, that they did indeed Ordain our Ministers, not qua Lord
Bishops, but qua Presbyte^s, and had other Presbyters to join with them, so
that our Ordination from them is valid, and may in no wise be disclaimed, more
than those Ministers, who were ordained in the P^imitive Churches. They were
ordained in Cyperians time by Bishops and Presbyters. The fourth Council of
Carthage ordered, that no Bishops should ordain without the Counsel of his
Clergy; Antichrist was not then got in his fea^. A Bishop, if we consider him
merely as a Bishop, was but a Minister, and set apart to do the work of a
Minister. And so Ordina^ion from them, was b^t as from Ministers, who have
Commission from Christ to ordain; and therefore the Argument proves nothing
against us, to null our lawful succ^ssion and Ordination.

Thus (beloved) having made a large progress through Mr. Nichols his three
Erroneous Propositions, having by Syllogist^cal Reasons and by Scriptures
showed unto you what is Babylonish and Antichristian, and what not, to wit,
that which is agreeable with the word of God, with the express Command of
Christ, and with practice and example of the Apostles; or that which crosses
the word, the Command of Christ, the practice and example of the Apostles; have
cleared our Churches and showed unto you, that, as Parochial, they are not
Babylonish, neither in their first Constitution (Parishes having been
constituted before Antichrist was discovered) nor in the end of their
Constitution (that being for the better and more convenient feeding of many
Souls by many Pastors) nor in their mixture of good and bad together; which
mixture I have proved in all those Churches, to whom Paul in his Epistles did
write; having showed also unto you, what practices against the word, the
express command of Christ, the examples of the Apostles, and according to the
Jesuits examples are practiced in Mr. Nichols his Congregation, which he calls
^he House of God; and finally having vindicated our Parochial Pastors and
Parish Officiating-Ministers from Mr. Nichols his false aspersion, and
uncharitable censure of them, branding them with the infamous Title of
Babylonish, I shall draw nearer to an end, and conclude wi^h a use of
Exhortation to some few duties.

2. Use of Exhortation. I have (beloved) these three Lords days carried you
about the bounds of Zion and Babylon; I have showed you at large what people,
what Churches are the Zion of God, and what practices are Babylonish, and how
free our meetings, and our Ministers are from such practices; and in these
three days surveying these bounds, I have blown my Rams horns, that the Walls
of Babylon might fall, as did the Walls of cursed Jericho formerly at the
blowing of them; I shall yet cause the sound of them to be heard all the Nation
over, committing what I have here spoken unto you, to the Press, that so
whatsoever practices are Babylonish in the Land and Nation, may be discovered,
Babylons strength and walls may be more ru^ned, while Z^on shall stand as a
Rock unmovable and Hell-Gates, Councels, and practices shall never (I hope)
prevail against her. I have found in my search and Survey of Zions Walls and
Bulwarks, that yet she stands amongst us, Our Churches, I have found by the
light and truth of Scripture, ^o be Gods spiritu^l Zion, I have found their
Antiquity, as Parishes, to be ^^om the first P^imitive times, and that it
belongs to the Decency and good Order of Z^on, that in so stately and great a
House there be many Chambers, and several distinct Tables, where the Ordinances
of God may be dispensed, and the mul^itude of Souls belonging to Zion may be
more conveniently fed. I have found also out of Scripture, that our Parish
Officiating-Ministers are true Shepherds with the true properties of
Shepherds, and true Pastors Ordained by Christ his own Commission to feed the
Souls in Zion, having the lawful power of the Keys by Imposition of the hands
of ^he Presbytery, without which all Commission given by the people is
subreptitious and false* and against the Institution of Christ, and
consequently Babylonish and Antichristian. And finally I have found Mr. Ni^h^ls
his three Assertions against us to be false, not enduring the Trial and
Touchstone of the Holy Scriptures, and nothing by him truly Objected to prove
us Babylonish, but that we are a mixed multitude with many cor^upt persons and
sinners amongst us, which he might as well have Objected against all the
Churches mentioned in the several Epistles of Paul, to prove Paul false in
calling them Saints and Churches, and against the Churches of Asia, and yet not
have unchurched them, ^s upon this ground he has not been able to unchurch us.
Yet because our sins only are the great block and beam in his eye, which
hinders his sight, that he cannot see where a true Church is, nor see that we
are true Churches, yea, truer than his; I beseech you let it be your care and
endeavor for the time to come, to give him no further offense by your sins,
but to live so religiously, that this block and beam being removed from his
eye, he may see that we of Deal, as well as those of other Parishes are a
Church, he may be won and recalled by your Godly walking and Conversation, to
come back to us, and to send back again unto our Churches those, whom he has
caused to separate from us. Which that ye may perform the better, give me leave
to conclude this large discourse with an Exhortation to these duties following.

1. Duty. First, Let us humble our selves for our sins, which have been such
Offenses and Scandals to our Friends and Neighbors, which have brought such
destructions and divisions amongst us, which have stirred up foreign Enemies
against us, which threaten us yet with greater miseries, than those which
hitherto we have suffered, which make us as unclean as Lepers, and cause others
to loath us, yea, to separate from us. Oh, Let us read our sins in our
miseries, in our wars, in our divisions, which are amongst us. We have
nourished Malignant lusts, Babylonish and Antichristian Brats within us, which
reb^l against the Spirit, and fight against the Soul; we have made sport and
pass-time with those sins, which shed the blood of the Lord Jesus. Oh, Let
those sins draw tears from us, which drew blood from Christ. We have grieved
the holy Spirit, and therefore well may the Spirit refuse to comfort us, who
have grieved him. Well may the God of Heaven bathe his Sword in our blood, and
yet bring more foreign Enemies upon us, and make the Land fat with our
Carcasses, for we have forfeited our very Estates and lives; we do not deserve
one bit of bread, or drop of water; justly may God feed us with the bread o^
sorrows, and give us tears to drink; we would not serve God ^i^h joyfulness,
and with gladness of heart for the abundance of all things, and therefore well
might God send us to serve our Enemies in the want of all things, Deuteronomy. 28. v.
47, 48. Behold the Heaven is as brass, and the Earth as iron; we have had a
brazen brow, and there is an iron Sinew in our Necks, we have gone on
impudently and stubbornly in our sins; Gods Doctrine has dropped as the rain,
and distilled as the dew, but not as upon the tender Herb, for our hearts have
not been tender, our lives have not been fruitful. We have loathed Manna, the
Spiritual food of our Souls, and well may God loath us, and cast us off from
him; we have alienated our selves from our good God, we have separated one from
another, we have increased divisions, and well may God take away his mercies,
and his blessings from us, and increase our divisions, and make our breaches
greater yet, and wider than hi^herto they have been. We have by reason of our
sins given occasion to our friends and Neighbors to unchurch us, (though in
them it have been unjust) but if we humble not our selves for these our sins,
God may justly unchurch us, unpeople us, and cast us quite away for ever being
more his people. Oh than, Let us humble our selves at the feet of Christ. let
us with Marie Magdalen weep at the feet of Christ for our sins, let us at the
feet of Christ break our Alabaster boxes, our hearts I mean, for that we have
broken his Laws, and have made great breaches in the Land.

2. Duty. But secondly, Let us make it our earnest business from hence forward
to reform our particular persons. Oh, are there not Babylonish Inmates
protected within us? Oh, Let us turn our eyes inward, and every one search what
he can discover within his heart. Are there no unruly passions there, no
unmortified lusts, no self ends, no lusts of Covetousness, no lusts of
uncleanness, no pride, no envy, no malice enshrined there? These, these are the
Brats of Babylon, for the which we are called by some Babylonish* Oh happy,
yea, thrice happy shall he be, who takes these Infant lusts, before they are
grown up, and dasheth them against the Rock, as it is in Ps. 137. verse. 9. The
times, wherein we live, are said to be Reforming times, we have talked of
Reformation these ten years and upwards; we have beaten down whatsoever has
appeared outwardly Babylonish, either in Altars, or in Crosses, or in Images;
but oh, let us take heed we do not leave some Idols yet standing in our own
bosoms; There are (beloved) Idola saeculi, as well as Idola Templi, (...) are
(...); all our lusts must be cursed, anathematized, that they may like the
Fig Tree, after it was cursed, die and wither at their very Root. Tell me, Is
not self-love an Idol? Is it not in some of y^u the great whore? Is not lust a
beast, a Monster with many Heads and Horns? Oh, hate this Whore, mortify
self-love, and you stab the beast to the heart; for self love is the very heart
and Soul of Original sin, it is the last Enemy which will be destroyed* it was
primum vivens, and it will be ultimum moriens. Come then, Let us beat down our
bodies, and cry to God to humble our Souls, and beat down our corruptions; Let
not only reason vote down your lusts, but Faith and Zeal pray them down. The
precious Sons of Zion are most troubled with this same Babylon within, and
therefore they do make most frequent and penitent complaints against
themselves, and put up most zealous p^ayers to God, to give them power and
victory over their headstrong, and stomackfull corruptions; and in their
prayers their Faith ever closes with such promises, as assure them of Grace
enough to resist temptations, and morti^ie corruption. This is the first, which
I exhort you to do, to deliver your selves from Babylon within you, that
dwells within your hearts, as an Inmate in the same house, by Humiliation and
Reformation. Bu^ secondly, I beseech you to consider that you must not only
bea^ down Babylon, but you must build up Zion, and that is to be done by faith
and holiness.

3. Duty. Therefore in the third place, Look well to your Faith. The Walls of
Bab^lon like the Walls of Jericho are battered down by Faith; All the faithful
Prisoners in Bab^lon, whose hear^s were sprinkled by the blood of the Covenant,
were prisoners of hope, and therefore were sure to be delivered from the
bottomless pit, in which there is no water, for B^bylon was a Type of Hell, As
for thee also by the blood of thy Covenant, I have sent forth thy prison^rs out
of the pit, wherein is no water, Zach. 9 verse. 11. and in the next verse
following these are said to be prisoners of hope. Beasts live by sense,
Heathens live by reason, Christians must live by Faith; they must mortify
their lusts, renounce their merits, rest only upon Christ his perfect
obedience, and full sa^isfaction for their justification; for we cannot be
constituted righteous, but (...) the obedience of Christ, Romans 5. verse. 19. In
this Faith let us live, in this let us die. By this we shall show our selves to
be true Sons of Z^on; And let us beware, we become not Babylonish in these
times, by yielding to new Doctrines, which may make us fall from our
Principles, from the true word of Christ, as revealed unto us, and faithfully
expounded to us by able Pastors, and Teachers, and so be brought at last to
fall from our Faith in Christ.

4. Duty. Fourthly, and lastly (my beloved) be exhorted to study holiness, and
to cry down by your holy lives those, that c^y you down for B^bylonish, for
want (as they ^ay) of holiness. Holiness is the beauty of Zion, for there they
were to worship God in the beauty of holiness; There can be no beauty in our
Souls, no glory in our Congrega^ions without holiness* Zion was the Mount of
holiness, Za^h. 8. verse. 3. Holiness is the end o^ humane society.

Vtque alios alii de Religi^n^ (...),
Contiguas Pi^tas jussi^ ^abere domos.
Certainly this age is even grown Barbarous, or else Holiness, which is the end
of humane society, would never be contemned and despised, as it is now adays
in this wicked generation. O what a base thing is it for a Nation to be ashamed
of its glory, and to glory in its sin and shame? Men think it a base thing
for to be holy, and yet God himself is glorious in holiness, Exodus 15. verse.
11. Certainly if we would be glorious in holiness, Gods right hand would be
glorious in po^e^, and dash our Enemies to pieces, Exodus 15. verse. 6. Without
holiness we cannot have any intimate acquaintance with God, or good men. We
long for peace; but peace is a Jewel, which God gives to none, but to those,
that are of his acquain^ance* A^quain^ now ^^y self with him, and be at peace;
the^eby good shall come unto (...), Job 22. v. 21. A Godly life is the life of
God; and those that were strangers to a Godly life, are said to be alienated,
or ^stranged from the life of God, Ephesians. 4. verse. 17, 18. They then that
strike at holiness, strike at the life of God, and have a kind of Atheistical
murder in their thoughts; they would lay the Church a b^eeding, let out the
very heart-bloud of Religion, and take away the very life of God. O if England
will not be holy, it cannot be happy; if we continue in our lukewarmness and
profaneness, Woe, woe, be unto us; though it go well with Zion, it will go ill
with us; Zion was preserved even when Jerusalem was destroyed; and England may
be destroyed for i^s unthankfulness, unf^uitfulness, Schism, Id^latry,
lukewarmness and profaneness, and yet the Church preserved, for the Church is
not confined to any one place. It concerns us then to be such manne^ of men
in all h^ly Conversation, 2 Pet. 3. verse. 11. Such Pilgrims on Earth, and
Citizens of Heaven, that it may appear that we seek a better Country, an
Heavenly, and that God will not be ashamed to be called our God, Hebr. 11 verse.
16. But if we go about spiritual duties with carnal hearts, and worl^ly minds,
if we lie at catch waiting for a fair opportunity to return into Egypt, the God
of Heaven will be ashamed to own us for his people, Hebr. 11. verse. 15, 16.
Therefore (my beloved) if we live in the Spirit, let us walk in the Spirit,
Galat 5. verse. 25. Let us march fair and straight, in rank and file, as the
word signifies, (...), walk according to the C^non given to Evangelical
Soldiers, Galat. 6. verse. 16. and if we walk according to Rule, this Rule of
the new Creature, verse. 15 mor^ifying our lusts, crucifying our selves to the
World, and living un^o Christ in righteousness, and true holiness, Peace will
be upon us, and upon Zion the Israel of God, verse. 16. Let us therefore, as it
becomes men of Zion, devote our selves to God, and spend our strength in the
Practice of Piety. Let us be better acquainted with our selves, and with our
God; let us learn, what sin, and what Grace means; let us be watchful over our
own hearts with an holy jealousy; may, let us set a watch before our mouths,
and all our senses, nay, let us watch over one another, that we may provoke one
another to holiness and good works; let us beseech the God of Heaven, to kindle
gracious desires in our hearts, that we may oppose and Conquer all our filthy
and implacable lusts, which set us all in a Combustion of War and divisions,
Iam. 4. verse. 1. Thus shall we be delivered from Babylon, and by our Holiness
we shall become the Beauty of Zion. And thus (beloved) have I employed my
utmost strength, consecrated my Totum nil, blown my Rams Horns against Babylon,
and endeavored to build up Zion, that all you here present may be Members of
it, to Gods praise, to whom be glory throughout all Ages. Amen.

Soli Deo Honor and gloria.
FINIS.

