Good News in Bad Times; OR Absaloms Return to David's Bosom.
To the Tune of, Adieu to the pleasures and Follies of Love.
A Dieu to the hopes of the Whigs of the State,
The long-wish'd for News is arrived, though late;
Reflections of Conscience did Monmouth convince,
How much he had wronged his dear Father, and Prince;
So hanious a Crime there is none durst befriend,
But only the Monarch which he did offend;
Great YORK interceeds for him,
And Nature Pleads for him,
to Kiss the Hand of his Monarch again.
II.
So humble a Submission, so pensive a Face,
So glorious an Advocate needs must find grace;
The God-like great Brothers did Monmouth restore,
The height of whose Crime showed their mercy the more:
As before in the Court all together they shined,
In the Presence again they will strike envy blind;
For York has retrieved him,
The King received him,
Monarchs have mercy, and Nature is kind.
III.
The Peace you made so successful will prove,
No Seperatist dares to add Gall to your Dove;
Be deaf to those Crocodiles if they do Whine,
They love not your Father, nor none of his Line:
A Presbyter-Priest when his Zeal does provoke,
Is a heap of Combustables in a long Cloak:
Who e're Burned the City down,
Now it is a pretty Town,
But they once made the three Nations to Smoke.
IV.
Away to the Court and Survey every Room,
Your presence will bring there a richer Perfume:
Each Picture will bow there, and smile in your face,
And those that detracted will pray for your Grace;
Then keep in the Court, and your favor renew
With Caesar, and those that have loved you so true:
And let the Rabble know,
You Will have no more to do
With such a Factious Illitterate Crew.
V.
The Faction who carrys Religion in's face, (Grace;
Will make no more Treats, nor drink healths to your
For since you are returned to Great Caesar's Breast,
They swear you are a Papist as well as the rest;
And now they remember their Machine of State
Was afraid that your Father and you were too great:
And nothing troubles them,
But that you Bubbled them,
Of all their hopes, and of many a Treat.
VI.
Keep close to your Gracious forgiving Great King,
And every day some new Offering bring;
Discover Great-Brittain's Intestine Foes,
And those that the Church and her Interest oppose;
By this you will deserve the great favor obtained,
And wipe off that Blemish with which you were stained
And like a Glorious Star,
Of our bright Hemisphere,
One of her Patrons for ever proclaimed.
VII.
Then bless the good Duke, and your Father renown,
But hate those that put you in thoughts of a Crown;
Live under its beams, for the shelter is good,
But think not to injure the old Royal Blood:
Who Heaven has adopted for a Crowned Head,
Must wait for the hour of the Field or the Bed;
And there in Honors fight,
Take naught but what is right,
Wronging Succession is wronging the dead.
FINIS.

Printed for P. Brookshy, near the hospital-gate, in West-Smithfield.


