GOOD NEWS FROM KENT.

Being a true Relation of an hundred and twenty pieces of Ordnance taken near
Gravesend, and of five cart loads taken from Cobham Hall, August 20.

AND A discovery of ammunition for five hundred men taken from the Archbishop
of Canterburies house at Lambeth on friday night last.

Also a description of the battle between the Hollanders and nine ships of
Dunkirk going to aid the Rebels in Ireland, and how after three hours sight
they were surprised by the Hollanders.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Printed for Io. Johnson. August 22. 1642.

JOYFUL NEWS FROM COBHAM-HALL IN KENT. Being a true Relation of such arms as
were taken from thence August 20. ALSO A Discovery of such Ammunition as was
taken from the Arthbishop of Canterbury Aug. 19.
SVch has been the providence and vigilancie of this our Parliament, having
been so prosperously seconded with the blessing of God upon their endeavors
that they have been successful even beyond hope, in detecting and defeating
the plots of the malignant party, how cunningly soever by them contrived. Upon
the nineteenth of this month the Parliament received information of about an
hundred and twenty pieces of Ordnance that lay near the water side four miles
from Gravesend, which causes the inhabitants to watch them every night,
fearing lest those which are ill-affected to the King and Parliament should
possess themselves of them or steal some of them away, many of them being so
small, that they might be carried away by two or three men, which might prove
very prejudicial to the peace of that country: whereupon the Parliament have
taken order for the securing and safe keeping of them.

No sooner is one pernicious design discovered, but another supplies the room
of it: for information being given to the Parliament House, that great store of
arms and ammunition was provided by that arch-ploiter of these evils, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and laid up in his house at Lambeth, the same
evening, being friday, about two hundred Foot, and a troop of Horse were sent
to search his house, wherein they found arms for four or five hundred men,
all which they took away from his house at Lambeth, and laid them in the City
having little need of such ammunition for his defense, being better provided in
the Tower since he kept Court there. Upon the same evening a troop of Horse
were sent into Kent to search some Recusants houses which were suspected to
have great store of arms and ammunition, and coming to make search at
Cobham-Hall, they were denied entrance, and very much resisted, though little
hurt was done, as is credibly reported, notwithstanding the rumor of so many
being hurt and slain: after much opposition they entered the house, and found
there five cart loads of ammunition, which they have taken away, intending to
bring it up to London. Upon this day also Sir John Meldrom that was sent to
Hull, according to the desire of Sir John Hotham, by the Parliament, for to aid
and assist him in the defense of that town, came to the Parliament House, and
acquainted them with the true state of of things there, and that Sir John
Hotham has so cleared the coasts about him by sea and land, that the Cavaliers
dare not so much as to come near the town. As for the mayor part of Yorkshire,
they are so well affected to the Parliament, that when as His Majesty had
commanded all his loving subjects to repair unto him that would aid and assist
him, the chiefest of the Gentry of that country refuse to obey the said
command, and are resolved to assist the Parliament against all that shall
oppose them, profering their own persons to both Houses to maintain the said
Cause: and for that end have desired the Parliament to send such forces as
might secure them in so doing.

As the faces of all Britain show their hearts and inclinations, so if their
hearts were transparent, and as perspicuous as their faces, they would appear
fearful of the future, were not the Representative Body of the State careful
to cure the present malady, by qualifying and tempering the distempered
humors, and save the much endangered body, by cutting off some rotten and
putrified members which infect, infest and invade the republique: and herein
consists a great part of the happiness of this Kingdom, which (next under the
Searcher of hearts) is derived unto us by the pious care and industry of the
Parliament, in that they have been so successful in discovering and searching
out of the plots and machinations of the adverse party, and so indulgent and
friendly to all such as are well-affected to the peace and welfare of this
Kingdom. Nor is there amity and friendship circumscribed and terminated within
this Kingdom of England, but is further showed in the unity and correspondence
betwixt us and our Brethren of Scotland, though so many ill-affected spirits
have endeavored a disjunction. A further degree of our happiness in this Island
is to be seen in the mutual concord betwixt us and the States of Holland,
whose confederacy with this Nation has been happy, and all their designs
seconded with success since their first union. They have lately declared their
fidelity and good affection to the Parliament in certain letters presented to
the House, wherein is intimated and declared to them their true, real, and
constant affection and resolution to the Parliament. Their actions show as much
as their words, which is further manifested in an overthrow given to the Fleet
of Dunkirk going to aid the Bebels in Ireland.

Upon the 15 of this month nine ships set out from Dunkirk, sailing with all
speed to the coasts of Ireland: but the Lord of the seas being displeased with
their intentions prospered not their proceedings, but raised a great tempest
which drove them back upon the coast of England^ but fearing to come too near
by reason of the Earl of Warwicks Fleet they cast anchor about 41. leagues
distant from the English coast, and staying there two days by reason of a
contrary wind, they espied two Flemish ships sailing near them, which caused a
great fear and jealousy in them, suspecting they would descry them to the
Dutch Fleet which lay by the way as they were to sail homeward, which indeed
they did, describing the number of the Spanish Fleet, and in what place they
lay: which occasioned the Dutch Admiral (a terrible enemy against the
Spaniard) with all speed to prepare five ships of war to hoise sail toward
the Fleet of Dunkirk, going himself in person, and coming in sight of them
hanged out his colors, and making all ready for the fight, coming near made
shot against them, the fight lasting full two hours, and many men being slain
on both sides, at last two of the Spanish ships were sunk, which dishearthed
the rest, and forced them to flight: the Durch Admiral chased them within six
leagues of Dunkirk, where he took two of them laden with ammunition, intended
for the aid of the Irish Rebels, but the other five, being swift of sail,
escaped into Dunkirk.

The Lords and Commons in Parliament declare. That all such persons as shall
upon any pretense whatsoever, assist His Majesty in this Warte, with Horse,
Arms, Plate or Money, are Traitors to His Majesty, the Parliament and Kingdom,
and shall be brought to condign punishment for so high an offense.

Ordered to be forthwith published and printed,

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

