GOD A GOOD MASTER, AND PROTECTOR. Opened in several Sermons on Esaiah 8. 13.
14.

By JOHN GOODWIN Pastor of S. Stephens Coleman-street.

Non sine praemio diligitur Deus, quamvis sine intuitu praemii sit diligendus.
Malo obedire, quam miracula facere, etiamsi possem. Luther. Magnus hic animus
est, qui se Deo tradidit. Seneca. And know ye, that whatsoever good thing any
man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free.
Ephesians. 6. 8. LONDON, Printed by T. Cotes, and are to be sold by W. Harris at his
shop, at the sign of the white Hind in Coleman-street. 1641.

TO THE WORSHIPFVL, AND WORTHY Gentlewoman Mrs Elizabeth Hampden of Westminster.
Worthy Gentlewoman,
I Know not how well or wisely I shall manage my intention in addressing my
self in this Dedication unto you: but confident I am, that if a wise man had
it in hand, you should be no loser by it. I know you wish your self at a
greater distance (in affection) from the world, and closer, and more entire in
your dependence on God, and deeper engaged for Heaven: wherein if this small
piece does you no service, the Author miscarrieth in the best of his design.
Neither would the perusal of it (I conceive) without the propriety accruing
to you by the Dedication, have had the same advantage (altogether) of gaining
upon you that way, and winding into your spitit. The sight of your Name before
it, cannot (lightly) but raise some thought or apprehension within you, that as
God intended you external comfort in special manner, by that part of the
world, that outward estate, which you call yours: so he has purposed
spiritual support, and consolation to you in some more peculiar, and
remarkable manner, by those meditations, which you may call yours, by a right
of propriety, distinct from all other men's. As it is no part of my meaning to
flatter you (a sin, as unsavory to my spirit, as unsuitable to my calling) so
neither would I willingly undervalue, or discourage you in any endowment,
wherewith God has honored you: yet this I think I may be bold to say (though
I stand in much a we of a sharp and piercing eye which I have more than once
observed in your understanding) that you little think or conceive, what such a
touch in your spirit, or apprehension (as was mentioned) may advantage you, in
reading or searching either this, or any other piece of spiritual learning. I
cannot think, but that Paul's mentioning the Names of the particular Churches
and persons, in the inscription of his Epistles, to whom they were sent, was
some help and advantage unto them respectively, to reap the spiritual things
sown therein unto them, more plentifully. Neither do I conceive that any of
these Churches, received proportionably, the like benefit by any other of the
Epistles of the same Author, as they did by that which was particularly
directed unto them: nor yet, that any Church since, ever gained that measure of
edification from any one of those Epistles, which the Churches themselves, to
whom they were written, gained severally. Neither can I judge the adequate
reason hereof, to lie in this, because they were compiled and framed by the
Holy Ghost, with special relation and accommodation, to the then present
occasions of those Churches: but this (I conceive) did also contribute much
here unto, that they had lively apprehensions of Gods intending grace and mercy
to them peculiarly by those very writings, which had their Names in their front
or inscription: the consideration whereof did either occasion, and raise, or
(at least) quickened and confirmed those apprehensions. When a man is touched
with any secret impressions, or is able to lay hold on such a hope (whether
there be any sufficient ground for it, or no) that God has a purpose indeed,
to come home unto us, and to do us some special good by such or such a
means, as by such a minister, such a man's writings, such a book, or the like,
the heart upon such a touch opens more sweetly and freely, and lies large
before such a means tendered unto it, observes and watches things more
narrowly, weighs and ponders things more heedfully, and is content and willing
to strain it self more than ordinary, to conceive and reach the full
importance and tendencie of every thing it meets with: whereas on the contrary,
when the soul is not relieved, and strengthened by some such hope or
apprehension as this, the heart is nothing enlarged to the extent and capacity
of it, but lye's scant before the means, and like a sail that is not
skilfully weathered, loses the best part of the benefit and advantage of the
gale that blows.

I am tender of being troublesome unto you: neither shall any man, to salve the
seasons of all your occasions and affairs, be more willing to keep silence,
than I, though otherwise, I trust I shall always be found ready to make no
spare of my self, when the affairs of your soul shall require it. I
acknowledge my self a grand debtor unto you, for those respects, and many
expressions of love, which very faint and slender provocations or engagements
on my part have drawn from you. Sed faciles motus men's generosa capit (as he
said) that is,

The mind that is true noble bred,
With easy motives will be led.
I have nothing wherewith to recompense your kindness, but my prayers, and the
travail of my soul, for yours. A Ministers thankfulness to his friend, is to
show them the way to Heaven, and to enable them (if he can) to walk from
strength to strength, that they faint not, till they come there.

The God, whom (I doubt not) you serve in your spirit, make you strong and
whole in your dependence upon him through Jesus Christ, and fill you with the
blessed hope of life and immortality, and draw out all this again from you, in
fruits of righteousness, and true holiness, abundantly, that it may return
back again upon you, multiplied, and increased, yet an hundred fold, that so
you may find Heaven out of it is place, and taste two worlds at once, that which
is present, with that which is to come. This is nothing more than the prayer of

From my study in Coleman-street, October. 14. 1640. Your Worships to be
commanded in all Christian service John Goodwin.

To the READER.
SO it is (good Reader) I am fallen into thy hands the second time, how I shall
be used, I know not, but if thou had rather take example, than offense, I
have no cause but to hope well, For (doubtless) my heart is perfect with thee,
in giving thee part and fellowship with my self in these meditations (if thou
please) and weakness it must be not want of good will, if they leave thee
not better than they find thee: If thou likest not to be bound to the
occupation and trade of Angels, which is the service of God, I am like to be
troublesome unto thee, and look for no other, but in that respect to suffer
from thee: for I shall strive and wrestle hard with thee, and with much
importunity, before I give thee any rest or peace, in any contrary course or
resolution. If thou will but acknowledge as much concerning thy censures, and
profess, that if thou misusest, or dealest hardly with me in any of my words
or intentions, it shall be weakness in thee, and no want of good will; I
shall not go about to take thy rod from thee: use it, and smite with it. When
love mistakes, and receives that with the left hand, which was given with the
right, the atonement is soon made: and friends are easily reconciled, when
the breach was nothing but mis-imagination. But to be malice bitten, is
dangerous, and very painful, except a man's flesh be easy of healing, and
carries a principle of a cure in it: and the more dangerous it is to be so
bitten, when the cause of the biting, or wound given, is not so much a mistake
as a pretense. Solomon tells us that the wrath of a fool is very heavy, Prove.
27. 3. the reason whereof (doubtless) is because he wants judgment, and
understanding to allay and moderate the rage and heat of it, so that where it
falls, it falls with the whole strength and weight of it. But the wrath of the
malicious is much more heavy: because he uses and imployeth reason, and
understanding, to increase and double the rage of it.

If thou think that alone, sufficient matter of censure and reproof, that
the world is still pesterd with more books (having more already upon the hand
of it, than it can tell what to do with, except it be to complain of)
especially upon so common a theme and argument, as the service of God is,
wherein so much has been said already, that either there cannot (at least
there needs not) be said more, my apology is: that in new handling common
subjects, especially if they be matters of weight and importance (as what can
be of more, than the service of God, and dependence upon him?) there is this
benefit, that people expecting, and hoping for somewhat new, in new books,
will be drawn to read them: wherein though they should be deceived, yet it
will be to their advantage. For by this means, they shall (however) revive the
remembrance of what they formerly knew, and be further built up and,
established in it: upon which the Apostle sets this weighty accent (Phil. 3.
1.) that it is a thing sure, or safe for men. I cannot assume to my self the
knowledge of all that has been written, nor of all that thou have read, upon
the subjects I discourse, in these Sermons, and therefore dare not promise with
a thorough confidence, that here thou shall find any thing new: yet if thou will please to search the boughs narrowly, I verily believe thou may find of
this Summer fruit (if thy soul longs) upon the tree.

Trimnesse of style, and quaintnes of straigne and invention, I know where thou
may find, but not here* The ^ent of my care and study is, to provide for
the consciences of men, though their fancies starve: and the truth is, that
effeminatenesse, and lightness, and comptnesse of phrase, does but transmit
and carry up the matter to the fancy and imagination, and so feed them:
whereas a masculine, grave, and weighty expression, carries it down into the
conscience, and makes it settle and sink into the soul.

I make no question, but in the reading of it, thou will ever and anon find
the image and superscription of the Author stamped upon it, weakness and
infirmity: but for affinity and sympathy sake with thine own, I hope thou will bestow a veil or curteine upon it. And upon condition thou will make no
more faults, than thou find, I will congratulate thy happiness, in finding
those that are. It is one of the best qualifications of an error, when it
spreads no further, nor hurts more, than the Author: and for mine own errors,
though they be my greatest enemies* yet shall I always wish them the greatest
felicity they are capable of (whilst they have their being) which (doubtless)
is, the deliverance of all others from them.

The Lord supply all that which is wanting in weight or measure thoroughout
these meditations, and drown all defects, by the abundance of his blessing
upon them, and cause them far above their own strength, and worth, to do
worthily, and wonderfully in thy soul.

Thine in Christ what thou desire I. G.

The Contents of the CHAPTERS.
Chap. I. VVHerin some things* are briefly premised by way of direction
(especially for the hidden man of the heart) in and about the keeping of a
Fast. Fol. 1. Chap. II. The context briefly opened; the coherence and sense of
the words (in part) cleared, with some brief conclusions raised from them.
Fol. 11. Chap. III. Containing Scriptures demonstrations of the first Doctrine.
Fol. 25. Chap. IV. Wherein the four first grounds of the Doctrine, are briefly
laid down and opened. Fol. 34. Chap. V. The Doctrine further opened and
established, by an addition of three grounds more. Fol. 49. Chap. VI. The first
use of the Doctrine, for confutation of two dangerous errors briefly pointed
at. Fol. 73. Chap. VII. Wherein the doctrine is further drawn out, in an use
of instruction, and that in two particulars. Fol. 79. Chap. VIII. Two sorts of
offenders censured by warrant from the Doctrine. Fol. 105 Chap. IX. Comfort
from the Doctrine, for those that are, and chiefly for those that have been,
and yet continue the servants of God. Fol. 126 Chap. X. The first doctrine
concluded in an use of exhortation. Fol. 134 Chap. XI. The words further opened
than before, and way made for the explication and handling of the Doctrine.
Fol. 183 Chap. XII. Wherein the latter Doctrine is propounded and explained.
Fol. 193 Chap. XIII. The Doctrine confirmed by the Scriptures, with an
objection answered. 235 Chap. XIV. Containing the grounds or reasons of the
point in number four. 253 Chap. XV. An Use of Instruction from the Doctrine in
two particulars. 270 Chap. XVI. The Doctrine made useful, in way of Reproof.
284 Chap. XVII. The last Use of the Doctrine in an exhortation to depend on
God, with a motive or encouragement thereunto. 294
GOD A GOOD Master and Protector to his people.
ISAIAH 8. 13. 14. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your
fear, and let him be your dread, and he shall be for a Sanctuary, etc.
CAP. I.
Wherein some things are briefly premised by way of direction, (especially for
the hidden man of the heart) in and about the keeping of a fast.

BEfore I come to the words, give me leave (only in one word) as concerning
the duty and service of the day, to remove one stumbling stone out of your way,
and break one snare in pieces, whereat (it is to be feared) many stumble in
such occasions as these, and are ensnared.

1 Therefore briefly you are to consider, that in these duties which we call
fasting and humiliation of our selves before God, there is such a difference of
parts and circumstances, as was in the Law, (as our Savior expresses upon
occasion, to the Scribes and Pharisees) between tithing of Mint and Cumin, and
exercising of Mercy, and executing Judgment, these are called the great things
of the Law: implying that those other were matters of inferior consideration.
So there are in this duty, in this Great and solemn service, some thing that
ought, and are necessary, and fit to be done; others wherein the maine weight,
and importance of it stands: as Christ told the Pharisees, that for the tithing
of Mint and Cumin, they were things they ought to do, as well as the keeping
Mercy and Judgment, though these had the pre-eminence, and were the great
things of the Law.

2 Those things in this duty, which ought not to be left undone (though the
life of the duty lies not in them) are such as may go under the name of
bodily exercise: which I shall not need to recapitulate particularly, because
(as I conceive) they are every man's knowledge; as namely, fasting, not only
from our ordinary repast, as eating and drinking, but likewise from
recreations, costly apparel, and many other things, wherein the fancy of man
is apt to take a delight and refreshment. And so your bodily presence before
God in the assembly for a greater space of time than ordinary. To this head, I
may refer likewise those contributions that you use to make unto the poor
upon such occasions as these. Now all these are things very fit to be done, but
yet you must take heed (this is the stumbling stone that I speak of, that I
would remove,) first, that you place no weight at all, or as little as possible
may be, in the most strict and literal observation of these things, lest you
lose the crown of the service, and reward of the day; for such exercise
profits little (as the Apostle speaks) except it be (perhaps) to make the
surface or appearance of the service, the more comely, and solemn. But now the
Mercy, and the Judgment, and the Great things of the Law, the Great things of
this day, and service, are the exercise of the spirits, as first the summoning,
and gathering together into your memories; next a serious, and affectuous
consideration, then an acknowledgement of the sins of the nation. So likewise
a confessing (in this sense) of the sins of your own souls, and the sins
of those that are under your hand and charge, yea and of the sins of your
forefathers; even to the breaking of your hearts, and the humbling and laying
low, the smiting down, and wounding your spirits and consciences in the sight
of God.

3 Next to this, your serious purposes and resolutions taken hold of by a fast
and a single hand, of being divorced from all your known ways of your
several sins: not only your plucking out, and cutting off, but casting from
you also your right eyes, and your right hands. This is another thing that is
of the maine body, or rather of the very heart and soul of this duty, viz.
reformation and truth of repentance. Lastly, your humble requests, and earnest
strivings, and struglings with God for the pardon of the sins you have
confessed as well national as personal, the putting forth your strength and
might, yea and the increasing your strength and might, the provoking your
hearts to do more and more in this kind, in importuning the God of Mercy to
power out of his grace and goodness abundantly upon your persons, and upon
your land, in all manner of expressions thereof, which concern the peace,
either of the one or the other. For there is no man, but if he has once
smitten the rock of his heart, and gotten out prayers and requests unto God,
let him smite the second time, and the third time, and he shall find that the
waters will still flow more and more. For there is spring upon spring, desire
upon desire. Many rich veins and mines of this treasure, that might with
labor, be dug out of the soul, etc. And this is the fourth and the last
thing.

4. Now this is that I desire to give you in by way of caution, that you charge
little of the weight of the day upon the former things mentioned, or the
literal observation of them (though never so strictly observed) for there is
little of the substance of the duty in the^, when you have done your utmost;
but all the strength and weight, and hope, and power of the service lies in the
latter. And yet I would not have you charge these neither beyond their
strength, and beyond what they are able to bear: As Paul would not have any
man to think of him above what he either saw in him or heard of him, (2 Cor.
12. 6.) that is, above what he had sufficient Ground to think; and therefore
let our thoughts be commensurable to the nature and quality of the things.
Thus far you may build upon them, and thus far you may trust unto them, in
regard of the testimony from heaven given unto them. If so be they be done with
truth of heart, and performed as in the sight of the God of heaven and earth,
you shall see that light will arise out of darkness unto you, and that the
heavens are ready, and do but wait till the earth calls. Only you must not
think that the Good, the reward that comes upon those services, is from the
merit or desert of any thing you do, or from the strength, or worth of grace
received, to go through such a work: when you have caused your voice to be
heard on high, no you must know that all the blessing, and the virtue, that
seem to come out of such things, even the holiest duties, in the holiest
manner performed, lies rather in the strength of the promise of God, in that
truth and faithfulness of his which inclines him to perform, and make good,
all that grace and goodness, that he has been pleased to settle and confirm
under the great seal of heaven, unto such duties and services as these. (But
this by the way only) now come we to the words themselves. Sanctify the Lord
of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread, and
he shall be a Sanctuary, etc.

CAP. II.
The context briefly opened; the coherence and sense of the words (in part)
cleared, with some brief conclusions raised from them.

THe Prophet having prophesied of the coming of the great, and mighty King of
Assyria in a very terrible manner with a great host both against the two
Kingdoms of Syria and Israel, where they should spoil all. verse. 7. and also
against Judah, where he shall prevail far too, and reach even to the neck,
which we know is immediately joined to the head, meaning that he shall
prosper, and carry all before him without resistance, till he came at Jerusalem
it self, the head of that state or Kingdom, verse. 8. where notwithstanding
he does (in effect) threaten him, that he shall be made to lay down his proud
waves, where his great army made up of several nations, with all their
consultations and projects, shall be broken in pieces, and ruined utterly,
verse. 9. 10. though they gird themselves, yet they shall be broken in pieces,
yea though they take counsel, yet it shall come to naught; having (I say)
prophesied, and foretold all these things in the 11. verse. he seems to give a
reason, of what he had with so great confidence affirmed, in the last words of
the 10. verse. which was, that though they spoke the word, yet it should not
stand, that is, though they made never so sure account, to swallow up Jerusalem
and all, and concluded that it was as good as done already, yet it should be
otherwise; they would be confounded in such their hopes, and expectations; and
that for this reason, because God is with us; viz. to protect, save, and
deliver us* as the presence of God usually imports in the Scriptures.

2 To prove that God was with them, and would deliver them, he goes on verse.
11. in this manner; for the Lord spoke unto me, with a strong hand (that is,
by an effectual and powerful motion of his spirit) and instructed me that I
should not walk in the way of this people, that is, of the generality of that
people amongst whom I live, who refuse (or despise) the waters of Shiloah,
because they run softly (as he expresses it verse. 6.) that is, that
provision of strength, and means of defense they had, because in outward
appearance, and to the eye of flesh and blood, who never reckon upon Gods
presence, never value or count of that in such a case) it was but low and
mean, and no ways likely to hold out against the strength of their enemies,
and therefore rejoiced after Rezin, and Remaliahs son, that is, admired the
riches, strength and power, that the King and State of Syria and Israel had,
desired and sought by confederations, to equallize themselves in power unto
these.

3 This being the way of this people (says the Prophet) the Lord by a strong
hand instructed me, and (in and by me) the rest of his people with me, saying;
say not ye a confederacy to all them, to whom this people shall say, a
confederacy; that is, seek not, desire not, any such external aid, or
addition to your strength, as they seek after: say not ye a confederacy to
all them, etc. that is, not to any of them all: for so this word of
universalitie, All (according to the propriety of the Hebrew language) is to
be taken distributively, for any one comprehended within that universalitie, to
which it is applied in such a case: As Ephesians: 4. 29. (to pass by many other
instances) let not all corrupt communication, (for so it is in the original)
proceed out of the mouth: that is, let no such communication proceed, etc. it
follows in the Lords Lecture of instruction to his Prophet, and People:
neither fear you their fear, neither be afraid: as if he should say: they
fear the weakness of their own strength, and are afraid, and troubled at
the great strength, and power of their enemies: but neither fear you the one,
nor be afraid of the other: but sanctify you the Lord of Hosts, and let him be
your fear, and let him be your dread: that is, fear nothing, little nor much,
but him alone: do not only dread him alone, but fear him alone likewise: let
him and nothing else whatsoever, be the object and motive of that passion
within you, not in the deeper and sorer motions of it only, but in the least
and lightest of all.

4 To come now (briefly) to matter of observation and Doctrine: first, from the
connection here found, between Gods commanding, and promising, between service
required, and reward promised, observe: That God has no desire or intent, to
be served by his creature for naught: all his precepts are attended and (as it
were) waited upon, by promises: yea his precepts are but subservient to his
promises; he commands chiefly that he may promise and perform accordingly; no
man shall work for him, but he shall eat of his meat. Sanctify him, and
he will be a sanctuary, or secure you.

Secondly, from the order or method the Lord here uses, first, requiring
service, and then promising reward; observe: that God will stand upon his
prerogative, the prerogative of his Godhead, which is to be first served. He
will do all things like a God: he has no table for any to eat at, but those
that have first girded themselves, and ministered unto him, whilst he has
eaten, his precepts still go before his promises; neither has he any thing
for those by way of reward, that have nothing for him by way of service.

Thirdly, from those words: Sanctify the Lord of Hosts: observe, that the
sanctifying of God is a special duty lying upon the creature.

Fourthly, from those latter clauses, let him be your fear, and let him be
your dread, observe, that there is nothing to be feared, little or much, but
God alone.

Lastly, from that promise, verse. 14. And he shall be a sanctuary. Observe two
things:

First, that God is able to protect in times of greatest dangers in the midst
of greatest evils; otherwise he would not have undertaken the protection of
men in this case.

Secondly, from the connection of this promise with the duty of sanctifying God,
mentioned in the former verse, observe: That those that will sanctify God (or
honor God like himself, for that is the importance of the word sanctify, as
we shall see hereafter) in times of danger or greatest trouble, shall have
protection from him, shall be provided for in peace. This last is the point,
that I cast mine eye chiefly upon, for the present occasion, though there be
none of the former, but are worthy our best consideration, and would furnish us
also with matter of meditation very suitable thereunto.

CHAP. III.
Containing Scripture demonstrations, of the first Doctrine.

1. THe first point was, That God has no intent to be served by his creature
for naught. He has no work to do, but he has his reward, and that a
gracious and and liberal reward for it. There is no command of his, but has
his promise suitable to it, which shall be performed in it is season, and is as
good to him that obeyes, as money in his purse (as we use to say) as good as
present payment, and performance out of hand, we shall not need to make a
labor of the proof of this: the Scriptures seem not to rejoice more over any
truth whatsoever, then this; we shall take sparingly from the heap, Esa. 45.
19. I have not spoke in secret, in a dark place of the earth: I said not unto
the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain. I the Lord speak righteousness,
etc. God does not require nor command any man, to seek him in vain: to seek
him, that is, to serve and obey him: which (I conceive) is called a seeking
him, in regard of that loss of him we sustained, by our fall in Adam. First,
in our creation, God was our portion and possession: by our sin we lost him,
and knew not how to find him, or recover him aagaine, but God in mercy,
willing to be found re-injoyed by his creature (in a way of righteousness)
bids them seek him, that is, serve and obey his voice, and this he assures
them, he does not require of them in vain: meaning, that if they would thus
seek him, they should find him, that is, they shall recover their ancient and
first interest in him, and he would deal as graciously and as bountifully
with them, (if not abundantly more) as ever he meant to have done, had they
continued in his first covenant, had they never lost him. And this abundant
reward which he intended toward them, if they would seek him (as he required
of them) may well be employed in the figurative expression here used: I said
not, seek you me in vain, that is, I required not this of you, upon any other
terms, nor with any other intention, then of your own unspeakable and
infinite advantage. It is that kind of expression which they call a (...):
which is, when a rich sense or meaning, is put into low and mean words. As in
that of our Savior, Matthew. 10. 42. Verily I say unto you, he shall not lose
his reward: the meaning is not, that he shall have something, or that he
shall have that which shall be as good to him, as that which he parted with,
his Cup of cold water, (though the precise letter of the words reaches no
further then thus) but the true and apparent meaning and importance of that
promise is, that he shall be richly and abundantly rewarded. Besides very many
like expressions in the Scriptures. So again, Ier. 2. 31. O generation, see
ye the Word of the Lord: or take heed to the Word of the Lord (as the former
translation has it) have I been as a Wilderness unto Israel, or a land of
darkness? Wherefore say my people then we are Lords: we will come no more
unto thee? as if he had said, if whilst they served me, I had not been
gracious and bountiful unto them, if requiring of them to be as Eden or the
Garden of God unto me, fruitful in works of righteousness and holiness, and
I had been nothing but a Wilderness unto them, they might with some pretense
and color, have said thy had been Lords, that is, that they had power to do
with themselves, and disposed of their service, as and where and to whom they
pleased. But the case being far otherwise, and their service always,
abundantly recompensed and rewarded by me, they have no cloak for their
revolting and apostacy from my service.

2. Yea it is not only a truth that God will not suffer such services of his
creature to go unrewarded, as have the true nature and spirit of services
indeed, such as are performed in love and with truth of zeal to his glory:
but even to those that have been but half services, that have been services
in the letter and outside only, he has (for the most part) gratified
abundantly. Thus in Ezekiel. 29. Verse. 18, 19, 20. to Nebuchadnezzer, who served
him with his army against Tyrus, he promised the lands of Egypt with all her
spoil and treasure, for his reward. So to Iehu, for that service he did unto
God, in rooting out the house of Ahab, he granted the succession of the
Kingdom of Israel to him and his children for four generations, 2 King. 10.
30. so to Ahab himself, in reward of that outward and formal repentance,
which reached only to the rending of his clothes, and putting on and lying in
Sackcloth, and outward abstinence, and walking softly, (for it reached not his
heart in any effectual change or conversion unto God) yet we know God
gratified this repentance of his (such as it was) with the defering of that
judgment, he had intended against him and his house, for his days. Many other
like instances there are of this particular in the Scriptures.

CHAP. IV.
Wherein the four first grounds of the Doctrine are briefly laid down, and
opened.

THe Reasons of this point are;

First, God will not be served by his creature for naught, because the love
that he bears unto his creature man, being the workmanship of his own hand.
I shall not need to prove this love of God to men; the Scripture, nay the
whole world is full of it, I mean of the sweet fruits and expressions of it.
Yea the truth is, that this same root; The love God bears to the World,
bears fruit far more excellent and glorious, then that we now speak of,
this rewarding men for their service done unto him: so that we may easily give
way in our apprehensions and judgments to this: So God loved the world, (says
our Savior, Ioh. 3. 16.) that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. It was a
thousand times more to give such a gift as Jesus Christ was, freely to the
world, then to give the greatest reward under heaven (yea or in heaven either)
to the meanest service that could be performed. Love is kind, or bountiful
(says Paul, 1 Cor. 13. 4.) that is, is of a communicative nature or
disposition. And if this affection out of it is own nature, property, and
inclination, otherwise unprovoked, disposes to doing good, or giving gifts, to
those that are loved; how much more is this nature and property of it
strengthened, when those that are loved are also serviceable, and still ready to
obey and fulfill the desires of the lover. As if a man loves his child because
he is his child, how much more does he love him, when he serves him? This is
one reason of the love of God to man.

2. The second reason may be the royal and bountiful disposition in God: It
is the peculiar genius or spirit (as it were) of this disposition, which we
call bounty, to reward services, and that with a liberal and full hand, above
the level (as it were) or nature of them. This bountifulness in God the
Scripture often expresses. David speaking of the judgments or commandments
of God, tells us (to the glory of God in this behalf, Psalm. 19. 11.) that in
keeping of them there is great reward. So it was this bountiful disposition in
God, that was the foundation upon which Paul built that high saying of his, 2
Cor. 4. 17. For our light affliction which is but for a moment, works unto us
a far more exceeding eternal weight of glory; light and momentany
afflictions could never work after such a rate of recompense and reward, did
they not work upon the glorious munificence and bounty of God. A manifest
demonstration of this disposition in God you may see in Gods abundant
rewarding of Abraham for the obeying his voice, Genesis 22. 17, 18. This for the
second Reason.

3. Again, a third reason why God will reward all the services of his
creature, may be because he desires to manifest and make known both these
gracious dispositions of his to the world. He rewards his servants both because
he loves them, and is bountifully disposed: as likewise because he desires to
make a discovery of both these properties in himself. As a man may build,
partly because he has skill in architecture, and so building is a natural kind
of exercise or employment to him, and in that respect, delightful: and again
he may build too, to express and show the skill and insight sight he has
into that art: So God may reward those that serve him, partly, because the
goodness of his nature, his love and bounty leads him thereunto, in which
respect it is suitable and delightful to him to do it (though he had no
further end or intent in doing it; partly because he desires to make known
unto his creature, how he is disposed both those ways, both in point of love
to his creature, and bountifulness of nature also. And this discovery or
manifestation of these two natures or properties in God, may be called their
perfection, in such a sense as Christ himself, 2 Cor. 12. 9. says, that his
strength is perfected through weakness: And Abraham's faith is said to have
been perfected by works, lames 2. 22. Any thing that is excellent and
glorious, whilst it is kept secret, and remains invisible, suffers a kind of
imperfection, and wants something that belongs unto it, and which would in some
respect, in an external consideration, better the condition of it, that is to
say, discovery or manifestation. As the Sun when it is in the eclipse, or a
candle when it is in a dark Lantern, or under a Bushel, though there be
nothing internally defective or wanting to them, no more then when the one
shines in his might, and the other is put on a Candlestick, yet they are in a
kind of suffering condition; the native inclination or tendencie in light
being, to be seen, or to inlighten others. So the excellencies, and virtues,
and glorious perfections in God; love, bounty, power, wosedome, etc. though
they be internally perfect and entire, and wanting nothing of their perfection
(in that kind) whilst they remain unknown and undiscovered to any but to
himself; yet it is a kind of improvement to them, which the Scripture calls a
perfection, when they are brought forth into a further light, when the
knowledge of them is communicated ad extra. For that doubtless is the full and
direct meaning of our Saviors words mentioned: my strength is perfected in
weakness, that is, that absolute strength and power I have to support my
creature, receives perfection, such a perfection, as it is capable of, that is
to say, discovery or manifestation, in and through the creatures weakness. In
such cases it is best discovered, and consequently made perfect, or (rather)
perfected, (...). The like may be said of all the other divine perfections in
God: their manifestatio^ is their perfection in this sense; so then this may
well be another reason of the point, why God should reward the services of his
people, viz. to manifest those two excellent properties of his, his love to his
creature and the bounty of his nature.

Fourthly, a fourth reason may be, the love that God bears to the
righteousness or obedience it self of his creature, the desire he has, or
the delight he takes, to have his voice, and his Laws obeyed by men. The Lord
takes a pleasure, and holy contentment to see men walking in ways of
righteousness, to see their hearts and hands lift up to his Commandments. And
because he would fill the world with righteousness (if it might be) he would
have all the plants, all the vines in his great Vineyard the world, laden with
clusters of these Grapes; he therefore strengthe^s the hands of men hereunto, by
propounding and promising them large rewards for such works. The Scripture
speaks much of this disposition in God also, his love to righteousness, his
delight in the obedience of men. The righteous Lord loves righteousness,
(says David Psalm. 11. 7.) meaning in men, or in his creatures: and that with a
love, redundante in personam (as they say) that is with a love flowing over,
and redounding to the persons working it: as it follows in the latter clause
of the Verse, and his countenance beholds the just, that is to say, with
favor and acceptance; he takes a pleasure to look upon them, in the ways of
their uprightness. So 1 Samuel 15. 22. The Prophet informs us of the same
disposition in God. Has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt offerings and
sacrifices, as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed? Behold, to obey, is better
then sacrifice, and to hearken is better then the fat of Rams: implying, that
the Lord takes a holy and solemn contentment in the obedience of his creature,
for being of a holy and righteous disposition himself, he cannot but
sympathize and be affected with the same ways and courses wheresoever he
finds them: as David employed in the words before mentioned: the righteous Lord
loves righteousness, intimating that his own righteous disposition, is the
ground or foundation of this his affection, to righteousness in others. Now
then, as no man but will use means and seek to have and enjoy that which he
loves and takes pleasure in, yea and if it may be, will seek to have it in
abundance: So God loving righteousness and obedience in men, lays out for
it in the world, holding forth rewards, and ample considerations, to those that
will accommodate and pleasure him therein. Gods promises, are (as it were) the
seed of obedience to his Commandments.

CAP. V.
The Doctrine further opened and established, by an addition of three grounds
more.

Again, in the fifth place, God promises rewards to those that serve him
(happly) for this reason also: because this is the most proper and natural
way, or method, to deal, and treat with his reasonable creature, man, for
that commodity of righteousness; it is a course most agreeable to the
principles of his nature and being, and likewise to the terms of his
condition. It is a known commendation of the wisdom of God, and sweetness
of his providence, disposing and, governing all things, to comply, and follow,
to go along, and fall in with the several tempers, frames, natures, and
properties of his creatures, so as to act and move every of them, by ways and
means peculiarly fitted to them. When God made Balams Ass to speak, to
reprove the madness of the Prophet, (as the Scripture speaks) he did not
effect it in such a way, or by such means, as he used to move his Prophets,
(as for example, Isaiah, or Jeremy) to speak to the like purpose, to reprove
the false Prophets amongst them. He did not enlighten the fantasy of the
Ass, to know or understand, the weight, or intent of what she spoke: neither
did he move her by way of conscience, or reverence of himself, to utter what
she spoke, or the like, which was the method he used with the Prophets, in
like cases, but only by the Ministry of his Angel (as is most like) acted the
tongue of the beast to shrike the sound of those words in the air. So in
procuring obedience from the Sun, Moon, and Stars, Winds, Seas, etc. (for
these obey him too, and fulfill his words in their courses, and motions, Psalm.
148. 8. he does not proceed after the same method, wherein he walks with men,
to procure obedience from them, because they are of a different creation, and
frame, from these: he does not promise rewards to the Sun, or Moon, or any
irrational creature, to persuade them to obey, nor threaten them to keep them
in from disobeying, because they have no principle in their natures, capable of
such impressions: but he has put natural propensions into them, which are
sufficient to carry them on in their ordinary and natural motions, while he is
pleased to support them, and when he would have them forsake or cease their
natural motions; as in case of miracles, there he overbeares them with a
strong hand of absolute power, and rules them (as it were) with a rod of Iron.
But when he comes to work obedience out of men, whom he has endued with
principles of reason, judgment, understanding, desires of their own good,
fear of evil, etc. He applies himself to these in such a manner, that all
these powers and abilities in their natures may be acted and exercised withal:
which is done by addressing himself unto them, in a way of promising rewards,
if they will obey, and threatening punishments, if they obey not* In this sense,
speaking of his manner of dealing with Israel of old, to persuade them to his
service, and the obedience of his law, he says ( Hosea 11. 4.) He drew them
with the cords of a man, that is, he dealt with them, to make them an obedient
people unto him, in such a way, and upon such terms, as were proper and
fitting for men to be dealt withal: implying, that God has other cords to
draw other creatures unto him, when he is pleased, and has occasion to do it.

This then is another reason for the point, God deals with men for their
obedience, and service in a course suitable to the natures and dispositions of
men.

2 Sixthly, God therefore promises rewards, and recompenses to the services of
men, (and those very ample and large) yea and will assuredly perform them
accordingly, that so he may commend his own infinite worth and greatness: and
give his creature to see, and understand, how highly he values himself, that
his creature also may strive, and make conscience to value him accordingly. For
this is to be known and considered, that the greatness and goodness of God,
(which is indeed true greatness) together with his own thoughts or judgment
hereof, (which doubtless are according to truth, and commensurable thereunto)
are both to be seen, as in a glass, in those rewards, those large and vast
recompenses, which he bestows upon those that do him service: as well (if
not better) and with more cleernesse, than in the horror and punishments of
those, that have rebelled against him, and if he should either not reward at
all, or give but some low, and common rewards, to services done unto him, he
should much obscure and darken his own infinite worth in the eyes of his
creature: we have a common saying amongst us, that there is no service to the
service of a King. And so proportionably, the services of men that are great
on earth, especially if they have but that wisdom, to make the best of their
outward greatness in a civil and moral way; are better than the services of
meaner men. One special reason hereof is, because Kings and Princes, do not
properly give wages, but rewards to their servants, that is, in those
recompenses which they give for service done unto them, they put in the
consideration of their own greatness, over and above the strict value of the
service, simply considered in it self: which is not so much a point of
equity, as of wisdom in them (though there be a kind of equity in it too,)
for by this means they do inform the world that they are sensible of, and
understand their own greatness, and so impose a kind of awfulnesse upon them,
and a necessity of considering the same also, so the great God of Heaven and
Earth draws (as it were) the similitude and proportion of his own excellent
greatness, in those great rewards he gives to those that serve him: and
withal makes it known to the world, that he understands himself to the
utmost: and so raises suitable apprehensions of himself, in the minds both of
men and Angels. In which regard they are said to speak stout words against the
Lord, that say, it is in vain to serve God. Mal. 3. 13, 14. They that seek to
abolish, or take away the bountifulness of God in rewarding those that serve
him, fall very heavy upon him, and bear the world in hand, that he does not
much regard himself, nor value his own greatness (if there be any greatness
in him,) and consequently, teach and tempt the world to esteem lightly of him
also. And God accordingly, when he speaks of recovering that honor and glory,
which men by such thoughts or words take from him, expresses himself thus,
verse. 18* Then shall you return, implying, that they were far out of the way
before, and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that
serves God, and him that serves him not The greater difference God makes
between those that serve him, and those that serve him not, the more fully he
vindicates his own greatness and glory. And this is the reason (I conceive)
why though God loves righteousness and obedience in his creature (as was
touched before) yet he does not love them so much simply for themselves, nor
for that sympathy, and agreement they have with his own righteousness and
holiness, as for that advantage or opportunity they offered unto him, of
drawing that lovely expression of his own greatness in the reward of his
creature: which seems to be the sovereign, and highest end of all Gods
works, and of his going out of himself, in the way of creation. The
Scriptures are many, and very pregnant, which show, that God requires
obedience, and service from men in subordination to their reward and
happiness, or for that end, that he might reward them, as Psalm. 81. 13. Oh
that my people had harkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways! Why?
What benefit, or booty, what heaven had this been unto God? Yes: see the 14,
15. verses. I should soon have subdued their enemies: and turned my hand
against their adversaries. The haters of the Lord should have submitted
themselves unto him: but their time should have endured for ever. As if he had
said, God had then met with those summer fruits, which (of all others) his
soul longs for, viz. an opportunity of rewarding. So in the 10. Deuteronomy. 12. And
now Israel, what does thy Lord thy God require of thee, what? that thou keep
the Commandments of the Lord, which he has given as for that advantage or
opportunity they offered unto him, of drawing that lovely expression of his
own greatness in the reward of his creature: which seems to be the
sovereign, and highest end of all Gods works, and of his going out of
himself, in the way of creation. The Scriptures are many, and very pregnant,
which show, that God requires obedience, and service from men in subordination
to their reward and happiness, or for that end, that he might reward them, as
Psalm. 81. 13. Oh that my people had harkened unto me, and Israel had walked in
my ways! Why? What benefit, or booty, what heaven had this been unto God?
Yes: see the 14, 15. verses. I should soon have subdued their enemies: and
turned my hand against their adversaries. The haters of the Lord should have
submitted themselves unto him: but their time should have endured for ever. As
if he had said, God had then met with those summer fruits, which (of all
others) his soul longs for, viz. an opportunity of rewarding. So in the 10.
Deuteronomy. 12. And now Israel, what does thy Lord thy God require of thee, what?
that thou keep the Commandments of the Lord, which he has given thee for
thy good. So in the 12. of Deuteronomy. 25. So likewise the 26. of Deuteronomy. 18, 19. and
the 28. of Deuteronomy. So in John 10. 17. Therefore does my father love me, because
I lay down my life: (but that is not all, but) that I might take it again. It
was not simply Christ's laying down his life, but his laying it down in such a
way, and upon such terms, that he might receive it again of his Father, id
est, his laying it down in a way of righteousness, that so his Father might
restore it again unto him with an abundant increase, and recompense of glory,
this was that (says Christ) that drew out my Fathers affection so abundantly
unto me. So that however it is not to be denied, but that we were created by
God for his worship and service, yet his superior and greater end in creating
us was our being rewarded, or our glorification, and happiness by him; or, the
serving of himself in rewarding us, and therefore the Holy Ghost (I conceive)
when he speaks of this end of our creation, our glory, speaks of it with a
more emphaticall and significant kind of expression, than of the other: as 2
Cor. 5. 1. For we know, that if our earthly house of this our tabernacle were
dissolved, we shall have a building of God, a house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens: for we that are in this tabernacle do groan being
burdened, not for that we would be uncloathed, but clothed upon, that
mortality might be swallowed up of life, etc. for he that has wrought us for
the self same thing is God: (...), etc for this very self same thing, that is
to say, which he had spoke of, verse. 1. our house made without hands, eternal
in the heavens, (meaning our utmost glory) (...), (says Saint Paul) God made
us for this very self same thing: as if all Gods other ends concerning us,
were nothing in comparison of this, or at least were all contained or
comprehended in this.

3 Seventhly (and lastly) another reason of the point may be, to leave the
rebellious and disobedient without excuse. This is one thing which God stands
much upon, concerning those that shall perish and be destroyed, and which he
will provide for with a high hand, that their mouths may be stopped; that they
may not be able to lift up a word or thought against his proceedings against
them, in their condemnation: now we know (says S. Paul, Romans 3. 19, 20.) that
whatsoever the law says, it says it to them that are under the Law, that
every mouth may be stopped, and all the world be obnoxious (or subject) to the
judgment of God. And verse 4. Let God be true, and every man a liar, as it is
written: that thou might be justified in thy words, and overcome when thou
art judged. viz. touching the judgments thou executest, and the punishments
thou inflictest upon wicked men. For God is seldom judged, or questioned, but
about his proceedings against sinful, and disobedient men: and besides it is
evident, that he speaks of this particular in this place: now God will
always be sufficiently provided for victory in this kind: he will cut off
from wicked men, and from all those that shall rise up to plead for them, all
matter of defense, apology, or excuse, that might be pleaded for them. And he
so much esteems this full, and entire justification of himself, in the
condemnation of the wicked, that he highly respects any service or means used
by men, tending thereunto: upon this ground it was that Paul concluded for
himself, and other faithful and diligent Preachers of the Gospel (2. Cor. 2.
15.) that they were unto God the sweet savor of Christ, as well in those that
perish, as in those that are saved: that is, they made Christ advantageous, and
acceptable unto God, not only in the salvation of those that believed, but in
the condemnation also of the wicked: viz. because the effectual proffer and
tender of Christ, and salvation by him unto them, removed the cause of their
condemnation as far from God as might be, and cast it upon their own necks,
and left them without excuse: so amongst diverse other means and
circumstances, that God in his wisdom has belayed for this end, to leave
wicked men naked to judgment, and without excuse, this particular we speak
of, is one, his promising such rewards, to those that shall obey him. If he had
been a hard master, and would have had the service and labor of men for
nothing, this had been a colorable pretense for such men, why they refused
his service, (as was proved before out of Jeremy, 2. 31.) But now requiring
nothing from any man's hand, no worship, no service, no obedience, but for which
he promises consideration to the full, reward upon reward, recompense upon
recompense, if now they will burst his yoke, and cast his cords from them, if
now they will walk stubbornly against him, and be disobedient, the blood of
their souls will be upon their own head apparently: and when God judges them
to death, or sends them quick to hell, they cannot say unto him, why do thou
so? Themselves can answer such a question too well, to ask it. This for the
seventh and last reason: the uses of the Doctrine are,

CAP. VI.
The first use of the Doctrine for confutation of two dangerous errors briefly
pointed at.

FIrst for confutation: and that of two opinions.

First, If God has no intent to be served by his creature for naught, but so
many precepts, so many promises, either expressed, or employed, either distinct,
or in complication, that is, either so many in number and tale, or so many in
weight, and worth, then that opinion, or imagination rather (if the name of a
Frenzy be not fitter for it, then either) which was maintained by some in
Malachi's time, namely, that it should be in vain to serve God, must fall to
the ground, and be attainted of blasphemous untruth. Whether there be any in
presence this day so far delivered up to a reprobate mind, as to have their
judgments coupled with such an error, I know not, if any man find any
grudging, or secret heaving in his thoughts of such a conceit, let him weigh
and consider seriously, what has been delivered in the Doctrine: and this,
(through the blessing of God) may be a means to deliver him out of a great,
and dangerous snare of death. He that says, the God of Heaven takes no regard
of them that serve him, has no intent of doing more for them that obey him,
then for others shakes one of the maine pillars of the heaven of Religion, and
goes about to undermine the foundation of the throne and Kingdom of God
amongst men. I have done with this: the opinion is wicked, and will fly (I
trust) fast and far enough from us, though there be none to pursue it.

Secondly, for confutation: we might strengthen our hand abundantly from the
Doctrine delivered, for the opposing and overthrow of another opinion of the
same blood, and of near affinity with the former, which denies the
immortality of the soul: or (which upon the matter, falls in with it)
denies the resurrection from the dead. This opinion has heretofore looked out
of many atheistical spirits abroad into the world, and the nakedness of it
been covered with the best figleaves, that the wisdom of the flesh, and the
learning of hell could find out for it: and it is much (if not more then to be
feared, that at this day, it walks amongst us, like the pestilence, in
darkness: and is kept like a sweet morsel under the tongue of many, yet
hoping this assembly to be wholly clear from the infection, and that the
blessed hope of immortality has delivered you from the sinful and accursed
hope of perishing like the beast; I shall wave this disputation also; when I
have spoke this one word, that he that is not willing to have his soul
immortal, is not willing to have any God at all, if he knew how to help it.
Only by occasion of my naming the error, in this the day of our humiliations
before God, I cannot but impose a tax of sorrow and tears, and contrition of
soul upon my self and you, for this and for many other corruptions of
judgment, and breaches that have been, and daily are made amongst us, upon
the everlasting Gospel of the everlasting God, partly by men of corrupt minds,
and partly by men unlearned, and of unstable judgments (as Peter speaks) for
that rolling and troubling those pure streams of the sanctuary. This for the
first use of the Doctrine, which is for confutation.

CAP. VII.
Wherein the Doctrine is further drawn out in an use of Instruction, and that
in two particulars.

1. THe second use of the point is for Instruction, and that in two particulars.

First, If God be a rewarder of those that seek and serve him, then observe
hence by way of instruction, that it is no lost labor, no time ill spent, that
is spent in the service, and worship of God: we may say of the service of men,
many times, as Solomon speaks of the fear of men, Prove. 29. 25. That it
brings a snare upon men, out of which they never recover, and when it brings no
snare, many times it brings nothing at all. Men are unthankful, and soon
forgetful, of the best kindnesses, and services that have been done unto
them: yea many are unjust, and defraud the hireling of his wages, and musle the
mouth of the ox that treads out their corn. Pharaohs Butler forgate Joseph
in prison, after he was restored to his place. And King Ioash remembered not
the kindness of Iehoidah the father, when he commanded Zachariah the son to
be stoned to death: and James spoke of some that by fraud kept back the hire
of the laborers that had reaped their fields, besides many other examples and
instances of most unnatural and foul injustice, and unthankfulness both in
Scripture ecclesiastical, and civil histories. But God (says the Apostle,
Hebr. 6. 10.) is not unrighteous that he should forget your work and labor
of love which ye showed toward his name, etc. No he forgets nothing, he keeps
a book of perfect remembrance of all done for him, throughout the world. To
serve him is more for our profit a thousand fold, than it is to sow the
fruitfullest soil under heaven, than that which brings forth an hundred fold.
And therefore David says, Psalm. 119. 111. that he had taken Gods testimonies,
as a heritage for ever: meaning, that he looked to live by his service, he
looked for at plentiful, and comfortable means of support and subsistence in
the world, from his obedience to the Law, and precepts of God, as other men
have from large possessions and inheritances.

2 Godliness, if it has the promises of this life, as well as of that to come
(as the Scripture affirms it has, 1. Tim. 4. 8.) doubtless it has the
performa^ces also. And as the seekings, and services, and addresments of
particular persons unto God, have never been unrewarded by him, but were still
returned with abundant consideration into their bosoms, and that (for the most
part) even before the sons of men, in very gracious, and large expressions in
outward ^ercies, and blessings of this life: so have the seekings, and
addresments of whole societies of men, of cities, states, and kingdoms unto
him, much more. I do not believe, that any one instance or example can be
produced out of the sacred records of the Scripture, where ever a city, nation,
or people, did humble themselves before God (especially with prayer and
fasting,) but the windows of Heaven were opened upon it, and the blessings and
mercies sued for, powered down upon the^. When the children of Israel were for
their sins sold into the hand of the King of Aram, Judge. 3. 9. and were
oppressed and kept under subjection by him; we only read of their crying unto
the Lord, and soon after he stirred up a deliverer unto them, who brake the
yoke of this bondage from off their necks. In like manner, when upon a new
score of provocations, God had suffered Eglon the King of Moab, to oppress
them, verse. 15. the like cry and calling upon God presently fetched down from
heaven another Savior unto them, who soon brake the staff of this oppressor
also. A third time, when notwitstanding former pressures, and former
deliverances, they fell yet again to their old trade of doing wickedly against
the Lord, and he gave them wages fit for their work, and sold them into the
hand of Iabin King of Canaan, a stouter oppressor (it seems) than either of
the former; for he had nine hundred chariots of Iron: yet only suing and
crying unto the Lord (as before) they soon got an execution, or a judgment
against the nine hundred chariots, which was served by the hand of Barak, and
Deborah. Again, a fourth time when they suffered grievous things under the
Midianites, and were driven from their cities, houses, and dwellings, into
dens, and caves in the mountains, and were mightily impoverished by them (as
the story says) yet the former means of crying unto the Lord, wrought so with
him, that he presently sought, and found them out a deliverer from under this
calamity also. The rest of the Tribes of Israel, which had been twice beaten
by the Benjamites, upon the second humbling themselves before God, obtained a
great victory. We might instance of all those other fasts and h^miliations
mentioned in Scripture, as that of Ezra, chap. 8. that of Nehemiah, chap. 9.
that of Ester, chap. 4. that of Iehosaphat, 2. Chron. 20. that of Ninivie,
Jonah, chap. 3. There was none of all these seekings of God, but that found
him: the service scarce performed; but it was attended with a reward.

3 So that we may build upon this foundation as high as the heavens, if we had
wherewithal to do it, if our hearts will serve us. If we serve and seek God
with upright hearts, and do not make him to serve with our sins (as the
Prophets expression is) that is, subject his will to ours, and make him bear
such burdens, as are not meet for him to bear,) we shall have our hearts
desire, whether it be in the depths beneath, or in the heights above, whether
it be the flower of the wheat, or the honey out of the rock: if the out
stretched arm of the Lord can come at it, we need not fear: God will not be
sought nor served in vain: he knows his creature must live and subsist by
him: and he that will do his work, shall eat of his bread.

4 It is true, we have many great, and important suits and requests to put up
to the throne of grace, and to solicit the Almighty about this day, as the
pardoning the great iniquities, and mighty transgressions of the nation, the
healing of the sores of a land which shakes, and whose foundations are out of
course: the taking off the wheels of the chariots of our enemies, who are
driving furiously against us: the putting up the sword of his indignation into
the place of it, which is now shaken over us; the making way for his Gospel,
that it may run and be glorified through the land, through the midst of the
rage and gainsayings of men, with many others of like consequence. Which if we
should by causing our voice to be heard on high this day, draw out of heaven,
and see brought to pass before your eyes, you will be (I conceive) as those
that dream: you seek them (I fear) in some respect, upon the like terms,
(it were well if you did so in all) that the Church of God sought for Peter's
enlargement out of prison, Acts 12. They were at it close, and prayed earnestly
for Peter's life and liberty: but yet they said, she was mad (though one of
their own company) that brought them tidings, that their prayers had
prevailed, and had fetched Peter out of prison: so you weep, and mourn, and
are troubled in your souls, and lift up your cries to heaven, to obtain these
mercies, and suits from God, but if a man should come in amongst you, and
should say to you, that your prayers, and tears are accepted, that the Lord
has heard the voice of your weeping, and you shall have a speedy answer from
heaven of all things: the iniquities of your people is forgiven* your land
shall be healed, your enemies shall fall before you, and lick the dust at your
feet: the Gospel of Jesus Christ shall run, and be glorified in the midst
of you, etc. I fear you would say, (or at least think within your selves)
that such a man were mad. Well, follow you the work, and service you have in
hand, as those Christians did, and call, and cry with your whole hearts, though
your faith and hope of particulars, especially of present prevailing, be as
short, and weak, as theirs (in all likelihood) was: yet you have the same God
to do with that they had, whose eyes are as open to the prayers of his servants
at this day, as ever, who cannot forget to be gracious, because he practices
continually, and keeps his hand in ure daily and hourly. And therefore though
you will not believe your selves, yet suffer patiently, and take it not amiss,
if others will believe for you, that God will give you, and that sooner than
you can expect, a gracious return of this days service into your bosoms. God
has not said unto you, this day serve me for naught, nor gathered you
together, to seek his face in vain. This for the first point of instruction.
It is no lost labor, no time ill spent, that is spent in the service of God:
such labor, such service shall have that good measure (our Savior speaks of,
Luke 6. 38.) rendered unto it, measure pressed down, and shaken together, and
running over. If one world will not fill the bushel, there is another that
shall make it run over.

5 Secondly, if it be no part of Gods meaning to be served by his creature for
naught, but he will give rewards, and be bountiful to those that serve him,
and has declared himself upon such terms: then observe again from hence, by
way of instruction, that it is a thing well pleasing to God, and no ways
offensive to him, for all men to provoke and stir up themselves to the
service of God, by the consideration of his bounty, and of those great and
gracious things he has promised to do for those that serve him. Doubtless,
God would never have kindled this fire in the world (especially he would never
have made the pile so great, and heaped on wood in that abundance he has now
done to increase the heat and strength of it) if it had been unlawful for
the creature to have warmed it self at it. What? has God cast out these
golden baits out of heaven to fish for the hearts, and souls of men in the sea
of this world, and is it not lawful for the soul to bate at them, yea and to
swallow them? Has godliness the promises both of this life, and of that which
is to come, and May it not regard them? may it not touch, nor taste, nor handle
them? May it not live, and strengthen it self by the hope of enjoying them?
Has God planted so many trees, so many precious promises, in the paradise of
the Scriptures, and is it not lawful to eat of any of them? Hope must be no
longer a grace, but a sin, if it be not lawful both to look at, and to
look for the good things that God has promised to those that love him.

6 It is true, that God is, (as the Father expresses it) sine intuitu praemii
diligendus, to be loved (and consequently served) without any eye to a reward:
that is, though he gave no reward to his servants, yet for his own sake he
were to be loved (and served accordingly) yet now he is much more to be loved,
and much rather to be served, now he does reward so abundantly: And therefore
it is not a thing only lawful, but necessary also, yea a matter of duty and
conscience, to serve him for his rewards, at least to serve him more, and more
willingly, and cheerfully. Otherwise we must hold, and maintain, that God is
never the more to be regarded, nor to be loved, or served for all his promises,
how great and precious soever they be: we are in never the more bonds or
engagement at all unto him for these: which is a conceit, that both reason,
and religion alike abhor.

The best (indeed) and most spiritual use that can and ought to be made of the
promises, and large recompenses which God gives unto those that serve him, is,
to use them as glasses, wherein to contemplate and behold the glory of the
love, goodness, and bountifulness of God toward the creature; and so indeed
to be more provoked to the love and service of God, by what he sees or
feels of God, or from God, either in his promises or rewards, then by what
he either sees or feels of his own, or coming toward himself, in either.
This, as the Scripture it self (I conceive) intimates unto us, in the frequent
expression, of seeking the face of God. 1. Chron. 16. 11. and elsewhere:
meaning by the face of God, some favorable or gracious expression of himself
unto us in some mercy, deliverance or the like, wherein (as it were) the face
of God, that is his love, goodness, bounty, etc. is to be discerned, but
sinful (doubtless) it is to neglect, or pass lightly, either by his
promises, or rewards, because these cannot be neglected or despised, but God
himself must be despised in them, there being so much of him, of his grace,
goodness, and bounty in them; it being every whit as true (and happily with
truth of a greater weight and importance) concerning the promises of God, as it
is concerning his precepts, and Commandments, that he that despises them,
despises not man, but God, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 8. And if it were not a thing lawful
to provoke, and stir up our selves to seek God by consideration, and hope of
his mercy, and goodness to be shown unto us, according to the exigencie of
our necessities, estates, and conditions: why do we keep these days of more
solemn addressements, and deep humiliations unto him? or why have the
children and servants of God kept them before us?

8 It is evident from Scripture, that the hope and consideration of obtaining
mercy from God answerable to their fears, and desires, and present exigences
of their affairs, have still been the ground of all those more serious
seekings of God, whether by prayer and crying only, or by fasting also (the
chief whereof, were briefly mentioned unto you) If they had been foul, and
sinned in so maine a circumstance, as the ground and foundation of their
service, would God have sealed his approbation and acceptance of them from
heaven, with such gracious answers to their desires, as he did from time to
time? Therefore we may be comforted and established in this point: that we
sin not at all, but approve our selves unto God in his own way, by exciting
and quickening our selves to seek his face this day, by a hope and confident
expectation of finding favor in his eyes, in delivering us out of the hand of
all our fears, in turning away his judgments from us, and from our nation.
God, as he commands the poor to speak entreaties to him: so he gives the
poor leave to expect, and look for consolations from him: and in the strength
of this hope, to lift up their hands in prayers, and entreaties unto him. So
much for the use of instruction*

CAP. VIII.
Two sorts of offenders censured by warrant from the Doctrine.

1 In the third place by way of reproof. If God be so gracious, and bountiful
in his rewards to those that serve him, then woe be to them, that serve him
not: fire, and brimstone, and an horrible tempest (as David says Psalm. 11. 6.)
is like to be the portion of their cup* Gods bounty and fullness toward those
that serve him, is a great presage of his heavy and deep severity, and
vengeance against those that despise him. O consider this (says the same
Prophet, with bowels of compassion rolled together) you that forget God, lest I
tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you. Who are they that forget
God? not only they that never think of him, that never come in places of his
worship, that never join in the outward exercises of Religion, that never
speak of him, etc. Men may do all these, and yet be of those forgetters of
God: that shall be torn in pieces by him, and have none to deliver them. To
forget God (in Scripture phrase) is when a man does not remember him with such
a remembrance which produces effects suitable to the nature, holiness, and
glory of God, as love, fear, obedience, etc. Other kinds of remembrances of
God will rather turn to men's heavier judgment and deeper condemnation, then
otherwise. To remember God with a neglect and contempt of him, is far worse
than a total forgetfulness of him: as that knowledge of God which the heathen
had (whereof Paul speaks Romans 1. 21.) not working in them the fear and
service of God made the^ the more inexcusable, and consequently laid them open
to the greater vengeance.

1. The truth is, that all the judgments, all the threatenings, all the curses,
all the wrath, all the vengeance, all the terrible and intolerable things, that
are found from the one end of the Scriptures to the other, they are burdens of
the neglect of this serving of God, and shall be borne by those that do
despise him, yea all the wrath and indignation of the Almighty that is powered
out in fire and blood upon the earth, upon the heads of Kings and Princes, of
Kingdoms and Nations, of cities and peoples, are nothing else but the rebukes
of heaven for not serving him.

2 The land about whose peace and safety we are contending, and wrestling,
and struggling this day with him, that has them in his hand, the great and
terrible God of heaven and earth, is (as our hearts well know it, and feel it)
a land of sorrows, of fears, of troubles, and of great anxietie, and
perplexity of soul to the inhabitants thereof, even ready to consume and eat
them up: but what are our sorrows, our fears, our troubles, our anxieties,
and perplexities of soul made of? What is the matter, and (as it were) the
very substance of them, but only our sins, our defectivenesse, and wanting,
our having been found too light in the service of God? and so the Scriptures
use constantly to speak, to call punishments, sins, in some such sense or
figure of speech, as the nation of the Jews, Jacobs natural issue and
posterity, are usually expressed by the names of Jacob and Israel, in the
scriptures, because they came all out of his loins, and were sometimes nothing
else, but Jacob. Thus Esaias 24. 20. The transgression of the land shall be
heavy upon it; meaning their punishment for their transgression shall be
heavy upon them. So again, Hosea 10. 13. Ye have plowed wickedness, ye
have reaped iniquity. So that our fears, our sorrows, our troubles, etc. are
nothing but our Idolatries, our superstitions, our pride, our covetousness,
etc. Can the bulrush (says Job) grow without mire? (Job 8. 11.) and yet
certainly God can more easily make the rush to grow without mire, than he can
sorrow or trouble, without sin. Anger is not in me (says God Esaiah 27. 4.)
that is to say, till it be put into him: and how is it put into to him? by
setting briars and thorns against him in battle, that is, by the raising up
of weak and contemptible men in disobedience and rebellion against him, who
are therefore resembled to thorns and briars, because they are ill to be
handled, but easy to be burnt: so rebellious, and wicked men are troublesome,
and offensive to God, and hard to be endured by him, but they are easy to be
destroyed and consumed. And if anger be once put into the Lord, and the fire of
his wrath be thoroughly kindled, except the fuel be withdrawn from it in
time, it will burn terribly, even to the lowest hell: (as the Scripture
speaks, Deuteronomy. 32. 22.)

3 It may be you think (at least many of you, that are of weaker, and looser
consideration) that you have your full load upon you, all things are as bad
with you, as they can be, that there is scarce any room or place left in the
body of the state or land, to have any new wound given it: that you cannot be
in worse case than you are. A less (as our Savior says to the Jews, Mat.
22. 29.) you are deceived not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. As
there is no fire or burning so vehement, or great, but by the laying on of dry
wood, or casting oil upon the flames, will make it greater: so there is no
affliction, no judgment, no calamity, so grievous, or so heavy, and terrible
upon a nation, or people, but the iniquity and sin of the nation still
continuing and increasing, the judgments of it may be yet increased seven fold
(at least.) God is able to hold out as long in expending of plagues, and
vengeance, upon the children of disobedience, and rebellion, as he is to hold
out in mercy and goodness to those that serve him and obey him, which is to
the days of eternity. And therefore, as Christ says, ( Matt. 11. 21.) that it
shall be easier for Tire and Sidon, than for Corazin and Bethsaida; and so for
Sodom and Gomorrab than for Caparnaum in the day of judgment; and yet both
Tire and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah, are like to have a very sore, and terrible
day of it, when it comes: so our present condition, though it be full of
heaviness, and makes our bellies or bowels to sound like a harp within us (as
Isaiahs expression is, chap. 16. 11.) the land being like a wild bull in a net
(as the same Prophets expression is in a like case) bearing, and tearing it
self this way, and that way, and not able either to find, or to make an issue
out of its troubles, yet is it tolerable, and easy to be borne in comparison
of what yet may be, if the hand of the Lord shall be stretched out against us
still. Which extremity of misery, there is no ground of hope at all, that we
shall escape, or be delivered from, except the whoredoms of Iesabel, the
abominable Idolatries, and superstitions of that mother of abominations be
taken from between our breasts, except the blood, wherewith the land now for
many years together has been polluted, be some ways purged and attoned,
except there be some short work made (in one kind or other) with the Agents
and factours for the Sea of Rome amongst us, and the course, and the vent of
her trade and merchandice stopped, (which yet increases daily) except judgment
run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream. (Amos 5. 24.) to
bear down, wash, and carry away as well the strong, insolent, and countenanced
impieties of the land, as those of less resistance; except the lion will be
content to eat straw like the bullock, and live upon it too, that is, except
the oppressor will cast away his rod, and the rich give over his trade of
grinding the faces of the poor, and live upon that which is their own, in a
righteous and innocent way: except the great prophannesse of the land, cease
from the hearts and mouths of men: in a word, except there be a reformation,
at least of the crying sins, and loud provocations of the land, we must
look to hear the sound of the trumpet of Gods judgments, yet louder and
louder amongst us, till it be exceeding loud and terrible indeed.

4 For that has been Gods constant method in proceeding against a nation or
people, to begin with rods, to go on with scorpions, and to make an end with
lions, that tear all in pieces, and devour: except he be met withal in the
way of his judgments, with repentance, and tears: destruction, still rising,
and ripening, and coming on toward perfection, as the corn does to the
harvest, first the blade, then the ear, and lastly the full corn in the ear.
The impenitencie, and stubbernnesse of a people, despoyles the father of
mercies, and the God of all comfort, of all his bowels and compassions: they
turn the God of all grace, into a consuming fire: you must look to see your
land an Aceldama, a field of blood, and your cities, and houses flaming up
toward heaven like Sodom, except you compound with the Almighty for them in
repentance: except you will ransom them with the casting away of your great
transgressions. Sin when once it has drawn blood of you, will never give
over hunting and pursuing you to the death, except you first give over the
following of it. A land of righteousness, turned into a land of wickedness,
without repentance is no more meet, or capable of the mercy of God toward it,
than the ragged and steep rocks are for a horse-race, or to be plowed with
oxen. The comparison is the Prophet Amos, in the 6. chap, 12. verse.

This for the former branch of Reproof, bent against the faces of such, who
regard not the service of God notwithstanding the bountifulness of his
rewards, toward those that serve him.

5 Secondly by way of Reproof (more briefly) If God be so gracious toward
those that serve him, and will not be served for naught: then are those
likewise children of reproof, who though they do not wholely despise, or
neglect this service of God, yet they are afraid of being burdened, and
overcharged with it: they will bind it to it is good behavior, that it must
not wrong, or hurt them, neither in their bed, nor in their bushel, I mean
neither in their ease nor pleasures, nor in their business and profits. We
have many like posthorses, who will run their stage lively enough, and with
good metal and speed: but it is death to them, to go never so little
further: so is there a generation both of men and women amongst us, who can
with some tolerable patience and attention go along with the minister of God
speaking the Oracles of heaven, whilst the glass is running: but if he
carries them a little further, though the great things of their own peace be
never so earnest, and instant with them; yet (a less) they are themselves no
longer: they now begin to sweat, and to faint, and sometimes to nestle this
way, and that; as if their seats by this time were grown too hot for them: or,
as if all that is spoke after the hour is expired, were unsanctified matter,
and borne out of due time: they cannot relish it, nor edify by it.

6 To men of thus low and straightened spirits in the service of God, I shall
only say this (for the present) that if God gave Rewards for his service, by
neeked scant measure, if he gave so many heavens of an hour long apiece, as
we hear sermons whilst we live, this were some tolerable ground for men to
nourish, and suffer their hearts in such an humor: but they that say, they
hope for good measure indeed at Gods hands, measure heaped up, pressed down,
shaken together, and running over, they that look for crowns of
righteousness, for life, and immortality from God, by way of reward; for these
men to nurture, and train up themselves, and their hearts in such degenerous,
and unsuitable strains, and ways, as we speak of, to make their Epha so
small, when Gods Omer is so great, is it not, as if (in Iehoash's comparison,
2. Kings 14. 9.) The thistle in Lebanon, shall seek to the Cedar in Lebanon,
to give his daughter in marriage to his sons: it is altogether unworthy the
name, not of religion only, but of reason it self. But I shall not now insist
any further on this.

CAP. IX.
Comfort from the Doctrine for those that are, and chiefly for those that have
been, and yet continue the servants of God.

1. IN the fourth place, by way of comfort, for those that are, but especially
for those that have been, the servants of God. If God be indeed so open
handed, so full of rewards to those that serve him, then let such, as have
wrought to the throne of heaven, that have been diligent and faithful in the
affairs and service of God, in case God has done no great things for them
yet, since they first entered his service, let them lift up their heads, and be
comforted from hence: their work is all this while with the Lord, and will be
shortly with them, even in their bosoms. As the Scripture says of Christ,
that he that does come, will come, and will nottarry: so he that does reward,
will reward, and will not tarry: All your sufferings form Christ in any kind,
all the labor of your love that ever you showed to any of the Saints; all your
prayers and hearings, and addresments unto God in any kind, all your holy
conferences, and meditations, in their full weight and number, all your holy
purposes and resolutions, all your standings up to plead the cause of God, or
of his truth or people upon any occasion, all your instructions administered to
the ignorant, reproves, and admonitions to delinquents, yea all the diligence,
and faithfulness you have used in your particular callings, in conscience unto
God, if there be any other work, any other service, in any kind, wherein you
have obeyed the voice of the Almighty: behold the exchequer of heaven is
countable unto you for it, it is as good estate, as good strength, life, peace,
joy, glory, as any Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, or all the Angels of heaven
stand possessed of.

2 As Peter speaks concerning the estates of one kind of wicked men, (2. Pet.
2. 3.) That their judgment of a long time lingered not, and their damnation
slumbred not: meaning, that from their first entrance upon those wicked
practices, their judgment and condemnation were coming nearer and nearer upon
them daily, and not only so, but that they slept not, nor slumbred not by the
way, that is, they gathered and increased weight and measure in their coming,
every hour the execution of them was deferred, there was a proportionable
addition made to them, so that they came full paid, and fell sore and terrible
above measure upon them at last: so may it be said of that happiness and
reward of the servants of God, which yet are not come unto them, that yet of a
long time they linger not, they are upon their way, every hour and moment
brings them nearer and nearer unto them: neither do they sleep nor slumber by
the way: God will give reward, not for work and service only, but for time of
forbearance also: the longer it is ere he makes us a return of our
righteousness from heaven, he makes it so much the richer, and with the more
advantage, when it comes.

3 It may be there are some among you (yea I hope there are both men, and women
not a few, of whom I now speak) who have been heaving at this great stone,
where unto all the shoulders of the land are this day put (if yet it may be
removed) you have (I mean) humbled your selves and afflicted your souls in
private before God, for the peace of your nation, and people: and as yet you
have eaten little of your labors, the heavens are yet as black, or blacker,
over your heads, then they were: the judgment and destruction of the land, yet
works before your eyes. Well, yet let this ground of consolation support you:
God has not been, neither ever will be sought of you, in vain: you must give
your prayers and tears, your humiliations and fastings a little time to work,
though you think it long ere you hear of them, there are others (on
whomsoever they fall in another kind) will think they hear of them soon
enough: when they fall down from heaven, in fire and blood upon the^, they
will be ready to think with the Devil, that they are tormented, they are
destroyed before their time. And so for the service of this day, if you
perform it, with all your hearts, and with all your souls, fear not, but it
will do you as good service, as ever David's worthies did him. I will defend
your land against the Romish Philistims, your enemies, and bring down the high
looks, the pride and insolency of the sons of Anake themselves; the
overgrowne greatness of their statures, their six fingers on every hand, and
six toes on every foot, the monstrousness, and formidablenesse of their
power, shall not be able to deliver them out of the hand of your tears, and
cries, and importunities, wherewith you have armed your self against them this
day. So much for this use also.

CHAP. X.
The first Doctrine concluded in an use of exhortation.

Fifthly (and lastly) for exhortation: If this be the grace and bounty of the
great God of Heaven and Earth, that he will not be served by his creature for
naught, but has both purposed and promised to recompense all services, and
whatsoever good thing any man does, sevenfold into our bosoms; let us all be
exhorted and persuaded from hence, without any consultations had with flesh and
blood about the matter, to consecrate our selves this day, (and so for ever) to
this blessed service let us (out of hand) enter our names in the list or roll
of his servants, and resolve from henceforth to work to the Throne of Heaven:
let all other work, which is inco^sistent with the work of God, be an
abomination unto us, and let all our right hands forget their cunning when ever
they shall offer to lift up themselves unto it: and as for that master, to whom
we gave our selves, indeed, as servants to obey in the days of ignorance, I
mean unrighteousnes, or sin Romans 6. 16. let us break his yoke from about our
necks, and cast his cords from us: let us trample his authority under our
feet, and make an escape from his Iron Furnace, that so we may be at perfect
liberty to run the ways of the Commandments of God, and have nothing to
do, nothing to look after, but only the advanceme^t of his throne and glory,
and things subservient thereunto.

But lest this may seem a hard saying to flesh and blood, to men that neither
have known God, nor what his service means (being the men, whose peace in
special manner we labor and travail with in this exhortation) to be called
off from the ease and pleasures sures of the flesh, and from the service of
Mammon, who gives them wages daily which they see, and taste and handle, to
serve an unknown master, whose worth and service do no ways suite or sort
with their spirits, I desire to propound a few motives or considerations to
ease the burden of our exhortation, and which by the blessing of the most High
upon them, being once gotten into their hearts and inward parts, may render the
service of God, sweet and desirable above all things unto them.

First therefore let such men consider, that he whose service is now tendered
and recommended unto them, is the great, and excellent and mighty Jehovah, the
glorious possessor of Heaven and earth, who has the heaven for his throne, and
the earth his footstool, Who is attended by thousand thousands of Angels, and
ten thousand times ten thousand stand and minister unto him, Dan. 7. 10. to
whom the nations are as the drop of a Bucket, and the inhabitants of the earth
as Grasshoppers, and are counted as the small dust of the balance, Esa. 40. Who
is terrible to the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 76. 12. and brings Princes to
nothing, and makes the Judges of the earth, as vanity, Esa. 40. 23. In a
word: he is that God, of the treasures of whose wisdom, goodness, power,
glory, majesty there is no end, nor ever shall be: he is a God from
everlasting to everlasting. If the greatness of a master be any recommendation
of the service, if to power water on hands that are honorable, be an employment
of higher satisfaction to the minds of men, then on those that are meaner, if
attendance upon majesty and greatness, be rather wages then worth, honor
then service; then has the service of the God of Heaven the pre-eminence; and
no other employment, no other service whatsoever to be desired in comparison
thereof; because his throne rules over all, he is infinitely exalted above all
Gods. They are a pair of sayings amongst us, which are too strong in reason
and truth to be gaine-said: that there is no fishing, to fishing in the Sea:
no service, to the service of a King: and Solomon desirous to advance diligence
and caresulnesse in business, all he could; had no greater encouragement, no
price or crown of greater value to hold faith unto it then this; that it would
be their preferment to the service of Kings. See thou a man that is diligent
in his business? he shall stand before Kings: he shall not stand before mean
men, Prover. 22. 29. Alas they that stand before anointed dust and ashes (I
mean earthly Kings themselves stand before mean masters, in comparison of
those who serve that high and lofty one, who inhabiteth eternity (as Esaias
speaks.)

Secondly, this service of God, whereunto we exhort and persuade, is due debt
from his creature: all reason equity and conscience stand up to plead the
right and title of the Almighty hereunto. First the law of our creation or
being, setleth this tribute we speak of upon God. He that is Alpha by will and
good pleasure, is Omega by right and conscience: the beginning of a thing
deserves to be the end of it. Give her of the fruit of her own hands (is
Solomon's plea on the behalf of his virtuous woman, Prove. 31. 31.) and let her
own works praise her in the gates. Who planteth a Vineyard (says Paul) and
eats not of the fruit thereof? He speaks this, not so much de facto, as de
jure, not as a matter which simply men did, but as that which they did very
lawfully no man taking the least offense at them for so doing. The scope
likewise of the place, clearly evinceth this to be the meaning; which is to
show, not that Ministers of the Gospel did receive, but that lawfully they
might receive and look for maintenance, from their labor therein. If men's
labor or charge in planting, give them a right to eat what they please, of
the fruit of the trees planted by them: much more is the gift of subsistence
and being from God, a lawful ground unto him, for requiring any service from
his creature, suitable to the being received from him. And David accordingly
labors to promote the cause of the worship and service of God, both in his
own conscience and other men's, by the equity of the same consideration. Come,
let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker, (Psalm. 95.
6.) As if he should have said: if we acknowledge God to be our maker, there is
no refusing, no standing out against his service.

Secondly, the law of protection, and second the Law of Creation, and joins
hand in hand with it to maintain Gods right to the creatures service. He that
saves a man's life, having a lawful power to take it away, purchases to
himself a just title to the best improvements thereof. Now God (we know) is
the great and gracious, and mighty protector of the world: he defends the
whole earth with his loving kindness, as it were with a shield. What shall I
do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? says Job unto God, Job 7. 20. In him
(says the Apostle) that is, by or through him, we live, and move, and have our
being, viz. continued and made good unto us, Act. 17. 28. And Christ, Heb. 1.
3. is said to carry, or bear up all things by his mighty Word: as if there
were nothing, that could either go or stand alone, or as if the whole creation
were ready to sink rightdowne into nothing. If Christ should let go his hold,
but a moment. And yet we know we are all obnoxious to him: and long since put
a sword into his hand, wherewith he might justly have slain us at once. He
that protecteth us upon these terms, does he gather in proportion, above what
he scatters, if he receive service and obedience from us?

Thirdly, the law of Preservation, and maintenance, strengthens his title
hereunto yet further. Who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the
flock? says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 9. 7. Support and maintenance are ready to
complain, and cry out of injury, and wrong, if service be denied them. Because
we have maintenance from the Kings Palace, it was not meet that we should
see the Kings dishonor: therefore have we sent and certified the King: was a
good reason, though in bad men. Ezra 4. 14. It is the brand of the child of
perdition, to have eat of our Saviors bread, and yet lift up his heel
against him: Ioh. 13. Well then, God being the great Foster Father of the
World, filling all our hearts daily with food and gladness, he, who opening
his hand, satisfies the desire of every living thing (as David speaks, Psalm.
145. 16. and puts the staff of bread into the hand of all flesh, giving it
strength likewise to support them: How shall we despise such a great and
solemn engagement as this? How shall we break, or cast away such golden
cords as these from us? that is, how shall we refuse to serve him? The Saints
indeed shall judge the World: (1. Corinthians. 6. 2.) but the ox, and the ass
shall judge and condemn us, if we know our Masters crib no better.

Fourthly, the Law of Redemption triumphs yet above all therest, in the
vindication of Gods right and title to the best of our strength in his service.
And as himself teaches us to reason for our self, on the one hand: He who
spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all to death, how shall he not with
him give us all things? So on the other hand this love of his to us, so richly
manifested in the death of his son for us, teaches us to reason against our
self, (and yet not against our self neither, if we knew the things of our
peace and glory) for him. He who spared not his own Son, but gave him for us
all to death, how shall he not for such a gift expect and look for all things
from us, yea, how shall we not for such a gift prevent his expectation herein
(if it were possible) and even give him all things, though he looked for
nothing. To dispute the interest God has in us, or to demurre upon his
service, is to set abroach a new queree in the world, and to ask for whom
Christ died? whether for Angels, or for the seed of Abraham? He that is out
of Gods work, and despises his ways, and glory, seems willing to comfort the
Devils, and to possess them with a hope, that it was the Captivity of hell,
and not of the world, that was turned by the death of Jesus Christ. There is no
withstanding, no rising up against the Majestical power, and authority of this
law: it leaves a man nothing of himself, it despoyleth him of all right and
power of living to himself, and seeking his own things; it seizes upon all
his heart, and all his soul, and all his mind, and all his strength, upon all
that he is, and all that he has, and all that he is able to do, for the use
and service of the great God of heaven and earth: and all this it does by a
strong and high hand of righteousness and equity. So that there is no man
that acknowledges his Redemption wrought, his ransom paid by Jesus Christ,
can murmur or complain in the least degree, that he is served neither better
nor worse (as we say) then thus, to be caught up out of himself, and from the
earth, and by a holy violence constrained, and compelled to serve above, and to
attend the throne of heaven, and to live unto him that sits and reigns
thereon for evermore. Redemption by Christ, is, as the most gracious Lawgiver
in one kind, so the most severe in another, that ever was: God himself never
gave Law, that reached so far, or so deep into his creature, Other laws and
commandments of God it shook off from it self, and despised, and yet God was
able to bear it, and to overruled and keep back his fire and brimstone, that
they brake not out, to take vengeance of the transgressors: yea
notwithstanding the contempt, and disobedience of his creature to that Law, yet
he loved it still; yea with such a love, that travailed with no less birth,
than the gift of his only begotten son Jesus Christ out of his bosom, for
the comfort, peace, and blessedness of it. But the Law of that service which
the gift of Christ and Redemption by him, imposes upon man, is indispensable
altogether* that knows no mitigation, or compliance: all the grace, goodness,
mercy, compassion, bounty, patience, longsufferance in God, will never look
after, never think the least thought of making the least provision for the
peace or safety of him, that shall live and die in disobedience to it. There is
no bit or bridle that will ever be put in the jaws of hell, to keep it from
falling upon such a man: nay hell will be ready to cry to heaven for more fire,
and brimstone, (if it were possible) to advance the torment and destruction of
such a creature.

Fifthly (and lastly,) the Law of instruction, rejoices also to do service to
the God of heaven, in this kind, and further ingageth his creature, man, to
serve him. Teach me (O Lord) the way of thy statutes: and I will keep it unto
the end. Psalm. 119. 33. David thought it was but reason, to covenant with God,
to give him practice, for knowledge, service, for teaching. Yea, God himself,
who is far from overvaluing any gift or grace vouchsafed to his creature, nor
ever charge any commodity of his, wherein he deals with the world, with any
hard, or unreasonable imposition, has yet put such an estimate or rate upon
knowledge, that whosoever receives it, must either render service, and
obedience upon it, or else suffer punishment above his fellows. Therefore
service to God, is a rent charge naturally due, and issuing out of an estate of
knowledge, to whomsoever it is given. The servant that knew his Masters will,
and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten
with many stripes. But he that knew it not, and yet did commit things worthy
of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes, etc. Luke 12. 47, 48. with what
severitie of displeasure did God proceed against those heathen, that withheld
the truth in unrighteousness? Romans 1. 18. and that especially, because, that
when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, etc. verse. 21. that is, (in
effect) they did not serve him. And David propounds it, as a matter of the
greatest and most apparent equity and which the consciences of all men cannot
but see and acknowledge, that God who teaches men knowledge, should chastise
and correct, namely when those that are taught knowledge, refuse to tender
service and obedience, as a duty or tribute belonging thereunto, Psalm. 94. 10.
upon which place the Chaldee Paraphrase has these words: Is it possible, that
he has given the Law to his people, and they not be rebuked when they sin?
So that this service of God, whereunto you are exhorted, is nothing but what is
due unto him, by multiplicitie of Titles and engagements from you: you must
trample under foot, right upon right, reason upon reason, equity upon equity,
and turn head upon all conscience, if you will stand out, and rebel against
the voice of this exhortation. And know this, that if you will break all their
golden Cords by which God has tied and bound you so fast to himself and his
service, and cast them from you; God will gather them up from your hand, and
turn them into Scorpions, and make a terrible scourge of them, it may be for
your consciences by the way, but most assuredly, for your souls in hell. Every
reason that pleads for the service of God at your hands in this world, will
plead for vengeance against you at the hand of God, in that which is to come,
if it be despised.

Thirdly, to make the necessity of your serving God more weighty and
prevalent upon you, consider, that as it is his right, so it is his
commandment also, to be served by you. He has declared, and testified from
heaven, that he is fully purposed to stand upon his right in this behalf,
that he looks for the hearts and hands of all flesh to be lift up unto his
Commandments. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Psalm. 2.
11. He does not simply command service of men, but is very choice of the
service he commands: it must be made savory, and such as his soul loves: it
must be prepared for him with that spiritual composition of fear and joy. So
again, Psalm. 100. 2. Serve the Lord with gladness, etc. Besides other
passages in Scripture of like importance, and charge, without number. now then
let it be seriously thought of, and laid to our hearts, as hot (or hotter) than
they can well endure it, of what high concernment it is to the creature, both
on the right hand, and on the left, that the voice, and commandment of God be
obeyed, Mallem obedire, quam miracula facere, etiamsi possem: I had rather
obey, than work miracles, though I could, was a strain of that wisdom, which
God gave unto his servant Luther. The truth is, that obedience it better, than
a being in heaven simply: because without obedience, a being in heaven would
soon be turned into a being in hell (a position ratified by the fall of
Angels) whereas on the contrary, a being in hell, would soon be turned into a
being in heaven, if obedience be found with it (a conclusion gloriously sealed
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, and his ascension into
glory, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thy Holy One to see
corruption. Act. 2. 27. Has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt offerings and
sacrifices, as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed? says Samuel to Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 22. So that he that obeys the voice of God, pleases him: and he
that pleases God is a benefactour to many, and pleasures the world round about
him. God is seldom pleased, but the windows of heaven are presently opened,
and the blessings thereof powered down upon the Earth. But oh! who is able to
abide the heat of his indignation when he comes to avenge the words of his
mouth, upon the disobedient and rebellious? What is it that puts the
foundations of the world out of their course? that makes Kings and Princes to
labor in the very fire? What is it that tears up the mountains by the
roots, and carries them into the midst of the Sea? What is it that shakes so
terribly the Earth, as it is at this day, nation being risen against nation,
and Kingdom against Kingdom? What is it that causes the Sun to be darkened,
and the Moon to be turned into blood, and the Stars to fall out of heaven,
and the powers of heaven themselves to be shaken, that is (as some interpret)
the holy Angels with astonishment at the great terror of the Almighty falling
on the earth? In a word: What is that separates between the world, and the
peace of it, having the God of Peace for its Protector and Ruler, that turns
the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, into a consuming fire to it,
but only the neglect and contempt of this great commandment of the most High:
He commands the world to serve him: and the world would make him serve with her
sins: and this is that, that the jealousy of him, whose name is jealous
cannot bear. Thus the great breach is made upon the earth, and the whole world
(in a manner) cast upon the bed of sorrow: yea, from the womb of the contempt
of this Commandment of God, are the regions of darkness replenished with
inhabitants, and the chambers of death furnished with guests, to be lodged in
shame and torments for ever.

Fourthly, to ease the burden of this exhortation (to the service of God)
where (I conceive) it wringeth and pincheth most, upon the shoulders of
natural and carnal men; consider, that if you be but once really persuaded,
and made willing to take this yoke upon you, to consecrate your self to this
service of God; all the bitterness, and burthensomenesse, and unpleasantnesse
thereof unto you, is past immediately. The g^eatest snare of death, wherein
vain and inconsiderate men are taken, and held from the service of God, (I
conceive) is this. They conceive, and imagine, that the ways of God, and
religious courses, which are so contrary unto their natures, and wherein they
taste a bitterness like death, for the present, will never be healed of this
antipathy and unsutablenesse to them, but will continue alike bitter and
distastefull, to the end. Upon which apprehension the heart is enraged, against
all that is called holy, and stands off at defiance with spiritual courses,
feeding upon, and strengthening it all with this reasoning, that it shall never
be able to hold out in a way of that enmity, and irkesomenesse to it: and so
resolves never to taste or make trial of it, but seeks matter of pretense,
and quarrel, and exception against it. Therefore to remove this stumbling
stone out of the way of these men, and to represent the service of God upon
more hopeful, and desirable terms unto them, than so: I desire this may be
taken into knowledge and diligent consideration: that if men shall suffer
themseves to be persuaded, to be really, truly, and inwardly willing to embrace
the service of God, by means only of this change in their minds, and hearts,
the troublesomenesse and offensivenesse of those ways, and courses, wherein
God is to be served, will be eased and taken away. To move upwards toward the
circumference, is a motion as natural, and of as much ease and delight to
fire, as moving downwards toward the center, is to a stone, or other heavy
body: and a stone, if it were changed into fire, or had a contrary p^opension
of levitie put into it, would perform the motion upwards, with as much ease
and contentment, as now it moves downwards. So to the fig tree, it is no more
labor or pains, to bring forth that sweet and pleasant fruit we call figs,
nor to the vine to bring forth grapes, than it is to the thorn to bring forth
that harsh and sour fruit, which is proper to it: or to the thistle, that
unprofitable flower that grows upon it. In like manner, when the frame of the
heart, and bent of the will are changed, when new dispositions and inclinations
are planted in the soul, ways of righteousness and holiness, are as suitable
unto him, and of as natural and sweet compliance with his spirit, as ways of
vanity and looseness were, whilst his heart was yet carnal. It is joy (says
Solomon, Prove. 21. 15.) to the just, to do judgment: and what can it be more
to the drunkard, to be drunken, or to the unclean, to practice uncleanness?
David says, that his soul should be filled with marrow and fatness, when he
remembered God on his bed. Psalm. 63. 5. 6. And can the ambitious man's
speculation of all his honors and greatness; or the covetous man's rumination
of all his treasures and riches, yield them a more cordial extraction, or more
spiritfull quintessence, then this? When the heart is renewed, there is an
agreement made between the man, and the commandments of God, and then they
can walk friendly and lovingly together. Yea, it is not only true, that ways
of holiness are as connaturall, and pleasing to a man, when he has changed
his carnal heart for a spiritual, as ways of sensuality were before: but
there is seven times, yea seventie times seven times more inward contentment,
and satisfaction to him, in these ways now, than ever there was in those false
and crooked ways of sin before. This were easy to demonstrate: but I hasten
to the fifth and last motive, which I dispatch in few words.

Therefore fifthly, (and lastly,) to render the service of God, too desirable
unto thee (if it be possible) to be refused, consider, how great the recompense
of the reward is, that belongs unto it, and is settled upon it, with as good
security as heaven it self can give. Suppose the work were never so hard and
sore, and that to serve God, were to dwell among lions, or in the shadow of
death all a man's days: to fight with beasts after the manner of men, (as Paul
sometimes did at Ephesus. 1. Cor. 15.) to be as sheep appointed to be slain
all the day long; suppose it would turn our black hairs into white before
their time, and bring the symptoms of foure-score (as Moses expresses them,
Psalm. 90. 10.) upon our strength at twenty or thirty, even pain and sorrow;
suppose we should spend our whole portion, and all we have in this world, in
it, yea, and be spent our selves upon it; what were all this in comparison of
far more exceeding great reward, which attends the end and issue of it,
(besides what is received in present, and concurrently with the work; which
though it be but first fruits, and gleanings, yet is it better than the whole
lump, or vintage of the world) and which is in the hand of the great Master,
who is served, ready to be given, in good measure, heaped up, pressed down,
shaken together, and running over into our bosoms. The Nations of the world
are many, and the inhabitants of the earth innumerable, if they were mustered
accordingly, they would make many armies, great and terrible: yet in respect of
the infinite greatness of God, Behold, the nations are as the drop of a
bucket, and are counted as the small dust in the balance: (which will not so
much as cast the scale) yea, All nations before him are as nothing: and they
are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity. Esaias 40. 15, 17. Doubtless
there is the same disproportion, between all the troubles, difficulties,
losses, crosses, offenses, inconveniences in every kind accompanying the
service of God, and the reward belonging to it: they are all but as the drop of
a bucket, or as the small dust of the balance, in comparison hereof: yea they
are to be esteemed less than nothing: yea, it were no hard matter for a
servant of God, that knew how to manage such an advantage to the best, to take
the very hope and expectation of his future reward, and by the power and glory
of it, to make him self past sense and feeling of any thing he suffers or
endures in this world, in the way of his service. (...), etc. But I pass for
nothing; was the invulnerable temper and condition that Paul had wrought
himself up unto, in this kind: bands* and afflictions he passed not for, nor
for any thing else of that nature. Acts 20. 24. What shall I, or what can I say
more? if men either desire to fulfill the course of their pilgrimage on earth
with joy, or to see the days of eternity in heaven, or seek the good things
of this world, or of that which it to come, there is no means, no method, like
to the service of God, to put us into possession of both desires. I know
nothing, but godliness (which is, in effect, the service of God) that has
either the promise of this life, or of that which is to come: but sure I am
that this has the promise of them both: 1 Timothy 4. 8. and as sure I am, that
having the promise, it has, and shall have the performance also. Men that love
death (as Solomon speaks, Prove. 8. 35.) that can make joy of torment, and
happiness of misery, that can neglect, and despise all that the great, and
mighty God can do, either for his creature, or against his creature, either in
this world, or in that which is to come, may turn the back upon the voice of
this exhortation, and keep their liberty and freedom to serve sin: but you
that can relish the love of God, and love to walk in the light of his
countenance, that can tell what to do with peace and comfort on earth, or with
crowns of glory and equality with Angels in heaven, that neither love the
smell of fire and brimstone by the way, nor the torment of it at your journeyes
end: open you your bosoms wide, and loose not the least breath of the
exhortation given: desire, love, embrace the service of the most High God: and
pray for enlargment of heart and soul, that you may desire, love, and embrace
it yet seven times more.

ESA. 8. 13, 14. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, etc. And he shall be for
a Sanctuary, etc.
CHAP. XI.
The words further opened then before, and way made for the explication and
handling of the second Doctrine.

Sanctify the Lord of Host himself, etc. What is meant by Sanctifying in this
place, and what the nature of the duty requires herein, is, we shall show* in
the explication of our Doctrine, who is meant by the Lord of Hosts. It is one
of the great Titles of honor that belongs to him, that is the high and mighty
Possessor of Heaven and Earth, the great and glorious God blessed for ever: and
it represents him in that Sovereign and absolute power and command he has
over all creatures whatsoever, even over those that have the greatest strength,
and power, and that are most formidable to others, as Hosts and Armies are,
and in that respect seem most incapable of rule, and command: for I conceive
that in this style of Honor, which is so constantly appropriated to Gods
Hosts, or Armies, are mentioned as the utmost bounds and highest perfection of
all created strength, and so include all inferior strength of the creature
whatsoever: according to the frequent manner of the Scripture, and propriety
of the Hebrew tongue which usually put the extremes or limits of things for
the whole content or compass: as (to omit many other instances in Scripture)
Psalm. 2. 8. where the Prophet speaks in the person of God the Father to
Christ, bids ask of him, and he will give him the Heathen for his inheritance,
and the utmost parts of the earth for his possession: that is, the latitude and
extent of the whole earth, meaning there shall be no language nation or people
under Heaven, but shall be subject to him. Now this name or title of Lord of
Hosts is in this place given unto God (rather then any other because it so well
answers the present occasion, or that duty which the Prophet here requires to
be performed unto him. It represents God under such a notion or apprehensition
to the mind or thoughts of a man, which will help the soul to be delivered
of the duty with ease, if it be rightly conceived and believed: He that knows
what it is to be the Lord of Hosts, and believes God to be such ^ Lord
indeed, cannot lightly but sanctify him.

Secondly, let him be your fear, and let him be your dread: that is, bestow
upon him the whole and entire substance of that affection or passion within
you, called fear, both in the ligher or lower motions and risings of it, and
also in the weightier and higher: as if he should say, fear nothing else but
him, little or much. Let him be your fear, and let him be your dread: that
is, let him be the matter or object not of your dread only or deep fears,
but of your fear simply, of the least and lightest of your fears. And this
latter clause, let him be your fear, and let him be your dread, does (in part)
explain the former: for this one especial thing in our Sanctifying the Lord
of Hosts, to make him, that is, him alone our fear and our dread.

3. It follows, and he will be a Sanctuary, namely unto you that so
sanctify him; or (as the word may be translated) a Sanctification unto you:
There is not much difference between the one and the other: only the former
seems more plain, and is readier to be understood; and therefore we shall the
rather take, that by Sanctuary he means a place of refuge, or means of safety
and protection, as a Tower, Castle, Fortress or the like (as some translate
the word here) which may be called Sanctuaries, because they hold some kind of
Analogy with that which is a true Sanctuary indeed (that is to say) Gods
habitation or dwelling place in heaven; for as God has framed the heavens (and
has consecrated or sanctified them accordingly) to be a place and perfect
rest, peace, tranquillity, safety and security to all that come thither:
there is no evil that can approach that habitation: So those places or
buildings on earth that either by common consent of men, have immunities and
privileges to save and protect from outward violence those that are found in
them (excepting happily some particular cases) as all Temples consecrated to
divine worship whether of the true, or false God, heretofore have been, or
else have been strong built, and purposely fortified with Ammunition* and
means of defense, have been called by the names of Sanctuaries. So that when
God promises to be a Sanctuary to those that shall sanctify him, the meaning
is, that he will be a protector and defender of them, he will take care of the
things of their peace and welfare.

4. And that is remarkable in the Prophets expression, that he does not say
that God will provide, or look out a Sanctuary for them, but that he himself
will be a Sanctuary unto them. By which kind of expression he seems
desirous to prevent and cut of all distractions and runnings out of mind and
thoughts in his people, all castings about in times of danger this way or that,
what course they should take, what they should do for their safety, where that
Sanctuary should be, that God would provide for them. To save them all this
labor and travail, and turmoile of soul; he tells them, that he himself
will be their Sanctuary: and they shall not need to look but unto him. If
there be any thing else to be done for their safety, he will direct them, and
teach them what it is. A like expression you have, Ezekiel. 11. 16. Thus says the
Lord. Although I have cast them a far off among the Heathen, and although I
have scattered them amongst the Countries, yet will I be unto them as a little
Sanctuary in the Countries where they shall come.

CAP. XII.
Wherein the latter Doctrine is propounded and explained.

1 THe words thus opened, the points of Doctrine naturally arising from them
will be this. The sanctifying of God, is a sure way to make him, a sanctuary or
defense, and (as it were) a Heaven unto us in times of danger.

For the opening of the Doctrine, two things would be explained: First, what it
is to sanctify God: Secondly, how this promise of being a Sanctuary, made to
such a Sanctification of him, is to be understood, and how far to be
extended. The word is sometimes attributed to God himself, he is said to
sanctify: and sometimes to the creature. God is said, sometimes to sanctify
himself, and his own Name: and sometimes) and that more frequently) to
sanctify his Creature: When he is said to sanctify himself, or his own name,
it is for the most part (if not always) spoke in reference to the thoughts and
apprehensions of men concerning him, being* low and mean, and altogether
unworthy of him and his excellency. In which case he is often said to be
polluted, and his name to be polluted among the Heathen. Now when God does any
thing, takes a course to vindicate or deliver himself, or his name from those
mean, and contemptible, and common thoughts which men had of him before, and
raises the esteem of himself on high, in the minds of men, he is said to
sanctify himself. And so in the place cited from Ezechiel, chap. 38. 23. the
magnifying of himself, and the sanctifying of himself, are joined together,
as being of one and the same importance, and one interpreting another.

2 When he is said to sanctify the creature, which is often ascribed to him
in the Scripture, and that both in respect of things, and in respect of persons
(see an Instance of both together, Exodus, 29. 44. I will sanctify the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, and the Altar: I will sanctify Aaron also, and
his sons.) When (I say) God is said to sanctify the Creature, this is
sometimes to be understood only of an external, typical, or Sacramental
kind of sanctification, a mere and bare Relative sanctification (for
otherwise all sanctification is relative, or with relation) as in the place
last mentioned. The Tabernacle, and Altar, and so Aaron, and his sons, and so
the whole nations of the Jews, were thus sanctified by him; that is, God
separated them, and made a difference, and distinction between them, and all
other things, and persons in the world, with relation to himself: And
sometimes again, when he is said to sanctify the creature, it is to be
understood of a real and positive sanctification: when he does not only
separate, or set apart the creature for some special service, and in some
special Relation to himself, but withal make him partaker of his own nature
and holiness. The word sanctifying in this sense is sound, especially in the
New Testament, as in Ioh. 17. 17. Christ prays his Father to sanctify his
Disciples: Sanctify them with thy Truth, etc. So Ephesians. 5. 26. that he might
sanctify, and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word. And 1 Thessalonians.
5. 23. And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly, etc. Thus you see in
what sense the word is used, when applied to God: both in respect to himself,
and to his creature.

Again, when it is applied to the creature, to men, it is with reference to
the same object; though not altogether in the same sense or signification. For
men are said sometimes to sanctify themselves, sometimes other things (and
persons too) besides themselves, and sometimes God himself (as in this place,
and some others) Not to insist upon the signification of the word, where it is
spoke with reference to other Objects (because this may be gathered, by what
has been already said) but only to open the force and importance of it in
Relation to God himself, and to show in what sense the creature may be said to
sanctify him. Now then the creature may be said to sanctify God two ways,
either externally only, and in the face as ( Paul speaks) or inwardly, and in
the heart also: as Peter (alluding to the Scripture in hand) expresses it. But
Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, etc. Now this is to be considered, that
that sanctifying God, which is external, or in the face only may be separated
from that in the heart: but that in the heart cannot be separated from it: as
there may be a picture or likeness of a man, where there is no Realitie or
substance of the person of a man: but wheresoever there is a man, there is the
appearance and likeness of a man also.

4 But what is it to sanctify God externally: I answer, it is either by word,
or by deed, to set forth the glory of God in his attributes, and perfections
so, that by such words or works, God may be separated, that is, plainly, and
distinctly known from all other things, or persons whatsoever, whether in
heaven or in earth, that are not God: to sanctify God, properly, is nothing
else, but to separate him to and by himself, from all creatures, being, and
possible to be: to deliver him (as it were) out of the hand of all common, and
polluted thoughts, and opinions that men either have, or possibly may have of
him: where he is ranked, and lodged (as it were) amongst creatures, and has no
more glory given him, no more mercy, goodness, truth, power, wisdom, etc.
ascribed unto him, then creatures have (or at least might have) now when any
thing is either done or spoke by the creature, whereby God may be separated,
and drawn out (as it were) from amongst such common, profane, and polluted
thoughts, and apprehensions concerning him, so that now he may be conceived of
by himself, and like himself, and like no other, but infinitely above all:
This properly is to sanctify him.

5 And that this is the true Notion and Importance of this phrase of
sanctifying God, may appear from those passages cited out of Ezekiel. 36. 23. And
I will sanctify my great Name, which was polluted among the Heathen, among
whom you have polluted it, and the Heathen shall know that I am the Lord.
Clearly implying, that as the polluting of God, or his name, lies in this,
when the Creature is tempted or occasioned to have low and common thoughts of
him, and not to know him to be the Lord; that is, to be that which he is in
his dominion and soveraigntie, above all creatures: so on the contrary, the
sanctifying of him, or of his name stands in this, when any, thing is done, by
which his glory may break out, and himself be (as it were) seen, and
acknowledged in his greatness by the creature. Now the glorifying of God or
Christ, and the sanctifying of God or Christ, are things that do not differ in
substance, but in respect only, and consideration. To glorify God, is to do
that which simply and absolutely tends to the manifestation of his excellency
or glory in any kind, without any relation to the creature, but to sanctify
God, properly is (as has been said) to do that which tends to exalt the
excellencies and greatness of God by way of disproportion, from, or above his
creature. Only this is to be further remembered (in a word) concerning this
outward sanctifying of God; that this may be done sometimes by wicked men, and
when the heart is not honest and upright in the doing of it, Natural men may
sometimes glorify or sanctify God, as the natural or unreasonable creature
does, that is to say without any knowledge or intention of any such end in
their actions. The heavens, says David, Psalm. 19. declare the glory of God:
and in that respect may be said to sanctify him. So Caiphas when he
prophesied, and Judas when he confessed he had sinned in betraying innocent
blood, glorified God: but this glorifying or sanctifying God was not their end
in what they did, this end set them not a work to do either, and therefore they
glorified God without any reward.

6 But this for the external sanctifying of God; which though it be not the
principal sanctification here intended, yet is it included and intended, as
well as the other, which is the internal, and that which is in the heart. And
what this is may readily, and clearly be understood by what has been already
said concerning the outward: for look what work or effect it is, which by the
external sanctifying of God, when this prospers and takes place in the hearts
of others, is wrought there: when we work, act, or do the same in our selves,
and in our own hearts, this is our internal sanctifying of him. And this
work or duty of sanctifying God internally, and in the hearts, we may well
place in these four things.

First, in a right apprehension or understanding the attributes or properties
of God, and that not only in their several natures and qualities, but some
ways also in the height or excess of proportion, which they have above all
perfections in the creature of the same kind, or that go under the same name.
As for example, a man must understand, and apprehend what love means, that
is, what the nature, and property of such an affection is, and so what
goodness, wisdom, truth, power, etc. mean and import, and likewise what an
infinite love, infinite goodness, wisdom, truth, power, etc. import, at least
indefinitely, and by way of negation, that is, that by an infinite love, is
meant, a love more intense, large, and fervent, than by any created, and finite
understanding can be comprehended.

Secondly, in a true, and unfeigned believing that such perfections, even in
that height and surplussage above all that is found in the creature, are truly,
and really in God, and in him alone.

Thirdly, in deliberate, and serious contemplation, or consideration of these
infinite perfections, rightly apprehended, and firmly believed to be in God.

Fourthly (and lastly) in framing the heart, and composing the affections, and
shaping, and fashioning all a man's purposes, intentions and resolutions, in an
answerable decent, and comely manner, thereunto, that is, to these attributes
of God so apprehended, believed and considered upon: though if we speak
strictly, and properly, the duty we speak of stands precisely in the last of
the four, the having the heart, and and all the counsels, and purposes of it
tamed, and set in a just and sweet proportion to the Name or Attributes of
God, so that every thing, which is in God, as Mercy, Truth, Power, Wisdom,
etc. and not only so, but that the proportion of every thing, of all these:
that is, that fulness, or overplus, wherein all these and the like are found in
God above what they are in any creature, may have a peculiar, proper, and
distinct effect suitable to every of the^, in the heart and soul of man. Even
as we see a seal, that is well cut or graven, when it is applied to wax well
te^pered, and soft, does not leave an impression, or likeness of it self in a
general, or confused manner upon the wax, but you shall see letter for letter,
point for point, and every part of the incision in the seal, will have its
peculiar, and distinct effect upon the wax, so is the great God then
sanctified in the heart of a man or woman indeed, when there is no attribute in
God, but you may find it there, and that not only in the nature or kind of it,
but in the proportion or dimension of it too: as when not only the goodness of
God is found in our love to him, but the proportion of his goodness, found in
the measure and degree of our love: and so not only his truth and
faithfulness found in, or dependence upon him, but the unquestionablenesse, or
infallibility of his truth, and faithfulness found in the freeness,
willingness, strength, and entireness of our dependence upon him: and so in
other his attributes.

7 Not as if we were able to draw the full proportiof Gods Attributes, which we
know are all infinite, in the narrow compass of our hearts or affections:
there is no room or space for any thing that is infinite to stand there, in
its positive, and proper Notion. As for example: a creature cannot love God
with any such infiniteness of affection, as Gods goodness is infinite in him:
but yet the infiniteness of the goodness of God may be thus represented in
our love, and affections to him: we may love him with a love stronger and
greater then any love we bear to the creature, or know that we ought to
bear unto any creature whatsoever; and this is interpretatively infinite: that
is, it is such love, as plainly confesses, and acknowledges the object of it
to be infinite. The same is to be conceived touching all other holy
impressions, dispositions, and inclinations raised in the heart or soul, by a
due consideration of the attributes of God. As for those other three things
mentioned, right apprehension of the nature, and infinity of these divine
perfections or attributes, the settled belief or persuasion of their being in
God, together with an effectual consideration of them, as united and seated in
him; these (I conceive) are not parts of this duty (this sanctifying of God)
but rather acts of the mind, or soul, precedently requisite, and necessary
thereunto. A man cannot possibly sanctify God, with that internal, and
special sanctification, which this Scripture principally requires (and which
has in part been described) without somewhat done more or less in all these.
He that either knows not, what infinite love, infinite wisdom, power, etc.
mean and import, or believes not that such natures, are indeed in God, in
their infiniteness: or lastly, does not affectuously contemplate, or consider
these things in him, can never work his heart to that close and entire
dependence upon God, which is the special sanctification of him required there
and elsewhere, in the Scriptures.

8 For that (in a word) is further to be considered, that howsoever the phrase
and expression of sanctifying God in the Scripture, be indifferently used for
the sanctification of him in any kind, that is for them agnifying of him in
any one of his Attributes, whether love, mercy, goodness, wisdom, power, etc.
particularly: yet it is in special manner, and with greatest propriety, and
(as I take it) more frequently used for that sanctification of him which is by
dependence, or reliance on him. This of all other acts, or kinds of
sanctifying God performed by the creature, is the greatest, and of most
acceptance with him, because it is a magnifying or glorifying of him in many
Attributes at once, and those in whose manifestation, and glory he is best
satisfied and delighted. A man may sanctify God in his mercy, or in his
wisdom, or in his power, or in his truth, and faithfulness, severally, and
apart, when he does not exercise any special act of dependence upon him. A
man may either in words or discourse, or else in mind and apprehension, or
both, single out any attribute of God from all it is fellows: he may exalt and
magnify the power of God alone by it self, without putting any glory in one
kind or other upon any other attribute, but he that actually depends upon
God, magnifies them all, and so sanctifies God in them all. For if a man doubts
or questions, whether there be any thing wanting in God, either in nature or
perfection, either in kind or degree to make him a God indeed, a God meet or
worthy to be relied upon, such a man will never be whole and entire, and close
in his dependence upon him: there will be some faultering, and fumbling (as it
were) and rustinesse in his faith: the heart, and soul of a man will still
boggle, and make a stand, and demurre, yea and be ready to give back in such a
case. It is not the greatness of God alone, that will make the creature depend
on him, neither is it his power alone that will do it: nor his faithfulness
alone; no, but there must be a concurrence of all these (and others too) in
God, to make him a God in cases of great difficulties and dangers to be
depended on. Therefore now when the creature does indeed and in truth, and with
all the weight of his soul, cast himself upon God, and depend on him, he
sanctifies God not in one, or some, but in many (or rather indeed in all) his
attributes and perfections. And this (doubtless) is that special sanctifying
of God by way of dependence which he requires at our hands in this place, so
that he may become a Sanctuary unto us.

The scope of the place, with the whole carriage of the context, and more
particularly, the addition of those two clauses, as it were by way of
explication, let him be your fear, and let him be your dread, lead our
judgments, and understandings (as it were by the hand) to this interpretation:
so that we shall not need to contend further about this, to prove that by
sanctifying God in this place, is meant, a stable, and comfortable depending on
him. See the word used in a sense importing trust, or dependence elsewhere: 1
Pet. 3. 15. Number. 20. 12. 27. 14. Esa. 29. 23. This is the first thing to be
opened in the point.

9 The second thing to be opened for the further clearing of the doctrine is,
how the promise is here to be taken, that God will be a Sanctuary to those that
shall sanctify him (as you have heard) whether it be to be restrained only to
a soul protection, and the meaning of it only this, that God will have a care
of such in times of dangers, difficulties, etc. so that the things of their
everlasting peace shall suffer no loss or damage by all the storms and
tempests of outward troubles that may fall on them: that their souls shall not
miscarry, that no wind shall shake that corn of theirs: or whether it be to
be extended further to an outward protection also, as that God would either
preserve or keep them, so that the trouble shall not take hold of them, or
hide them under his winge, where the danger that finds out others by hundreds,
and thousands, shall not find out him: or at least, that he would carry them
through, and bring them again, with comfort and peace in this present world,
though they might happily drink deep of the cup with others.

10. For answer to this. It is out of all controversy, that that great
protection of the soul is here included however, whether it be principally
intended, or aimed at, or no. Those that sa^ctifie him in the times of great
waterfloods (as David speaks) of great dangers, and public calamities, or
judgments, whether they have their lives or no given them for a prey, they
shall have their souls given them for a prey: neither tribulation, nor
anguish, nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor peril, nor sword,
nor life, nor death, shall be able to separate them from the love of God in
Christ. Romans 8. Therefore of this there is no question.

11 But concerning the other kind of protection, or temporal deliverance,
etc. it may be somewhat more questionable, whether that be here included and
intended, or no. Yet by that immediately follows, as likewise by the general
stream, and current of the Scripture, both for promises, and examples in this
kind (some whereof we shall produce for the confirmation of the doctrine) it
seems that even this kind of protection also is here included, if not
principally, and directly intended. For so it follows. And he shall be a
sanctuary, that is to say, unto you (as we said before) but as a stumbling
stone, and as a rock of offense to both the houses, etc. This is apparently
spoke of, of those outward and temporal judgments, and calamities, which the
wicked Jews, both those of the ten Tribes, and those of the two would bring
upon themselves by not sanctifying God, by not trusting and depending upon him,
and not of eternal judgments. Therefore that which God promises to those
that sanctify him, by way of opposition to what he threatens against those
that would not sanctify him, must be understood (principally at least) of
outward mercies and protections. And besides, Ezekiel. 11. 16. where the very
phrase is used, of Gods being a Sanctuary, it is in special manner meant of
outward protection, and that as apparently as satisfaction it self can desire.

12 There is yet a third way to interpret this promise or phrase of Gods being
a sanctuary unto his people, which will stand well with both the former, and
yet is differing from either. God therefore may be said to be a Sanctuary unto
his people, viz. to those that shall so sanctify him (as you have heard) not
only in respect of soule-protection from hell, nor of bodily and outward
protection, from external troubles, and miseries: but in respect of
heart-protection (as we may call it) from the sad piercing and tormenting
fears, and apprehensions, both of the one and of the other. For there is not
only pains, and torments in hell, but in the fear of hell also: so there is
not anguish and perplexity of soul only in suffering, and enduring outward
miseries and afflictions, but in the fear and expectation of them, and their
issue. And for outward miseries and sufferings, the truth is, not only that
the fears and expectation of them; are many times a greater misery and burden
upon the soul, then themselves are: but if the soul were perfectly healed,
and delivered from fear, touching the event and issue of them; the grief of
bearing and suffering them would be no great burden to it. And this sense I
conceive to be as natural and proper to the place, as either of the other: yet
so, as to exclude neither of them. For the truth is, when God undertakes to be
a Sanctuary, he will be a Sanctuary indeed.

13 So that now, when I lay it down in the Doctrine, that God will be a
Sanctuary or protection in dangers, to those that sanctify him, I would not
have this limited to either of the two kinds last mentioned (for as for the
first, we shall not further have to do within this point) either to that
which is from outward dangers and troubles, or to that which is from fears,
and distractions of soul, in and about such dangers and troubles. Nor yet on
the other hand would I have it universally extended to them both, as if God
would always protect: those that sanctify him, from both, both from dangers,
and evils themselves, and also from fears and perplexities about them: but I
would have the word taken, though in the latitude of it is signification, yet in
a distributive sense, thus, that God will certainly be a Sanctuary in times of
trouble unto such: but not always a Sanctuary in the same kind, or upon the
same terms, not always by an external preservation of them from troubles,
that they shall not fall upon them; not always by delivering them, and
bringing them off, when they are fallen upon them: not always by guarding, and
protecting their hearts against the fear of them; but yet a Sanctuary always:
either a Sanctuary of preservation, or a Sanctuary of deliverance, if not from
the dangers, and evils themselves, (yet that which it more, and the greater
deliverance) from the oppressing, raging, and devouring fears, and terrors of
them. So that still we make good, in the sense, and meaning of our doctrine,
the truth of what the Lord here promises by his Prophet, that is to say, that
God will be a Sanctuary in one kind or other to those that shall sanctify him,
in times of danger. Now we have the clear and distinct meaning of the
Doctrine. Let us proceed to the proof and demonstration, of the truth of it,
and that first by Scripture, and secondly by grounds of reason.

CAP. XIII.
The Doctrine confirmed by the Scriptures, with an objection answered.

1 FOr the first, you shall find the Scriptures full of such promises as
these, that God will be a refuge, safety, hiding place, etc. unto his people,
that shall depend upon him from storms, and tempests, that he will be with
them, and stand by them in times of trouble, and public judgments or
calamities in the world round about them, to support them with peace, and keep
up their head above water, when others shall be at their wits end for fear,
and be overwhelmed with the flood: See what he promises to Iosuah and Caleb
who (we know) followed the Lord and made their dependence upon him, when time
was, others starting aside from him like broken bows. He promised Sanctuary,
and protection to these, when the rest of the people shall be left naked to his
judgments, and pursued to death by his indignation. Numb. 14. 35. etc. I the
Lord have said, certainly I will do so to all this wicked company, that are
gathered together against me in this wilderness they shall be consumed, and
there they shall die. And the men which Moses sent to search the land, who
returned and made all the congregation to murmur against him, by bringing up a
slander upon the land: Even those men that did bring up the evil report upon
the land, died (or as the former translation had it) shall die by a plague
before the Lord. But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Iephunneh,
which were of the men that went to search the land, lived still (or) shall
live. So in those troublesome and calamitous times in the Kingdom of Israel,
when it was infested both with the sword of Hazael, King of Syria, and of Iehu
the son of Nimshi, that is, both with foreign and civil wars. See what
difference God promises to make between those that cleave fast and faithfully
unto him, and those whose hearts were withdrawn from him, 1 Kings 19. 17. And
him that escapes from the sword of Hazael shall Iehu slay: and him that
escapes from the sword of Iehu, shall Elisha slay. Yet will I leave me seven
thousand in Israel, even all the knees that have not bowed to Baal, and every
mouth which has not kissed him. We see a defense upon all the glory that is
upon all those that kept themselves close in dependence upon God, when others
went to wrack, by heaps upon heaps. So David Psalm. 33. 18, 19. Behold the eye
of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and upon them that put their trust in
his mercy, to deliver their souls from death, and to keep them alive in
famine. That clause [ in famine] I take rather figuratively, by a Metonymie of
the species for the genus, one kind of calamity for all kinds (a form of
speech very frequent in the Scripture, wherein a particular is put for the
general, as the sword is put for any kind of death, and many the like) so
that the meaning is, that when peace, preservation, and means of subsisting
are rare, and hard to come by, in the place where they live, as it is in times
of famine, God will have a care of those that depend upon him, to preserve
them. So that, Psalm 2. 12. is of like truth and importance, Kiss the Son
lest he be angry, and you perish from the way: when his wrath is kindled but a
little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him: meaning, that in such
times especially when Gods wrath is kindled in the world, the blessedness of
those that depend upon him is discerned, and made manifest, namely by the
difference God makes between them and others.

2. That whole 91. Psalm contains little else but high expressions of Gods
care over those that depend upon him, and of that protection, he would afford
them in times of greatest and most eminent dangers. I will say of the Lord he
is my refuge, etc. verse. 2. here is the child of God, his dependence upon God:
Surely he shall deliver him from the snare of the Hunter, and verse. 7. A
thousand shall fall at thy right hand, and ten thousand at thy left, but it
shall not come nigh thee, that is, thou shall be as certainly preserved, as if
there had not been the least danger near thee. Here is his Sanctuary and
protection. See Esa. 28. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Woe to the Crown of Pride, and to the
drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious beauty is a fading flower, etc. Behold
the Lord has a mighty and strong one which is as a tempest of hail, and as a
destroying storm shall cast down to the earth, etc. The Crown of pride, etc.
And the glorious beauty shall fade, etc. And what follows? In that day shall
the Lord of Hosts be for a Crown of glory, and for a Diadem of beauty unto the
Residue of his people, that is, to such as did not with the rest depart from
him, thorough an evil heart of unbeleefe: so Ier. 14. 8. calls God first the
hope of Israel, and then the Savior thereof in the time of trouble. When God
is the hope of Israel, that is, when Israel depends upon him, then he is the
Savior of Israel in his troubles; so, to the same Prophet, and his remnant (as
he calls them) that is the godly party, who had stuck to God and made his
dependence upon him, when all his people (in a manner) would have quarrelled
and persecuted him out of his faithfulness, he makes this promise: The Lord
said, Verily it shall be well with thy Remnant. So again, chap. 17. Blessed is
the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is, for he shall be
as a tree planted by the waters, and that spreads out her roots by the
river, and shall not see when heat comes, but her leaf shall be green, and
shall not be careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from
yielding fruit. By this tree's not ceasing to yield fruit in a year of drought,
he expresses the comfort, peace, and joy, which should live in the heart, and
soul of those, who made the Lord their hope, in times of greatest troubles,
when there should be no visible or outward means either to raise or to
maintain them. So Joel 3. 16. The Lord shall roar out of Zion, and utter his
voice from Jerusalem; but the Lord will be the hope (or harbor) of his people,
and the strength of the children of Israel. So Nahum, 1. 7. The Lord is good: a
strong hold in the day of trouble: and he knows (that is, regards, or
respects) them that trust in him. You may add to these diverse other
Scriptures which are strongly bent this way: as, Amos 9. 8, 9. Mal. 3. 18. Esa
1. 27. and Esa 6. 13. In all which places we shall easily perceive that the
fairest and fullest stream runs upon either a preservation from, or a
protection under, or a deliverance out of public judgments, and calamities,
to those that sanctify God by dependence on him in such times.

3 If it be objected: but are not those who do sanctify God, and depend upon
him, many times taken away, and utterly consumed and destroyed by public
judgments, as pestilence, sword, etc. and that in such a manner, as no
difference at all can be made between them and others? To this I answer two
things.

First it is not ordinarily so, as may appear from the Scriptures cited in way
of proof for our Doctrine, it is seldom seen or heard of, that a man is cut
off by a public judgment, in the strength of his dependence upon God. Godly
men, indeed, if they pollute their Sanctuary in heaven with inordinate fears,
may suffer in such a way: Peter's faith shaking his life (we know) sympathized,
and was shaken also with it: but this is that, whereof (I conceive) few
instances (if any) can be given, that a public judgment should be sent to slay
any man that has his hand fast upon the horns of this Altar. For the most
part, faith and dependence upon God, (as James speaks of mercy,) rejoice
against judgment, and triumph over the stroke thereof.

4 Secondly: suppose men and women have been thus taken in their bed of this
heavenly security, have been smitten, when they have been close and strong,
and entire in their dependence upon God, yet impavidos feriebant ruinae (as he
said) the stroke did them no great harm. Why? because their hearts were in
Sanctuary: the truth and faithfulness of God, who has in effect promised,
that all things shall work together for good to those that love him, was
shield, and buckler to the inner man: so that as Paul speaks Phil. 1. that to
live, and to die were to him alike; the difference between the one and the
other was so narrow in his eye, that he was in a straight, he knew not which
to choose: but yet of the two (serting circumstances aside) he would rather die
than live, he would be dissolved, and be with Christ, that was best for him.
So when the heart or soul of a man is erected and lifted up on high in a rich
dependence upon God, the one way or the other, going or staying, life or death,
there is little to choose between them. Fear has pain (says John) and the
truth is, that scarce any thing else has pain, except there be some kind of
fear or other, joined with it. Take any sore, or tormenting disease or
sickness, as stone, or gout or the like, if there were not some apprehensions,
and fear of the continuance, or return of them, the very instant pain would
be easily digested, and no great matter made of it: so when God has guarded
and fenced the heart of a man with the presence of his grace (as it were) with
a wall of fire round about; so that no fear or apprehension of evil can
break in upon it to smite and wound it, the evil it self, when it comes, is
of no great concernment; it cannot much afflict or annoy the soul: so that
whether preservation from danger, or no preservation, whether deliverance out
of danger, or no deliverance, (I mean till death) that comes much to the same
to those, to whom God will be a Sanctuary, that is, to those that sanctify
him. If God be a Sanctuary, either from the evil, or from the fear of the
evil, it makes no great difference in the estate and condition of a Christian.
Of the two he has the better acco^modation from his Sanctuary (I conceive)
whose protection serves against fears. The reasons of the point are four.

CHAP. XIV.
Containing the grounds or reasons of the point in number four.

1. FIrst, God will assuredly be a Sanctuary to them who sanctify him by
dependence, because he has made himfelfe a debtor by promise) unto his
people, of safety and deliverance upon such terms, we may speak it with
reverence, that he is entangled with his own words (which are as strong or
stronger than himself.) to do as much as this comes to, to save and protect
his people that truly make their dependence upon him. The Lord redeemeth the
soul of his servants: and none that trust in him, shall perish. Psalm 34. 22.
None from the greatest to the least of them. Put your trust (says King
Iehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 20.) in the Lord your God, and ye shall be assured:
believe his Prophets, and you shall prosper: (besides many such like promises
you have in Scripture) for the present I only add that in the Prophet Esa.
chap. 57. 17. Vanity shall take them, that is, Idols with all their train and
retinue of worshippers shall suffer the law of their vanity, and be destroyed:
but he that puts his trust in me shall possess the land. That is, shall
return out of captivity, and be settled in his own land in peace, which
golden vein of promises, enricheth us abundantly. with the precious assurance
of this, that God is in, for the protection and deliverance of those that
depend upon him in times of danger, as much as the glory of his truth and
faithfulness come to: and we need not fear that ever he will loose or
forfeit such a pledge, etc.

2 And this happily is worthy some observation: that the holy Ghost usually
takes occasion upon such Promises as these, made for the relief and
deliverance of those that trust in God in times of danger and trouble, to
commend and magnify the most infallible truth, and certainty of the word of
God: for this reason especially (as I conceive) because the truth and
certainty of it suffers most from the unbeleeving hearts of men, in such
promises as these. And therefore the Holy Ghost, here interposeth a special
testimony of the truth and faithfulness of it, as it were on purpose to
prevent and disappoint the spirit of unbeleefe in me, that that might not rise
up so much as to mutter or whisper against it in this behalf. Thus Psalm. 12.
5, and 6. The Lord having promised that for the oppression of the poor, and
sighing of the needy, he would arise and set them at liberty, verse. 6. The
Prophet subjoynes this Elogium or testimony of the word, or promise of God. The
words of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried in a furnace of earth
purified seven times, that is, thoroughly purified; till all the dross be
consumed and purged clean from it, so that there is nothing but the pure and
solid metal remaining: meaning that there is no lightness, or looseness at
all the promises of God, made to those that put their trust in him, but every
jot and title will bear the weight, if it were of the whole world laid upon
it. So Prove. 30. 5. Every word of God is pure, that is, every promise of God is
solid, massy, and entire truth. He is a shield to those that put their trust
in him, etc.

3 The second reason is because there is a proportion and fitness between
this duty, this addresment of the creature to God, in away of reliance and
dependence upon him, and his addressing himself to the creature in a way of
mercy, and deliverance: there is a sutablenes and answerablenes between the one
and the other. As it a thing meet and comely in the creature, to stay it self
upon God, and to wait his leisure for it is deliverance. So is a compliance in
God with his creature in this posture (as it were) of dependence, comely and
glorious in him. The great God of heaven and earth has no apparel to put on,
in all that infinite charge and variety he has, more glorious, or wherein he
can commend himself: and his greatness upon higher terms to his creature,
than this, his saving those that put their trust in him. Hence it is the Saints
of God, to strengthen their hand in prayer, usually plead their faith and
dependence upon God for deliverance: as if this were a ground and foundation to
build an assured hope upon, that God now will not reject them. Psalm. 33. 21,
22. Surely our heart shall rejoice in him (says David) because we have
trusted in his holy name. Let thy mercy O Lord be upon us as we trust in thee.
As if he had a pawn sufficient of his faith, that God would send him help,
wherein he should rejoice So Psalm 25. 2. O my God I trust in thee; let me
not be ashamed, etc. So again, Psalm 86. 2. O God save thy servant that
trusts in thee.

4 Hence likewise it is, that when men have been Idolaters, and lift up their
hands to strange gods, and yet will expect that the true God should save and
deliver them in the time of their trouble, he sends them for help and
deliverance to their false gods, whom they had chosen, and relied upon,
implying that it was meet and fitting for those that are trusted and relied
on, to deliver and protect those that relied on them. See instances hereof in
Scripture, and read Judges 10. 14. Ier. 2. 28. Esa 57. 13. etc. Hence it is
also, that God purposing to save and deliver his elect from the wrath to come,
and to bestow everlasting life and happiness upon them, would not yet actually
confer his salvation and glory upon them, till they first shall believe, and
depend upon him for it. And therefore he did not only give his son Christ,
to pay their ransomes, and make atonement for their sins, but also caused
the Gospel to be written, wherein the history of the life and death of Christ,
together with the whole frame or body of the Mystery of his will touching the
salvation of men, should be declared, and this Gospel to be carried up and
down the world, from place to place, from Nation to Nation, to be preached
unto men, that so men might first believe in him through Christ, or by means
of Christ (as Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 1. 21. before they entered into their glory.
By all which it appears, that God thinks his mercies, and favors (and
deliverances especially) do best, and are given by him upon most equal, and
righteous terms, when they are grafted (as it were) upon faith, and given into
the bosom of those that expect and wait for them before they come.

5 A third reason is, because if God by a special work of his Spirit, should
uphold the hearts of his people to depend upon him for help, or to expect
deliverance from dangers from him, and then should not deliver them. He should
disrespect, and discountenance the workmanship of his own hands, yea that
piece of work, wherein he takes special delight. The Scripture every where
derives the original and dissent of faith from God, See Heb. 12. 2. Act. 18.
27. now it is certain, that God will have respect to his own works, and will
glorify and magnify them, that they may glorify and magnify him again. If
he inclines and moves, and persuades the creature truly, and unfainedly to
rest and stay it self upon him for help, in time of need, (as he does, if
the thing ever be done: no man takes hold upon God, but God himself guides and
strengthens his hand to do it) certainly he will not neglect, much less shame
and confound this great work of his own, which he should do, if he should
suffer the creature to miscarry or perish under it. Lord (says David, Psalm.
10. 17.) thou have heard the desire of the poor (or humble) thou will prepare,
or (as it is in the margin) establish their heart: thou will cause their ear
to hear. As if he should say, when God prepares or establishes the heart to
pray, he never fails to give a gracious hearing to the prayer. Otherwise the
work of his own grace should suffer loss and disparagement from himself.

6 The fourth and last reason may be, because, believing, trusting and
depending on God, is a thing so much despised, reproched, neglected, and little
set by in the world, indeed persecuted (upon the matter) and this may provoke
the jealousy of the Lord, and cause him to cast the more honor upon it,
because the world does so much disparage it. As David, who was well acquainted
with Gods ways, reasons, upon the like occasion, 2 Samuel 16. 12. It may be
the Lord will look upon mine affliction, and appoint good unto me, for his
cursing this day. Now the Scripture makes it clear, that this dependence upon
God, it is a practice in the way of Christians that has always undergone
reproach, and have been made a laughing stock in the world. In the Psalm. 14.
6. you have shamed the counsel of the poor, because the Lord is his refuge:
he has no outward support, no friends in the world. He made the Lord his
refuge, therefore you made a mock at his way. And so the Scribes and Pharisees
mocked Christ for his dependence he had upon his father, Matthew. 27. 34. He
trusted in God: let him deliver him now, if he will have him, for he said, I
am the son of God. And so the Apostle tells us in the 1 Timothy 4. 10. For
therefore we labor, and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God,
that i^ the Savior of all men, especially of those that believe. Now then the
spirit of the world, and the folly of men being set against this great work of
God in the hearts of his servants, they laboring to reproach and vilify it;
God sets himself so much the more to magnify it, and make it glorious, for
God has chosen the foolish things of the World to confound the wise: and God
has chosen the weak things in the world to confound the mighty, 1 Cor. 1.
27. that is, the things which the world counts foolish, and the things which
the world counts weak to confound that which the world counts wise, and
mighty; and will despise that which the world magnifies, and magnifies that
which the world despises.

This for the grounds and reasons of the point: come we now to Use and
Application.

CAP. XV.
An Use of Instruction from the Doctrine in two particulars.

FIrst, by way of instruction, and that in two particulars.

1 First, if God will be a Sanctuary in times of dangers, Troubles, and all
kinds of Calamities, to those that sanctify him, by a sincere and single
depending upon him; then observe hence, That there are no times so bad, no
days so evil, but may be redeemed, that is, but that the dangerousnesse, and
evil of them may be reduced to an equality with the peace, safety, and
comfort of better times, yea of the best that (ordinarily) this world affords
to the Church and servants of God. As the sharpness of a cold season may by a
proportionable addition of warm clothing, the use of fires exercise, and the
like, be made as little offensive to a man's constitution, as a temperate season
is, or as a man that is in a strong hold, fort, or tower, that is sufficiently
provided with ammunition, men, victuals, and all other provisions necessary in
such a case, for defense, is in as much safety, though he be besieged by
enemies round about, as another man is, that has no enemy near him: so when
a man has God for a refuge and Sanctuary, and defense: when a man has the
covering of his wing spread over him, what arrows soever are flying, or what
winds soever are blowing, or what waves soever are raging in the world about
him, it is as much alike to him, as if all were quiet about him, and the voice
of the turtle heard in his land as ( Solomon speaks) He can be but safe, and
well at rest, and ease in h^s mind, if he lived in those golden times
prophesied of Psalm. 72. 3. when mountains, and little hills shall bring forth
peace to the people, that is, (I conceive) when neither high nor low, rich nor
poor shall be troublesome (for it is generally seen that the troublesomenesse
or evilnesse of times arise from one or both of these sorts of men especially)
and safe he is, and well apaid in the inner man, when he has taken sanctuary
under the wing of God.

2 As we see in Paul's case: the times wherein he lived were as bad, and hard to
him, as lightly they could be, and yielded little outward peace or comfort to
him: see what thorns there were in his eyes, and scourges in his sides
continually, as if all the troubles, and sorrows, and miseries in the world,
had agreed together to fight neither against small nor great, but only against
Paul, see his condition in the 2 Corin. 11. from the 23. to the 28. verse, In
labors more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in
deaths often: of the Jews five times received I forty stripes but one: thrice
was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a
night and a day I have been in the deep, in journeying often, in perils of
waters, in perils of robbers, in perils of mine own countrymen, in perils by
the heathen, in perils in the City, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in
the sea, in perils amongst false brethren, in wearin^sse, and painfulnesse, in
watchings often, in hunger, and thirst, in fastings often, in cold, and
nakedness. You would think, that there was a great valley, or rather, a vast
gulf, to be filled up and levelled. Behold Paul was not much cast behind hand
in the things of his peace, and comfort with all these breaches the world made
so thick upon him, he was no loser (to speak of) by all this: the reason is,
he was safe in his Sanctuary from all fears; yea, and could rejoice in the
midst of all his troubles: and what could he have done more, had he washed his
paths in butter, (as Job speaks) and lived in the midst of all the
pleasures, and contentments of the sons of men. As sorrowful (says he, 2
Cor. 6. 10.) and yet always rejoicing: as having nothing, and yet possessing
all things. His troubles were but as shadows, and appearances of troubles: as
sorrowful, as if he had said, other men used to be sorrowful, when they are
in the like outward condition, and therefore he was thought to be sorrowful
also: but his joy had the realitie, strength, and substance of joy, always
rejoicing: he does not say, as always rejoicing, but simply rejoicing, that
is, indeed, and in truth. Paul knew how to make the day, and night, the day of
prosperity, and the night of adversity, to him both a like. Therefore
certainly there is no impossibility for others to do the like.

3 This is a point of very precious importance unto us, if we can conceive it,
(as I do not well see how we cannot refuse it.) It will not easily enter into
you to believe or conceive, what a ground of advantage it will be, what a door
of help opened unto you, to subdue the fears and dangers, and troubles of the
times (what ever they either are for the present, or may be fot the future)
unto you, to hold fast this foundation, that be they what they will be, or can
be, you may be above them in peace: let them rise never so high in terror,
that yet in comfort you may be higher than they. Sword, famine, pestilence,
fire, faggot, lions, adders, dragons, Jesuits, devils; there is a God that can
pull out the sting, and vanquish them all: for those that love him, and put
their trust in his mercy. Therefore let no man's heart be disquieted within him
upon this point: troubles cannot so abound, but the consolations of the Saints
may abound as much, and hold out full weight and measure with them.

4 Secondly, if God will be a Sanctuary in times of trouble to those that
sanctify him, by depending upon him: observe from hence, the preciousnesse of
faith, and the high acceptance of it with God: that he should vouchsafe upon
the poor creatures only dependence on him, thus to undertake his protection
and peace. Some men are jealous, lest the crown that is set upon the head of
Faith, should be made of too fine gold, I mean, lest too much should be
ascribed to faith. But God, who is jealous of all other creatures, and has
said, that his glory he will not give to another, Esa. 42. 8. seems to be so
indulgent toward Faith, that if ever he meant to part with it, or with any
part of it, faith should be his grace, upon which it should be conferred, or
rather, because he has that assurance of faith, that it will never be false to
him in this kind, but what honor or glory soever is cast upon it, it will
immediately surrender and deliver up unto him without keeping back the least
jot or tittle from him: he therefore by his own example, teaches, and
encourages men to use a lip of excellency concerning it, and to speak high,
and glorious things of it, and not to spare: yea, the things which otherwise
he appropriateth to him self, as his own peculiar glory. Daughter be of good
comfort (says Christ to the woman healed of her bloody issue, Matthew. 9. 22.)
thy faith has made thee whole. And yet, Mar. 5. 30. it is said that Christ
felt the virtue go out of himself, by which she was healed. So that he was
not tender in giving away (at least in appearance) his own praise, and glory
unto faith, he knew they were never the further from him. So to the woman that
brought the Alabaster box of ointment, and anointed him therewith, and wiped
his feet with the hair of her head: he says in like manner, even concerning
that salvation which accompanies forgiveness of sins: Thy faith has saved
thee, go in p^ace. Luke 7. 50. If you read the eleventh Chapter to the
Hebrews, you shall find as great and wonderful things ascribed to faith, as
God himself is recorded to have done, as causing the walls of Jericho to fall,
verse. 30. subduing Kingdoms, stopping the mouths of Lions, verse. 33.
quenching the violence of fire, making strong of weak, v. 34. raising the dead
to life, verse. 35. etc.

CAP. XVI.
The Doctrine made useful, in way of Reproof.

1 THe second Use of the point is for Reproof. If God will be a Sanctuary in
times of trouble, and danger to those that sanctify him, and depend upon him,
then are those to be reproved who make it a ground of discouragement, fainting,
or hanging down of hands to the servants of God at every time, that their
enemies are either ever so many in number, or so mighty in power, or that their
hatred is ever so tyrannous or implacable against them. Alas! What are all
these to their Sanctuary? What was the great host of the Aramites in the
valley, to the horses and chariots of fire in the mountains? God is our
refuge, and strength (says David, Psalm. 46. 12.) a very present help in
trouble. Therefore will we not fear though the earth be removed, and though
the mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea. Implying, that all dangers
and difficulties, whatsoever are but of the same consideration, the greatest no
more to be feared than the least, by those that have God their refuge, and
their strength. So again, Psalm. 27. 1, 2, 3. The Lord is my light and my
salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid? David, out of his Sanctuary, from under the wing of the
Almighty, laughs all dangers, enemies, and things otherwise terrible, in the
face to scorn, and defies (as it were) the whole host of them. And being yet
full of the spirit of this confidence, he eases himself further, verse. 3.
Though an host should encampe against me, my heart shall not fear: though
war should rise against me, in this I will be confident. Why did thou
fear, O thou of little faith (says Christ to Peter, Matthew. 14. 13.) when he
was afraid at the rising of a great wind: implying that that was no excuse or
reason to be given of his fear, because the wind blew stronger than before:
inasmuch as the same strength that did support him walking on the Sea, whilst
it was calm (yea, and on the firm land also) was as able to preserve him
against the most fierce, and raging winds that could blow; all things
whatsoever standing in the same proportion of easiness, and hardness to an
infinite power: so they that have God for their Sanctuary, need not care who
they have for their enemies, or pursuers. They that are ever a whit the more
troubled, or dejected in mind to see the horn of the enemy exalted, his
power increased, his armies, chariots, horses, and such like multiplied, what
do they (if such fears were rightly interpreted) but profane the Sanctuary of
their strength; and either lift up their enemies to an equality with God, or
else bring down the glory and infinite power of God to the weakness, and
contemptiblenesse of their enemies, who are but men, or devils (at the most) As
Paul's expression is, Gal. 3. 28. There is neither Jew, nor Greek, bond nor
free, male nor female, but all one in Christ Jesus: meaning that all
differences between person and person, whether of nation, condition, sex, or
whatsoever, are drowned and swallowed up, in the abundant glory, and excellency
of the condition, whereinto they are translated by Faith in Christ. The rich
man's riches, are of no consideration at all, for the augmentation, or increase
of his happiness, being otherwise, so superexceeding, abundantly happy in
Christ: neither is the poor man's poverty at all considerable, as diminishing
ought of his happiness in Christ; the poor and rich are to be looked upon as
alike happy in Christ; even as it is likewise in other differences: to him that
has God for his Sanctuary, there should neither be few, nor many; nor
weakness, nor strength; nor folly, nor wisdom; nor mercy, nor rage; nor
speaking, nor roaring; nor papist, nor atheist; nor Jesuit, nor Devil, but
all things in their enemies shall be a like unto them: all such differences as
these shall be of no consideration at all: except (happily) it be for whetting
up of their faith, and provoking of themselves to a more entire and close
dependence upon God, and in this respect, better few than many, better strength
than weakness: better wisdom than folly, better rage than mercy, better
roaring than speaking, better papist than atheist, better Devil than Jesuit.
The more dangerous, and mighty to destroy an enemy is, the greater necessity
he imposes upon usto strengthen out depe^dance upon God: yea, and as the
necessity of dependence on God is greater upon us in this cause, so is the
exercise or duty it self of greater facility, and more easy to be performed:
at least it would be so, if we were so well acquainted with the mind and
ways of God, as we both ought and might: for God loves to make the Mountains
to skip like rams, rather than the little hills like young sheep. He loves a
fair mark to shoot at, and will sooner down with Goliath the Champion, than
with a common Philistine. It was easier for the Israelites (had they known the
ways and counsels of God) to have believed the overthrow of Pharaoh and all
his mighty host, than to have believed the destruction of half so many women
and children, had they pursued and marched after them. As sometimes he said of
men of his own party, that there were too many, for him to save with, but he
never complained of too few: so it may on the contrary be well conceived of him
in respect of his enemies, there may be too few sometimes for him to destroy;
but there is no fear in the world that evert there should be too many. David
from time to time made notable advantage of the multitude, strength, and
fierceness of his enemies, for the raising and strengthening of his faith in
prayer against them: and made little question but that he should carry it in
heaven against them: if he could but plead this for himself before God, that
they were many in number, and mighty in power, and bare a tyrannous or cruel
hatred against him.

CHAP. XVII.
The last use of the Doctrine, in an exhortation to depend on God, with a
motive or encouragement thereunto.

1. THirdly (and lastly) This doctrine will afford matter for exhortation also.
If God will indeed be such a Sanctuary to those that sanctify him by depending
on him, We are to be persuaded to this great duty of duties, this sanctifying
of God, as the nature of it has been already declared; let us down with
Mountains and up with valleys, let us know no fears, no doubtings, no
discouragements whatsoever, no infirmities, no unworthiness, no sins
whatsoever (in this respect) but make our way through all the reasonings and
disputings of unbelief, into those everlasting Arms of the free grace, bounty
and goodness of God. Let us strengthen the arm of our dependence upon God
with all our might, and all our power. If we say that God is full of grace,
mercy, goodness, truth, faithfulness, wisdom, power, let us not be afraid
to seal with our hearts, to the words of our own mouths, let us speak all
these things at once in another language: that is, Let us depend upon him. A
motive or encouragement to the duty, is to,

2. Consider, that the way for this duty of sanctifying God by our dependence
upon him, is free and open before us: there is nothing in God, nothing in our
selves, nothing in men, nor in Angels, nor in devils, nor in this world, nor
in that which is to come, that needs be the least discouragement or occasion of
doubting or fear unto us. What can we suspect or stumble at in God? What is
there in him that should make us tender, faint, or fearful, in reposing or
casting our selves upon him? what is there that should cause thoughts to arise
within us, or make it matter of dispute or question unto us, whether we should
make him our strength and confidence, or no? Is there any star in all that
blessed constellation of his glorious Attributes, that has any malign
Influence this way, that is any ill willer to us in this kind, that any way
withstandeth or opposes this dependence of the creature upon him? Is not his
face and appearance, as he is every where discovered in the Scriptures, as the
appearance of a God made for dependence? Is not his similitude and likeness,
as of a strong Tower with the gate open and bowing (as it were) it self down,
to take up those that are running toward it, into its protection, even before
they come at it? does not every Attribute in God (especially, laid in
consideration with its fellows) invite the creature to repose it self in a
sweet and settled dependence upon him?

3. No (it is like we will object) the holiness and purity of his Nature,
together with his Justice and incomprehensible Majesty, etc. These make our
hands to hang down, and our knees to wax feeble; these are as great Mountains
raised up betwixt God and us, which we know not how to throw down; these
quench our dependence upon him, whilst it is yet but a spark, and stifle it
in the very conception and the womb. We can fear him to condemnation and
destruction, but we cannot depend upon him for protection and peace.

4. To answer these things in few words: Let me ask first: Would we have a
God to depend on without holiness and purity? a God that were unjust? or do
we conceive that the absence of these things in God, would add to our
dependence, and bring it on the faster, or increase the strength and confidence
of it? Do we think we could sanctify him better in his other Attributes, if
these were wanting? Doubtless a God without holiness (and so without
righteousness) were no God to depend upon: because such could be no true God,
to whom holiness and righteousness are as essential, as power, wisdom, or
any other Attribute whatsoever. And besides, supposing an All-sufficiencie of
power without holiness or righteousness, it would be just matter of deepest
fear to the poor creature; but no ground of hope or dependence at all. As we
see, the greatness of power in the devil, and so in Tyrants and wicked men
that are mighty on earth, being disjoynted and separated from holiness and
righteousness, is no ground at all to the poor, or those that are oppressed,
to trust or depend upon, but on the contrary to fear further evil and
mischief from them. And therefore David makes the holiness of God, rather then
his strength or power to be the ground of that exaltation and praise which is
due unto him from the creature. Let him praise (says he) thy great and
terrible Name: why? because it is great and terrible? no: but because it is
holy: for it is holy, Psalm. 99. 3. So verse 5. Exalt the Lord our God, and
worship at his footstool: for he is holy. So that you see that holiness which
is in God to be so far from having any thing in it that should any ways
trouble, weaken or hinder our dependence upon him, that it does (as it were)
qualify, prepare, and bring down that almightines of his power to our weakness
and necessities, and so makes him a God (as it were) on purpose to be depended
on, or that his creature might with all ease, willingness, and readiness, stay and
repose it self upon him.

5. And so for his Righteousness, or Justice: this is altogether with, and not
at all against our dependence on him. For he that is Righteous and just, will
keep promise, and this is worthy all consideration, that although all other
goodness, grace, pity, compassion, etc. were wholly separated from God, so
that he regarded not his creature at all, in the greatest fears, exigencies, or
extremities wherein he could behold it, yet if we can apprehend and confidently
believe him to be just of his word, and a promise keeper, this alone is
sufficient to lift up the horn of our dependence upon him, even to the
Heavens, and to make our rest in him glorious: The reason hereof is evident;
because he has promised the covering of his wing, protection, safety, and
peace, to this very grace or act of dependence alone (though the creature
otherwise should be never so unworthy of protection from him) as may be further
made manifest beyond all contradiction, or question, by a diligent perusal of
these, and many like Scriptures, Esa. 26. 3. Esa. 57. 13. Nahum. 1. 7. Jere.
39. 18. 2 Chronicles. 16. 8. 1 Chronicles. 5. 20. Jere. 17. 7, 8. Psalm. 22. 4. Psalm. 26.
1. 28. 7. 31. 19. 33. 21. 37. 40. 56. 4. 1 Samuel 12. 20. 22. In all which you
shall find safety and deliverance from God either promised, or performed, to
this simple and entire act and service, of the creatures trusting or dependence
upon him, And David accordingly joining only the truth or faithfulness of God
with the greatness of his power, makes them together a firm foundation of
happiness to all those shall hope in him, or depend upon him, Psalm. 146. 5, 6.
Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord
his God, which made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that therein is: (here
is his power) which keeps truth or fidelity, for ever, (here is faithfulness
in keeping promise.) There needs no more but these two Pillars (if we speak of
a strict and absolute necessity) whereon to build that house of confidence or
dependence on God, wherein peace and safety shall dwell for ever. Therefore
neither is the Justice or Righteousness of God a Thrower down, but a great
builder up of dependence upon him.

6. Again (secondly) to allay your fears in respect of the greatness and
Incomprehensiblenes of the Majesty of God: I would demand this, how, or which
way, or in what consideration the greatness of the Majesty of God, should any
ways shake, or be offensive to our dependence upon him? It may be the evil
managing, and the frequent experience we have of the hard ways of earthly
greatness or power, have been a snare unto us, and made us judges of evil and
unrighteous thoughts, concerning the Majesty and greatness of God. Because
men that are great in power and pomp on Earth, and full of the glory of this
world, are not wont to regard or look after, or take care for the poor and
needy, and those that are of mean condition in the world: they are liker to
ride over their heads, then to take them up from the dust of the earth, to
oppress them and grind their faces, then to relieve and comfort them. And so
the Tentation being upon us, we presently fall before it; we measure the
heavens by the earth; and him that is God, by those that are called Gods; we
conceive (it is like) that he that sits upon the Throne, which rules heaven
and earth, that has thousand thousands, and ten thousand times ten thousand of
glorious Angels attending on him and ministering unto him continually, that has
the Sun and the Moon, and all the Stars in the firmament of heaven, the
winds and the Seas, the Hills and the Mountains in subjection to him, that
has all the great and mighty Creatures on earth, Kings and Princes with their
Hosts, whole Nations and Kingdoms at his command, that he, as he is lifted up
in power and Majesty above all earthly Potentates whatsoever, so he is
proportionably estranged more then they, from all care or regard, or
remembrance of Creatures, that are poor, weak, afflicted; that he is no ways
sensible of their fears, dangers, miseries, distresses, etc. Liker to break
their bones, then any ways to heal or bind them up: to crush them in pieces
and destroy them utterly, then to lift up their heads, and make their faces to
shine.

7. The Scriptures indeed give Intimation that such thoughts as these (and that
upon this very occasion or tentation we have now mentioned) are incident to
the minds of men, touching the excellent Majesty and greatness of God: but
withal hews the snare of death asunder, and delivers the souls of men (as it
were) with joy and triumph from the bitterness of it. The Lord is high above
all nations (says David, Psalm. 113. 4:) and his glory above the Heavens. Who
is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on high, who humbles himself to
behold the things done in Heaven and in the earth: he raises the poor out of
the dust, and lifts the needy out of the Dunghill, etc. As if he should say;
God in his Majesty and greatness has this gracious property by himself
alone, and there are very few or none of those that partake with him in
greatness, that resemble him therein, that is to say, to look with a gracious,
merciful and compassionate eye beneath him, to look after the poverty and
distresses of those that lie at the greatest distance of all from him; to
support and deliver them: The reason why earthly greatness and power have (for
the most part) that evil influence into, and operation upon men, to dispose
them rather to the neglect, contempt, and oppression of the poor and those
that are beneath them, is because they are defective and weak in goodness,
wisdom, and true understanding: and know not (indeed) what to do with that
power and greatness which is in their hand, to any purpose: they know not how
to contrive them for the best to themselves, and their own good, but fall upon
grievous and desperate mistakes, and turn all both to their own, and others
ruin: but God having goodness and wisdom fully answerable to his
greatness, power, and excellency of being: there is not the least cause to
suspect or fear, but that he should manage the full power of his scepter, as
well to the highest advancement of his own glory, as for the happiness and joy
of his creature depending on him. neither can it be imagined that he could be
ever the more gracious, merciful or respectfull to the poorest and meanest of
his creatures, if he could be supposed to be divested of all his Majesty, or to
have laid aside all his greatness.

8. But it may be thou art not yet all thought made, but wilt still object and
say: It is true, the children and servants of God, if they sanctify him by
such a dependence upon him in time of danger, as you have mentioned, it is like
they may see his salvation, be protected and delivered by him; the holiness and
righteousness, and greatness of God, will make nothing against them: but I make
question of my self, whether I be in the number of either, and consequently,
whether I have any right to depend upon him, or no; I fear if I should cast my
self upon God, or make any dependence upon him in an exigent or straight, I
should rather be condemned for presuming, then any ways accepted in my
dependence.

9. Give me leave to answer this objection; and then I have done. First
therefore, touching that occasion of the objection, thy doubting whether thou
be in the number of the children and servants of God, or no: I answer two
things: First, thy doubting, or making question in this kind, is no argument or
proof at all, that therefore thou art not in that number, I mean a child or
servant of God: The rest of the Apostles questioning every man himself, whether
he were the man that should betray his Lord and Master Christ, did not prove
that therefore they were the men, or any of them that should have a hand in
that great sin, Nay this doubting and questioning themselves, is generally
interpreted and co^ceived rather as a testimony of their innocence this way.
And (as it appears from the text, where this passage is related, Matthew. 26. 22,
23, etc.) he that was the guilty person, and foul in his intentions that way,
Judas, did not question himself at first, with the rest: but afterward, when
Christ, to deliver the rest from their fears, had singled him out by a sign,
as good as by name, then the text says, verse 25. that he also came in with
his question touching himself, Master, is it I? The reason of which carriage of
his, seems to be this: Whilst the rest of his fellows were under fears and
jealousies of themselves (and perhaps every one of another) he would seem to be
the freest and most innocent man of them all: he would not seem so much as to
suspect and doubt himself that way; but thought it policy to let them alone
with the matter, to shift it out among themselves as they could. But when he
saw that Christ had as good as acquitted all the rest, and had burdened and
branded him for the man of that wickedness, he had now no better shelter or
covert for his hypocrisy, then to join himself with those that were
acquitted, in their manner of questioning. In like manner, jealousies and
doubtful thoughts, now and then rising within us, touching our spiritual
standings and conditions, as whether we be hypocrites and unbeleevers, or no,
are rather signs on the right hand, then on the left, and speak more for us,
then against us. Men that are altogether strangers to the life of God, have
(for the most part) more security and confidence of their standing, then to
be shaken with any disputes in themselves about it: Nay secondly, to this
particular, I answer yet further: that though thou should lay violent
thoughts upon thine own soul, and conclude right down against thy self, that
thou were no child or servant of God, yet neither were this any material
proof, that therefore thou were neither child nor servant of his. As it is
said of God in one sense, in respect of the greatness of his power (fa^ling in
conjunction with the motion of his will) that he calls the things that are
not, as if they were. Romans 4. 17. so may it in another sense be said of men, in
respect of their weakness, and inabilitie to judge, that they also call the
things that are not, as if they were: they give beings to many things in their
imaginations, which have no being at all otherwise. But though Gods calling
things that are not, gives them a reality, and truth of being in themselves:
Yet man's calling them in his thoughts and imagination, does not so. Things are
never the more so or so, because men conceive and imagine, or conclude them to
be so upon insufficient grounds. As the Apostle also reasons, 1 Cor. 12. 15,
16. If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body: is
it therefore not of the body? And if the ear shall say, Because I am not the
eye, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body? There is nothing
more frequent and common with men, then to be strong and sore in their
conclusions, when they are but weak and contemptible in their premises: then
to sit down in their most resolute determinations and judgments, quite
besides the truth, neither is this more incident to any sort of men, in, or
about any subject whatsoever, then to the children of God, in reasoning and
arguing their spiritual conditions: as might be showed by many instances, and
is observed by experience: Therefore there is little in this ground of the
objection, thy questioning whether thou be a child of God, or no.

10. But secondly, to the maine and more material ground thereof, which seems
to be this; that in case a man or a woman be not the child of God, they
therefore have no right to depend upon God, or should be rejected in their
dependence, or or that the dependence of such would be rather presumption, then
any dependence accepted with God: to this (I say) I answer further, 1. By way
of concession. 2. By way of exception.

By way of concession, I answer, and grant three things; First that true it
is, that the children and servants of God, have peculiar and special
iucouragements from him, to make their dependence upon him in times of danger,
and to look for deliverance and protection from him. Ye that fear the Lord
(says David, Psalm. 115. 11. Psalm. 145. 19.) Trust in the Lord: besides many
like passages, which (I conceive) may be found in the Scriptures.

Secondly, I grant, that wicked men, that is, men that continue in the
stubbornness and impenitencie of their hearts and ways, are every where
threatened with wrath and vengeance, and destruction from God for their sins,
and consequently are discouraged, and that with a high hand, and in a terrible
manner, from expecting any good, mercy or favor from the hand of God; by
reason whereof, continuing and purposing to continue in their sins, they have
no ground at all to make any dependence upon God, for any grace or favor in
what kind soever. Psalm. 7. 11, 12. 11. 6.

Thirdly (and lastly) I grant, that there is a kind of dependence, or trusting
on God, wherein the creature shall be rejected, and which shall rather turn to
his deeper shame and confusion, then any ways advantage or benefit him in the
favor of God. The Scripture affords many instances, or examples hereof. David
speaking of his enemies, They cried (says he) but there was none to save them:
even unto the Lord, but he answered them not. Then did I beat them small as
the dust before the wind, etc. Psalm. 18. 41, 42. Their calling and crying
unto God, shows plainly that they had some kind of dependence on him: as the
Apostle argues this point, Romans 10. 14. How shall they call on him, on whom
they have not believed? Invocation, always argues some kind of hope or
dependence, one or other. So Matthew. 7. 22. It is evident that those that should
say unto Christ in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name?
and in thy Name cast out Devils, etc? had some kind of dependence upon him, for
acceptance unto life and salvation: and yet we see in the following verse, how
they were rejected: Then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart
from me, ye that work iniquity. If you desire to see more instances, of this
kind of dependence, you may (at leisure) peruse these and the like passages.
Esa. 36. 10. Prove. 1. 28. Matthew. 7. 26. Jere. 13. 16, etc.

So that neither is this to be denied, but that there have been, and are at
this day many relyings, many dependings upon God, which he will not own, and
to which the Sanctuary, here spoken of, will be denied. These things therefore
I answer by way of concession.

11. But secondly, by way of exception, I answer diverse things: First, that
howsoever the children and servants of God, that is, men and women that are
already converted, and of some standing and continuance in the ways of grace,
have special encouragements to stay themselves upon God, and to depend upon
him for protection under, or deliverance out of dangers: yet as Christ told the
people that stood by, when that voice came from heaven, and spoke unto him,
John 12. 28. that it came not because of him, but for their sakes, who yet were
unbeleevers, as apeares verse 37. and so, though he was infinitely more beloved
of God then they, yet in that particular, in the miraculous voice, though
directed particularly unto him, God respected them more then him: So in those
encouragements, for dependence on God, which are particularly directed to the
children and servants of God, though God loves these many degrees better then
the rest of the world, yet may he more respect the residue of men (at least his
elect, which yet lie hid amongst them, walking in the same ways of sin and
vanity, with them) then his children and servants themselves. God may therefore
speak graciously and comfortably, and indulgently to those that are his
children and servants, to commend the sweetness of his service unto others, and
to draw them also to desire part and fellowship in so blessed a business: as
the happiness of his Fathers servants, above the condition he was in (for the
present) moved the Prodigal son (we know) to return home to his Fathers
house, Luke 15. 17.

12. But secondly, suppose this be not so, that God has no such eye upon those
that are yet without, that are yet the servants of sin and Satan, in those
gracious encouragements to his Saints, to make their dependence upon him, and
to secure themselves in his love and care over them in times of danger, yet
further I answer, that not only righteous persons, men and women, who have
already embraced the ways and service of God, have encouragements to come unto
him, and to depend on him, but even others also, yea, the greatest of sinners,
and the most unworthy. Wash you, make you clean, etc. (says the Lord, to the
highest rank of sinners, Esa. 1. 16. 17. etc.) and then: Come now, and let us
reason together, says the Lord: though your sins be as skarlet, yet shall
they be as white as snow: though they be as red as crimson, yet shall they be
as wool. If ye be willing and obedient, you shall eat the good things of the
land. Surely God is willing that men should depend upon him for the obtaining
of such things as he promises unto them: Now you see that here he promises
both forgiveness of sins, and outward prosperity to those whose sins were
as skarlet, and crimson, only upon their repentance. I might add many more
passages of like importance. If you here again object: But I doubt whether I
have repented, or no: and then I have never the more ground or right to depend
upon him, for the making good of these, or any the like promises unto me. To
this, as also to the maine objection, I answer on

13. In the third place: Suppose thou have not as yet repented, yet is the way
as open unto thee, for thy trusting, relying, and depending upon God for all
things that concern thy peace, as it is for thy repentance: and thou have as
much right unto, and may as lawfully do the one, as the other; as lawfully
depend upon God for all good, as repent of thy sins. Nay, as thou have, not
only a lawfulnes and a right, but even an absolute necessity of Repentance
lying upon thee, so that woe be unto thee, if thou repent not: So is there, not
only a like lawfulness and right, but a like necessity also of this dependence
upon God, upon thee, and the like condemnation abiding thee, if thou refusest
to make thy dependence upon him. Blessed is that man, (says David) that makes
the Lord his trust, Psalm. 40. 4. He does not say, blessed is that godly, that
righteous, that penitent man, that makes the Lord his trust: but simply and in
definitely, Blessed is that man, whosoever he be, how vile, how sinful, how
unworthy soever otherwise: this making the Lord his trust, the casting of
himself upon God in way of a true and unfeined dependence, will dissolve and
remove the misery and curse lying upon him for his sin, and set a Crown of
blessedness upon his head. As on the contrary, it is as a title, or
superscription written upon the forehead of him that perishes, containing the
cause of his condemnation or perishing: Lo, this is the man that made not God
his strength, etc. Psalm. 52. 7. And again, Jere. 17. 5. Thus says the Lord,
Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose
heart departs from the Lord. If the departing of the heart from the Lord,
that is, a man's refusing to make his dependence upon him, be that which makes
him accursed, doubtless it is most lawful for him to depend upon him: yea, as
lawful altogether, as it is to seek to deliver himself from the curse, or to
escape the wrath which is to come. If God denounces every man accursed, for
not relying, not depending upon him, this is a sufficient ground and warrant
(yea and more then either) for every man and woman under heaven, to do both the
one and the other, to rely and depend upon him, without asking any further
question for conscience sake. For certainly God would never pronounce any man
accursed, for not doing that, which he has no right or warrant to do. It were
rather a ground of praise and reward from God to a wicked man, if he should
refuse to depend upon him, in case he had no ground or warant for the doing
it. That which makes it a sin of that high provocation in the sight of God,
with whomsoever it is found, in all persons whatsoever that are guilty of it,
is the commandment of God, together with the abundant righteousness and
equity thereof, lying upon all men for the doing of it. So that there is not
the least scruple or question to be made, but how sinful and unworthy soever
thou conceivest thy self to be, thou have as much right, because as great a
necessity, to depend and cast thy self upon God, as the most righteous person
under Heaven. Therefore,

14. In the fourth place, I answer yet further (and desire it may be well
considered) that a man's trusting and depending upon God, is both the first, and
the only effectual means or cause of every man's repentance, and has a
necessary, infallible, and universal connection with it; so that no man can
depend upon God (we speak now of a true and unfeigned dependence) but ipso facto
(as we say) in the very act of his dependence, he repents: neither can any
man truly repent, but he that truly depends upon God, and that by the power,
and native property and influence of that his dependence. For we are to
conceive of God and sin, as of two contrary terms, or two points in the
heavens, diametrally opposite, or directly cross one to the other, as the East
is to the West, and the North to the South, etc. So that whilst a man's face is
toward sin, that is, whilst he remains impenitent and unconverted, his back
is toward God, that is, he sees not that in him, why he should trust him, or
depend upon him: as a man whilst his face is toward the West, his back must
needs be toward the East. And the reason why any man remains in an estate of
impenitencie, is not so much (as happily we conceive) the pleasure, or profit,
or contentment of sin in any kind, as the ignorance of God, of that infinite
goodness, sweetness, mercy, bounty, truth, power, etc. that are in him;
though it be true also, that there are bands, and snares, and cords of vanity
in sin, which bind men heart and hand to it, and so keep them fast; making
them listlesse and careless of inquiring after God and his ways, till God by
a high hand of grace, prevants them with such a light of the knowledge of
himself, as does deliver them. For if there were not the hundredth part of that
pleasure, profit, and contentment in sin, which impenitent persons conceive
there is, yet they remaining ignorant of God, and without knowledge of those
riches of his grace, which expose him in all his greatness, power, and
all-sufficiencie, to every creature under heaven, that is but willing to come
unto him, and depend upon him, without any other condition or qualification
whatsoever, would never repent of their sins.

15. If God should grind the face of the creature (as it were) and take out all
the flower and pith of it, and leave nothing but husks and shells; yet men
would not give over feeding upon these, unless they were persuaded of finding
better intertainment with God. If covetousness were nothing so pleasing or
suitable to the corrupt hearts of men, as now it is, if the heat of the pleasure
of drunkenness, idle company, uncleanness, and the like, were abated and
taken down never so low; yet the covetous would be covetous still, and the
drunkard would follow drunkenness still, and the adulterer would be an
adulterer still, except he saw in God an effectual door open unto him, by
which he might enter, and find grace and acceptance with him. Again,
notwithstanding all that sin does, or can do to prevail with the heart of a
man, to deteine it in the love, practice and approbation of it, notwithstanding
all the strong allurements, and effectual bewitchings it has attending upon
it to keep men in bondage and subjection to it, nay if sin were more sinful
(in this respect) then it is, I mean, more alluring, and more tempting, and
more bewitching then now it is: yet upon the shining of the light of the
knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ upon the soul, upon the appearing
of the bountifulness and love of God our Savior toward man (as the Apostle
speaks, Tit. 3. 4.) the heart of a man would break loose from sin, and
cast all the cords of it from him: he would turn his back upon it immediately,
and come about with his face toward God. By both which considerations (which
are both clear in reason, and might be sufficiently confirmed by the word of
God, if it were necessary) it is fully evident, that the main and principal
reason of any man's continuance in his impenitencie, is not so much any thing he
finds in those ways of sin wherein he lives; no nor yet in those corruptions
of nature, which make those ways of sin so pleasing above measure unto him, as
his not depending upon God. Which conclusion being granted (as it cannot with
any color be denied) it necessarily follows, that men must begin, and make
entrance upon their repentance, by way of trust, or dependence upon God.

16. A man must not think, that either he ought, or c^n, first repent, and
then trust and depend upon God: no, all that a man can find, or feel, or
fear in sin, will not raise the soul so much as to the first and lowest step
of a sound and true repentance, till he has taken some hold on the covenant of
grace, and begun (at least) his dependence upon God. In the raising, and
framing of which act of dependence, in the soul, the heart falls off, and comes
about from sin: which is the substance and nature of a true Repentance. So
that, howsoever, To believe, and to repent, are things much differing in
consideration, and also in respect of their objects, it being God, that is
believed on, and sin that is repented of: yet are they effected and wrought
by God, in or by one and the self same work or motion, in the heart or soul of
a man. For by that act of the Spirit of grace, by which the soul is turned and
acted upon God in believing, by the same it is turned away from sin also: which
properly is repentance. And look, as when a man turns his back toward the
west, and his face toward the East, he does both the one and the other, not by
two distinct motions or turnings of his body, but by one and the same, neither
can he possibly turn his face toward the one, but he must of necessity, by
and with the same motion turn his back upon the other: So is it between Faith
and Repentance: God does not work Faith by one work of his Spirit by it self,
and repentance by another, by it self: but by the same act and motion of the
Spirit, by which the heart is drawn and turned upon God in believing, it is
likewise drawn off, and turned aside from sin in Repenting. Hence it is that
the Scriptures so frequently speak of these two, Repenting and Believing, as
supposing, involving and comprehending one the other, and make the same
promises of grace and forgiveness of sins indifferently to both: as might be
showed at large, if it were so proper or pertinent to this place. That which is
called repentance, Act. 2. 38. is called the receiving of the Word. verse 41.
and Believing, verse 44. And as Peter in the place cited ( Act. 2. 38.)
requires Repentance in the Jews, to qualify and fit them for Baptism: So
does Philip require Faith or believing, in the Eunuch. Act. 8. 37. which
shows, that there is a very near affinity between them, and that the one
supposes the other. So Act. 11. 18. that is called Repentance unto life, which
verse 17. was called believing on the Lord Jesus Christ. Besides diverse other
Scriptures of like current and importance.

17. Yet notwithstanding though (as has been in effect already said) Repenting
and believing or depending on God, be but one and the same motion of the soul,
as a man's going from London to York, is but one and the same journey: yet may
believing or depending on God be said to be before Repenting, in order of
nature, and al so the cause of it, because the soul is not occasioned, moved,
or persuaded to believe on God, by turning away from sin: but on the contrary,
is persuaded and drawn aside from sin, by believing on God: as though a man's
going from London to York be one and the same motion or journey, yet is his
going to York, and his business there, the cause of his going from London, and
not his going from London, the cause of his going to York. Even so is the
Creatures desire of finding rest and happiness in God by believing on him, the
cause of his willingness to turn away from sin: but on the contrary, his
willingness of turning away from sin, is not the cause or means of his desire
to enjoy God by believing.

18. As for that passage of our Savior, Matthew. 21. 32. which is alleged by
some, to prove Repentance before Faith, as a cause or means of it, where he
lays it to the charge of the chief Priests and Elders, that when they had
seen it, that is, that the Publicanes and Harlots had believed John in his
Ministry, yet they repented not afterward, that they might believe: the
meaning is not, that either the Publicans and harlots first repented of their
sins, and then afterward believed John, and that their Priests and Elders are
reproved for not doing the like: but the sense and importance of our Saviors
reproof in this place, seems only this, that their perverseness and
obstinacy in the way of their unbelief was such, that the examples of
Publicans and harlots before their eyes, who believed on him, and repented of
their sins, upon the preaching of John, wrought not at all upon them; they
still hardened themselves in the sin of their unbelief, and had no relenting
in them, no inclinations or desires at all to believe. So that the Repentance
here spoken of, which seems to go before, and to conduce and dispose toward a
full, perfect and complete believing, is not that general and solemn
Repentance, by which the heart is taken off, and stands at a distance from all
sin (indefinitely) but only notes the first relentings, breakings, or
yeeldings of the heart and soul, touching the special sin of unbelief, but
not as yet fully conceived or apprehended to be a sin, but as such an estate
or condition of soul, whereof a man cannot suddenly resolve, whether he should
do well to change it or no, and turn believer. Which kind of repenting or
relenting may be perceived in some, about, and somewhat before the time of
their settled and full conversion and believing, and may be isntrumental and
serviceable in the hand of the Spirit of God toward the effecting thereof.

This exposition might be further opened and confirmed, as well by the context
and circumstances of the place, as by the agreement and sympathy of other
Scriptures; but that now we neither have time, nor otherwise any urgent
occasion to do it.

19. The sum then of all that we have reasoned and laid down in this fourth
member of our answer, comes to this: that how sinful, vile, and unworthy
soever a man has been, or yet is, he is not therefore bound in conscience, to
defer or put off his believing or depending on God, till he has repented of,
and forsaken all his sins: no, but whenever the golden scepter of grace and
acceptance in Christ is held out unto him, though it be whilst he is yet in
the midst of his iniquities, he ought without any more ado (especially, when
he finds his heart touched from heaven, and any desires working in him that
way) to leap and spring (as it were) into those everlasting arms of the mercy
and faithfulness of God, which are ever open to embrace and enterteine all those
that cast themselves into them, how unworthy soever they were, the very next
moment before they came there. And therefore

20. In the fifth place (to draw toward a conclusion of this great and
important business) whereas it was laid in, in the objection, that wicked men
are discouraged from expecting any good from God, by those threatenings that are
so severely bent against them; to this I answer, that all threatenings
whatsoever, that are gone out of the mouth of God against sinful and wicked
men, have no longer power over them, then they continue in their unbelief.
Their power this way is somewhat like that power of censure and excommunication
that was given Paul, concerning which, he speaks thus. 2 Cor. 13. 8. We can do
nothing (by any power given us) against the truth, but for the truth: as if he
should say, whilst you walk orderly, and as becomes the Gospel of Christ
(which is the Word of truth) I have no power, to judge, censure, or cast you
out: but only when you sin against the Gospel, and are a shame and reproach
unto it: then indeed I have a power to stand up for the honor of the Gospel,
and to judge and censure, according to the nature of your sins.

Notwithstanding (as it follows) he was glad, when he was weak, and they
strong, that is, when their lives and ways were such, that he could exercise no
more power over, or against them, then as if he had none at all given him. Such
is the power that Scripture threatenings have against wicked men: they have no
power neither against the truth, but for the truth: whilst men go on in the
contempt of the Gospel, and despise that great salvation which is tendered unto
them in Jesus Christ, these threatenings have power to judge, censure, and to
burn with unquenchable fire, to set men with fears and terrors, as in the
midst of hell: but yet they are glad also, when they are weak, and men are
strong, that is, when men turn unto God by a true Faith, and sound repentance,
in which case their power cease, neither do they judge or condemn them any
longer. So that now such threatenings, are no grounds at all of discouragement
to wicked men from believing or depending on God, no more then the power of the
spiritual sword we spoke of, that was given to Paul and the rest of the
Apostles, for cutting off from Christ, was a ground of discouragement to those
Christians that walked inordinately, from returning to ways of holiness,
before the stroke of it came. Nay, as this power in the Apostles, was so far
from being a discouragement to such men, from walking answerably to the Gospel,
that it was a special encouragement thereunto: in as much as by reason thereof,
they had this recompense and reward added unto their obedience and repentance,
that they escaped the edge of that sword, which wounded the souls of others: so
the threatenings we speak of, that are made out against wicked men in the
Scriptures, are in this respect, rather matter of encouragement then
discourageme^t unto them, for believing on God, because they do increase the
reward of their believing, by this considerable addition; they shall be
delivered thereby out of the danger of those threatenings, which will do
terrible execution upon others, that shall persist in their unbelief.

21. Nay (to go yet one step further) the threatenings we have now under
consideration, are not only matter of encouragement to wicked men, to move
them to believe, and depend on God, but (that which is much more) they impose
the greatest, the deepest, the most absolute and peremptory necessity upon
them, that they are capable of, for believing. They certify the souls and
consciences of men, that there is (as we use to say) no way with them but one,
nothing but the vengeance of eternal fire to be looked for, except they
believe. We have a saying: Ingens telum necessitas: necessity is a great
weapon, and will put men upon, and strengthen men to atchieve and perform many
great enterprises and actions, which without such an advantage, they neither
would have adventured upon, nor had they been able to have effected and brought
to pass.

And I make no question, but that the terror of the threatenings of God, and
the dreadful and utmost necessity they lay upon men to provide for the things
of their peace, have contributed and conduced much to the Faith (and
consequently to the salvation) of many whose rest is now glorious in the
Heavens. Therefore (doubtless) the threatenings of God against wicked persons,
rightly apprehended and considered, are no ways hindrances or discouragments
unto such men, from or about believing or depending on God.

22. But in the sixth and last place (to finish all with the addition of a few
words more) to that branch of the objection, wherein the hope, trust and
dependence of wicked men on God, were said to be rejected by God, from whence
it was argued and concluded, that such had no right to believe or depend on
God, and that it was in vain for them to do it; to this (I say) I answer,
that though there be a kind of trust and dependence on God, which men may
have, and yet miscarry and be rejected (as was granted before) yet is there a
trust and dependence on God also, which will secure the greatest sinner under
Heaven from Death and Condemnation, if it be found with him: As though Simon
Magus believed, and yet was in the gall of bitterness and bands of iniquity
notwithstanding, and so though Judas repented, and went to Hell: yet Thomas
believing, and Simon Peter repenting (besides thousands more with them) were
both saved. For we may distinguish of Faiths, or dependences on God, in respect
of their ends, or issues whereunto they tend, much after the same manner, as
John distinguishes of sin, 1 John 5. 16, 17. There is a sin (says he)
unto death, and there is a sin not unto death. So may we say of Faiths, and
dependings on God: there is a Faith and dependence which is unto life, and
there is a Faith and dependence too which is not unto life; and if the Faith of
wicked men be of this kind, it is no marvel, if their faith and they perish
together, and be both alike rejected by God. That Faith which is required of
men, being yet in their sins, and under the power of darkness, which therefore
they have a sufficient right unto (as has been already proved) did they
address themselves unto God with it, this would strike that great stroke for
their souls, this would make them heirs of that immortal and undefiled
inheritance, and would never be rejected by God: This is that faith or
dependence, which in the act or exercise of it, sanctifies God: and of this
only we have treated in our doctrine hitherto.

Again, there is a Faith, which rather unsanctifieth, polluteth, and profaneth
God, when it is acted upon him: and it is no marvel, if such a faith be not
able to save a man (as James speaks.)

23. It were unseasonable altogether (I conceive) upon this occasion only, to
enter upon a just discussion or examination of all differences between the one
and the other: we have sufficiently (I trust) made good the tenor and
substance of the motive propounded, to quicken and stir you up (and withal
to encourage you to depend upon God) against those intanglements and colors of
fear, that were presented unto you in the objection, and have built you
clearly and strongly upon this foundation, that there is nothing in God,
neither holiness of nature, nor righteousness of works, nor greatness of
Majesty, nor yet any thing in your self, neither sinfulness of nature, nor
sinfulness of life, nor any weakness or unworthiness whatsoever cleaving to
you, that considering the golden scepter of Grace, held out unto you in the
Gospel, with so much freeness, and love, and mercy powered out, needs be the
least discouragement or weakening of hand unto you, from making your dependence,
whole and entire, strong and glorious, upon God. And this was the sum of our
undertakeing.

24. Notwithstanding to salve the longing (it may be) of your desires in a
point of this weight, and near concernment as well to the present, as future
peace of your souls, only until you come at some full fountain of these
waters, where you may quench your thirst thoroughly, I shall be willing to give
you a taste of one maine difference, between that kind of Faith and dependence
on God, which will open the door, and lead you into this blessed Sanctuary
here promised, and that which will leave you without, naked, and exposed to the
wrath of God in every kind. That dependence on God, which is raised in the
soul by the help or means of that ignorance of God, or of the mind and
counsels of God, which is within a man, is a dependence which God will reject,
and with which the creature may perish: as on the contrary, that which either
springs out of a true light of the knowledge of God, or is accompanied and
attended (as it were) in the production or birth of it, with such knowledge, is
that great and sacred dependence, which ingageth the Almighty to his creature,
and carries Heaven and Salvation before it.

This difference is built upon the sure foundations of the Scriptures. This is
life eternal (says our Savior, to his Father, in that solemn Prayer of his,
a little before his death, Joh. 17. 3.) That they know thee, the only true God,
and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. This is life eternal, that is, a
certain means of attaining salvation, or life eternal: it is a figurative
expression (very frequent in Scripture) wherein the effect is put for the cause
or means of such an effect: as Deuteronomy. 13. 5. Because he has spoken apostacy or
revolt, (so it is in the original) that is, because he has spoken that which
may be a cause or means of your revolting from God. So John 3. 19. This is the
condemnation, etc. that is, the means of the condemnation. So again: Romans 14.
20. Destroy not the work of God, that is, take not a course, use not the means
to destroy him. In this figure of speech, Christ is called our peace, that is,
the Author or means of our peace, Ephe. 2. 14. The resurrection. Joh. 11. 25.
The Lord our righteousness. Jere. 23. 6. that is, the Author or cause of our
rising again, and of our righteousness (or justification) besides many like
expressions. Now then if the true knowledge of God, and of Christ (for the one
cannot be known aright without the other) be an unquestionable means of
eternal life, it must be this means, thus, as it produces and works a true
and living Faith in men; according to that which David affirms, Psalm. 9. 10.
They that know thy Name, will trust in thee. Because without such a Faith, or
trusting in God, eternal life is not to be had, or obtained. Mark 16. 16,
etc. Therefore that faith or dependence on God, which arises from such a
knowledge, must needs be the true Faith, which is accompanied with the favor
of God, and with salvation: otherwise such knowledge could not be the means of
either, inasmuch as neither is to be enjoyed without such a Faith.

25. And for those instances and examples (cited from the Scriptures) of some
men's relyings and trustings on God, without acceptance, as Psalm. 18. 41. 42.
Matthew. 7. 22. 26. etc. It were easy to demonstrate, that they were assisted
and strengthened in their raising and production, by the ignorance of God found
in the hearts of those, who are said so to have relied or trusted on him. It is
evident, that those spoken of Psalm. 18. who were there rejected in their
prayer, and consequently in their dependence (such as it was) on God, were men
destitute of the true knowledge of God. For they are said, verse 40. to have
hated David, a dear child, and faithful servant of God. Now the Scripture
teaches expressly, that he that hates his brother, is in darkness, and
walks in darkness, 1 John 2. 11. that is, is in a worse condition then he
thinks, or is aware of, and knows not how to do any thing, to perform any
work or service in a holy and right manner, as he ought.

And again. 1 John 4. 8. He that loves not, knows not God, for God is love,
that is, God truly known, always fills the heart with love toward men. So for
those, Mat. 7. whose souls miscarried under a kind of hope, or trusting and
relying upon God or Christ, as apparent it is, that neither had these any right
knowledge, nor due apprehensions of either. Because it is said, that they were
workers of iniquity, verse 23. and that they heard the words of Christ, and
did them not, verse 26. that is, they lived in known sins. Now concerning
such, the Scripture also speaks plainly, That whosoever sins (willingly,
and against light and knowledge) has not seen him (that is, God) neither has
known him, that is, has not had so much as a clear sight or enterview of him,
much less any settled, experienced, or more profound knowledge of him. The
sight of a man (we know) is but the first degree of the knowledge of him.

26. So that the rule is universally true, that that Faith or dependence on
God, which either arises out of a true knowledge of him, or is accompanied
with such knowledge in its arising, always prospers, and triumphs in its
acceptance: as on the contrary, when men will claim friendship and
acquaintance with God, and will needs depend upon him for favor, out of
ignorant and fond imaginations and persuasions of him, such claims and
dependences are still rejected, and cast out by him. The reason hereof may well
be that which the Apostle delivers, and lays down, Romans 11. 16. as a ground or
principle, upon which God builds many other of the ways of his providence and
dispensations in the world: If the root be holy, so are the branches. As on the
other hand Job reasons, and demands, Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? Job. 14. So if the root of our dependence on God be holy, that is, if
this dependence springs and shoots (as it were) out of righteous thoughts and
apprehensions of God, and of Christ, it cannot but be holy, and so accepted
with him. As on the contrary, if it be any common, unclean, or polluted conceit
or notion of God, that gives the raise and advantage to our trust, or be the
basis and bottom of our dependence on him, it is no marvel if such trust or
dependence be profaned by him, and rejected with disdain and indignation. As
for example: the wicked, of whom David speaks Psalm. 50. 16. is said, verse 21.
to have this conceit or thought of God, that he is altogether such an one as
himself, that is, that he likes and approves those ways and practices of sin,
wherein he was engaged and hardened, as well as himself did. Now if such a
thought or opinion of God, as this, that he should approve of, or any ways
comply with sinners in the evil of their ways, be the reason or ground, or else
gives any assistance and furtherance to our hope and dependence upon him for
favor, protection or deliverance in any kind, how can the light of reason it
self in a man, judge or conceive any other, but that such hope or dependence
should rather turn to the shame and confusion of him that comes unto the Lord
with them, then find the least grace or acceptance with him?

27. This (doubtless) is the case of such Christians and professors in the
Church, as our Savior represents ( Matt. 7. 26.) in his parable or similitude
of the foolish builder, that built upon the sands. He that hears my words,
and does them not, shall be likened unto a foolish builder, which built his
house upon the sand, etc. That hope or expectation of salvation, or favor from
God, which all men whatsoever, professing Christianity, take unto themselves
more or less, is compared to a house wherein a man dwells: because, as such a
house protects and defends a man from the injuries of the weather, as cold,
wind, rain, snow, etc. besides many other inconveniences, which would
otherwise be offensive to his health, and peace, and might endanger his life it
self, so that no man would willingly be in the world without a house over his
head, and he thinks himself poor and miserable indeed, that has none: so does
the hope of finding favor with God, and of obtaining salvation by Christ, arm
and fence the souls and consciences of men, from the spiritual annoyances and
inconveniences of their sins, and of the wrath of God due unto them: they were
not able with any tolerable peace or comfort of their lives, to bear the fiery
and terrible assaults and incursions of the fears of hell and damnation, which
would ever and anon be breaking in upon them, had they not some hope of
salvation, to guard and fence their consciences withal. Therefore there is a
kind of necessity lying upon all men, to build themselves such spiritual
houses as these, that is, to raise some hope and dependence on God, in
themselves: because otherwise their consciences would be too hot for the^, and
their sins, and hell, and the wrath of God together, would torment them
before their time, and give them no rest, neither night nor day. But (says our
Savior, in effect) as he should show himself a very weak and foolish man,
that could build himself a material house to dwell in, upon the sand, which
is a loose matter, and no ways likely to bear the foundation of a building,
especially when stresse of weather comes, when boystrous winds, raging raines,
swelling floods, should at once assault it: So is that man very unwise in his
generation, that builds any hope or dependence on God for protection or
deliverance in any kind, upon any such opinion and persuasion of him, that he
should tolerate and connive at, or any ways approve or countenance such as
shall despise the words of my mouth, that shall only give me the hearing of my
righteous Laws and Commandments in the Gospel, and cast them behind their
backs, when they have done, and walk on their own ways notwithstanding: and
yet (says he) there is a generation of men that will do it, that will build
upon these spiritual sands, these washie, loose, and ungrounded conceits and
apprehensions of God.

28. So again, if the root of a man's hope or dependence on God for life and
salvation, shall be any such opinion of him as this, that he will set my good
works against my evil, my righteousness against my fin, and for the merit of
the one, will pardon the demerit of the other, or that he will justify me, or
accept of me in any other way, or by any other means, then in, and by, and
through Jesus Christ alone, this root being rottenness, the blossom of it (my
hope or dependence on God) shall mount up as dust before the wind (to allude
to the Prophets expression. Esaias. 5. 24.) that is, shall vanish and come to
nothing. To depend upon God upon any lying and false apprehensions of him, is
as if a riotous person, and drunken companion, being in danger of the laws for
some misdemeanour or other, should come to a great man, of a grave, sober, and
religious course of life, after this manner: Sir, I know you are a friend of
good fellows, and wish well to those that will be free and merry among their
cups: I pray stand my friend in such a business: I depend upon your help and
countenance, to be brought off from my trouble, without much loss or shame,
etc. Would not such a motion, and pretended trust and confidence, be
interpreted rather as an abuse, or a disparagement to such a man, and
consequently be utterly rejected by him? so what conceit or apprehension soever
it is, that any man shall take unto himself concerning God, otherwise then
according to truth, and what God has revealed of himself in his word and
works; and shall strengthen and encourage his soul thereby to stay himself, or
to depend upon him, shall rather profane that glorious and fearful Name, the
Lord his God, then any ways honor, or sanctify it, by such a dependence: and
consequently, his dependence and he are like to perish together. For there is
no thought or apprehension that can be framed and fashioned in the mind of a
man concerning God, but will be a profanation of him, excepting only those
that answer the truth of his nature and being, there being nothing wanting in
him, but that which is altogether unworthy of him.

29. If you be yet unsatisfied, and ask yet further how you may certainly and
clearly know, whether your hope and dependence on God, be built upon the right
foundations of the true knowledge, and righteous apprehensions of God, or
whether they be built upon the sandy and deceiveable thoughts of thine own
heart, concerning him: To this I answer, in a word (and so an end of this
business:) If thy hope, trust, and dependence on God, be built upon this rock,
the knowledge of God in Christ, that is, a settled, inward and unfeigned
persuasion or apprehension of God, that he will for his Son Christ's sake
alone, without mediation of any other consideration, qualification, preparation
or motive whatsoever, nay, and against the mediation of any consideration,
qualification, preparation or motive whatsoever, for destruction and death,
will embrace with his love, and confer life and salvation upon all those
without exception and partiality, that shall trust in him, or depend upon him
through Christ, such hope, trust and dependence, are most unquestionably built
upon the best and surest foundations under heaven, and if they knew their own
strength, might laugh at all the tempests, troubles and turmoyles of the world,
yea, the gates of hell, and all the powers of darkness in the face to scorn.

30. It is true, hope and dependence upon God may (I conceive) be lawfully and
safely built upon other foundations then this, I mean upon some other vein,
or stream of this knowledge of God in Christ (besides this maine and
masterstream described) if men be of a spiritual dexterity and exactness, to
make due application of such knowledge, upon such occasions. As for example: if
a man has the testimony of his own conscience, witnessing unto him in the holy
Ghost, that he has for any space of time walked before God, with all
faithfulness and uprightness of heart, without hypocrisy, this (doubtless)
is a sufficient and lawful foundation, whereon to raise a hope and dependence
upon God for salvation, I mean for salvation by Christ, and for his sake, not
for the testimonies sake, nor faithfulness sake, or the like: because God has
promised salvation to such, I mean to those that walk before him in ways of
faithfulness, integrity, etc. and (no question) God may be safely depended
upon for whatsoever he promises, according to the terms and conditions of his
promise. So, for the same reason, if a man truly loves God, or the brethren
(as the scripture speaks) he may hereupon lawfully and safely depend upon God
for salvation, because God has established both the one and the other, for
signs thereof.

31. Again, if I depend upon God for salvation upon this ground, because I am
verily persuaded that God will save me in particular, if through Christ I come
unto him, or depend upon him for it, I make little question but such a
dependence also will stand before God, and draw heaven after it, because the
foundation of it is agreeable to the word of truth. Notwithstanding there are
two maine differences (besides, it may be, many others) between these, and such
like branches, or lesser streams of the knowledge of God in Christ, and that
body (as it were) or maine stream thereof, lately mentioned, in respect of
advantage and commodiousnesse, to raise our hope or dependence on God upon.
First, a man can very hardly (if at all) come at any of these particular
branches of this knowledge, to make foundations of them, of his trust or
dependence upon God, except he first lays hold on the maine body it self. As
for example: he can hardly believe, that either the testimony of his
conscience, witnessing unto him his faithful and upright walking before God,
or that his love of God and of the Brethrren, or that a persuasion of his own
salvation by Christ in particular, or the like, can be any sufficient grounds
for him, to depend upon God for salvation, except he first believes and be
established in this main truth, that God for his Son Christ's sake, without
any other consideration whatsoever, yea and against any other co^sineration
whatsoever, will give life and salvation to all those without exception, that
through Christ shall trust in him. He that sticks or staggers about the
receiving or believing of this truth, doubtless can never be thoroughly
grounded, or strongly built upon those other: because these are as branches
shooting out of that main stock, depending thereon, subordinate and subservient
thereunto. Whereby it is evident, that a man may raise a true hope and
dependence on God for salvation, before he can come at any of those inferior
grounds mentioned to build upon, as either the testimony of his conscience
touching his faithfulness and uprightness before God, or a sense of his
unfeigned love to God or men, or a persuasion of his personal salvation, etc.
namely upon this great foundation of truth, That whosoever through Christ shall
believe on God, shall be saved (which is before a man at all times.) And is it
not wisdom to take the first opportunity we can come at, to build our
dependences upon God?

32. But secondly, a more material and considerable difference is, that those
inferior and subordinate grounds we spoke of, as the conscience of our
uprightness, sense of our love, persuasion of personal salvation, and the
like (upon which especially, if not only, most men labor, as it were, in the
fire, to build and settle their hope and dependence on God for salvation) are
very hard to be distinctly, clearly, and satisfyingly discerned and judged of:
they are very few that can or dare conclude with any confidence, that their
uprightness is an uprightnes of that kind of perfection, which God has sealed
for an infallible pledge or sign of salvation to ensue. And so for the love of
God, and of the children of God: how rare a thing is it, to find either a man
or woman, so fully satisfied touching the truth of such an affection in
themselves, that they are able to build upon it a quiet and composed hope of
salvation? And even of those that seem to build with most peace and confidence
this way; are there not some suspected (and that happily not without just
cause) by others? And the reason why these and such like grounds of hope, and
depending upon God, are so tickle and slippery, so obnoxious to jealousies,
doubtings and fears, is because though the rule be as certainly true here, as
in the other (it being every whit as true, that he that is upright before God,
or that truly loves God, shall be saved, as it is, that he shall be saved,
who truly believes, that God for Christ's sake will save all those, that by him
come unto him) yet the application of it is much more difficult and uncertain.
And the reason of this is: because to the due application of such rules
(without which no hope, or dependence on God can with safety be built upon
them) there is required a clear and satisfying knowledge of more particulars
(yea, and of some things more intricate and obscure) then is to the application
of that other. As for example; Before I can build any settled and stedy
dependence upon God for salvation, upon this ground (or rule) that I truly love
the Brethren (that is, the Saints and servants of God) I must be clearly
resolved, and secured in my self, touching these 3. things; First, that this
is the undoubted Word and Truth of God, which cannot deceive me, That whosoever
loves the Brethren, shall be saved; Secondly, I must be secured in my self,
that my belief of this truth, as being the undoubted word of God, is sound and
strong, and such as cannot be shaken; Thirdly, I must likewise be clear and
fully satisfied in my self, that my love to the Brethren is true, genuine,
natural, and of that very kind (and none other) which God has sanctified for
an evidence and seal of salvation, wherein how difficult a thing it is (even
above measure) to gain any such satisfaction, so clear and absolute, but that
the conscience will repine and mutter at (more or less) has been already
intimated, and from the experience of more then many thousands, may be
concluded. And yet if I be wavering or doubtful in any of these particulars, I
cannot build upon this ground, with any confidence or peace. But to build upon
that maine ground mentioned, that whosoever believes in God through Christ,
shall be saved (and that with the richest and deepest assurance) satisfaction
in these two things only will abundantly suffice. First, that this is the
unquestionable truth of God, that whosoever believes in him through Christ,
shall be saved. Secondly, that my knowledge or belief of this truth
accordingly, is substantial and sound. He that has a well grounded security
in himself touching these two particulars only, may safely build unto himself
a hope and dependence upon God, for salvation. For what should hinder him? or
whereof can he be afraid? He that certainly knows, that a man is justified
(and consequently saved) by the faith of Jesus Christ, cannot but believe in
Jesus Christ, that he may be justified (and so saved) Gal. 2. 16. Neither can
he (at least with any reason) doubt more of his believing, then of his
knowledge: nor of his justification (or salvation) more, then of either. So
that without controversy, the great and maine promise of the Gospel, that
whosoever believes on Jesus Christ (or on God through Christ) shall be saved,
is both a readier and cleerer, and a more satisfying foundation for any man
that shall consider the just importance thereof, to build his hope or
dependence on God for salvation, then any other ground or foundation
whatsoever. But this is a point wherein I have enlarged my self unto you
otherwise: and willing I am, to discharge both you and my self, you from
hearing, and my self from speaking more of this subject for the present, upon
the warrant of those meditations.

FINIS.
Septem. 28. 1640.
Imprimatur,

THO. WYKES.


