(...) TO THE WORSHIPFVLL AND MUCH HONORED JOHN PYMME Esquire,
SIR,
IT is no part of my design in this Dedication, by the reflection of smooth
language, to show you yourselfe in your glory, or to take the work of admiring
your worth, out of the hands of all the world, who are now very intent, and
busy at it. If honor and approbation will pay debts, the Nation (I conceive)
is not much behind with you, for all the service you have done it: for (as
far as I understand) you have scarce enemies enough, to deliver you out of
the hand of that curse of our Savior, Woe be to you when all men speak well of
you, Luke 6. 26. I have no authority to question the singleness, and
uprightness of your heart, in those notable and noble engagements, that are
upon you: yet if you will plead your self to do it, the security attending
thereon, will bear the charges. When credit and conscience are yoked, and draw
the Chariot together, Conscience (ofttimes) proves dull, and heavy in the
work, and if not sometimes remembered with the goade, and put on, will suffer
credit to draw all on the one side, and so lay her fellow on the wheel. It
argues an high, and excellent frame of spirit where a man can follow with
intensnesse of mind, things that be of good report, and yet not be over-acted
with the goodness of the report; but fetch the strength of that inspiration,
by which he is carried on in his motion, from the goodness of him that has
commanded it. The more God is interessed in our intentions, the more he is like
to interest himself in our executions. If we make him a stranger in the
proposition of our ends, he takes no pleasure to make himself known unto us
in our prosecutions, except it be by way of opposition, and rising up against
us. The royal method in great actions, to break all difficulties, and bar
off discouragements in sunder, as with a rod of iron, is to dig out of our
selves as much of our earth, that is, as much of our selves as we can come at,
and fill up the pit, or empty place, with God and zeal for his glory. The
consecration of an enterprise is sovereign against abortion, whereas to work
for a man's self alone, is little less, being interpreted, than to betray his
action, and to give security to his enemies, that God shall not build with him,
nor prosper him in his way: and consequently, that his labor in building shall
be in vain.

The least offensive (I am sure) and yet withal, (with serious and inside men)
as weighty a testimony (as I conceive) as can be given to your wisdom, is to
speak thus in the plain dialect of the ancient simplicity unto you, and not
to spare you, as far as the truth may do you good. Neither do I conceive,
wherein any man's worth or wisdom can do him better service, than by
strengthening others to lay on himself to bear greater weights of this
treasure, than men of an under-sufficiencie are able to stand under.

The Disciples themselves, were great loosers (for the time) by their
weakness, in this kind; they wanted the sweet company, and converse of many
high and important apprehensions, which (doubtless) had bin equal too (if not
much better then) the society of so many Angels, because in respect of the
present infirmity of their spirits, they were as unable to bear the strength
of their influence and working, as the frailty of the flesh and blood is, to
abide the glory and presence of those Ambassadors of heaven. Their gracious,
and great Lord and Master himself, plainly professed this unto them: I have
many things (says he) to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now, Joh. 16.
12. And had they not out grown this weakness afterward, by means of that
golden shower from heaven, wherein they were rained upon with the Holy Ghost,
and with power, they had been kept fasting from the feast of those fat things
(whatsoever they were), all the days of their lives.

The reason why the world (so generally) drinks old wine (in our Saviors
Metaphor) which is of a lower and flatter taste, is, because their vessels are
not new, and strong: and therefore not fit to have new wine (which is of a
stronger, and more lively, of a more stirring, working, and provoking spirit)
put into them for fear of breaking. We have but the light of the Moon
instead of the light of the Sun, or at most, but the light of the Sun,
instead of the sevenfold light of seven days, promised Esa. 30. 26. shining to
us, because we are tender eyed, and inconsiderately afraid, lest an excellency
of knowledge should undo us.

Not to wrong (in the least measure) the rights of Heaven in point of
thankfulness, due from us, nor to quench the least spark of the joy of our
congratulations: for the blessing of knowledge powered out unto us so
abundantly, above the line and measure of former ages, certain it is, that
truths of highest importance, and which should join Heaven and Earth nearer
together, and heal a great part of that deplorable distance, which yet lies
between men and Angels, and so advance and quicken the spiritual intercourse,
and commerce between the two worlds, are little stirring in the world. One
maine reason whereof is, because, as the Disciples of Christ, when they saw
their dearest Lord and Master coming toward them upon the water, were sore
afraid, and cried out, supposing he had been a spirit, that had appeared as an
executioner of present death upon them, who yet was the glory and crown of
their security: so many in the world (no worse affected neither, to the truth,
in general, than they were to Christ) cry out, as men out of measure
troubled, at the first glimmering, and appearing of some truths unto them, as
if they were the spirits of Devils coming upon the world, for the spoil and
ruin of the precious souls of men; whereas, were they capable of their
inspiration, and either did, or were but inwardly willing to know of what
spirit they were, they could not but acknowledge and confess, that they were
of the dearest, and deepest, and sweetest confederacy with Heaven. It was
Austines complaint long since: Nonnulli intelligentes citius volunt exagitare,
quod non intelligunt, quam quaerere, ut intelligant, and non fiunt humiles
inquisitores, sed superbi calumniatores, Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 72. I forbear to
make English of this Latin: because the party chiefly interessed, are (for the
most part) men of the language.

But Sir, I consider the weight and importunity of your present employments, I
know you are (with your worthy Assistants) about a great and laborious cure,
(the Lord prosper it under your hands) and far be it from me to desire, that
this should suffer in the least, through any occasion of mine. I had not
presumed thus far, but that this little piece had stuck in the birth some
years together, and was well near stifled, found now a way into the world, by
the providence of God, and by the benign aspect, and influence of that happy
constellation, wherein your self shine as a star, in much glory. And the
subject of it being of that near affinity and sympathy with the sovereign
piece of that great work you have in hand, the rescue, and advancement of the
Gospel, I should (I conceive) have turned my back upon that providence which
looked me in the face, if I should not have presented it to some of those
Worthies, whom God has anointed with wisdom, grace, and power, as for the
bringing of many greater, and weightier things to pass, so (the event bearing
witness) for the helping forth of it also into the world.

In which great and honorable assembly, I knew not one, whom rather to cast
mine eye for this dedication, than on your self, who, as you are known to the
whole Nation, by your worth and zeal, for the things both of God and Men, so
have you been known to my self, heretofore, by some more particular
acquaintance: the discontinuance and decrease whereof, I impute only to mine
own unworthiness, and negligence in addressing my self unto you.

I do not in these meditations put you upon any thing (in the maine) but
wherein you have prevented my motion, and are already home-engaged: I know you
are in for the Gospel, with all your heart, and with all your soul, and if
with all these, with all whatsoever besides. So that you might (in that
respect) expostulate with me the impertinencie of this my address unto you,
in those, or such like terms, (...). What need you quicken him that makes
haste? Yet make I no question, but that of your self you know, how fairly to
salve the seasonablenesse, and usefulness here of notwithstanding: In which
regard, an apology would prove the impertinency, not the Dedication. I verilly
believe, that P^^^ never met with Christians so abundant in the work of the
Lord, but still he exhorted them to a bound ye more.

Besides, though I cannot say with the confidence of an intuitive knowledge,
that you meet with any secret fears, discouragements, conflicts of doubtful
thoughts, and reasonings with your self in the way of that contention for the
truth, which now you sustain: yet can I hardly believe, but that sometimes you
feel the activenesse of the powers of darkness against you, and find some
insinuations, and grudgings, (if not stronger, and sharper fits) of fears
touching the success, and issue of your great undertakings. In which respect,
I conceive, it should not be unseasonable altogether, to administer unto you,
of those excellent comfortations and strengthenings of heaven, which the Holy
Ghost has treasured up in the Scriptures, for such times, and occasions
(especially) as these. The Lord Jesus Christ himself, being in deep conflict,
was refreshed by the presence of an Angel from Heaven comforting him, Luke 23.
43. The consolations of the spirit in the Word of God, administered by a hand
consecrated thereunto, have sometimes been little inferior in the glory of
their effects, to those of Angelical dispensation.

I dare not undertake for any sapientiall advantage you are like to gain for
the Faith, by the perusal of these few pages: I know if there be any to be
gotten, you will not overlooke it. Yet give me leave to say this: that the
best and wisest men's thoughts, apprehensions, purposes, ends, intentions in
their best actions, will never lie right, and straight in their bowels, nor
with that ease and intimate satisfaction to their own spirits, except they be
marshalled, ranged, and composed by the hand of the spirit of God, stretched
out from the Scriptures.

The God of grace and glory, who in your self, together with that worthy
Senate of joint consultations with you, has opened a door of hope to a Land
and People, brought very low, and has begun by your mouths to breath upon the
dry bones, so that there is some noise and shaking heard already, bring them
together, bone to his bone, and flesh upon them also, in due time, and cover
them with a skin, and put a spirit of life into them, that they may live: and
recompense abundantly into their bosom, the labors and travells, and
faithfulness of those, whose hearts, and hands have been, and still are
lifted up to the work, that tasting the presence, and mighty hand of God with
them, they may rejoice as strong men to run the remainder of their race, and
not faint or wax weary; till the great breach be repaired, till the throne,
and kingdom of Jesus Christ be lifted up on high, above the rage, power, and
contradictions of those, that seek to lay the glory of it in the dust; till
judgment run down like water, and righteousness as a mighty stream, to
wash; and carry away all the filth; and noisomeness of the Land, till the
hearts, and mouths of all those who love the peace, and prosperity of the
Nation, be filled with joy, and gladness, and the faces of all that are
enemies unto it, with shame, and confusion. And for your self, your personal
honor, peace, and safety, you have an interrest in your self (which sleeps
not) in the prayers of

Coleman-streete December. the 4. 1640. Your Worships home-devoted in the things
of Jesus Christ L. G.

TO THE READER
GOod Reader, it was a saying of Erasmus concerning Luther, that poor Luther
made many rich. His meaning seems to have been, that many were raised to
great places of promotion and dignity in the Church, and otherwise highly
rewarded for standing up in the Popes cause and quarrel against him. The
saying is capable of another interpretation also, somewhat more spiritual and
remote, and may have this importance; that many taking part with, that, poor
servant of God, who was fiercely assaulted on every side, and presented again
and again to death and hell, by the sworn sides men of the Pope, by this
service commended themselves with terms of highest acceptance unto God, and
so were enriched with abundance of his grace and favor. The Gospel which in
this respect may be called poor likewise; but the truth, glory, and power of
it, are still suppressed and trampled on, by that great and strong party, the
Devil has in the world, (may in both senses be) said to make many rich; but
in the latter, would make many more rich then it does, if their hearts would
serve them, to be engaged in so honorable a service, as to consecrate
themselves, and rise up in the defense of it.

The great men of the earth, who desire to ride on the world, as on a horse (as
God is said to ride upon the Heavens) and to rule, though not with God, but by
themselves, yet with an opinion of ruling with God, seldom or never show
themselves more magnificent and bountiful in rewarding, never give grater
wages to any workmen they employ, then unto those that are zealous, active, and
dextrous, to accommodate the Gospel unto them; and to slay the hatred and
enmity that burns between the truth and power thereof, and their ways and
practices with the fairest and most plausible colors of love and peace.

It is Peter's observation concerning Teachers, that such as have their hearts
exercised with covetousness, (and therefore are best seen in the art and
method of fetching in the world apace unto them) still forsake the right way of
the Gospel (because there is little good to be done in that way) for such a
purpose: the world will seldom give much for truth, and go astray after the
way of Balaam, the son of Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness. 2.
Pet. 2. 14. 15. What was Balaams work for the doing whereof, he should have
been so richly and royally paid? It was only the cursing the people and
children of God with their ways and courses, and consequently the justifying
and blessing of Balack and his people in their proceedings against them. And
what was this (in effect) but to undertake to reconcile Christ and Belial: and
to divide Christ in, or against himself? Balack and his rout must be
righteous and just men, and approved of God: Moses and his company must be
children of the curse, enemies of God, and hated of him. I believe the better
half of the Popes Kingdom, two thirds of the triple crown would be given to
any man, that shall undertake (and quit himself like a man by a semblable
performance) to overthrow the State, government, doctrines, practices of all
the reformed Churches by the Scriptures; but by the same labor he shall
compound and reconcile the rule, government, doctrines, and practices of the
Sea of Rome, with the Gospel.

We know the base descent and pedigree of far, the greatest part of
promotions and preferments in the world: they are begotten by the base desire
of an earthly greatness, upon an earthly greatness, vainly desirous of being
thought to be of the house and lineage of goodness. Thus (in one sense) the
poor oppressed and persecuted Gospel, makes many rich in the world.

Again, the same Gospel, notwithstanding the poverty of it (nay rather
because of such poverty) makes many rich (and sad is the consideration, that
it makes not many more) in a better way. As the world gives no greater wages,
of such a treasure as it has for any work, then for the pulling down the
truth and power of the Gospel where it rises up against them. So neither does
God open his hand wider in his way of bounty, to any service, then to the
faithfulness of those that will labor to build them up again, and try it
out by a deep and solemn contestation with the world, whether light or
darkness shall rule, whether God or Baal shall be he. When our Savior
promises a Prophets reward, to him that receives a Prophet, in the name of a
Prophet (doubtless) he promises more then bare measure, even that good
measure (which he speaks of in another case, heaped up, pressed down, shaken
together, and running over. Now the service or work of a Prophet; is, as to
hold forth the word of righteousness to the world; so (in special manner) to
hold fast the same word, to convince the gainesayers, Tit. 1. 9. and not to
suffer the world to destroy, elude, or make void any part or parcel of it. So
Paul upon the thought and mention of that good fight he had fought, whereby
he had kept the Faith (as he says) viz. against the subtle and outrageous
malice of the Devil, wherewith he had inspired his Angels in the world, to
make all the havocke and spoil they could of Evangelicall truth, was filled
with the hope and confidence of that his crown of righteousness, which (he
said) was laid up for him, and should be given him by the righteous Judge at
that day 2. Tim. 4. 7. 8.

So that if thou desire to make something of nothing, J mean, to make the
best earnings of thy times and days on earth (which were they not capable of a
spiritual improvement, were but as light as vanity, as little as nothing)
there is no labor thou can undergo, no course thou can run, no service
thou can perform, either to God or men, like unto this, to stand up in thy
might for the Gospel, and to set thy foot by it, and so come men, come Devils,
come friends, come foes against it, come honor, come dishonor, come liberty,
come prison, come life, come death, come Heaven, come Hell, to stand to the
defense of it to the last hair of thy head. It is a sign, that a man knows
not to what purpose he was borne into the world, that will suffer the Gospel to
receive a wound by him, or die before him.

And being prevented with such an opportunity and season as is now given down
from heaven unto us, even above our expectations, and commensurable with our
desires, for contending for the Gospel, not to attempt the moving and removing
of every stone which God has not fastened, be it never so hot or heavy, not
to do, not to suffer, not to speak not to pray, not to cry, both unto God and
men, not to give, not to lend, not to ride, not to run, not to watch, not to
study, not to continue, not to execute, whatsoever the peace and safety
thereof shall require, and to profess that we love not, we regard not, we
desire not the Gospel, are but expressions of one and the same interpretation.

Only J must crave leave to touch thy conscience, it shall be gently, with
one caveat about thy contending; and then the discourse it self take it thee,
and make thee a soldier in this warfare. When thou contendest for the Gospel,
let it not be grievous unto thee to look very narrowly, and to consider seven
times over, that thou contendest for nothing of thine own, for nothing of men,
instead of the Gospel, and matter of Faith. It is a thing not to be passed
over in our thoughts without much sadness and sorrow, that there is not one of
many that takes hold of shield and buckler for the truth, that stands forth
with zeal to plead the cause of the Gospel, but suffers this dead fly to lie
putrefying in this box of so precious an ointment; he is not careful to
separate the vile from the precious, but takes his own and other men's
opinions, into part and fellowship of the same defense, with that which is
Faith and Gospel indeed. Great pity it is that darkness should share in the
privileges of light, or that error and truth should be joined together in the
same protection.

I easily apprehend how cutting and painful it is to flesh and blood, to see
those opinions which were long since begotten and bred within them, and have
for many years been tenderly nursed and cherished in their bosoms; yea, and
(happly) have been their glory and reputation, in the world; yea, and
(perhaps, that which is yet more) part of their comfort and confidence in God,
to see these (J say) cast out upon the dunghill, and reputed as good for
nothing, but with salt has lost the savor, to be trodden under foot by men;
cannot but be as grievous in the eyes of men, as it was to Abraham to cast his
son Ismael with Agar his Mother out of doors. Genesis 21. 11. Our Savior that
perfectly knew the ways of the hearts and spirits of men, put his finger upon
this sore, in that passage, Luke 5. 39. No man having drunk old wine, straight
way desires new: for he says, the old is better. Men's opinions and thoughts,
with their semblable practices, in matter of Religion, may well be compared to
wine, because they are the great cheerers of their souls and consciences. And
our Savior affirming, that men that have drunk old wine, seldom, or never
love to change their diet suddenly; seems to imply these two things, (besides
what lies in the plain superficies of the letter.)

First, that men that never drank old wine, that is, that were never
principled nor grounded in any way of Religion at all, as that never were
engaged or interressed in their judgments touching any particular controversy
in Religion, may sooner be brought to drink new, i. e. may with less
reluctation and trouble with less reasoning and disputing, and (for the most
part) with less shame and sorrow be persuaded to embrace and profess the
truth, then those that have been built up and comforted in a false way of
Religion, and been fast tied to the wrong end of a controverted point, by
their credits and reputations in the world. Jn which respect that saying of
Epiphanius takes place: (...). A man had better believe nothing then that which
is contray to the truth.

Secondly, that many, who are for a time, extremely opposite and averse, from
entertaining better thoughts and opinions in things appertaining unto God, then
their own are, because of the newness and strangeness of them, may yet in
time, after they have conversed a while with them, and looked them in the face
again and again be brought to relent; yea, and espouse them, and open the
bosom of their affections, judgments and consciences unto them, with joy and
gladness. But this by the way.

My advise therefore (for the present) is only this; that when thou risest up,
as a man of zeal and courage, to plead the cause of the Gospel, in any kind
against any enemy thereof, thou show thy self a man of wisdom and
judgment also; making a difference in thy zeal, between things that differ
(in their nature) as much as light and darkness, as Heaven and Earth. Take
heed of binding up, hay, stubble, and wood, in the same bundle of defense,
with silver, Gold, and precious stones. And know this, that as the Apostle
speaks of a knowledge amongst professors in his days, that was falsely so
called, 1. Tim. 6. 20. it had the name, but not the nature, worth, and
substance of knowledge: So has it been found in all ages, that where ever the
body and substance of the Gospel has come, it has in time, still gathered
much dross and refuse, and loose matter about it; and that not only by the
malice of enemies, but by the weakness and injudiciousnesse of the best
friends of it, which has still been counted treasure too, and gone under the
name of the Gospel, as well as the truth it self.

But I must not now prosecute this caution any further, I fear J have
over-prefaced my discourse already. Jf I have transgressed the rule of
discretion, J will be sure to observe the rule of charity (in the close) and
cordially pray for the building up in the knowledge of the only true God, and
him whom he has sent, Jesus Christ by the reading of this and all other
pieces, consecrated to that high and glorious service.

Thine in all thou desire in the Lord. I. G.
Coleman-streete 1640.
THE CHRISTIANS ENGAGEMENT for the Gospel.
Jude verse 3. That you should earnestly contend for the Faith which was once
delivered unto the Saints.


CHAP. I.
The scope and coherence together with the sense and meaning of the words
cleared, and the Doctrine to be handled, raised, and propounded.
1 AS David speaks to the security, comfort, and joy of Israel (the Church
of God) Behold, he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep: Psalm.
121. 4. So on the other hand may it also be said, for the awaking of Israel
himself, (that he may neither slumber nor sleep, either more or otherwise
then may stand with his safety) that he that seeks the destruction of
Israel, neither does he either slumber or sleep: your adversary the Devil
(says Saint Peter) what? sits still, or sleeps? no: but like a roaring
Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may dovoure. He cannot come at all to
devour them: some keep themselves, that the evil one touches them not, (as
Saint John speaks) they have an eye upon him, as well as he upon them, they
carefully avoid all occasions of evil: which are as it were, medium tactus to
the Devil: means without which the Devil can hardly come to touch any man,
in this kind, or to fasten either pawe or teeth upon him; The Lion though he
rages and roareth never so terribly, cannot come to prey upon all the beasts
in the wilderness.

2.
2. Now, because Satan would not willingly run thus up and down for his
living, to pick out here a man and there a man, to devour or prey upon. He
counts this but small gain, and little better then loss of time, an
allowance altogether unproportionable to the vastness of his devouring
greediness, he therefore spreads his nets to take whole companies and
congregations of souls at once; to destroy men by whole Towns, Cities,
Nations, and Kingdoms.

. 3.
3. To bring to pass a design of this nature, a project of such an accursed
and dismal consequence as this: there is no way more direct and compendious,
then to procure the fountains of living waters; of which all jointly together
drink: or the bread of life upon which all feed, to be poisoned, to convey
death into the pot: this is a way of quick dispatch with the poor souls of
men, if he can procure such a project as this, to be advanced in any part of
the world, where there is any necessity or occasion for him to desire to do
it; I mean where God has a Church, or where truth of religion is planted. He
needs not now run up and down, seeking whom, or which man he may devour; he
may sit still and devour whole multitudes at once, without seeking further for
them. If the waters be poisoned, the Fisherman needs not be careful of his
bait, how he may deceive the fish, they will come to his hands alone, and lie
dead upon the top of the waters, he may take them up as he please.

. 4.
4. When in any place the truth of God is universally tainted with pernicious
and damnable errors, the souls of men are there unto Satan, as the Fig
trees with their first ripe Figs ( Nahum the 3. 12.) if they be shaken they
will fall into the mouth of the eater: little tempting will serve to effect the
ruin and destruction of the souls of those men, that have no better, no more
wholesome nourishment wherewith to be fed, then either the Doctrines of Devils,
our traditions of men. The Apostles of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ even in their days discovered Satan close at his work, laboring by
his Agents and Factors to undermine the spiritual peace and salvation of the
Churches of God, by corrupting those wholesome streams of saving knowledge,
which in plentiful manner issued forth from the Sanctuary, from Jesus Christ
in the flesh, into the world; And accordingly their care was both to withstand
him themselves, for their times with all their power, and also to leav a deep
and weighty charge behind them upon all Churches to beware of so dangerous an
enemy, especially in so dangerous a Machination and attempt.

. 5.
5. This very thing seems to be the full and adequate motive that moved this
Apostle Jude to frame and address this Epistle to all Christians wherein he
might exhort and quicken them to be very careful to preserve the word of
their peace and salvation, (yea, indeed of the peace and salvation of the
world) to preserve it in the glorious purity of it, that so it might continue
a word of salvation, and be as able at the last, as it was at the first, to
save all their souls:) or as he does express himself in the words of the
text. That they would earnestly contend for the Faith that was once delivered
unto the Saints.

. 6.
6. For the meaning of which words (to dispatch that very briefly) I shall (for
the present) only need to show you, first, what I conceive to be meant by
Faith; (what the earnest contending for the faith here spoken of means, we
shall see afterward:) and secondly, what the meaning and weight of that latter
clause is ( which was once delivered to the Saints.)

For the word Faith, it is a term the holy Ghost uses for many purposes, and
in diverse significations; only two I find pretenders for this place.

First, by Faith some understand that grace or habit of faith by which these
men were justified, which indeed is the most common and proper acception. And
thus the meaning would be, that Christians should earnestly contend, to
maintain and make good that precious grace, wrought in the heart, upon which
their eternal peace and safety depends against all that may endanger the life
and power of it.

. 7.
7. Secondly, this word Faith is often by a figurative expression, taken for
the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, by which the grace or habit of faith is wrought
in men, in an usual form of speech, wherein the better to express the
efficacy and virtue of the cause; we term it by the name of the effect it
self which it produces; especially when the effect is great and glorious, and
has a special dependence upon such a cause: so that without it, it could not
be produced. This is an emphaticall speech to commend the excellency of the
virtue of such a cause. As if a Physician should come to a sick man, and bring
his receipt in his hand, and showing it to the Patient, should say this to him;
here is your recovery, here is life and health for you. This kind of speaking
is the highest expression of the virtue and efficacy of that which he
administreth: so we find that the holy Ghost to commend the excellent power of
the Scriptures, or word of God, very usually calls them by some or other, of the
names of those glorious and blessed effects which they produce, and raise in
the hearts of men; and whereby they become of infinite advantage to the world.
Thus John 4. 22. the word of God is called by our Savior, salvation: for
salvation is of the Jews, that is, the word of God, (by which the salvation of
the world is effected) is from the Jews; as Paul says, to them were committed
the Oracles of God. So Heb. 2. 2. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great
salvation, that is, so great means of salvation. So Solomon. Prove. 4. 13.
commends wisdom to men thus: keep her, for she is thy life, that is, the
means by which thou must live. Thus Moses concerning the Doctrine that he had
delivered, to the people from God, told them that it was not a vain word
concerning them; but that it was their life: that is the only means to
prolong the days of their peace, Deuteronomy. 32. 47. and so we find the glorious
Gospel, or Doctrine of Jesus Christ, often expressed by this great and
excellent effect of it (says:) thus Gall. 1. 22. He who persecuted us in time
past, now preaches the faith, that is, the Gospel or Doctrine of faith which
he destroyed. So again (to name no more places) in that of Paul. Phil. 1. 27.
a place of very near affinity with this in the text; that ye continue in one
spirit, in one mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel: or rather
(as the original has it) ((...)) striving together with the faith, that is,
with the Doctrine of the Gospel; for this Gospel it self strives and quarrels
with the world, and Paul would have the Philippians to join with it; and to
side with it and assist it against the world, that seeks the destruction and
subversion of it.

. 8.
8. I find the former signification of the word preferred by some expositors:
but there are these reasons lie strong against it (which also make way for, and
confirm the later) first from the text it self.

First, in the beginning of the verse, he faith he would write unto them
about the common salvation: now the particular habitual faith of men is only
about their own private salvation: my contending to preserve my particular
grace, is little or nothing concerning the general salvation of the Church.
But my contending for the maintenance of the truth of the Gospel is.

Secondly, in the later clause of the verse, it is said; that this faith which
they are exhorted earnestly to strive for, was once given, or, as the word in
the original gives it, ((...)) delivered unto the Saints. Now justifying
faith in no propriety of speech can be said to be delivered to the Saints;
such faith indeed may be said to be the gift of God ((...)) but never ((...))
Ephesians. 2. 8
a thing delivered to the Saints; neither in any congruity of speech could be.

Thirdly, Phil. 1. 27.
this sense is most agreeable with other Scriptures, Gal. 1. 22.
that speak after the same manner; whereas the other sense that contendeth for
justifying faith, can hardly be paralleld.

. 9.
9. The other clause follows, which was once delivered to the Saints. I
conceive these words are added in the clause of the exhortation, as a reason or
motive to press the exhortation by; therefore he would have them contend for
the faith, for the truth of the Gospel, the Doctrine of salvation; because this
Doctrine was, or has been once delivered to the Saints. That is, because God
of his infinite mercy and compassion to men, did once by special revelation
convey the same to holy men, beloved of God, chosen for that purpose, whom he
made feoffees in trust for their times, to convey it safe to their posterity;
that so it might pass from generation to generation amongst the Saints, in the
Church of God to the worlds end: the present generation being still bound by
the same bonds (that the first Immediate receivers of it from God were) to
preserve it pure and entire from all corruptions, and so to be transmitted as
a precious inheritance to succeeding generations.

. 10.
10. That particle ((...), once) may admit a double signification, and it
carries a full emphasis with it both ways. There is not any loss of the maine
scope of the holy Ghost, whether way we take it.

First, the more usual and familiar meaning of the word is; by once, to
understand, but one time in opposition to the word often, or more then once;
and thus the weight of the motive will be, as if he had said, you must
therefore contend for the Faith, for this faith has been once given to the
Saints by God, and will be no more; namely, by any such special and immediate
revelation: therefore, now you have the words of eternal life, it stands you
in hand with all your might to keep them; because, if you suffer them to be
taken from you; there are no more Christ's, no more sons of God, to bring them
down again from heaven; out of the bosom of the Father to the world. or,

Secondly, the word once signifies as much as thoroughly, perfectly, to purpose,
sufficiently, etc As where it is said Christ dyed once for sin, the full and
proper meaning of the place, is not that Christ died one time for sin, that
comes off but (coldly) but he died once to sin; that is, he died to
purpose; his death was enough, and enough for the abolishing of sin for ever.
Number. 13. 30.
Romans 6. 10. Judge. 16. 28.
And so often in the Scripture elsewhere, Psalm. 74 6
if we rather choose this signification of the word; the meaning will fall
thus: you ought therefore to contend for the faith, seeing it was once
delivered, that is, fully and perfectly; yea, and peremptorily delivered by God
unto the Saints: so that he meant not to deliver it the second time. As if he
had said to the Saints in the delivery of it, look to it, there is the word of
your peace and eternal life: there it is complete and perfect, I mean to make
no more work of revealing it again unto you: if you suffer it to perish, or
to be taken from you; and therefore (faith Jude) it stands you in hand to hold
it fast, though it cost you blows: both significations I conceive would be put
together, to give full weight to the place.

. 11.
11. The words thus opened, 2. things in general are to be observed. First, an
exhortation. Secondly, a motive seconding the exhortation.

The exhortation in the first words: That you contend for the Faith, the motive
in the later, (which was once delivered unto the Saints.)

In the exhortation we have these particulars:

First, the parties exhorted; you Christians, believers: Secondly, the duty it
self whereunto they are exhorted; that is, to contend, or strive: Thirdly, the
manner how to strive earnestly: Fourthly, and lastly, the possession (as it
were) or matter of consequence, about which they are to strive, the Faith: In
the later the motive pressing the exhortation. 2. Particulars likewise. First,
the Author of that precious treasure for which they were so earnestly to
contend? who is not here expressed, because this is readily understood, namely
God himself. It was God by whom this Faith was given or delivered. Secondly,
the delivery or making over of this treasure from the Author or first possessor
of it, in the word ((...)) was given and delivered. Thirdly, the parties to
whom this conveyance was made, or that were infeoffed, the Saints. Fourthly,
and lastly, the special provisoe, or Item in the conveyance, or delivery in
the word once, it was so fully and perfectly delivered, that it never needed
more (nor indeed ever should) be delivered again in any such manner.

. 12.
12. These particulars are sufficient to multiply points of observation; but
because we have leisure now to prosecute but some one point (at the most) I
therefore put those of the first General into one, and the consent and
harmony of divine truth which they make up together, is this?

The Doctrine.
That it is a special and weighty duty lying upon all Christians whatsoever,
to stand for the truth of the Gospel to the uttermost of their power.

Remissenes and indifferency will be better borne at our hands, in other
matters of duty, rather than in this; if the truth of God be invaded, or set
upon by the enemies of truth; every man in his rank and order must come forth
to help the Lord against the mighty, against the Prince of darkness, who
labors to turn this great truth of God into a lie (And will turn it if he be
let alone,) and out of this light of the Gospel, draw his own darkness, if
he be not withstood by men of wisdom, and resolution.

CAP. II.
The method of the discourse briefly propounded, with some discovery of the
enemies of the truth, who occasion the maine necessity of contending first.
. 1.
FOr the managing of this point to your best edification, we shall first show
you what the occasion of this general muster of Christians throughout the
world, is; or what enemies they are that seek to oppose and destroy this
truth, what it is that imposes upon Christians this great necessity of
contending for it. Secondly, for more security, and fuller evidence of the
Doctrine; That Christians must at any hand contend for this Faith, we may call
in more witnesses from the Scriptures, to speak to the point. Thirdly, some
reasons and grounds would be considered, which will be as so many motives to
persuade, and press the duty upon us. Fourthly, we may consider the manner
of this contention, and show by what weapons this warrefare is to be achieved
and performed. Fifthly, and lastly, conclude with some words of application.

. 2.
2, For the first, the enemies of the Faith (in this sense) or Doctrine of our
salvation, in general are two. First, Satan. Secondly, wicked men. First,
Satan he is an old adversary to the truth of God, as God is to him; These two
are contrary one to another, like Ephraim and Mannasse, Ephraim against
Mannasse, and Mannasse against Ephraim; so Gospel is against Satan, and Satan
against Gospel. Satan he goes about seeking whom he may devour; and the
Gospel that goes about seeking whom it may save and rescue out of his hand;
the Gospel seeks to destroy Satan indeed, but no others, except such as are
willing to be destroyed: and as Solomon says, love death, Prove. 8. and this
destroying which Satan fears from the Gospel, is the true fountain of that
implacable enmity he bears against it: he knows except he can some ways
destroy it, it will destroy him.

. 3.
3. It is said, Heb. 2. 14. That Christ suffered death, that by such suffering,
he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil; It is a
new or further destruction to the Devil to be thrown out of men's hearts, and
lose his interest in the precious souls of men: this is his tumbling down
from heaven, like lightning. Luke 10. This was a second heaven to him, after he
was thrown down from the third heaven, (and the best he was now capable of)
to be honored and served like the most Highest in the hearts of sinful,
blind, and miserable man.

Now, as it was the power of God to throw him down from the third heaven; so it
was the weakness of God, the death of God being made man, that fetched him
down from the second heaven, out of the hearts of men. And it is as much
against his nature and inclination, as tormenting a destruction to him to lose
this second heaven, as it was his first; and therefore he is said to fall from
this heaven like lightning: That is, fully against his nature and inclination
with the greatest reluctancie, and torture of spirit; as it is the greatest
natural torment (as we may say) to fire whose natural inclination and motion
is constantly upwards toward the circumference, to be compelled and forced
downwards toward the center; and the more pure the fire is (as lightning is
of the purest kind) it includs still the greater repugnancie to the nature of
it, to be forced downwards.

. 4.
4. Now, if it be the death of Christ indeed that fetches Satan down like
lightning from this heaven, off his power and throne, that he has gotten in
the world, yet does it not this immediately, without some other advantage; as
it is not a bullet, or powder that batters the walls of the City or Castle at
such a distance, or cuts off the lives of so many men, but by the advanrage of
the enemy, or Cannon: so is it this same Gospel of truth, that utters, as it
were, and vents the death of Christ, up and down the world in that effectual,
and saving manner, according to which it works; this is as the Hysope that
sprinkles that blood upon the consciences of men.

. 5.
5. So that Satan's aimand project is to disable the Gospel from the
performance of such a service, to make it wholly unusefull for the dispencing
of the death of Christ, unto men in a saving way. This he knows well enough
will be done by corrupting the truth of it, if the straight ways and paths of
it be much perverted, and made crooked; the holy spirit will be grieved and
take offense at it, and being a spirit of truth, will refuse to go forth with
a lie, or to work by it, as the Lord told the people by Ezekiel 28. 18. They
had defiled their Sanctuary by the multitude of their iniquities; defiled it,
that is, made it unfit for an habitation for him, so great and holy a God; and
therefore he would profane it too, as he says in another place, that is,
he would dwell no more there, nor delight to manifest his presence any more to
them there, then in any other profane and common place in all the world: so if
the Gospel be defiled with mixture of errors, and tenets, and opinions of
men; the holy Ghost will loath and abhor it, and profane it also, and do no
more toward the salvation of men by the Gospel so corrupted, then by any other
profane learning and writing whatsoever: Satan I say, knows this better then
men do, or indeed care to do, and therefore he is still busy to wring and
wrest Gospel truths: and because Satan is still the Author of this work, the
primus motor. when any thing is stirred or shaken of the simplicity and truth
of the Gospel (though the immediate actors above ground be men) hence it was
that Paul with that severity. Acts 13. 10. Set a black brand upon Elymas the
Sorcerer, calling him the child of the Devil; because he still perverted the
right ways of the Lord: those in the Scripture are called the children of the
Devil, that resemble him in his disposition and work, (as all confess)
therefore it is the endeavor, and work of Satan to oppose the truth.

. 6.
6. A second sort of enemies to the Faith in this sense given (that is, the
truth of the Gospel) are all wicked men in general, without exception. That of
our Savior is not only true here and there; but it is a universal truth, and
lays hold upon the four corners of the world: he that does evil hates the
light. John 3. one said well, that verbum Dei, was, lucerna ad quam fur
deprehenditur; the word of God was a light or candle, by which the thief was
taken: no thief that means to steal, but hates the light that should
discover him: true, this evil affection against the truth does not break out
in all: some men's hearts are not so full as others; It does not ruin over our
of every vessel, neither has it always that malignancie in it, to break out
at the lips and hands of men; nay, it is not at all to be doubted, but many
evil men may and do support it for carnal ends.

CAP. 3.
A further discovery of the enemies of the truth.
. 1.
But there are some sorts of wicked men that are more dangerous enemies to the
truth in this sense then others, and from whom, the ruin and subversion of it
is more to be feared; men that have ends of their own, and not simply so (for
all carnal men have these) but further, are much intent, and zealous in the
advancement of such ends: men whose motions eccentricall to the course and
motions of the Gospel, and yet are active and vigorous in their motion. These
are men who threaten great danger to the truth of God.

. 2.
2. The reason is clear, because the bent, and inclination, and level of the
Gospel, is in the straightest line that can be imagined to be laid for the
advancement of God, and his glory, and his Christ; and not at all for the
carnal ends and purposes of men. It was never framed to serve turns. The
highway of the Gospel lies through the midst of men's fruitful and pleasant
fields; through their Gardens, and Orchards, and Vineyards; yea, many times
through the midst of their palaces, and stately houses, through the midst
of men's honors, and preferments, estates, pleasures, reputations, etc. and so
if it be sufferd to go forth in its own spirit, and take the way it self
desires and chooses, it will make great spoil of men's carnal advantages: It
will tread and trample under foot, the base and unworthie ends, and designs
of men; therefore, those men that are much intent upon such ends, as these which
are so incommensurable, with the great end of the Gospel, and cannot be content
with God alone for their portion, must needs seek to turn the course of the
Gospel another way, that they may suffer no loss or prejudice by it, in their
particular ends: yea, if it were possible, if the strength of their wit, and
learning, and understanding, authority, and interest, in others will reach to
it; they will hail and bring over the Gospel to themselves: they will force
it, and compel it to plead for them, and their ways; they will take the words
of the Gospel, and dispossess them of that spirit of truth, that lives and
speaks in them, and will inform and animate them with their own spirits, and
give such senses, and meaning unto them; as if God himself spoke to the heart
(as the Hebrew phrase is) of their fleshly minds, and worldly ends.

. 3.
3. Thus men do labor to persuade themselves, that gain is godliness, (as
the Apostle speaks) That honors, and preferments, are godliness: that
time-serving, and pleasing men, is godliness; that opposition to the truth is
godliness, that drawing Disciples after them is godliness; and every carnal
end and way, every carnal man makes godliness; that is, to make it seem
nothing else but what does well stand and agree with the true rule, and
perfection of true godliness: As Austins saying is, quicquid amant volunt esse
veritatem: whatsoever men have a mind to, that they resolve to make truth.
Thus merchandise is made first of the truth (as Saint Paul speaks) next of the
precious souls of men, as Saint Peter clearly affirms, speaking of covetous
men in this case. 2. Peter 2. 3. And through covetousness, shall they with
feighned words make merchandise, or with framed words, as the word bears
(...), framed for their purpose; that is, they will gloss over the truth, with
such cunning and fair colorable meanings, and interpretations, so well
pleasing and suitable to us, that except we be very wary to discover them; and
what they are like to do, they will sell us into the hand of Satan and
eternal death, only for a little money which they shall gain, by that which will
be our destruction: Namely, the corrupting the truth of the Gospel, and
bringing in those damnable herefies, ver. 1. If a man's profession be to make
bows, or hoopes, and the growth of the wood or timber, whereof he is to make
them, be straight; there must be violence offered unto them (that which is
straight must be made crooked, or bending, or else the Artificer cannot follow
his trade, nor make a living of his Art: so men having carnal and unworthy
ends, if they will seek to justify or advance them by the Scriptures, which
are spiritual, and in their natural posture lie a cross to them, must bow
and wind them this way and that, and carry them quite beside their own
intent and meaning.

CAP. IV.
Containing a more full and particular discovery of the enemies of the truth.
. 1.
IF we desire more particularly to know what kinds of men these are, that are
so dangerous enemies to our faith, and by whom the Gospel is like to suffer
great spoil, and loss of truth.

I answer, they are these and such like, as both Scriptures, and Histories of
the Church, in all ages clearly show. Amongst the diverse kinds of the
principal, and those that still have been most frequent in undermining the
truth are.

. 2.
2. First, men that are of ambitious aspiring dispositions that love to have
the preeminence, as we see in Diotrephes (though not always, they that have
preeminence,) men that love to mount upon the high places of the earth, to see
others sitting below at their feet, that cannot go on foot, but they must
ride on horse back, as Solomon speaks; that cannot frame to the humility of
Elias spirit: and gird up their loins to run by Ahabs Chariot, but must ride
in Chariots as well as he; especially, if with all they have in the mean
time; a desire to seem but humble, and modest, and moderate men. These men
must attempt to corrupt the Scriptures, that they may seem to speak for them,
at least to connive at them, and to say neither good nor evil of them; (as
Baalack would have indented with Balam: Because, if the Gospel be permitted to
speak its mind freely; it would fill the ears of men, and perhaps the
consciences of the delinquents themselves) with outcries, and clamours from
heaven against the ambitious distempers or such men: therefore they must beat
their brains, and set all their learning and books to work, to find out
some other sin that the Scriptures should condemn, that so their sin may
not be thought to be araigned, and sentence given against it by God in his
word. As the Papists, they find out one kind of Idolatry, which they
confess the Scriptures condemn; but as for their Idolatry, that is none of
it; the Scriptures speak not against that: we know the example of Jeroboam, to
set up and maintain the Kingdom to himself, he stuck not to maintain
Idolatry too.

. 3.
3. The like may be said of the second sort, (of some affinity with the
former, and many times materially the same) men that are resolved to serve
times, and please men.

That set down with themselves, that what men soever, or what humor, or
opinion of men soever reign where they live, they will reign with them (as
Paul speaks) they will have a share in an earthly Kingdom; these men are very
obnoxious to do injury to the truth of God, and will hardly forbear: we know
the Scriptures bear hard upon the upper forms and ranks of men in the world,
and speak as if few of them were likely ever to rise higher then they are; few
that now ride on horses, but are likely to go a foot for the days of
eternity: not many wise, not many mighty, not many noble: 1. Cor. 1. 26.
therefore these being (for the far greatest part) the reffuse of the world,
and therefore enemies to the truth, and professors of it, as James speaks of
the great and rich men of the world. James 2. 6. Those that will strike in with
these, and give contentment to them, and gain indeerement with them, must make
them glad with lies, Hosea 7. 3. As the false Prophets did with the Princes of
Israel; for with the truth they with never be able to do it: they that will
know men after the flesh themselves, will make the Scriptures do as they do,
that is, know men after the flesh too, which we know they will never do,
except they be mightily wrested; or perverted, and so are not themselves.

. 4.
4. Thirdly, another sort like to prove enemies to the truth of the Gospel; and
to seek the destruction of it, are men led away by a spirit of vainglory;
and being indeed little or nothing, desire to make themselves something in the
world: either first in a way of popularity by seeking to please generalities,
and multitudes; and desire to fill their sails with vulgar breath, and that
all men should speak well of them: they run a great hazard also of
accommodating the Scriptures, and making them a nose of wax, as the Papists
comparison is, to turn every way, and to turn into every man's humor, a
multitude can seldom be followed or seconded, but it will be to evil; which
made our Savior to pronounce a woe to such as whom all should speak well of,
or whether: Secondly, it be to draw Disciples after them; for many count this a
glory to them, to have a retinue of scholars, of whom they may be counted the
head, and Master Founders: and there is not any greater temptation then this,
to move a man to offer violence to the Scripture, for Paul makes this same
speaking or teaching perverse things (opinions that will not square with the
truth of God) to be the direct and proper means of drawing Disciples after
them, Acts 20. 30.

. 5.
5. A new opinion or new way, especially when it colors with the Scriptures;
but does not cotton: is as natural a means to draw men that are injudicious
and unstable, as a lock of new fresh smelling hay in a man's hand is to draw a
sheep or a beast after him: I say, if it be an opinion that has but a kind
look from the Scripture, and if the Scripture draw near to it in words,
though the heart be far from it: Then is it a bait for the purpose, it will
draw men by heaps and multitudes after it, the error in it, makes it suitable
to nature, and the face or visage of truth upon it, laying a religious and
conscentious obligation upon men for the embracing and receiving of it; both
these meeting together make men rather mad upon it, then simply to love or like
it: as generally it is to be observed in all cases where there is a like
concurrence, when there is any agreeableness to corrupt nature, in a thing,
and withal an apprehension of religion, to set a man forwards toward the
doing of it, a man is like a Ship that runs before wind and tide, he lays
all his weight and strength upon it, being like Ieremies wild Ass in the
Wilderness, men shall weary themselves to run after them, to think to turn
them. It is a saying of Gregory, Cum vitium virtus putatur ibi culpa sine metu
cumulatur, when error is taken for truth, men offend without measure, and
without fear also.

. 6.
6. A fourth fort that cannot but endanger the truth, and purity of our Faith,
are men of an evil eye, as our Savior speaks, that are of a malicious
repining and emulating spirit; either at the credit and esteem, or the
preferment of others, in any kind above themselves; men that cannot bear the
weight of other men that stand above them, that cannot go on foot when they
see others ride, or that are prone to drink in discontentments, or affronts,
or disappointments in any kind into the depth of their spirits, these are apt
to relieve themselves, by setting up some way, or some opinion in the Church,
that may seem to countenance the equity and justice of their discontentments,
or else reflect prejudice upon those from whom they are now divided in
affection, men that break the band of peace, to be at liberty, to set up
error, but especially these evil distempers are found in men that are eminent
in place, that have power in their hands in any kind.: but otherwise are
unworthy and base in their course of life and ways, and so men that are
farther inferior in place, are as far their superiors in esteem, and in
the hearts of men. I say in these this distemper of envy and discontent is of
most dangerous consequence to the truth; for now being armed with power it has
a greater encouragement and advantage many ways; both to set up (and to get
established) tenets, and opinions in religion by way of opposition to such men
and their ways, whose reputations are an eyesore unto them.

. 7.
7. Fifthly, men that are given to filthy luker, (as Paul speaks) that love
the wages of unrighteousness, that is, gain however coming in by a way of
unrighteousness: the Apostles in their writings speak much of these kind of
men; these are the men that will (...) as Paul speaks 2 Cor. 2. 17. that is,
adulterate, or embase the word of truth: it is a metaphor taken from Vintners,
or Wine sellers, that mingle, corrupt, or badde wine with that which is good to
help it off. The word of God, in the life, and power, and simplicity of it,
is but a drugge, a commodity that will yield little in the world to him that
shall utter it; it is very few men's money, except it be prepared, and the high
spirit of it corrected and taken down, that it may fall even with tempers,
desires, imaginations, and intentio^s of men: therefore he that seeks to make
matter of gain and advantage of it in the world, must accommodate and fit it
to the hearts of those that are like to be his best chapmen and customers. See
Mic. 3. 11. Mal* 2. 8.

. 8.
8. Sixthly, men that are not able to be baptized with the Baptism wherewith
Christ was baptized (that are not able (or at least much unwilling) to suffer
for the truth: these in a Passive way, or by way of consent many times, prove
enemies to the truth, and strengthen the hands of those that do impugn it,
and are accessory to many a breach that is made upon it. Thus Paul tells the
Galatians that such as did constrain them to be circumcized, that is, were
earnest with them to yield to Circumcision, did it not so much because in their
judgments, they rather thought it so necessary, or fitting, but only, says
he, because they would not suffer persecution for the cross of Christ; Peter
himself through his infirmity first knew not Christ, and again fearing those
of the Circumcision; he knew not but he might lawfully separate himself from
the Gentiles, that is in effect build up again the partition wall which Christ
had thrown down, and yet not prejudice the truth of the Gosspel: but Paul's
resolution and courage made straight what Peter's fear had made crooked; and
indeed except men will be somewhat willing and free hearted this way toward
the Gospel and truth in time of danger; there is no sin more present with us
at any time then even for those that are otherwise well-willers to the truth
with a little wit and learning to shuffle away the substance of it, and to sit
down upon a distinction clean beside it.

. 9.
9. A seventh sort that are enemies to the Faith, and (as dangerous as any of
the former, if not more, are men that will needs be spiritual benefactors to
Religion, I mean that are superstitiously addicted, and will needs undertake
to relieve the weakness of God with their strength, and supply the
foolishness of the Gospel with their wisdom, that will add traditions and
commandments of men, to make the precepts and commandments given by God
himself, hold full weight and measure that God may have his due, full
alowance, and heaped measure in his worship as the Papists do, and those that
are leaning to that kind of devotion; or in a word to express them (as Paul's
language is) that cannot rejoice in Christ Jesus, but have the prime (at least)
of their confidence in the flesh. Phil. 3. 3. men that find more satisfaction
in their consciences, in what they do, then in what they believe; and are more
in doing what themselves or other men have commanded, then in doing what the
great God himself has commanded: This is in effect to preach another Jesus
whom Paul never preached, 2. Cor. 11. 4. and to set up new ways of pleasing
God, is to set up new Saviors, and to set up new Saviors, is to exauthorize
and discharge the great Savior indeed; for this is an essential property of
that power of saving, which resides in him, to save alone, or to work by
himself alone in the salvation of any man: therefore if we offer to join any
help to him, we wholly destroy his power of saving; as Paul in very express
and peremptory terms tells the Galathians, that if yet they be circumcised
(namely with an opinion of any holiness in it, to help them to heaven, or to
accomplish their justification) Christ shall profit, or will profit them
nothing. Gal. 5. 2.

These several kinds of men are like to prove very dangerous enemies to the
truth of religion in respect of whose opposition there lies a great necessity
upon those that desire to have the truth of the Gospel to remain with them (as
Paul speaks) to contend for it, as the holy Ghost exhorts in the text.

CAP. V.
Containing Scripture demonstrations of the Doctrine propounded.
. 1.
TO prove this to be the will of God, that the people of God ought to labor
and strive to bestirre themselves to maintain and make good their Faith, to
preserve the Gospel in the simplicity, purity, and integrity of it, the text
being so pregnant, we shall not need to call in much aid for confirmation; yet
since they are at hand, let us have the mouths of two or three witnesses from
the word. Philip. 1. 27. Paul entreats them that he might hear that of them,
that they stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for, or
with the Faith of the Gospel: and so he musters their forces together, and
teaches them how to put themselves in battle array, and how to march in this
warfare; he would have them stand fast in one spirit, and then with one mind
or soul to strive or wrestle for the truth, in one spirit, with one mind;
that is, he would have them to be careful to maintain the perfectest union
among themselves that might be; (which union will hardly stand long, or live
amongst them, except it be much made on, and carefully, and tenderly fed and
nourished on all hands:) that they would have but the same spirit to act them
all; that is, a public spirit which inclines and moves particular men to seek
public good, and the advancement of the whole; and then but one mind that is
but one judgment: he would have them not only at unity in respect of the
end, but in respect of the means of proceeding thereunto, not distracted among
themselves this way, and in this way he wills them ((...)) to struggle and
wrestle with their adversaries.

For the truth, or as the word properly signifies, (and before now observed)
would have them assist the truth in its own cause, against the adversaries it
has in the world: And he would have them make a labor and a work of it, and
not any man to favor himself, or to keep back any part of that power,
strength, or skill, he has to do service in this kind, for so wrastlers in
their games and exercises were wont to put forth themselves to the uttermost.

. 2.
2. So the Church of Sardis, Rev. 3. 3. is charged to remember how she had
received and heard, and to hold fast, and to repent, had namely that she held
so weakly and loosely till now. Sardis must remember, that is, look back and
call to mind with what purity and soundness the Gospel was first preached
unto her, and she must hold fast, which is spoken as if some on the other side
were pulling hard against her, and tugging to get that out of her hands, and to
put something else into her hand instead of it, and she must repent; namely,
that she had already let something go and did not watch, when, and how it
went, that she might have laid surer hold and kept that which was deposited,
or committed in trust to her. So you see plainly (to heap up no more
testimonies from Scripture) that it is the will of God, that his people should
be earnest for the truth of the Gospel against all adversaries.

CAP. VI.
Wherein four grounds or reasons of the Doctrine are opened.
. 1.
To pass from Scripture confirmation, to the grounds and reasons of the
Doctrine, amongst many that might be given, I shall only insist upon these
four.

First, the enemies of this truth are very many, and (for the most part)
mighty too, and bear a tyrannous hate against it, and therefore there is no
hope or possibility of preserving and keeping it without contending. It has
been showed already, how Satan rages against it, and bends himself and his
whole might for the ruin of it, and for men of corrupt minds and lives, if
they have but the least power to make opposition; we cannot expect but to hear
of wars and rumors of wars against the truth, from them we know the truth
is not for their purpose: he that does evil hates the light, as our Savior
says, John 3. and ye know whereunto hatred inclines; every man wishes him out
of the way whom he hates.

. 2.
2. All manner of sin and wickedness are in the Scriptures called works or
deeds of darkness; as Romans 13. 12. and elsewhere not so much (I conceive)
either because they proceed out of darkness; that is, want of knowledge and
understanding of what is good and what is sinful (for there are many sins
committed against a great light of knowledge and conscience, and are never the
less, but rather much more the works of darkness for this) neither because
they end in darkness; that is, in the misery and destruction of the creature
(for many times this also is prevented by repentance, though I grant the
natural course and tenderness of sin is to the cha^bers of death) but because
sin is a commodity so conditioned, and so qualified, that it is never in
season, never in the right kind, never it self, but in times of darkness,
sins are called works of darkness, as some kinds of fruits are called Su^mer
fruits, because then they are ripe, and at their best for meat: and so we know
it is true of several kinds of nourishment, both of fish and flesh they are
in season, we say, in such a month, or about such a time of the year; that
is, when the season of the year agrees with their temper, then are they sound
and well fed, full of that wholesome moisture; that is, fit for nourishment and
agreeable with the health of the body: whereas take them at other times when
they are out of season, they are weak, waterish, unwholesome, and not worth the
eating: so is sin in season only in times of darkness and ignorance of the
truth; because then it has a kind of fullness or perfection of delight
contentment, pleasure, and profit in it, the vileness and horror of it now not
appearing, but in times of light and brightness of the Gospel, when the shame
and baseness of it are discovered to the world; when the wrath of God is
revealed from heaven against it, when the conscience is still gauld and stung
with it, now it is scarce worth the taking up, it will not bear its own
charges; the pleasure and profit of it will not make good the shame and the
dishonor that comes with it.

. 3.
3. Therefore men that love iniquity and are not willing to let any sweet
morsels of sin to go from under their tongues, cannot but seek to make it in
season always as water is always in season for fish to drink, which is done
when the light of the Gospel is put out, when the spirit of Godliness, that
lives in the word of God, is quenched, when that two edged sword is taken out
of the mouth of Christ, and a sword of lead put instead of it; when men are
naked and unarmed, they had need take heed of keen weapons in the hand of an
enemy: swords and spears are dangerous to them; now the works of darkness
make men naked men, and obnoxious to all, as the Apostle implies in that
opposition, where he calls an honest and virtuous life, the armor of light,
Romans 13. 12. namely, because men that are harnessed herewith need fear no
enemy, no weapons, no censures, reproves, threatenings, neither from God nor
men: the sword of the spirit it self wounds them not; but if men be loose,
sinful, and profane, the arrows of Christ in the Scriptures are very sharp,
and will pierce them through and through, wanting the breast plate of
righteousness, and uprightness of heart to defend them.

. 4.
4. Secondly, another reason to evince the necessity of this duty of contending
for the Faith, is mentioned in the end of the verse, and is this: because this
Faith has been once delivered to the Saints. God will make no such solemn
revelation of it, as he has done, the holy Ghost shall be no more sent down
from heaven in cloven and fiery tongues: therefore it stands the world in hand
now they have it, to look to it, to keep it safe; a thing of moment that is
not to be recovered, if once lost or gotten out of our hands, requires all care
and diligence in keeping; and as this reason has a truth and weight in it as
it concerns the world in general; so I think it may hold, if we confine it
to particular Nations, Cities, etc. if God has once given them the Gospel in
the truth, power, and simplicity of it, and they let it go, it will hardly
be delivered unto them the second time.

. 5.
5. If men under the Law sold an inheritance, it turned unto them again in the
year of Jubilee, and therefore the making away of an inheritance in such a case
was not so much; but now the Law of the Jubilee is antiquated, and out of date;
and this rich and blessed inheritance of the Gospel being once sold, seldom or
never becomes the possession of that Nation or people that has sold it the
second time.

. 6.
6. Thirdly, it must be contended for, because it is as well, a depositum, or
thing committed to our trust for others that are to come after, as a benefit or
blessing to our selves: It is to be an inheritance to the children that are not
yet borne; and the present generation of Christians are still as feoffees in
trust for them: the propagation of the Church of Christ to the worlds end,
depends upon it, and the salvation of millions of souls must come out of it;
therefore they that suffer it to perish in their days, bring the blood of so
many souls upon their heads, as shall perish by error and corruption of
truth, or for want of the truth of that Doctrine which they have suffered to
fall to the ground; yea, though God should show mercy to aftertimes and heal
thy cruelty by such mercy of his, in respect of others, and should by a
strong hand bring back again the truth which thou have betrayed and delivered
into the hands of its enemies: yet this will little ease the guilt of thy
sin: thy sin still remains spiritual cruelty, and blood, and damnation of
souls, for the Scriptures we shall find do not measure any thing men do
good or evil by the event, but by the proportion that the things done bear,
or congruitie they have to such and such events (as might be showed at large if
time would permit) to suffer the Gospel to sink or perish in the world, is to
bring a sorer judgment and calamity upon it a thousandfold, then if that
glorious and beautiful eye thereof, the Sun, should be plucked out of the
face of the heavens, and never shine more unto it. This is a third reason of
the point; the truth is to be contended for (and that earnestly) lest through
any baseness or cowardice this way, we betray the joy, peace, and salvation
of the generations yet to come, into the hand of the great adversary the
Devil.

. 7.
7. The fourth and last reason that we shall now propound to demonstrate the
necessity of this duty, is the worth and excellency of such a piece: the
Gospel is a thing worthy for which we should earnestly contend; neither ought
it to be at all grievous unto us, though the price of its redemption should be
set never so high: many things there are which highly commend the worth of this
Gospel; I shall only touch these four.

. 8.
8. First, the original or descent it is from above, from heaven: the womb
that conceived it, and a long time bare it, was the breast and bosom of the
eternal God himself; there is his likeness and express image upon it. Iehu
thought it meet to show the more respect to Iezabel, though she had been an
accursed wicked woman, and was now dead, because she was the daughter of a
King. 2. King. 9. 34. How much deeper and more solemn are the engagements that
lie upon the wicked, to do all homage, and show all height of respects to the
Gospel, being in it self lovely and beautiful beyond all admiration, and with
all lineally and immediately descended from that great King (as himself
speaks in Malachi) who is Lord both of heaven and earth!

Secondly, the tenderness and high respect, as it were, that God had of it
while it was with him, he scarce suffered it so much as to look out into the
world; neither into heaven nor earth, but reserved it for company and
socieitie to his own Son, when he should be borne, that then it should go
forth, and not before: it was a mystery (says Paul) kept secret since the
world began, Romans 16. 25. These same signata, or things sealed up and kept
close, are ever matters of greatest worth. God, as well as he loved his
Angels, who stand continually in his presence, and behold his face, yet kept
them fasting from the knowledge and contemplation of this transcendent mystery
(at least from the clear and perfect knowledge of it) from the day of their
creation, till the fullness of time came, wherein it was to be revealed in the
world

Thirdly, the maine ingredient, whereof it is made, which runs in every vein
of it, and wherein the whole virtue and efficacy of it consist, is the blood
of Christ so precious, that gold and silver are scarce foil to it. 1. Pet. 1.
18. Therefore to neglect this Gospel in any kind, not to be jealous over it
with a jealousy as strong as death, is to profane the blood of Jesus Christ,
and count it as an unholy thing, and so to tread under foot the Son of God
himself. Heb. 10. 29.

Fourthly (and lastly) the virtue and efficacy it self that rules in it: The
Gospel is the life of the world, Deuteronomy. 32. 47. it is not a vain thing for you,
because it is your life, and through this thing ye shall prolong your days,
etc. and Solomon often speaking of wisdom still presses this argument upon
men to embrace it, because she is their life, Pro. 3. 18. and 22. Prove. 4. 23.
Alas, what were the world but a place of darkness, and as the shadow of death,
were not the light of the countenance of God in the glorious Gospel of Jesus
Christ, lift up upon it? If this beautiful gate of the Temple of Heaven were
shut up against it, would not the precious souls and consciences of men be
amongst Lions continually; I mean, amongst devouring fears and terrors, and
horrid expectations of wrath and vengeance to come? Therefore let this reason
also be considered: if we do engage our selves never so deep for the Gospel
and the truth of it, the worth and excellency of it will bear us out, and
justify all our undertaking in this behalf; yea, and will condemn us with as
high a hand, if it ever mis-carrieth, through any degeneratenesse, any base and
accursed fearfulness on our parts.

CAP. VII.
Four general rules or directions, whereby to discover, and judge what
opinions are most like to be contrary to the truth.
. 1.
BEfore we come to the use and application of things that we may not contend
with our own shadows, or be stricken with any panick fear like the wicked,
who fear where no fear is (as David speaks) i. e. where no cause of fear
is, or contend for that which is no part of our Faith. I shall lay down a rule
or two, by which we may be able (in part) to discern and judge when it is time
to look about, to lay hold, and to contend: or when Satan is about to beguile
us of our Faith; let me by the way give this one Item, that our Faith, or
truth of the Gospel, may be two ways indammaged, or suffer waste upon it, as
the holy Ghost implies: either first by adding or putting too; or secondly, by
incroaching or taking away: Rev. 22. 18. or indeed as often by a certain
composition of both together, by a kind of exchange, as by either alone: for
there is never any truth taken away, but there is an error in one kind or
other, given or left in the stead of it. As the Harlot pleaded before Solomon.
1. King. 3. 20. against her fellow, that whilst she slept, her fellow took
her living child from her side, and laid her dead child in her bosom instead
of it. So may it be said of Satan, and of those that are the men of his right
hand for such a service: they never take away any living truth from us, but
they lay some dead errors in the bosom of our souls, in the room of it: But
such charging as this, is the most hateful and accursed robbery of any other.
This briefly by the way.

. 2.
2. Now to give some rules of direction whereby we may be able to judge,
whether at any time there be any special cause more then at an other to stand
up in this case, and to practice this duty of contending for the Faith; at
least they will serve to give aim, they will serve to intimate when there is
special cause, to look about, and to consider, and to suspect the worst; as
touching the loss and damage of your precious Faith.

. 3.
3. First, that tenet or opinion in Religion, which is assaulted, and we
persuaded to let go, under pretense of being an error, contrary to our Faith;
if it has been established by men that have been sober minded, holy,
religious, and no sinister cause, known, or suspected, which would entangle
their judgment; but probable and sufficient reasons, for the corrupting of
their judgments by whom it is opposed, as time serving, covetousness,
ambition, superstition, etc. This I say is a strong presumption, that such a
tenet is the truth, and to be well considered before we give it up, or take
exchange for it, I only go so far in this rule as to say it is a strong
presumption of truth; because I know its possible that godly men's eyes may be
held in respect of some particular truth, and other men's may be opened: and
that there is no point of faith simply to be embraced upon the authority of
men, one or other, nor simply to be rejected upon the prejudice of men: yet
this difference both reason and religion will countenance, as meet to be put
between the judgment of holy and humble minded men, and of men sensual or
sinfully addicted: namely, not to reject the judgment of holy men without very
apparent cause against them, nor to receive the judgment of the other, without
apparent reasons and grounds for them.

. 4.
4. The equity or strength of the rule lies in this natural axiom, that where
there is a concurrence of more causes (and these equally efficacious) tending
to the same effect, greater likelihood there is that the effect should be
produced, then where the causalitie is weaker; as for example in going a
journey where a man is ignorant of the right way, the more ways there be to
distract him, the likelier he is to mistake them, if there be but one way
only to mislead him. The reason given of the extraordinary heat of that
season of the year, which we call the Dogge-dayes; is, because there is a
second cause, the Star so called, that joins influence of heat with the
Sun: so in godly men there is but one cause of mistake in matter of religion,
natural darkness upon their judgment and understanding, which yet in part is
healed; (whereas in other men there is that cause in the full strength of it,
and besides, corrupt affections which are apt to turn men aside from the truth
too.

. 5.
5. Secondly, the opinion which is called for out of your hands, or that you
are pressed any ways to take exchange for, under pretense of your spiritual
advantage: if it be an opinion (as Paul speaks) according to godliness, that
is an opinion that directly, and without any circuit of reasoning, and dispute
tends to the advancement of the service and worship of God, and has no degree
of aspect upon any unlawful or sinful way, or end of men; but the opinion
profer'd instead of it, stands in full conjunction, with carnal ends or
sensual desires, or dispositions, that opinion is to be conte^ded and stood
for, as for a piece of your Faith: the ground of this rule is; Because, it is
an essential character of the Gospel (and Paul uses it more then once for a
description thereof, to be a doctrine according to godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 3.
that is a frame or systeime of such rules and truths, and precepts; As
godliness it self, were it such a person as had power and authority to make
laws for its own advancement, would set up, and no other; and on the
contrary, a Doctrine that teaches to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts.
Titus. 2. 12.

. 6.
3. Thirdly, if the opinion which you are any ways tempted to deliver up, and
to part with, because it has an evil report, and is rejected by great and
learned men in the world, if it makes for the exaltation of him whom God would
have exalted; namely, of Jesus Christ, and his free grace, and for the throwing
down of such things as God would have thrown down; namely, nature, works,
etc. Whereas, the opinion you are sought to, to give entertainment unto, tends
to the contrary; as David speaking in the Psalm (as one Translation reads
it,) of wicked men, all their delight is to put down him whom God would exalt;
and as true it is in the contrary, toexalt him whom God would pull down: in
this case the opinion is to be contended for; the reason of this is evident,
because the Gospel labors, as it were, and travels only with the advancement
of the free grace of God, and exaltation of Jesus Christ to the uttermost, and
lays all other excellency low in the dust before him.

. 7.
7. A fourth and last rule, which may be termed the rule of ruls, in this
case to direct men what is truth, and to be contended for, and that which
contains the virtue and strength of many rules, is that of our Savior, John
7. 17. that if any man will do his will, that is Gods will, he shall know the
doctrine whether it be of God or no, or whether I speak of my self; and so
concerning any man besides, whether they speak of themselves or from God. If a
man will do the will of God, that is, if a man's spirit be clear and perfect
with God, that he pitches upon a right end, and labors with all his might for
doing of the will of God, or glorifying of God (for that is the substance of
his will) and suffers no by or base ends to defile the purity of his heart, or
intention this way, but compels all other ends whatsoever, to do hommage and
service unto this; such a man (says our Savior) shall be able to put a
difference between Doctrine and Doctrine, and to discern what closes with the
truth, and what stands off from it, shall be able to taste by the spiritual
ear, the words of men as the palate does meats, for it self; that is,
whether they be agreeable to it or no. Job. 12. 11.

. 8.
8. This ability stands not so much in any depth or reach of judgment or
sharpness of understanding, whereby a man is able to sist out truth by subtle
or exquisite disputs or argumentations; but rather in the spirituality of a
man's judgment, or that (...) (as Paul calls it) by which a man inwardly tastes
and relishes both truth and error, as many men that using to taste Wine, both
good and bad: and so having their sense exercised with the taste of both, can
give a judgment of the one and of the other, though they be no Philosophers,
nor able to dispute of the nature of tastes, nor of the four first qualities,
how they are to be tempered and compounded, to make either the one taste or
the other: so a man that is of a spiritual disposition, will have a kind of
inward sensiblenesse, whether an opinion pleases or suits his spirit, or
whether not; according to that speech of the Woman in the story of the
Martyrs, that answered, she could dye for the truth, but could not dispute for
it; she was as confident of truth upon her taste, as any man could be upon his
judgment and depth of understanding, and willing to lay as great a wager upon
it.

. 9.
9. And yet this rule is not so to be taken nor understood; as if a regenerate
or sanctified judgment were an infallible judicatory of all spiritual and
divine truth; no, it was said by one that had a preeminence this way above all
his fellows (I conceive) and next to his Lord and Master himself; as well
concerning himself, as others: We know in part, and we prophecy in part, 1.
Cor. 13. 9. to which may be added also (as included in them) we judge but in
part neither. And many daily and sad experiences teach us that Saints on earth
are not Angels in heaven this way, able to put a difference between all light
and darkness, between all error and truth: for then the whole generation
should be knit together in the same mind, and in the same judgment, in all
the things of God, whereas now they are little other then divided and scattered
upon the face of the whole earth, about them. But the meaning of the rule is,
that the simplicity, singleness, and uprightness of the heart before God,
propounding to it self no other end whatsoever, but such as have a perfect
consistence with the will, and glory of God; are a rich and blessed advantage
where ever they are found, to to enable a man to see and to discern the
smallest line of partition, that runs between error and truth to divide
them, and that especially upon this ground, and for this reason: because, such
a man has no need of, has no occasion to use the help or furtherance of an
error, in as much as the truth it self is abundantly serviceable and
sufficient to justify, maintain, and bear him out in all his ends and
purposes; whereas, men that have sinister and unsanctified ends in their eye,
wanting support and strength, err from the truth (in the native purity and
simplicity of it) have a strong temptation and engagement upon them; Acheronta
movere, to seek shelter and sanctuary under the wing of error, and so to
pervert and accommodate the truth, as Ahabs servants would have done by the
Prophet Michaiah, 1. King. 22. 13. that so it may go along with them in the way
of their desires, and not prophecy evil against them.

. 10.
10. Besides this, it appears from the Scriptures; that such men as we now
speak of, men that are most sincere, and incorrupt in their ends, have a
special prerogative this way given them by God, viz. of seeing God in his word
and truth, with more fullness and cleerenesse of manifestation, then other men.
Matthew 5. 8. Psalm. 119. 125. Thus much by way of direction and advice to know
when there is special occasion, to look about and consider, whether the truth
be not in danger, and stands in need of our help to defend it.

CAP. VIII.
A brief confutation of that opinion, which teaches that God may be truly
served, and men saved, in any Religion.
. 1.
TO come to Application, the use of the point is four fould.

First, for confutation, if this be the duty of all Christians to stand out
and to contend so zealously, so earnestly for their Faith, and truth of the
Gospel, and not to suffer it to be taken from them; then doubtless this
treads down the strength, and cuts the sinews of that opinion which some have
maintained that God may be truly served, and men saved in any Religion
whatsoever, maintained, or professed in all the world; such men's charity is as
irreligious and unsavorie, as was that of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, that
challenged Moses and Aaron, for taking too much upon them; seeing all the
congregation was holy, even every one of them, and the Lord among them: so say
these, all the world is holy, even every Nation, and every Religion professed
in it; let me say this one thing, that this spirit of confusion that labors to
shuffle all things together, and to destroy the excellency of things that
differ, is that spirit which the God of judgment most hates and abhors.

. 2.
2. What necessity can be imagined why there should be such striving, such
wrestling, such contending, such laying hold, such engaging men's selves for one
kind of Faith, if all the Faiths the world over will serve men's truns as well?
Men do not use to trouble themselves, or put themselves to straights and
difficulties for obtaining any thing, when they may have their turns served
with ease. This was the argument that Phaaroh used to Joseph's family, that they
should not trouble or cumber themselves in their remove with their stuff,
because all the good of the Land of Egypt was before them, and was theirs;
that so they might be sufficiently provided for there, without further charge
or trouble: so, who needs trouble himself, or endanger himself, or to contend
for one Religion, if all the world before him, or any Religion he can fall
upon in it, had the like certain safety. This is the argument which Paul
likewise uses to dissuade Christians from eating that which was sacrificed to
Idols in case of offense, or likelihood of offense; because (says he) the
earth is the Lords, and the fullness of it; as if he should say, the Lord has
meat enough for them besides all the world over, that would nourish and
preserve their natural lives and healths, as well as that which was sacrificed
to Idols; and therefore there was no necessity to press upon the eating of
that; it had been more tolerable if the Lords provision for his family had
been all spent beside: so say I: to set up any such opinion in the Church,
that there may be safety and salvation, as well in any other as in the
Religion of Jesus Christ is to destroy the necessity of this duty of
contending for this Faith. And on the contrary, to press the necessity of this
duty, is the throwing down of every such imaginations, whether men of this
opinion, by running, or contending with God, have wrested from him any more
names whereby to be saved, so it is: sure we are, that there is given none
other name under heaven, whereby to be saved; but only the name of Jesus
Christ. Acts 4. 12. There have been, and still are many names given by Satan
for men to perish by eternally: but to be saved by, there is only one given,
and that by God (as Peter affirms.)

CAP. IX.
The resolutions and practices of Martyrs and Confessors, both ancient and
modern, justified in an use of instruction from the Doctrine.
. 1.
SEcondly, for instruction, if it be a duty required of all Christians to
contend thus earnestly for their Faith, then from hence we may receive full
satisfaction, concerning the counsels and, resolutions of Martyrs and
Confessors, both of ancient and later times, in suffering things grievous to be
borne in all kinds; loss of goods, friends, credit, liberty, life, and all;
in the cause and service of this their Faith, many may please themselves with
conceits of folly and unadvisednesse in such men, as it was a speech full of
unsavorie profaneness: that the Martyrs who suffered in the days of Queen
Mary dyed like fools; whereas indeed it is a point of the greatest wisdom in
the world to do what God has commanded; and the harder any commandment is,
and the more contrariety it has to flesh and blood, so much the greater
wisdom it is to obey.

. 2.
It is not any distemper in the judgment or spirit of a man to savor the
things that be of God, and not of men: Be faithful to the death, says our
Savior to the Church of Smyrna, Rev. 2. 10. and I will give thee a crown of
life. Certainly our Savior promises wages in full proportion to the work;
yea, good measure, heaped up, pressed down, and running over: therefore there
can be no folly in accepting his conditions, but an excellency, and depth of
wisdom. To part with men's lives for nothing, to make no friend with them when
they go, to dye cowards; this (in Scripture language) is to dye like fools,
as in that of David concerning Abner, 2. Sam. 3. 33. dyed Abner as a fool
dies? that is, basely and cowardly; and to this purpose is that of our Savior
in the Gospel: he that will save his life shall lose it, he that will save
it; that is, he that will set it down with himself that he will not part
with it as long as he can keep it; let the occasions of heaven, and the
Gospel stand in never so much need of it, and call never so loud and earnestly
for it, such a man (says Christ) takes a course wholly to lose it, to make
nothing of it, and so it is true of credit, estate, liberty, and there is no
way to entaile them upon our selves for perpetuity, but only in the way, or by
a deed of consecration: behold says James, 5. 11. we count them happy which
endure; and except we judge and walk by the same rule, we give evidence
against our selves, that we are not of the Israel of God.

CAP. X.
Wherein three sorts of men are found offenders by the Doctrine delivered, and
reproved accordingly, with an objection answered.
. 1.
A Third use is for reproof, if this be a duty bound upon the conscience of
every man that calls himself a Christian, earnestly to contend for his Faith:
then there are three sorts of men here to be reproved.

First, such as are ignorant what their Faith is, what that Doctrine is, for
which they ought to contend. If they contend, it must be for they know not
what; their service to God in this case cannot be any reasonable service, and
therefore not acceptable to him: were it likely they would come forth in such a
case, to help the Lord against the mighty; but little hope there is that such
as these should join with Michael in this great battle against the red Dragon:
if men know what their ease, and peace, estates, and credit in the world mean,
and not what their Faith and Religion means; they will never endanger the one
to relieve and support the other: men are ready to speak evil of what they
know not, but to suffer evil for what they know not, there is not one of a
thousand will do it.

. 2.
2. A second sort to be reproved, are such as having some knowledge of the
truth, yet are of a lukewarm temper, they have no list to stir or be active in
this great and solemn quarrel of the truth: loath they are to engage
themselves in the defense of it: if Christ will have their service ( in
deliciis) something he may have of them, but in Costris they are not for him:
Deborah in her song sang concerning Rubens declining, the common service in the
war against Sizera, that the divisions of Ruben were great thoughts of heart,
Judges 5. 15. we may say truly that the divisions of these men are unworthie
and base thoughts of heart and politic and worldly-wise thoughts of heart,
which prevail with them, to decline that great and honorable service of Jesus
Christ, and his Church; this contending for the truth. They can war according
to the flesh (as Paul speaks) let but their health, their credits, and estates
provoke them: here they are men of action, and soon up in Arms; here they
will put forth themselves to the best; here are no thoughts of heart at all to
move them, to decline any such war: But for their Faith, let that be never so
injuriously dealt with all, invaded, wasted, new molded, turned upside down,
and fashioned over and over; and let men take from, put to, exchang, the gold,
silver, and precious stones of the Gospel, for the wood, hay, and stuble of the
Doctrines of men, like Gallio, they care for none of these things, there is no
room near their hearts to lay such things as these too; all that Region is
taken up with other thoughts, cares, and lusts: well, their doom is set, and
the book is opened; it will come to pass that Christ will spue them out of
his mouth; that is, will so cast them off, that they shall never be fit to be
received again; as that meat which is once taken down, and not digested, but
comes up again; no man will ever make meat of it the second time.

. 3.
3. Thirdly, A third sort yet obnoxious to a deeper and sharper reproof then
these, are men that not only refuse to contend for the truth, but bend their
strength and might, wit, learning, reading, authority, interest, and all they
can make against the truth: As all Heretics, opposers, and destroyers of the
Faith in all ages have done, with such as have been their Abettors; and given
the right hand of fellowship to them, such as with Jannes and Iambres resisted
Mosei, labored to suppress the truth, and wrest it out of the hands of those
who held it forth unto the world, (by sword, by fire, and other engines of
cruelty) and desperate wickedness.

. 4.
4. Many there are that have men's persons, as James speaks, in admiration
(yea, and opinions too) for advantage sake, for preferment sake, men that as
Plato said of Sophisters in his time, (...) men that do not so much weigh or
consider what truth is, as what way or course of Religion is in request: and
seem to have as many suits in Religion, as some men have of apparel, to shift
and change out of one into another, as the times they live in, change or alter:
as David speaks of Doeg, Psalm. 52. 4. Thou love all destroying, or devouring
words, oh! deceitful tongue; so may we say of many, they love all rising
words, all opinions that will draw preferment after them, their judgments and
consciences can close without scruple with them: all such words they love, true
or false; and the truth is that, that is the best use that many make of much
reading, and great learning, to furnish themselves with variety and choice
opinions (as there is scarce any tenet or opinion in Religion now held, but
what may be found to have been held, by some heretofore) not so much to
compare and examine what is the truth, but that they may be able to color any
erroneous tenet, which best serves their turn for present advantage, with
pretense of antiquity, that so they may not once be suspected to flatter,
(the present) but only to reverence and honor the former ages.

. 5.
5. But it may be objected, that many are charged to be enemies to the truth,
who stand stiff upon the purgation, and are ready to return the challenge
upon their accusers, with as much confidence as Eliah did upon Ahab, who told
him that it was not he, but it was himself, and his Fathers house who troubled
Israel: so, many that are accused for undermining the truth and Religion, will
reject the crime with great indignation, and strike through the loins of their
accusers. Therefore who in this case shall be judge where the guilt lies? To
this I answer, (besides the rules formerly given to guide men's judgments in
discerning truth.)

. 6.
6. First of all, it is no argument at all of innocence to disdain a charge
or imputation, as we see those Jews, John 7. 20. being challenged by our
Savior, that they sought his life; they rejected the imputation upon as high
terms as might be: thou have a Devil, who goes about to kill thee? as if the
charge had not been only untrue, but had had as much of the venom or poison
of the lie in it, that such a quantie could not have been cast forth, but out
of the mouth of the Serpent himself immediately, and yet for all this high
language the imputation stuck close to them, and was (and so proved it self in
time) most true: and so may it be in this case; such as are most zealous in
their purgation, may be deepest in the condemnation notwithstanding.

. 7.
7. Secondly, if men desire to stand upon such terms of innocence and
integriry this way, if the Judge protest he never has, nor ever meant to
corrupt judgment, then why are bribes taken? And what becomes of the
causalitie, or efficiencie of these? For these have their effects upon men;
yea, upon men that most indisposed otherwise, to be wrought upon, as the holy
Ghost, that perfectly knows the nature, and efficacy, and operation of all
things, testifies, Deuteronomy. 16. 19. A reward blinds the eyes of the wise, and
perverteth the words of the just: it blinds not only such eyes as are half
blind already, and so might easily be made blind altogether; neirher does it
pervert only the words of such as are naturally inclined to injustice and
doing of wrong, but even of the just themselves, now suppose the blind man
were never so confident of his way that he was right, the words of his
confidence were scarce worth the weighing; when men have suffered the eyes of
their judgments to be blinded with honor and inordinate desires of
preferment, covetousness, envy, contention: and the like confidence, and
peremptorinesse in such men is rather to be suspected. We say of blind men
that they do fortius impingere, stumble more strongly.

. 8.
8. Men that resolve thus, and say thus with themselves; I will run a course
of preferment, I will seek to raise my self in the world, but I, will keep a
good conscience too: I will not suffer my judgment to be perverted; do as if
a man, when he is awake, should promise himself what his dream should be,
when he is fallen a sleep: many like Jonathan follow the chase close till
they come where honey is, and there they break their ranks, and give over.

. 9.
9. Thirdly and lastly, the complaints, and tears, and sorrows, of godly men
for the loss of truth, or corruptions at any time brought in, in matters of
Religion; these may determine whether such men be depravers of the Faith or
not: But you will say, such may complain without cause; many men's fears, yea
and griefs too, may be superstitious, and worse then either the harm or danger
that occasion them. I answer, to do so, to complain without cause, were worse
then that which the beast does, as Job 6. 5. Does the wild Assebray when he
has grass? Or does the Ox low over his fodder? If the generation of the
righteous (as David calls them) consent in any thing (I do not say if some
particulars of them) but if the generation, that is of the maine body of such
men do consent in any thing, their unanimous and joint carriage or behavior is
sufficient (ordinarily) to determine matters of this nature: and David more
then once, resolves the ambiguities of his thoughts, and spirit into their
judgment. Then (says he) should I condemn the generation of the righteous;
or (as the last Translation has it) Behold I should offend against the
generation of thy children. Ps. 73. 15.
Implying that no carriage of his, no apprehensions, were like to be sound and
justifiable, wherein he should oppose or gainsay the general vote of the
righteous; though vox populi, the voice of the people, be not always vox Dei,
the voice of God: yet vox populi Dei, the voice of the people of God is (for
the most part) the voice of God.

CAP. XI.
Containing a brief exhortation, to inquire diligently into the truth, that
men may know what they ought to contend for.
. 1.
A Fourth and last use, is of exhortation, and that to two duties, the former
to make way, and to prepare for the later. The first duty is, that we would
inquire after the truth, that we would take pains, and use diligence to
inform our selves, what it is that we may not contend for error, nor
sacrifice to an Idol (as many do.) The second, that we would earnestly
contend for it, and seek to uphold it, when we clearly understand what it is.
In few words acquaint we our selves with the truth of God, and labor to know
the straight ways and paths of it. Imitate the Angels, 1. Pet. 1. 12. that is,
bend and bow your selves toward the things of Jesus Christ, that you may lay
the eyes of your minds and understandings close to the secret veins, and
spiritual conveyances of the great mystery of godliness, and so be the
better able to discern and judge when the fair and beautiful wisdom of God
therein, shall be any ways blemished or misfigured by any offer, or attempt
made to incorporate the wisdom of men with it. Think we thus with our
selves, that those abilities of reason, judgment, understanding, which are
given us above other creatures, are chiefly given for this end, that by these
we might be capable of the knowledge of God and of this truth, be earnest
with God to get the fleshly tabls of our hearts written with that Doctrine, and
principles thereof, which is according to godliness, by the finger of his
spirit.

. 2.
2. They that will show themselves men in this conflict, had not need be
children in understanding; it is our reasonable service that is here required
of us. God would have us known both what it is we contend for, and what it is
we oppose; the goodness and beauty of the one, and the drossinesse and
baseness of the other. why call thou me good, says our Savior to the
Ruler in the Gospel, Luke 18. 18. not that he did reject the term or title,
or refuse to own it because it was not his due: (for he was God, to whom he
did acknowledge it was due) but because he would not receive it by way of
complement, he knew the man did not yet believe that he was God indeed, and
therefore did not care to be honored by him as God; so God would have us
first know what truth is, and what is the glory and brightness of it, and
then our contending for it shall be highly accepted.

. 3.
3. To honor his truth with that honor that belongs to it, and not to know
that is the truth which a man so honors; this is but like the Athenian
inscription, to the known God: Therefore labor we to make our selves so many
Apollo's, mighty in the Seriptures. Acts 18. 24. for so we shall both know
what to contend for, and be able also (...) to quit our selves like men, able
to confute the adversaries of the truth mightily, as it is said in the same
place as Apollo's did the Jews; he carried the truth clear away before him
with great evidence and power. But I leave this and come to the latter duty;
to the urging and pressing whereof the Text more directly leads unto.

CAP. XII.
An exhortation to contend for the truth, with six several motives or
considerations provoking thereunto.
. 1.
WE see, and have heard that it is the perfect and express will of God, that
we should all earnestly contend for the truth of our Faith, for the truth of
the Gospel, and therefore suffer this word of exhortation to take place in us.
Let us take the courage and resolution of valiant men upon us, and be
entreated to become good. Soldiers of Jesus Christ, and hold fast the truth we
have received. Let us not be remiss and loose in a duty of that high
importance, as we will answer to our Captain at the peril of our salvation at
the great day. If we find our hearts averse from this service, dull and heavy
within us, use means of provocation, and let not the motion die in our
breasts. To quicken our selves in this case we may use these and the like
motives.

. 2.
2. First consider, that except we contend in this case, and show our selves
men; yea, and more then men: this Faith of ours will be laid waste and utterly
destroyed by the enemies of it, our Gospel will soon become another Gospel,
that Jesus which hitherto has, and yet is, (blessed be God) and long may be
preached amongst us, will be exchanged for another Jesus that cannot save us;
and let me say this unto you: the chang is sooner made then men are aware of,
Saint Paul was jealous of the Corinthians, lest this sore and heavy judgment
had befallen them, 2. Cor. 11. 3. lest their minds should be corrupted from
that simplicity which is in Christ. The simplicity of the Gospel is the life
and power of it: and yet in regard of such a property in it, it is fearfully
obnoxious to corruptions from men. The truth of the Gospel will not remain and
abide with us, except it be contended for: Satan will not suffer us to
possess so rich a treasure, except we set the house of our defense somewhat
high; except we hold fast our Crown it will be taken from us.

. 3.
3. Saint Paul gives this reason to the Galatians, why he so stoutly stood it
out against those false brethren, that were craftily sent in to bring them into
bondage, and would not give place to them, no not for an hour; namely, that
the truth of the Gospel might continue with them, Gal. 2. 5. Implying that all
had been gone, all lost in a moment, had not Paul risen up as a man of war
for the defense of the truth: so our Savior wills the Church of
Philadelphia, Rev. 3. 11. to hold fast that which she has, lest another take
her Crown; that is, if she did not contend for, and hold fast the truth of
the Gospel, which for the present was taught and established in that Church
(which was her Crown, or would be her Crown, if she kept it) it would fall to
the share of some other Church or people: for commonly when the Kingdom of God
is taken from one place it is given to another, because God will show his
liberty and freedom this way; or that he can better accord with mere
strangers then with old friends, that are declined and fallen in their
affections.

. 4.
4. Secondly, consider that if we lose our Faith, if the truth of God
miscarries with us, we lose the presence of God, and cause him to forsake his
former habitation among us; for God and his Gospel go together, and make their
abode together, throughout the whole world: we know the Scriptures plainly
teach us, that the Nation or people, that is without the true knowledge of God,
is without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. that is, have no interest in God, and
cannot reckon him inter bona sua, as any part of their goods or possessions:
God is to them no God, except it be to punish or destroy, so Zachary 8. 23.
prophecieth, that men out of all Nations should take hold of the skirt of him
that is a Jew, and should desire to go with him, because we have heard that
God is with you (say they). Now how or why should God be with them? namely,
because they had the true knowledge of God according to his word, as on the
contrary, 2. Cron. 15. 3. it is said that Israel was without the true God, so
long as they wanted the true knowledge of him, God dwelling only where he is
known.

. 5.
Now then consider what an invaluable loss we shall gain, to suffer the
great God of heaven and earth, whose truth and faithfulness have always bin
shield and buckler unto us, to depart out of our land, woe unto them (says God
himself by his Prophet concerning Israel) Woe unto them when I depart from
them, Hosea 9. 12. what will we do in the day when our wall of fire shall be
removed from being round about us: shall we not be left as a prey to all
miseries, judgments, and calamities? May not all the world serve their turns
out of us?

. 6.
6. What is a City, people, or Nation, forsaken of their God, but as a dead
carcass when the spirit of life is departed, and presently begins to corrupt,
and putrify, and cast forth a smell, and so calls all the birds of prey (even
from a far) to tear and to devour? This I take to be the meaning of that
place in the Gospel: Where the carkase is, there will the Eagles be gathered
together, Mat. 24. 28. compared with Luke 17. 37. It is clearly spoken
concerning the destruction of Jerusalem upon Gods departing and forsaking that
Nation, who whiles he continued in the midst of them, was as a spirit of life
unto them; and so long their enemies had no mind to seek their destruction,
or to prey upon them; as the Eagles, Vultures, and other birds of prey, have no
thoughts or desire of seizing upon wild beasts, whilst they live in their
strength: neither do their bodies send forth any ill favor, to invite and
call them to the prey till they be dead, and begin to putrify: So whilst God
was present with Jerusalem in the fullness of his grace; her enemies had no
hearts to think of making prey or spoil of her: but when he who was her life
(God I mean) departed out of her, she presently began to putrify; and the
Romans, her enemies (significantly intimated by the Eagle, which was their
ensign or colors in the war) soon sented her putrefying carkase, and were
gathered together against her, and devoured her.

But as well for further illustration of this exposition of the last cited
Scriptures, as for strengthening the motive in hand, I desire that these
passages may be looked upon, and diligently considered and compared together.
Numb. 14. 9. Deuteronomy. 1. 42. Deuteronomy. 7. 21. Deuteronomy. 13. 17. Judge. 16. 20. 21. Psalm.
46. 5. Psalm. 71. 11. Esa. 27. 11. Ezech. 19. 4. Ezech. 35. 10. And lastly the
Geneva note on Genesis 2. 17.

. 7.
7. Thirdly, consider if we will contend earnestly for the truth (as we have
been directed) we shall have assured success; our enemies shall never say in
triumph against us, behold we have prevailed, we shall be able to rescue the
truth, out of the hands of all gainesayers, and of all the powers of darkness.
If we will buy the truth at Gods price, no man shall have it out of our hands:
if we be willing to cleave to it, and live with it, God will never put us
asunder by a strong hand: hold fast (says our Savior to the Church of
Philadelphia) lest another take thy crown; implying, that holding fast will
prevent it; thy crown shall always stand upon thy own head, if thou will
keep thine own (as we say) if thou will set thy foot to the foot of the
adversary, and not let him carry away the truth, except he carry away thee
too, or something of thine with him.

. 8.
8. Continue (says St. Paul to the Philippians) in one spirit, and one mind,
striving together for (or with) the Faith of the Gospel, and in nothing fear
your adversaries, Philip. 1. 27. 28. if we will not contend, if we will make
no resistance against Satan, then will he tyrannize over us, and impoverish us
of our great treasure, and bring us to a morsel of bread, he will triumph in
the ruins of the truth, and of oursoules together, but if we will resist him
in this case, we know what the holy Ghost promises, who knows Satan's depths;
and tells all his secrets, that he will flee from you: James 4. 7. if he finds
resistance, so that he cannot speed presently, or suddenly as he desires, he
stands upon thorns (as we say) he must not lose time, he has but a little
left; he will away to others, where he hopes to bestow his time and
temptations to better purpose.

. 9.
9. Consider that if we will come forth and show our selves men in this
conflict for the truth, and partake in this most noble and honorable quarrel
of the Gospel, against the world; we shall share with Jesus Christ in his
glory, and triumph in the day of his great victory, against Antichrist and
his Angels, and followers: yea, (that which me thinks should be the most
suitable encouragement under heaven, to the spirit of a Christian right bred)
the success and glory of that great victory of the Lamb over the Beast;
shall be divided between the Captain and the Soldiers, and is in part
ascribed to the faithfulness of those that be with him in the battle, Rev.
17. 14. these shall fight with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them;
for they that are with him are called, and chosen, and faithful. Cast but an
eye upon this glory, and it cannot but fill us with the highest courage and
resolution for this service. That which ye have already, hold fast till I come
(says Christ to the Church of Thyatira, Rev. 2. 25. 26. For he that
overcomes, and keeps my works unto the end, to him will I give power over
Nations. The world is at his feet, whose heart will but serve him to look the
Devil and his terrible ones in the face, when they go forth to battle against
the truth

. 10.
10. Fifthly, consider that if we will therefore decline this warfare because
it must be undertaken at our own cost and charges, we may sustain loss in
our estates, loss of friends, credit in the world; our liberties, our lives,
etc. Consider, I say, and consider it again (it is a weighty and most
important truth) that all these may (may, yea must) lose and part with, it may
be upon harder and worse terms a thousand-fold; upon better and more
honorable, and with more advantage to our selves, then in this warfare;
impossible it is that ever we should: Me think this motive should cut off
all reasonings and gain. sayings of the flesh. If the flesh in any kind
should plead to be spared or excused from this warfare, it should not only
plead against the spirit, but against it self also. Therefore for such stuff
as this, regard it not: lo, the whole Kingdom of heaven is before us, and is
ours.

. 11.
11. Suppose that God at any time should call for thy service herein, and thou
see thou can not serve without expense of thy estate, abridgement of thy
liberty (it may be) danger of thy life, and thou make answer, no: thou will
see what will become of the truth otherwise. It may be the very next day (for
ought thou know, within a shorter space) God will suffer that great
extortioner death, to spoil thee of thy life and then (as God says to the
fool, Luke 12. 20.) whose shall all these be?) Where is thy estate? Where
liberty? Where credit? Where friends? Where life? all is lost for ever:
whereas, if thou hadest been willing to have made over these things by such a
Deed of gift (as has been spoken of) into the hands of God, they had been
safe for thee for eternity. There is no way else in the world for these
mortal comforts, to put on immortality, the outward and corruptible good
things, to put on incorruption; but only to make a consecration of them to him
that is immortal (as the Scriptures every where teach.) If thy goods be
otherwise spoiled, thy liberty restrained, life taken from thee; God will not
regard thee, nor take compassion on thee: It may be he will value thee and thy
life at as little, as thou do him and his truth: he will sell thee for
naught, and take no money for thee (as David speaks) that is, he will not so
much as punish, or show any judgment upon those that shall oppress thee, or
destroy thee.

. 12.
12. A Father that has given an estate to a son that is improvident, and
wastes it with riotous living (as the Prodigal did) regards him not, casts
him off, and suffers him to taste of want and all extremity. But if he so
lays out his stock to make still a return and increase, the Father delights
in him: so does God with men; those that will wisely and providently dispose of
such mercies as he has given them, so that though they be out of hand for a
while, yet they are still returning and coming in again, such are his
delight, and men of his affection: but for those that so order and manage
their present estates and comforts in the world, that they wholly perish at
last, and are never heard of more, nor seen in any return of good, his soul
abhors: he loves to see his children wise in their generation. And in this
sense, I conceive that of our Savior to be understood, John 10. 17. therefore
does my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it
again: that is, because I lay it down so, in such a way, upon such terms of
obedience and submission to his will, that I may in equity and justice receive
it again: we cannot think our Saviors meaning should be, that therefore
God should love him for a simple and bare intent of resuming his life again
upon death (for who would not desire to live again, in case he should dye;
that is rather nature then commendation, or matter of love) but this is that
that God did love him for, that he was careful and willing to dye with that
abundance of zeal to the glory of his Father, and abundance of love to his
Church and chosen; that his life by no Law of justice or equity could be kept
from him, but must be restored to him again.

. 13.
13. So, for us to part with any thing we have in such a manner, as that we
cannot take it again, which is properly to play the Prodigals, and to waste
what we have: To part with our money, liberty, lives, grudgingly,
unwillingly, to serve our own turns, etc. The Lord regards it not, but if we
part with them so, that we may take them again, that God may with justice,
equity, and truth, restore these unto us in due time with advantage; this is
that that he loves, and for which he takes a holy delight and contentment in
us.

. 14.
14. Besides, often times when a man has dealt basely, and unworthily (in this
kind) with the Lord and his truth, and has loved the wages of
unfaithfulness: as (for the most part) God himself takes no pleasure in such
a man's person; so is it a just judgment of his upon the man himself, that he
should take little pleasure in himself afterward, nor in what he saves by
this unfaithfulness unto the Lord.

. 15.
15. Sixthly (and lastly) consider that if we will contend for the truth as
we ought, whilst the brunt is not so sharp, whilst the duty of contending
is upon easier terms then blood, we may be excused from the necessity of a
more fiery contention: our estates, our liberties, our prayers seasonably
bestowed in this service, may possibly excuse our lives. I conceive this to be
the meaning of that promise made to the Church of Philadelphia, Rev. 3. 10.
Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the
hour of temptation, which shall come upon the whole world, to try them that
dwell upon the earth. Philadelphia (it seems) had been faithful, and stood
close to the Gospel, when it was opposed, but not with so high or bloody a
hand of opposition, as it was like to be afterward generally: and therefore
Christ promises her, in consideration hereof, that when the sharp and fiery
storm and tempest of trial, should fall round about her upon the Christian
world, she should find covert and shelter from it.

CAP. XIII.
Showing in what manner, and with what weapons, the truth is to be contended
for.
. 1.
IF you desire (in the last place) to know, and to be directed how, and in what
manner, and with what weapons, this holy war is to be under-taken, and truth
contended for: I answer, there are six things especially (besides others of
more obvious consideration) to be done in it, as time and occasion shall
require.

First, men must contend for truth by teaching and propagating it in the world:
the more copies we write of it, the like-lier it is to be preserved; if one
or some be lost, others may remain; therefore every man according to his
calling must be diligent this way, to stamp the frame of the truth upon the
judgments and understandings of those that are under their hand, and committed
to their charge.

. 2.
2. A child or a servant well grounded, may be isntrumental in spreading the
truth far into the world. Abraham had but one son according to promise, and
yet by him his seed was multiplied as the stars in the heaven for multitude,
and as the sands upon the Sea shore innumerable: what though thou have no
absolute promise, no certainty of so gracious and full a success, yet a
possibility in this kind especially quickened with some degree of probability
and hope should be a ground of encouragement and resolution to do it: true,
we must not do evil that good may come of it; but we may, and must do good
the rather, when more good may come of it.

. 3.
3. We find the holy Ghost inforceth many exhortations to many duties upon
this ground of possibility, especially when it draws one to a probability or
likelihood: God would have us in some cases to live by charity (as it were) as
well as by faith, and have us to expect and hope the best as well as believe
that which is certain, Heb. 13. 2. 1. Cor. 7. 16. Therefore let not this means
of contending for the truth be neglected at any hand. As the Apostle (in the
Scripture cited, Heb. 13. 2.) persuades men to hospitality or intertainment
of strangers upon this ground, because some men unawares had received Angels:
so it is good still to be seasoning of those in whom there is no great
appearance (for the present) children, servants, etc. with the principles of
Gospel, knowledge, though it were upon this consideration alone, that we may
unawares have our hand in furnishing the truth and Church of God, with such,
who may prove like Angels in their ministry and service about the holy things
of Jesus Christ afterward.

. 4.
4. Secondly, men that be of ability for it, when they meet with occasions
and opportunities, suitable to such actions, and endeavors, must vindicate the
truth as Paul did among the Galatians, Gal. 2. 5. they must not give place or
way to such as oppose it, or will stand up to plead for Baal. If men of
erroneous spirits find mouths to open against the truth, the children of
light must find mouths to open for the truth. As one said, if thieves will
rise at midnight to murder men, shall not men be willing to be awakened to
save their lives? That promise was made long since to the Church; that every
tongue that should rise up in judgment against it, it should condemn, or (as
the Original has it) should make wicked. Isaiah 54. 17. The meaning of the
promise may be, that Gods people who should be all taught of him?, should have
the spirit of wisdom given, that their enemies should not be able to resist;
but they should confute and confound them: we should therefore here live by
faith, and gather strength from such promises, and do as Cyrus is said to have
done, when the propchsies of Isaiah contained in the 44. and 45. chapters were
read unto him; he went with great courage and resolution against Egypt:
therefore we should endeavor to be as so many Apollo's, mighty in the
Scriptures, and gird on the sword of the spirit, and cause the word of Christ
to dwell richly in us; that so we may be able to grapple with an adversary
when he comes in our way, and not suffer him to make havocke and spoil of the
truth without contradiction.

. 5.
5. Thirdly, we must shine as lights in the world by innocence and purity of
life, and make our selves patterns and examples unto others in the practice
and exercise of every grace: this is a thing of special importance for
upholding the truth. That Doctrine which makes men like unto God, cannot
lightly be thought to be any other then the truth of God, it can be no
mortal seed, out of which children like unto God himself shall be borne; our
innocent and pure conversation will be shield and buckler to defend thee: the
truth, and religion is seldom wounded but through the sides of the sinful
lives of the professors thereof.

. 6.
6. If the truth and way of religion we profess be fruitful in this kind, if
it bring forth many good works, it is a blessing upon it, in such a respect as
David esteems that man blessed that has many children, Psalm. 127. 4. 5. such
a man (says he) shall not be ashamed or afraid of his enemies in the gate,
because he has many seconds to take his part, and to make good his quarrel:
children of youth, says he, are like Arrows in the hand of a Giant, which by
reason of the strength of his arm in the deliverie of them, must needs reach a
mark at a great distance, so will the good life and unreproveable conversation
in professors of the truth wound the hearts of the enemies of religion, even a
far off, and of such as were never near us, nor never knew our faces. The
holiness of our lives will be instead of miracles, men shall be compelled to
say of our religion, as Nicodemus said of our Savior, John 3. 2. no man can
do the miracles that thou do, except God be with him: no religion can
produce such gracious and lovely ways, except God be in it: do we but
manifest the power of godliness in our lives, we sufficiently manifest the
Doctrine of godliness in our judgments: these cannot be parted. If we do
well says Peter, 1. Pet. 3. 13. who is he that shall harm you: yea, if we
do well, who will or can harm us, or our religion? or if they do it with
their tongues, yet will they honor both in their hearts, and then it is no
matter. Take heed of the practice of the wicked; and men cannot likely blame us
for the error of the wicked.

. 7.
7. Fourthly, men must countenance the truth, the teachers, abettors, and
professors of it, this chiefly concerns the Magistrate, and men in place, and
men of respect; it is a debt which such men owe by virtue of their place, to
the truth and such as profess it, to be ready to speak for either, and to
stand up in the defense of both, and to show respects of honor unto them when
time require: as Iehoshaphat did to Michaiah, 2. Cron. 18. 6. 7. do well says
Paul, Romans 13. 3. so shall thou have praise of the same; that is, of the
powers, or men in authority: so God undertakes for those that are his
Ministers in those places of power and authority, that men that do well shall
have praise from them, and be countenanced by them they should hearten the
truth: As the influence of the Sun and other Stars is ordained in nature to
give vigor and life to trees, plants, and other sublunarie creatures: so is
the face and countenance of authority sanctified by God for the cherishing and
quickening of every good and virtuous way amongst those that live under them,
for strengthening and refreshing all seeds of piety and religion that are seen
in the hearts of men. And on the contrary their anger, and the cloud of the
faces of such men are a proper means to dash and break the strength and power
of ungodliness (as Solomon speaks of the King, the chief of that rank) Pro.
20. 8. the King that sits upon the throne of judgment; that is, that
executes that great place faithfully, scatters away all evil with his eyes:
his very looks will break the brood of evil doers.

. 8.
8. Therefore men that resemble God in power, should remember to imitate him
also in that gracious rule of government, Psalm. 138. 6. though the Lord be
high, yet has he respect unto the lowly, but the proud he knows far off. A
Magistrate that does otherwise, that has respect to the proud and wicked, and
beholds the righteous and lowly a far off, does in effect that which our
Savior says is not to be done, he takes the childrens bread, and casts it
to the dogs.

. 9.
9. Fifthly, men must confess the truth when they are examined or called to
it, whatsoever it cost them: this is that will preserve the honor and
estimation of truth in the hearts of men, and cause men to inquire more after
it, when they see men of knowledge, and grace, and wisdom, so constant in the
defense of it, when they see such round sums laid down for it as men's estates,
preferments, liberties, and lives, etc. willingly and freely, as if they that
so bought it, boasted of their penie-worth. This cannot but raise the
estimation of it, this will make it a commodity in request in the world when
men will not sell it at any rate, but will buy it.

. 10.
10. This confessing of truth and suffering for it, this sealing of it sometime
with blood, is that that has preserved it safe and sound from depravation and
corruption to this day, as God honored the death of his Son, with the life
and salvation of his elect, and those that believe; and this is said to be a
satisfaction to him, Isaiah 53. 11. so has he honored and recompensed the
lives, and all other losses, his children and faithful servants have sustained
in this world, with the life and preservation, of the Gospel; which is indeed
an abundant satisfaction to them. This is the fire from heaven which our Savior
kindled, and will never out, so long as there is such fuel to maintain it.
Men may triumph beforehand in a rich and blessed security, that the life of
the truth so fed and maintained, will be a long life, even for ever and ever.
David would not drink the water of the Well of Bethlehem, because it was the
blood (as he said) of the men that went in jeopardie of their lives, but
powered it out unto the Lord. 2. Sam. 23. 16. 17. So men cannot (though they
would) despise, or make common that truth which has cost the lives of so many
thousands to maintain it.

. 11.
11. Sixthly and lastly, there is one thing more which must be done by all, and
that constantly, and continually, men must pray for the truth, and for the
continuance and enlargement of it; men must quicken their hearts this way, and
deal effectually with the God of truth, for his support and helping hand, that
he will still from time to time discover the madness of men that resist the
truth, and are men of corrupt minds and reprobate, as concerning the faith;
that the would make it evident and manifest to all men, that they may prevail
no longer, that so the Gospel may run and be glorified: men must take and
bear the outrages and insolences of such against the truth, and do by them
as Hezekiah did with the letters of Rabshakeh, Isaiah 37. 4. he spread them
before the Lord, and prayed, and wept over them. And if God will not do it
upon other terms, let importunity be let loose, and set upon him; that will
do it though nothing else will, though he were an unjust Judge, neither
regarding himself, nor his own glory, nor the good of his poor creature, yet
this would overcome him. This is a means that is to be plied on all hands
night and day. Diverse particulars more might be given in, by way of direction
in this kind: but if men be sound within, and upright hearted toward the
truth, their own reins and consciences will sufficiently teach us what is to
be done for the maintenance of it, upon all occasions.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF Mrs. ABBOTT IN St. STEVENS CHURCH IN
Coleman-street London.

By JOHN GOODWIN Pastor of S. Stephens Coleman-street.

LONDON, Printed by T. Cotes, for Peter Cole, and are to be sold at the sign
of the Glove and Lion in Corne-hill near the Royal Exchange. 1641.

A FUNERAL SERMON.
Luke 10. 42. Mary has chosen the good part, which shall not be taken from
her.


THe words in their dependence, are part of an answer given by Christ, to a
kind of expostulation, or contestation made with him, by a woman whose name
was Martha, against her sister called Mary.

The case (in a word) was this. Our Savior Christ (whether voluntary, or
invited, is neither easy, nor much edifying to determine) comes guest-wise to
visit a family, when he knew he should find a little nest (as it were) of
his friends together; Mary and Martha, two sisters, and Lazarus the brother.
That God which had made them of one house, had made them of one mind also in
that house: and this mind wherein they agreed, and were as one, was the best
and blessedest mind of all: they were one in the faith and love of Jesus
Christ. Notwithstanding the two sisters, however they accorded well, and were
both as one in the maine; they were both (doubtless) children of the same
light: yet (it seems) they were of somewhat differing dispositions (or
apprehensions rather, for the disposition arises from hence) in some
particulars: Examples of which kind of differences we see daily amongst those
that are not only truly, but even eminently, godly, and religious. Martha the
elder sister, as is more generally thought, though Mary be first named John 11.
1.) her apprehensions gave her, that she should express her affections to her
clear Lord (her present guest) upon the highest and best terms, by bestirring
her self about his entertainment, and taking care that all things might fall
right here. Mary on the other hand, had another conceit (and that more
spiritual, and of a further reach) with her, that she should best commend her
self and her affection unto him, by being his guest, and feeding upon those
lips of his, which were a tree of life to feed many: by setting her self down
at his feet, to hear his preaching (as the text says.) Now Martha
apprehending, without all controversy, that she was the woman at this time,
and employed about that which was fittest to be done upon such an occasion;
and that her sister was careless, and forgetful of what best became her; and
withal (as it should seem) being a little jealous that her entertainment
might suffer some loss and prejudice, and not fully answer that curious
plat-forme, according to which she had projected it, because there was none
but her self to order and look after the carriage of it: Martha (I say) being
strengthened with these apprehensions, comes to Christ, and addresseth her
self unto him in these words: Master, carest thou not, that my sister has
left me to server alone? bid her therefore that she help me. She made little
question, but that Christ had been of her mind, and would have taken her part
in this gentle quarrel against her sister. Only she thought, that being taken
up in discourse, he did not mind or observe the matter between them; and
therefore she would be a remembrancer unto him: and comes and pleades her own
insufficiency to have things as she desired to have them for his
entertainment, and suggests, that if he pleased to speak to her sister to
help, she was at very good leisure to do it. To this request of Martha to
have her sister away from Christ's feet, from hearing his word, our Savior
returns this unexpected answer. Martha, Martha, thou carest and art troubled
about many things; One thing is needful: Mary has chosen the good part, which
shall not be taken from her. Martha Martha: the duplication of the word,
shows that his spirit was stirred within him upon the motion, and that his
answer was serious and earnest in a high degree. Thou carest and art troubled,
etc. as if he should say: thou find many things to take up thy time, and
trouble thy self about that might well be spared and left undone, and no man
hurt, or the worse for it; and in the mean time forgettest, and do not
consider that one thing, which is of Sovereign necessity indeed. But Mary thy
sister, she remembers it, she considers what it is to learn the mysteries of
heaven, and to take hold of the opportunities of eternal life. And therefore
howsoever thou think thou have espied a Moate in her eye, and blamest her
for doing what she does: yet I discern her eye to be single, and her sight
clear, and must approve of what she has done. Mary has chosen the good part,
which shall not be taken from her.

Of which part of the answer, there is a double exposition usually given,
according to the one, the sense falls thus: Mary's part, is therefore the good
part, and wisely chosen; because it shall for ever continue with her, she
shall follow this her employment in heaven, where she shall be taken up and
exercised in the contemplation of God, and of the great things of his glory,
all the days of eternity. This is the interpretation, that the Jesuits, and
Popish Expositors generally magnify upon this place, only to vilify and
beat down (as not only their manner, but profession also is) the
interpretation which Calvin gives, which yet (doubtless) is the best and
truest, and delivers out the sense thus: Mary has chosen the good part, which,
etc. As if he should say: in as much as Mary has done wisely; and made a good
choice for her self, it shall not be taken away from her by me, I shall no
ways put her by it, or advise her to make any other choice instead of it. Thus
we have the coherence together with the sense and meaning of the words.

In which words (thus apprehended) we have these two things considerable.

1. The approbation of Mary's choice, by the great and infallible Judge of all
questions and controversies, the Lord Christ himself.

2. His resolution upon it, not to disturb, or in errupt her in this her
choice: in these words: which shall not be taken from her. Both these breasts
are full of milk, and spiritual nourishment, and would gladly unlade their
treasures into your bosoms, as well the one as the other. But I shall
entertain your Christian and patient attention at this time, with the opening
and handling of this one observation only from the former branch (Christ's
approbation of Mary's choice.)

The minding and improving opportunites for heaven, is a thing of high and
special acceptatio^ with God.

The Lord loves none better than those that love themselves best in this way.
He that is upon the highest terms of resolutions for Heaven, he, he is the
man in whom the soul of the God of Heaven chiefly delights, he that can let
the world pass by, and not be moved nor stirred at it, but will be on fire to
lay hold on Eternal life, when that comes in his way, he is the man that
shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven, by the great King of Heaven
himself.

First, for the opening of the Doctrine; I will (with all convenient brevity)
show these two things.

1 What these opportunities for Heaven are, and what I mean by them.

2 What I mean by the improvement of them.

For the first, in the General it is to be considered, that there is nothing
that be falls us in this present world, good or evil; nothing that befalls
other men (if the knowledge there of comes unto us) nothing we think, nothing
we speak, or do in any kind; nothing that other men think, speak, or do,
if it falls within the sphere of our knowledge, but by a strong hand of grace,
and spiritual wisdom, may be converted to a spiritual use, and be compelled,
and forced to do service for Heaven. A gracious and wise heart knows how to
subdue all the ways of God, and all a man's own ways, and all the ways of
other men, and put them under this tribute. Amongst all the ways of the
providence and dispensation of God, in the administration of the affairs of
the world, there is none so dry, or barren, but there is somewhat of God in
it, there is some ingredient or other, either of his wisdom, power, justice,
goodness, faithfulness, or the like; which by servent and intense consideration
may be drawn out as a spiritual extraction, and be found as light prepared
for the soul. For there is not the least beam of glimmering of this light;
the least shining of the knowledge of God upon the face of the soul, but it is
of precious influence, and concernment for heaven. This is life eternal to
know thee the only true God, etc. Ioh. 17. 3. The Heaven and happiness of the
creature depends upon the happiness of the Creator.

So again, there is nothing we can think, desire, love, fear, or the like;
nothing we speak or do, but if we mind it, there is some taste and relish
in it of the frame of the heart within, some disposition or other is acted, and
consequently is manifested by all these. Now every degree of this light also,
every touch or streyne of the knowledge of our selves, directly tends to
enlarge, and strengthen our knowledge of God (as might be showed at large, but
that we have no leisure now for digressions) and therefore is a gale of wind
also to fill our sails for Heaven.

And lastly, there is nothing we can see, or hear, or know concerning other
men, as either spoken, intended, or done by them. Whether it be that which is
righteous, holy, and good, or otherwise wicked, sinful, and vile; but that we
may see the truth of the Scriptures acted (as it were) before us therein, which
testify in every place, as of the manner, law and properties of spiritual
wisdom, grace, and holiness on the one hand: so likewise, of ignorance,
vanity, and profaneness on the other. So that I say, there is nothing in this
world we can meet withal in any place, or at any time, either from God, or
from our selves, or from other men, be they things whose faces seem to stand
quite another way, and no point of the Compass toward Heaven, which yet by a
strong hand of grace (as was said) and by a dexterity of spiritual wisdom,
may be turned about, and be made fair advantages and oportunities for Heaven.

But howsoever, I would not in the Doctrine propounded, altogether exclude such
opportunities as these, which are but generally remote, and of inferior
importance. Yet I chiefly intend those that are more proper, and direct, and
that have a near affinity with heaven, that are opportunities prepared (as it
were) and made to our hand, and need only using.

And such are, 1. The Ministry of the Gospel, especially in the hand of a
Minister that is faithful, and enabled of God to bring forth life and
immortality into light by the Gospel, when we have no real hindrance or
cause of absence, as by sickness, weakness, or some other indispenceable
occasions, etc. this is an opportunity for Heaven of the first Magnitude.

To which we may add (in the second place) the administration of the
Sacraments, wherein we may feed upon the great and holy things of Jesus Christ
by other senses, as we do by hearing in the ministry of the Word; especially
the Sacrament of the Supper, where he that is our life (as the Apostle
speaks) the great Captain of our salvation, presents himself, and his
dearest love unto us in those elements of bread and wine: whereunto uniting
himself Sacramentally, they go down together, bread and wine into the body,
and Christ unto the soul.

Thirdly, another great opportunity for Heaven, is the presence and company of
holy men, especially such as are able to draw waters of life for us; out of the
wels of salvation (as Esaias speaks) that are able out of the good treasure of
their hearts (as our Savior calls it) are able to furnish us with all
variety of spiritual necessaries.

Fourthly, when God meets with us in the likeness or appearance of fire, I
mean in any great or remarkable trial, this is a special opportunity for
Heaven also; now is there a time or season, wherein to be made partakers of his
holiness (as the Scripture speaks) the fiery chariots of afflictions, are
still sent for our hearts to carry them up into Heaven.

Again fifthly. When God (on the other hand) appears unto us, as he did unto
Moses, and to the Elders of Israel. Exodus 34. 10. with the likeness of a
Saphir stone under his feet, and as the Heaven when it is clear, when he
causes his Sun of prosperity to shine upon us, whether spiritual or
temporal, and does things for us, whether in the affairs of this world, or of
that which is to come, which we looked not for, when either he lifts us up
from the dust of the earth, and sets us with the princes of his people, or
delivers our souls that have dwelt among lions, devouring fears, and raging
terrors, and brings them forth into a wealthy place, and settles their abode
amongst the powers of the life to come: this also is a rich opportunity for
Heaven: now is it seasonable to get such a fire of love to God, kindled in our
hearts, that shall never be quenched.

Sixthly, when a man is chosen, and called forth by some special hand of
providence, to do any special service for God, or for the Gospel, whether by
suffering or otherwise, this is a special advantage and opportunity also, for
a man to take hold of Heaven, and to set life and immortality on working within
him. Let patience (says James, cap. 1. verse. 4.) have her perfect work. i. e.
Never go about to shift or decline any suffering whatsoever for Christ's sake,
by any base or unlawful way: suffer on till God himself delivers you, and let
not Satan be your deliverer, this (I conceive) is to let patience have her
perfect work. The ground of this exhortation is: That they might be perfect
and entire ((...)) wanting nothing, i. e. that they might be a complete, and
immediate preparation and fitness for Heaven: for after we have done the will
of God by believing, and walking holily, we have yet need of patience (says
the Apostle Heb. 10. 36.) that we may receive the promise. Faith is our
foundation, holiness of life as the walls, and sufferings as the roof and
consummation of our building up for Heaven.

Lastly, any Lucidum intervallum, any respite or breathing time from the works
and labors of our hands from our ordinary callings, and employments, is a
season and opportunity for prayer, reading, meditation, etc. and consequently
for Heaven. When the world has nothing to do with us, it is our fittest
season to have to do with God. We might insta^ce in more particulars: but by
these you perceive what the special opportunities for Heaven are, which are
chiefly intended in the doctrine.

We come (in the second place) to show you (in a word) what we mean by
improving these opportunities. This is nothing else, but the raising of such
matter of benefit and advantage from them, as the nature and condition of every
opportunity does afford. It is like the gathering of fruit from the tree that
bears it, or drawing milk out of the breast that gives it. As when a Sermon
is preached, the receiving, and gaining in that knowledge, that quickening, that
raising of heart, that strengthening of the inner man, that weakening and
disabling of corruption, and the like, according to the tenor, and importance
of things therein delivered, this is the improving of such an opportunity. So
in time of affliction, and trial, for a man to join with the chastisement of
the Lord, and to help his rod forward, with that spiritual work and
business, about which it is sent, which (happily) may be the awakening of us
out of the sleep of security, the quickening of us in the ways of holiness,
and works of righteousness, the setting of our hearts, and this present world
asunder, at a greater distance, the reforming of somewhat in our lives, and
practice, which is heterogeneall, and so a stain, and blemish to the rest of
our conversation, or the like. Now when a man shall take the rod of God that
is upon him (as it were) in o his own hand, and by the advantage and
assistance thereof shall compel his foolish heart to let go the hold it has
taken on vanity in any kind; and to stoop to that yoke of righteousness,
which God would put upon it (which it may be is impossible for him to do at
another time, when he has not the like assistance from Heaven, in a way of
affliction: most men's hearts are unruly, and unteachable, except it be when
there is a rod at hand) this is an improvement of such an opportunity; the
like is to be conceived in other particulars. There may be an inferior and
under improvement of an opportunity, when a man gains somewhat by it, but yet
more might have been made of it: and there is a just, and full improvement,
when a man gathers the tree clean, and leaves none of the fruit behind him,
so much as in the outermost branches. The richer and fuller the improvement is,
the greater and higher is the acceptance from God. This for the unfolding of
the Doctrine.

We come (in the second place) to heap more of the authority of Heaven upon
the head of it, and to establish the truth of it with the testimony of more
witnesses. That complaint of God himself concerning his people, Deuteronomy. 32. 28.
29.
together with that expression of the earnestness of his desire toward them
this way, is a fair and full evidence, and confirmation hereof. For they are a
nation void of counsel, neither is there any understanding in them. Oh, that
they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their
latter end! How should one of them chase a thousand, etc. Oh that they were
wise, and would consider their latter end, etc. This shows that God does
highly prize and accept this wisdom, and understanding in men and women,
which makes them treasure up for themselves in Heaven and become provident for
their latter end. His soul longs (as it were) for summer fruit, to see his
people filled with the spirit of this wisdom; yea and professes himself
willing (as it were) to pay for this his longing, if he might have it upon any
terms. How should one of them chase a thou sa^d, etc. He would gladly hire men
and women with the best of this world, to work wisely for that which is to
come. So our Savior in that passage of Scripture, Luke. 12.
seems to be much taken, and (to speak with due reverence) to be even ravished,
and transported out of himself, and cast into an ecstasy of joy, and holy
contentment, upon the very mention of such a disposition, and wise behavior,
as we speak of, in mannaging and improving opportunities for Heaven. Let your
loins be girded about, and your lights burning: and ye your selves like unto
men that wait for their Master: and, Blessed are those servants, whom the
Lord, when he comes shall find waking. Verily I say unto you, he willgird
himself about, and make them sit down at table, and will come forth and serve
them. By girding up the loins and keeping their lights burning, watching, etc.
he means nothing else (in effect) but a diligent and careful mannaging of
the opportunities for heaven that were before them. Now rather than such men as
these should want honor, he promises once more to forget his own
greatness, and to dispense with Majesty: and will be found yet again in the
form of a servant. I only mention one Testimony more from the Scripture
(letting pass others without number, Revel. 2. 26. etc. And to him that
overcommeth, and keeps my words unto the end, I will give power over Nations.
And he shall rule them with a rod of Iron, and even as I received of my
Father. And I will give him the morning Star. This fame overcomming and
keeping the words of Christ unto the end, is nothing else (being interpreted)
but the acting of the true greatness of spirit we speak of in the Doctrine,
which is seen in the taking hold of, and managing, the opportunities that lie
for heaven, and carrying the affairs of his soul before him with a high hand.
Now of what acceptance this high and excellent streine of spirit is with the
Lord Christ, is easy to judge, by those rich and glorious ingredients, that
are put into the reward annexed thereunto. I will give him power over Nations,
etc. we must not stand now to make valuation of the particulars: in the
general, they are things transcendently glorious: of this there is no
question; it were easy to make the pile of testimonies greater: but we have
the mind of God and of Christ in the point we labor for, abundantly already,
we come therefore (in the third place) to demonstrate the Doctrine from the
grounds and reasons of it. Amongst many we shall only make use of four.

First, God therefore highly approves this disposition we speak of in men, of
minding and managing all advantages for heaven, this same lying out of the
soul with all its strengh and all its might for making good the things of
eternity, because he has given commandment that so it should be, and so his
voice is obeyed in it. Now this is a thing fully sympathizing and agreeing with
that nature or disposition in God, whereby he desires to see himself obeyed,
and his will submitted unto by the creature, it is as marrow and fatness unto
him, it is that wherein his soul delights. Has the Lord (says Samuel) as
great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the
Lord? Behold, to obey is better then sacrifice: and to hearken, then the fat of
Rams. The reason of the great testimony given unto David (and that by God
himself) that he was a man according to his own heart, is said to be this,
because he would fulfill all his will. Act. 13. 22. This is some of the
sweetest and pleasantest wine he drinks from this great Vineyard of the world,
which he has planted, to have his voice obeyed, his will done by his
creature. Now that it is the will of God, that men should thus weather all
their sails for heaven, and carefully gather in all winds that blow to make
that port or haven, it has been already sufficiently proved from the
Scriptures: if you desire to have this measure heaped up, and running over,
take that of Paul yet further. 1. Tim. 6. 12. Lay hold on eternal life. Lay
hold on it: but where is it, that a man may lay hold? It passes by us daily in
the precious occasions and opportunities thereof, and when these are taken hold
of, and improved diligently, eternal life is laid hold of. As those two blind
men in the Gospel laid hold on their natural sight, when hearing that Jesus
passed by, they took the opportunity, and stood forth and cried with might and
maine: O Lord, the Son of David, have mercy on us. This for the first reason.

Secondly, because this making out for heaven, and mortality with a high hand,
is the truest and most natural and genuine streine or fruit of that principle
of reason and understanding which God has put into men: it is a man's wisdom
(as the Scripture expression is) to do it. As on the contrary, to lay hold on
this worlds good, as riches, honors, pleasures, etc. with a neglect or
indifferency about the great things of heaven, is (in Solomon's phrase, Eccles.
2. 3.) to take hold on folly. i. e. to give out a man's self or his strength
for the employment of such things, as no man would do, but he that makes
folly of his counsel. And so the holy Ghost (we know) every where in the
Scriptures, calls the neglect in men, about spiritual and heavenly things by
the name of Folly and Foolishness, and sometimes of Madness, and doubtless
it is nothing else but the principle of Reason imbased, degenerate, etc grown
out of kind altogether; that makes this present world a stumbling block to
men, in their way to heaven. And therefore for a man to decline it, or step
over it, and in the very face and presence of all the desirable and pleasant
things of the world, to go forth in his might from day to day, to make all
occasions and advantages for the things of eternity must needs be the purest,
and highest, and most exquisite strein of that Sovereign faculty of Reason, or
understanding in a man.

It may be you will here ask: but what is there in this to gain approbation
from God, especially in any such eminent degree (as you seem to imply) if men
be wise and prudent for themselves, is God so taken or delighted herewith? Or
is there any true excellency or worth in such a thing? Therefore how is this
any ground or reason of the point?

I answer, yes (my Brethren) it is a matter of high contentment to the Almighty
Creator of all things, to see the works of his hands keeping the Law of their
creation, and duly acting the parts that are assigned, and given them in their
several courses and stations in the world, to behold them in the true, full,
and complete exercise of all those several motions, properties, and
faculties, wherewith he has enriched them according to their kind. To see
the Sun shining, the streams running, the birds flying, and all fruitful
trees bearing fruit in their kind, the Vine laden with Grapes, the Olive tree
with Olives, etc. is a sweet and holy contentment unto God: he beholds his own
wisdom, goodness, and power, in the glass he has made for that purpose. Now
as all other creatures have their specifical properties distinct every one from
other (with suitable operations belonging to them) and it is the exercise or
putting forth of that which is proper to every one by that creature whose it is,
and not by another, that is so comely and graceful in the creation, so
pleasing unto God, as when every tree or plant, or seed brings forth fruit
according to their kind (as the Scripture speaks, as when the Vine brings
forth Grapes, the Fig tree Figs (if Vine and Fig tree both should bring
forth Grapes and no tree Figs, this would be a maime, or breach in the
creation) so is there given unto man a specificall excellency of reason or
understanding, not only distinct from, but in dignity far above all
indowments or properties of other creatures. And when he walks according to
this principle, when he guides his affairs with discretion and understanding
indeed, when he seeks his chief good and happiness in a way leading directly
unto it; now he brings forth fruit in his kind, and does not degenerate
into the disposition of the brutish creature that is beneath him* and this is
that that is so highly pleasing unto God. And hence it is, that the fear of
God, and his service, and the add re^^^ment of the creature unto him, are still
commended unto us in Scripture, under the name of wisdom, understanding, etc.
And unto man he (i. God) said, the fear of the Lord is wisdom, and to depart
from evil is understanding. (Ieb. 28. 28.) As if he should have said,
therefore holiness, and the fear of the Lord are required by God of the
creature, because they are his wisdom or understanding, or because he shall
show himself wise or understanding by the practice of them. And doubtless all
duties whatsoever are comprehended in that one word of the Apostle
(emphatically understood) (...). i. quit your selves like men. 1 Cor. 16. 13.
And so the ground and reason of the wrath and heavy displeasure of God against
loose and sinful men, is ever and anon certified under the name of
Foolishness. It is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them
will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no
favor. Esaias. 27. 11. Implying that the only quarrel or controversy the
Creator has against his reasonable creature, Man, is the letting fall of that
great and noble principle of his creation within him, his reason or
understanding, or a suffering of that in its way of degeneration.

A third reason of the Doctrine, why this contending and striving for this
incorruptible crown of righteousness with so high a hand, should be so
highly approved by God, is: Because such a man will take the God of heaven
along with him in his way, will be ready and able to do great things for him
on earth: such a man will make the Altar of his God fat, and enrich the
treasury of his glory, will rejoice over his Lord and Master, to do him all
the good he can, to honor him with all he has; will make the crown of
glory to flourish upon the head of Jesus Christ his Lord: yea that man that is
resolved indeed to quit himself like a man for the Kingdom of heaven, and
seeks it with his whole heart, is ready (if it were possible) to part with it
when he has obtained it, and bestow it upon him that has given it unto him,
if he stood in need of it: He that loves God like a God (and heaven, or
salvation, is nothing else upon account, but God enjoyed in fullness, or to the
height) will be willing to part with God, for Gods sake, i. if his glory so
required it; and much more with all the world, as we see in Paul: whereas he
that despises or hates his own soul (as Solomon's expression is) that
under-prizeth the great things of eternity, that pincheth and spares (all that
he dares) in his pains and endeavors, and is still afraid lest he should
do too much, that is, (in his own interpretation) any thing at all more then
needs must, to be saved: such a man will never be but as a dry and barren
wilderness to the God of heaven: Jesus Christ will never be great of his
making. He that longs (with any earnest longing) to see his God face to face,
will not be afraid to look the Devil and all the powers of darkness, and all
the terrible things of the world in the face: he will make glorious pastime
with Lions, and Bears, and Dragons, and be ready to plead the cause of his God
in flames of fire. This is given for a reason why Moses refused to be called
the son of Pharaohs daughter, and chose rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; to esteem
the rebuke of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt. viz. because
he had respect to the recompense of reward: Heb. II. 24. 25. 26.
as if it had been said, had he not had a good mind to heaven, and been
resolute to take all opportunities and advantages that way, for the making good
that great piece the world would have gained him in, and God and his Christ
should have lost the great and honorable service which he did for them. This
is a third reason.

The fourth and last reason, why God so highly approves and accepts this labor
and travel of the soul for heaven is, because such a man furnishes him with
fit matter to work upon in that kind of work, wherein of all other he is
chiefly delighted, such a man is as fine clay in his hand ready prepared to
make a vessel of honor. God may pour out abundantly of the riches of his
bounty upon such a man in his reward, and make him as great in heaven, as he
desires: such a man's way and nobleness of spirit will bear a great weight of
glory, and that in such a way, and upon such terms that he that lays it upon
him, shall sustain no loss nor prejudice by so doing. For this is the case:
the great and glorious God of heaven, has abundance of heaven by him, and
infinite treasures of glory, which burn in his hand (as we use to say) and
he is pained (as it were) within himself till they be bestowed according to
his mind: and this must be amongst the children of men. He has prepared and
framed many crowns of glory, and he longs to find heads to set them upon. The
world furnishes him very sparingly with such persons; the fearful, and
unbeleeving and abominable, and liars, etc. are not meet to wear them: he
that has made them will rather break them in pieces again, and stamp them to
powder, then that they should ever come upon the heads of such; he cannot
satisfy himself in such a disposal of them, nor make any thing (to his
mind) of his bounty, if it should be carried in such a way. Such an excellent
and wise workman as God is, must not make any such loose or staring joints (as
it were) in any part of his providence and dispensation, as to join and put
things together that have no aptness, meetnesse, or proportion, the one to the
other, as a base earthly minded man or woman, and the undefiled inheritance of
heaven, God will never put these together. But when he meets with fit subjects,
with matter duly prepared to work upon in this kind, there is no kind of
work in all that infinite variety that passes through his hand, wherein he
takes the like delight and satisfaction, as to be heaping rewards upon the
heads of his creatures, and to be employing the treasures of the unspeakable
riches of his bounty upon them. It is true, whatsoever God does, he does it
like himself, and his works are comely and beautiful in their kind and
season, and have fair impressions of the wisdom and righteousness of their
great workman upon them. But yet if we consult narrowly with the Scriptures,
we shall find that God is never more himself in any thing he does, then in
doing good to those that fear him, in rewarding and recompencing those that
are capable of his magnificence in that way. He takes a delight in giving
grace, in principling the hearts and souls of men from heaven to work
righteousness, and to live holily, etc. Again he takes great delight to see
the fruits of this grace of his in men, to see men shining in holiness of life
and conversation, as lights in this present world. But yet he takes a greater
and higher comentment then in both these, to reward and recompense the
faithful service of those that obey him: yea he desires their holiness, and
service with special reference and subordination to these. This rewarding, and
magnifying those that serve him, is that, that has the ultimate, nearest, and
most entire connection with his glory. Oh that my people had barkened unto me
(faith the Lord himself, Psalm. 81.) and Israel walked in my ways! Why, what
if God had had his wish or desire herein? What would it have been unto him? Oh
yes, here had been work indeed for the gracious, and bountiful hand of God,
here had been an opportunity for him to have done great things for them, to
have blessed, and prospered his people: Oh this is (as it were) a second Heaven
to him, that is Lord both of Heaven and Earth. I should soon have humbled
their enemies, etc. and have fed them with the fat of wheat, etc. The great
God would gladly have been doing this way, that so Heaven and Earth might have
rejoiced together. You may find other Scriptures of like importance, as Esa.
48. 18. Deuteronomy. 32. 29. etc. This for the fourth and last Reason.

The use of this Doctrine is, first for confutation of that opinion; which has
been, and (I believe) still is maintained by some, viz. that it is a thing
unlawful and displeasing unto God, for any man to work intuitu merceds, to
do, though never so well, with an eye to any reward, to provoke, or stir up
himself to well doing by the consideration of the great wages of Heaven, which
God has pitched, and covenanted with men upon it. They hold it not lawful for
any man to warm at this fire, or to sail with this wind. Doubtless with
more, and more dangerous superstition, than was in the Doctrine of those
teachers, who (according to Paul's repetition of the heads of their teaching)
taught their disciples saying. Touch not, taste not, handle not, Coloss. 2 21.
If it be a thing unlawful for a man to strengthen his hand in the work of the
Lord by the remembrance, or expectation of the Lords reward, certainly God
himself has taught men to do evil, that good may come of it, for he often in
the Scriptures heapeth these coals of fire upon the heads of men, and teaches
our fingers to fight that good fight of faith, by holding forth the crown of
righteousness unto us. But because the whole carriage of the point (in a
manner) has been a pregnant, and sufficient conviction of this error, we
shall make no further waste of words or time about it.

Secondly, the point delivered, is serviceable also and useful by way of
Instruction, and that chiefly in two particulars.

First, it this close, and home following the sent of Heaven, this pursuing
eternal life, with all the strength and might of the soul, be a thing so much
set by, so highly accepted with God, then may we (in a word) take knowledge,
and inform our selves from hence, that the coldness, and deadness, and
general indifferency, that is found in far the greatest part of the world
this way, who seek for Heaven, as if they sought not, and run for this
crown of life, as if they cared not to obtain, is an abomination unto him, a
sin that will cause the wrath of God to smoke against him, that shall be
found under the guilt of it. It is a piece of desperate forgery in the Devil,
to procure that sin, to be stricken out of the roll, or catalogue of sins,
which flayeth with the most certain, and inevitable destruction, and takes
nearer and faster hold on hell, than a thousand other sins. How shall we
escape (says the Apostle, Hebr. 2. 3.) if we neglect so great a salvation?
implying scarce so much as a possibility of Salvation unto those that shall be
loose hearted about the seeking of it, and yet how few are those, that know to
make any sin at all of that sin, which is so near of blood to that sin
of sins, that unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost! Murder, Adultery,
Stealing, Lying, Drunkenness, and such like, the consciences of many are
somewhat shie of, as having affinity with hell indeed: but that sin which
carries eternal vengeance, and damnation in the mouth of it, that strikes the
soul dead at the root, this same casting the great things of Jesus Christ
behind our backs, making them only our second and subordinate care, this
according to the scale of the world is little (if any thing at all) out of the
way to heaven, men are loath to judge either themselves or others wicked men,
for being never so indifferent, and cold herein. But if the God of Heaven so
highly magnifies the zealous streines of men and women, this way (as we have
heard) then must it needs follow (by the rule of contraries) that a
superficial perfunctory, and remiss minding, and looking after these things,
lie in the same degree of abomination, and accursednesse unto him.

Again, secondly, If this earnest contending, and laying out for Heaven, be
thus countenanced from on high, and approved by God himself: then observe we
likewise from hence, that which will abundantly justify, and make good those
ways, and practices of the Saints of God in the world, which are made
obnoxious to much censure by many: and often returned to the reproach of them
that use them. As David says, that when he wept, and chastised himself with
fasting, it was turned to his reproach: So when any man shows any more
nobleness of mind, than others do, for the great things of Heaven, making it
another manner of business than is ordinarily made of it in the world, and
shall separate himself from pleasures, and lusts, and vain recreations, and
company, through the desire of eternity, and shall intermeddle with all
wisdom, and work upon all advantages that may advance and set forward this
great and honorable design in his hand; this is made matter of reproof, and
of a sore accusation against him, this way is every where spoken against by
those that judge themselves wise and men of understanding in the world. These
men think they have such a man at advantage enough, to cast dishonor, and to
power out contempt upon him: and as Judas censured the pouring out of that
alabaster box of ointment upon the head of our Savior, saying. What needs
this waste? implying that he on whom it was bestowed might have done well
enough without it. So do many judge, and call it a superfluous expense, and
waste of man's time, and pains, and estates, to be continually at this plough,
to follow it so hard night and day, to make it a matter of charge, to make a
labor and toil of being saved, and going to heaven: whereas they can go
fair, and softly, and make merry by the way, they can make it a journey of
pleasure, and recreation, and yet come safe thither in good time. Men might be
wiser (say these) and yet go to Heaven too: fools, and their pleasures are
soon parted. Now here is, I say, in the Doctrine delivered, an apology from
heaven, an answer (as it were) put into the mouths of these men thus censured,
which those that accuse them shall never be able to resist: an answer like
Solomon's King upon his throne, against which there is no replying, no rising
up: a shield and buckler put into their hands, under the confidence whereof,
they may laugh all such censures, and accusations in the face to scorn. The
Lord Jesus Christ himself, he approves of their way, he has set to his
seal, that their way is excellent, and commendable with the highest. It is God
that justifies (says Paul in another case) who shall condemn? He that has
God to justify him, need never be afraid of him that shall condemn him. No
man will dare to say, that Christ spoke foolishly, when he gave sentence on
Mary's side, and pronounced that Mary had chosen the good part: but suppose the
blasphmy should be swallowed, and men will yet say that Christ herein spoke
foolishly: yet we know what Paul affirms, 1 Cor. 1. 25. that the foolisnesse
of God is wiser than men. If the Lord Christ be risen up to speak in this
case, shall not all the earth keep silence before him?

In the third place, for Reproof. If it be a thing of this high esteem, and
approbation with the Lord Christ, to make it the great and solemn business of
our lives, to be engaged, body and soul, and all we have, to gain in a
blessed eternity: then will this Doctrine be found a hard saying against two
sorts of men. 1. Those that will not come up to any such terms themselves,
become of Heaven what will. 2. Those that forbid, or hinder such as would do it.

For the first: do not the hearts of far the greater part of men and women,
sit loose to this great business of Heaven? Is there any other fighting the
fight of Faith amongst them, than as of men beating the air (as Paul speaks)
making a kind of flourishing only, and pastime with their weapons, as if they
had no enemy indeed in the field to encounter, or to fight against? Is there
any other kind of running in this race of Christian profession amongst us,
than as if men did not much care whether they obtained, or no? A man might
rather think, by the indifferency and coldness of the world, that Christ had
cast water, and not oil upon this fire, that he had reproved and taxed the
world for being too forward this way, for being too busy with Heaven, than
any ways sharpened the faces of men, or strengthened their hand, by such
approbation as you have heard. Where is there a man amongst many, whose heart
is to the work indeed? Who labors for this bread that perishes not, as if it
were bread indeed? Who stirs up himself night, and day, and provokes, and calls
upon his heart, and soul, and all that is within him (as David speaks) to
take sure hold on the covenant of Eternity? No: the generation of wise
merchants, that will sell all they have to purchase the field, where the
treasure lies, as well nigh perished from the earth: that incorruptible Crown
of Glory is no longer worth the striving for, according to the laws propounded
by him that holds it forth unto the world. Heaven must come easy, or else it
shall go: rather than men will eat the bread of life in the sweat of their
brows, they will venture perishing forever through the want of it. The hearts
of men are sunk into the earth: the streams of their desires, and affections
do not stand upon heaps, and rise upwards, as sometimes the waters of the red
sea did: the cares, and lusts, and pleasures of the world lick them up clean,
as the Ox licketh up the grass: eating, and drinking, and gaming, and company
keeping, building, and planting, and marrying, watching the uprising of new
fashions, that we may be vain and proud with the first, sacrificing to Mammon
(the great God of weake-hearted men) these with the like, suck out the heart,
and strength of the souls of men, and there is only a husk or a skin left
for Heaven. Men are resolved to seek the things of this life, and to give
large quarter to the flesh: if God will cast in the Kingdom of Heaven unto
them, as an overplus, they will take it, but they will not stand so strictly or
peremptorily upon this: they will thorough with their bargain of the world
however. Things present must have the uppermost seat, and Heaven must stand at
the Earthes footestoole.

I say no more of this: but only advise men seriously to consider, that God
has a hell (and that strong and terrible above measure) to revenge the
quarrel of his heaven, and those that care little to be made meet to be
pertakers with the Saints in the inheritance of light, will be the fitter and
better prepared for the darkness of Hell.

Secondly (by way of reproof also) are there not many yet worse, and more
abominable and accursed than the former, who like those Scribes and Pharisees,
Matt. 23. 13. (upon whom our Savior spends so many of his woes) shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against men, because they will neither go in themselves,
nor suffer those that are entering to go in? Who going but on foot themselves,
are still pulling others from their horses? And driving heavily themselves
toward Heaven, would feign take off the wheels from other men's chariots, that
they might drive no faster than themselves? As if they had a secret Item, or
Prophetical instinct in their consciences, that such men's zeal, and fervencie
of spirit in the things of Heaven, will be there deeper condemnation one day
before God: and therefore they will be first the condemnation of that (if they
can) and will quench the life and power of it, that so if God should seek for
it against them, it might no where be found. But these men are in the way of
this wickedness, as a wild Bull in a net (as Esaias speaks) the more they
struggle and tear themselves to get out, the more they are entangled, and
further and faster in: the more they kick at this greatness of spirit in the
true borne Saints of God, which discovers it self in making out an
outstretched arm for Heaven, and bestowing themselves upon it, they do but
increase their bands the more, and purchase them selves a double instead of a
single condemnation. The Saints shall judge the world, let the world turn it
self which way it will, let it vex, and rage, and tear it self in pieces:
yea, and this judgment of the world by the Saints will be the sorer, by how
much more the world shall set themselves to judge the Saints I have but this
more to say to these men (for the present) He that will seek to stay or stop
men in their speed to Heaven, makes have himself to destruction, and there
shall be none to stay him.

This for the third Use of the point. Reproof.

The fourth and last Use is for Exhortation, and that to two duties: we shall
only touch upon the former. Since this minding, and improving opportunities
for Heaven, has this glorious testimony and approbation from him, who is the
Lord of Glory: let us all be exhorted to arm our selves with the same mind
(as Peter speaks and resolve to take this great thought and purpose of heart
to our selves this day, to show our selves men; yea, and (if it were possible)
more then men, for the compassing that condition wherein we shall be like to
the Angels: let us resolve to give out our strengh freely this way, and make no
spare of any thing that is in our hand to do. If rising early, or going to bed
late will carry it, if treading the world under foot will do it, if
abstaining from fleshly lusts (which fight against the soul) will advantage us
this way, if watching daily at wisdoms gates, and giving attendance at the
ports of her doors will do it, if crying unto God night and day will do it,
if doing whatsoever God commands us to do, will do it: let none of these
things from henceforth be grievous unto us: if the whole treasure of our might
and strength will fetch it, let us not spare to the uttermost mite or farthing:
let not heaven go one way, and we another: resolve with your selves never to
have Devils, if you may have God and Angels your companions at any rate.

To give you some ease and enlargement of heart, that you may take in the words
of this exhortation more willingly and freely, give me leave to propound and
press (a little) a motive or two amongst many.

First, consider that the great things of this world (falsely so called)
houses, lands, silver, gold, honors, pleasures, etc. they are but for the
short race, as soon as ever the wind of this present life passes away (be it
the hour next) the whole world is gone with it. This night (says God to the
rich man) they shall fetch away thy foul ( i. thy life) and then whose shall
these things be which thou have provided? implying that his they could be no
longer. Shall not this consideration enlarge our hearts mightily to pursue the
things of enternity with might and maine, viz. that there is nothing else to
pursue but the East wind (as the Scripture speaks) nothing but what is like
the Apples of Sodom (so much spoken of) which so soon as a man touches, or
lays hand on, are vanished into dust. If the world were any thing that were
able to stand in judgment or comparison, or would hold any proportion at all
with the things of heaven: the heart of a man might be put in some straight,
and endure some conflict in it self, and so might be overcome and carried
aside in its choice and resolution what to do. But as that ancient Father and
Martyr, when the persecuting Emperor offered him time of consideration, to
satisfy himself about sacrifising to his Idols, had his resolution in a
readiness, saying that in retan sancta deliberatio non habet locum, that was
not a point that admitted any deliberation. So if there were any thing of any
moment, of any valuable consideration in the world, to set up in competition
with the great things of heaven, it might cause some offense and stumbling in
the minds and thoughts of a man. If the world were any thing but what it is, a
man might (happily) make a stand to ask himself the question, whether he should
indeed follow the things of the world, or the things of heaven. But now the
things of the world being so unconceiveably light, and poor, and empty, and
will scarce hold the handling with the hand, or the looking on with the eye,
yea scarce the thinking upon with the heart: me thinks the soul of a man
should be carried and driven, as it were, with a spirit of disdain and
indignation, quite off from the world, upon the face of heaven, Neither turn
ye aside (says Samuel to the people) viz. 1. Sam. 12. 21.
from serving and following God, for that would be (says he) after vain
things that cannot profit you: implying, that it is one of the greatest grounds
and arguments in the world, for a man's keeping close to God, to know and
consider that there is nothing else to take up his heart, that is worth the
looking on: there is nothing else to purchase but broken Cisterns that will
hold no water, and broken Reeds that will run into a man's hand, instead of
supporting him. Alas! all that the world gains in the hearts and affections of
men, that it exercises such power and command over our desires, is not by the
means of any loveliness, strength, or power it has in it self, but rather
by means of the superstition of the dreams we dream of it, by means of the
lying imaginations of our hearts concerning it. And the truth is, heaven should
have no such great victory or conquest of it, no such great honor done unto
it, to be never so much preferred or exalted in our desires and affections
above it.

Secondly, consider, that as the things of the world have all their usefulness
confined and limited to this present life of nature which we live in the
world: so is the time of this life altogether uncertain, and little other then
an unknown nothing. The earth is a very slippery standing, to him that thinks
he stands fastest: the strongest man's foundation is but the dust; these houses
of clay, even those that are of the best building, are in danger of droping
down about our ears every hour. The Lord that knows our making, and the
terms of our standing in the flesh better then our selves, gives us a perfect
account thereof in this expression ( Esa. 2. 22.) when he tells us that our
breath is in our nostrils, when the passage is always open, neither is there
any door to shut to keep it in: yea, the condition of it is such; that the
laboring or striving to keep it in, is the next way to extinguish it, or to
cause it to go forth never to return. Therefore how infinitely does it
concern us above all that can be uttered or conceived, to belay and make sure
for a building or house from heaven, lest our earthly tabernacle being
dissolved on a sudden, we should not have where to hide our heads from the
fiery rage and tempest of the most insupportable wrath and vengeance of God for
ever. 1. Sam. 19 11.
As Michal said unto David, when time was concerning the imminent danger of his
life natural. If thou savest not thy self this night, to morrow thou shall be
slain: so it may be the case of the best and greatest and youthfullest of us,
that if we defer it a day longer, if we will not even this now be persuaded
to lay hold on eternal life, to morrow our souls may be slain with eternal
death.

Thirdly (and lastly) to persuade you to raise your labors and endeavors for
heaven to the highest, and to abhor and tremble at all looseness, and
low-spiritednesse that way, consider that heaven is a prize that is not to be
gotten with dallying, or by looking another way, or minding other things: he
that makes it not the great standing business of his life, will never carry
it. Thy bread will never be eaten but in the sweat of the brow. There is a
kind of Devil that will not out (as our Savior tells us) but by prayer and
fasting: this Devil will not go, nor heaven come but upon great and high
terms. Know ye not (says Paul to the Corinthians) that they, which run in
a race, run all, but one receives the prize; So run that ye may obtain;
clearly implying that running it self will not carry this prize, except it
be a running indeed, a running after the manner of those that outrunne their
competitors in the race: a man may go far, and yet come short: we may do
much, and yet to little purpose. If a man strive for mastery (says the same
Apostle elsewhere) yet is he not crowned except he strive lawfully, i. except
in striving he observes the Laws and conditions propounded and enjoined by
him, that bestows the prize, and makes the race. To say Lord, Lord, only,
i. to make profession of the service of God, and of subjection and obedience to
Jesus Christ, is not the Law or rule that God has appointed for the races,
wherein heaven is to be obtained: men must be operative and active in doing
the will of God which is in heaven, otherwise they are no company for him (in
that holy habitation of his glory.) Men must quit themselves like men on earth,
or never look to be like Angels in heaven. Those crowns of righteousness
and life will never go at the low and base rates of delicacie, case, and
sloathfulnesse. He that degenerates and corrupts himself with any of these,
gives hostages to the Devil, that he will keep him company, and be his
second in the midst of the torments of hell for eternity. Therefore strive to
enter in at the narrow gate: yea, I say again, strive to enter, the entrance
will abundantly pay for the striving: but woe be to him that shall not enter:
and the same woe will be to him that shall not strive. Yet a little while, and
the world that is present, will be the world that is past, and the world that
is to come will be the world present all the days of eternity.

This for the third and last Motive.

Concerning the deceased, a worthy Gentlewoman, and precious piece of mortality
she was, whilst she lived; and doubtless her name and memory deserve
imbalming with the sweetest odours and spices after the manner of the dearest
and chiefest Saints of God. Nevertheless, it is not much that I shall speak
of her; my custom in this case of speaking sparingly, being as a thing
consecrate unto me, I must not violate or sin against it: neither was it the
least of her comme^dations, of whom we now speak, that she affected that
less then any, which she deserved above most: I mean, praise and
commendation, distinguishing spiritually in this point of her practice, as the
Apostle himself seems to do in his precept, Phil. 4. 8. where he injoynes
men and women to think upon, and to follow the things themselves that are of
good report: but for the report it self belonging as due to the things, he
speaks no word of minding that.

Doubtless, if ever there were either man or woman since Mary's time, that
made Mary's choice, she was companion with them herein; and did likewise: the
way of her spirit and tenor of her life being a close example of that great
rule of the Apostle, for using this present world, as if we used it not. 1.
Cor. 7. 31. The zeal of heaven, and of the salvation of her soul had even
eaten her up. The delights and contentments of the world, which are wont
deeply to engage the affections of the daughters of men (especially of her
rank and years, being but about twenty six at her death) and to steal away
their hearts from their God, and from the noble and blessed contentments of
heven, had little or no power over her: they entermedled little with her
spirit: she trod and trampled upon them with a foot of heavenly disdain: her
heart was soft and tender upwards; but downwards toward the world hard as the
neither Millstone. When God spoke, he wounded her, the world cried and she
regarded not. Those cages of unclean birds the common Theaters or Play Houses
the shame and reproach, of the glorious profession of Jesus Christ amongst us,
so much hanted by unclean spirits, both of men and women; to whom modesty and
sobriety (surely) are a burden, and thither they go for ease and deliverance,
places, where if a man sought for company in the way to hell, he may find
choice of all sorts, where (I had almost said) a man may read whole pages of
Gods book of reprobation: these (I say) with all their execrable
appurtenances, the soul of this religious gentlewoman loathed and abhorred:
they were the firstborn of abominations unto her.

So for the costly vanity of apparel (though she sat by a fountain where
she might have drank her fill of these waters) she regarded it not: her
usual saying was: that she did not love to be talked of for her fine
clothes. But especially that great Goddess of her sexworshipped with so much
devotion, both by young and old, I mean Fancy or Fashion in apparel, she
blasphemed.

For richnes of furniture in her house another solemn temptation for her sex,
to add drunkenness to thirst, superfluity to necessity, non contempsit sed
neglexit; she did not so much contemn as neglect it. She did not affect or
desire to have her face seen and beheld by others in the glass of any such
glory. She was taken up with working out her salvation, and making robes of
immortality for her soul.

For the company and society of her delight, her heart went hand in hand (as it
were) with David's heart in this: Ps. 16. 4.
All her delight was in the Saints on earth, and in those that were excellent
that way. Those that could speak the language of Canaan, and discourse the
ways of life unto her, and minister any ways to her spiritual necessities,
though the gold ring were wanting, and the costly apparel appeared not, were
they persons of never so mean rank and condition in the world; yet were they
a joy and rejoicing of heart unto her. As on the other hand, no earthly
privilege, no greatness in the world, no accomplishments of nature could make
an atonement with her for light and loose, and unsavouble spirits, to cause
her to take pleasure or contentment in them.

The remembrance of that hour (which has now passed over her) when she
should be called out of the world, wrought mightily in her, and gave her little
liberty to mind other things: it cooled and quenched the inordinate heat of
affection (whereunto she was by nature as incident as others) to the things of
this world. She would often say, it was no light matter for men to appear before
God, to give an account of their lives.

Her manner was day by day to give the first of her strength every morning unto
God, in lifting up her soul in prayer unto him: upon her awaking she was still
present with him (as David speaks) yea, when her strength began to be but
labor and sorrow, by reason of her sickness; yet did she not take an occasion
hereby to intermit her daily sacrifice, or to behave her self frowardly in
this Covenant of her God. As long as she had any being though it were never so
weak and feeble, her resolutions remained as strong as ever, to praise the
Lord. The very night before her death, she presented this sacrifice of prayer
unto her God upon her knees.

Another daily exercise, and breathing of her soul likewise was to converse
with the mind and thoughts of God in the Scriptures. Her manner indeed was not
to read much at a time: but hereof she gave this conscientious reason, that
she desired to make that her own which she read. So that it seems still as
she read, she writ it out in the Tables of her heart. And so by the blessing
of God upon her diligent, and constant labors this way, she had attained
before her death a marveilous readiness in the Scriptures, and was able
(ordinarily) to supply the defect of a Concordance, and to assign any clause
or passage of Scripture mentioned to her, to their proper place, both for Book
and Chapter.

The house of God, and a golden shower from heaven in the Ministry of the
Gospel, were the strength of her life, and the great consolation of her
pilgrimage, her attention to the words of eternal life in the mouths of Gods
messengers, was constantly so reverent, serious, and undistracted, that it was
the observation, together with the rejoicing of some, that had communion with
her in that ordinance, these spiritual clouds could never drop fatness, but
she was still ready, if she knew when the time of their dropping was, with the
vessel of her soul to receive it.

The Lords day was a day of much observation unto her: she remembered to ^eepe
it holy, and called it her delight. That which remained of it from public
duties, she converted, with as little loss or waste as might be, into
opportunities for private.

Her spirit was full of a sweet and gracious humility: it was no way grievous
unto her, to make her self equal to those of the lower sort. A free and
familiar companion she was for all those that feared God, and that were
partakers of like precious faith with her.

Abundant she was in works of mercy, and lent much unto the Lord: she
understood what silver and gold were good for, and gave them freely unto the
owners. A woman she was of very tender bowels, and of overflowing compassions,
to those that were in misery.

In this course of life she was perfectly engaged, before that remembrancer of
her mortality, that lingering sickness, that came to live and die with her, was
sent unto her. God (doubtless) putting it into her heart, to prepare and
strengthen the inner man, the time drawing near, wherein her outer man, was to
decay and perish. During the time of her sickness (which continued some
months upon her) her carriage under the hand of God, was humble, and gracious,
and with much submission. She was in travel with the great birth of
immortality, from the very entrance of her infirmity upon her: and (I make no
question) but after all here other weakness, God gave her strength to bring
forth that. She was much in prayer unto God by her self, in private, yet
desirous also of the assistance of others, when opportunity served. Her
conference still was, upon that subject, or theme, whereof our Savior spoke so
much to his Disciples immediately before his ascending up into heaven, viz. of
the Kingdom of God: and cared indeed little to speak of any thing besides.
There were now and then some buddings of hope of amendment and recovery, which
were soon nipp'd and blasted again. But these hopes were no snares unto her:
she went on with her preparations for Heaven, and that with a high hand, until
the God of her salvation said, It is enough. To relate all particulars would be
as needless, as endless: I have detained you too long already. I have no more
to say. A sweet, loving, and virtuous young woman she was, meet for a
pattern to her sex and years, of piety, holiness, and the fear of the
Lord. Mary's good part was her choice: and a joyful resurrection (doubtless)
will be her reward: where they to whom she was dear in her life, walking in
her steps, may expect the seeing of her the second time in communion and
fellowship of the same glory with her.

December. 8. 1640.
Imprimatur

T. Wykes.

FINIS.

