The Blasphemous Socinian HERESY Disproved and Confuted, WHEREIN The Doctrinal
and Controversial Parts of those Points are handled, and the Adversaries
Scripture and School-Arguments answered:

WITH Animadversions upon a late Book called, Christianity not Mysterious:
Humbly Dedicated to Both Houses of PARLIAMENT.

By J. GAILHARD, Gent.

And many other things blasphemously spoke they against him, Luke 22.65. And we
know that the son of God is come, and has given us understanding, that we may
know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus
Christ, this is the true God and eternal life, 1 John 5.20. Textus non fallit,
multos speciosa fefellit
Glossa, Dei verbo nitere, tutus eris.
LONDON: Printed for R. Wellington at the Lute in S. Paul's Churchyard, and J.
Hartley, over against Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn. 1697.

TO THE Lords and Commons NOW IN PARLIAMENT Assembled.
Right Honorable and Honorable,
AT this time God's Providence has brought you together, to consult about the
great Concerns of the Nation; and the Matter I now do most humbly offer to your
serious Consideration, is one of, if not the most important that can be laid
before you; for it does conduce to the Glory of God, the Peace of the Church,
as by Law established, the Asserting and Defense of its Doctrine, and to the
Welfare of the Kingdom.

Though I presume to appear upon so high a Stage, and draw upon me the Eyes of
as August, and upon every account as famous an Assembly as any in the World:
Yet the Subject I go upon holding so near a Proportion with the Station and
Dignity wherein God has placed you, will I hope secure me from being aspersed
with Rashness and Vainglory, or accounted a Busie-Body. I offer you a Field of
Honor, and an occasion of exercising your Piety toward God, Love to Truth,
your Justice and Wisdom with putting a stop to and a Curb upon a boundless and
blasphemous Impiety, which seems openly to defy Heaven and Earth: Psalm. 111.3.
It Is God's Work, which, as David says, is honorable and glorious; it is good,
necessary, and great; but Time is short and uncertain, therefore must be well
improved, for the Opportunity may happen to be lost, never to be recovered, so
it is wished the thing be done whilst it may, and before it be too late; to time
things well is one of the best parts of Prudence, and one of the most Essential
Circumstances of our Actions: Among the several Seasons and Times mentioned by
Solomon we read of two, Eccles. 3.7
a time to keep silence, which I look upon to be over, and a time to speak,
which I take now to be fully come.

There ought to be a proportion between the Distemper and the Remedy, thus
extreme Distempers require extreme Remedies, and an extraordinary Necessity
does vindicate an extraordinary Method in the Use thereof: When the Watchman
whose immediate Duty is to give warning, does, through Sluggishness, or other
Cause, at the approach of the Enemy, neglect to blow the Trumpet, then every
one concerned in the Community has right to do it for the Preservation of the
whole. That Passage of Craesus's dumb Son, who one day perceiving how some went
about to, kill his Father, was so much stirred as to cry out Murder; though
trivial, may well be admitted upon the present occasion; for no true Christian
having before his Eyes the near and great Danger which our holy Religion lies
under, upon the account of some damnable Heresies now more than ever brought in
again, but must be moved and cry out against it: But what do I talk of danger,
when the evil it self, the Philistines are upon us? The Enemy is not only at the
Gates, but in the very body of the place, and in the Bowels of the Church, and
to speak in Moses's words, Number. 16.46.
There is wrath gone out from the Lord, the plague is begun; for blasphemous
Socinianism attended by Atheism, Deism, Profaneness, Immorality, yea, and
Idolatry, etc. does bare and brazen-faced walk in our Streets, as much as in it
lies, to deprive us of our blessed Lord and Savior, so it strikes at no less
than the Head and Author of our Salvation: And men are puffed up, and have not
rather mourned, 1 Cor. 5.2.
that they that do this deed, might be taken away from among us. To what
purpose is Popery or Idolatry expelled, if Socinianism or Blasphemy be let in?

But I am not so hasty, as to affirm Popish Idolatry to be turned out, for we
know too much of the contrary, witness those Swarms of Priests which are in and
about the City, and the many places where, I shall not say in private, for it is
public enough, the Wafer-Idol-Worship is performed against the Laws of God and
of the Land, which some that should, do not mind nor care for; whereupon we
have much cause to renew the Apostle's Complaint, All seek their own, Phil.
2.21.
not the things that are Jesus Christ's: And in the Country almost every Popish
Family of any note, has a Priest when able to keep it; all this for want of
due care to see Laws against them put in execution.

Upon this account a thing there is which does so much lie in my way, as that I
cannot avoid taking notice of it; and indeed the thing is so public, that many
have and do daily with a kind of Indignation wonder at it: As in this World
nothing is free from God's Jurisdiction, so when we have an occasion to speak
of his Cause, nothing has Immunity or Privilege to plead for: Here we have an
Ambassador, who for himself and Family has a private Chapel in his own
House, and a public one in a Street not far from it, for any one that has a
mind to come to it: We know it to be a Privilege as good as grounded upon the
Right of Nations, for every foreign Minister to have within his doors the free
Exercise of his Religion for his Person and Household, but a Plurality has no
ground to plead for: Here it has been unknown and unheard of since the
Reformation, that any foreign Minister was at any time allowed two Chapels: In
the supernumerary one I and many more besides, to whom it is an Eyesore, have
on Mass days seen and still can see Three or Four Hundred People going in and
out, not the Ambassador or his Family, if you except the Priest and his Clerk,
with, may be, some inferior Servants, but generally all English, and perhaps
some few Irish and others. We may well remember, how under a Reign which never
was commended for Piety, I mean of Charles II. when the Parliament complained,
and the People grumbled about the growth of Popery; that Prince not only said,
Gentlemen, offer what you think fit for the Security of your Religion and
Liberty, and I will give my Consent to it, but withal, he sent to all foreign
Ministers to desire them to receive none of his Subjects within their Chapel
Doors; also Men were sent thither to watch who went in and out, to give an
account of it: And if we well look into the thing in hand, we may find it is
like to be of ill and troublesome Consequence; for the Party in question is of a
Nation, which when once they have been in possession of a thing, will willingly
never part with, but for ever lay a claim to it; when this Man is gone, his
Successor will, according to their Maxim, never fail to pretend to Two
Chapels, and this will be a Precedent for other foreign Popish Ministers to
lay claim to Two; for if one has it, why not another? Which may happen to
engage us in some Difficulties: Besides that, here common People love not to
see unnecessary Popish Monuments, and God knows whether or not at one time or
other may not into their Head come some fancy of being rude, besides, those are
Meeting-places for Papists to plot against the Government, which
Inconveniences, I humbly conceive, it were both Piety and Prudence betimes to
prevent, and upon this Motive only, with Submission to Superiors, I speak of
it, though Blasphemy be the thing I now chiefly aim against.

Yet both Idolatry and Blasphemy are the two greatest Abominations of all in
the sight of God, for which he destroyed the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah, and
overturned the Assyrian, Babylonian, and other great Empires: And to come home,
to the Toleration of those Two transcendent Wickednesses among others, I think
we may chiefly attribute the cause of the heavy Chastisements which make the
Nation uneasy, and he is very blind that does not see, and insensible that
takes no notice of both, I mean Sin and Chastisement; and I most humbly beseech
God to avert from us that terrible Threatening by his Prophet, for at least we
are as bad as those whom it is directed to, Isai. 26.11.
Lord when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall see and be
ashamed. What a matter of unexpressible Grief is it, for true Christians to see
in a Nation an Incorrigibleness under great and many Judgments, as we read
enumerated by the Prophet, and withal, the greatest of all, a Hardness of
Heart; as if the Anvil should say to the Hammer, strike as often and as hard as
thou will, Amos 4. from 6. to 12.
I will never be the softer, Yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord;
Men will consider neither God's Work nor his Word, the Dispensations of his
Providence nor his Ordinances, the Workings of God nor the Words of Men; the
Prophet's Counsel is worth following by every one in his station, Let us search
and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord. Lament. 3 40.
In comparison of the utter Destruction of Jerusalem and Judah, our
Chastisements here are but like Whips, instead of those with Scorpions; but let
us have a care lest we hear, Isai. 5.25.
for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still: We have been threatened with Insurrections and Invasions, the danger is
not over, we have Enemies at home, and one potent, crafty and faithless at our
Doors, a Nation as bitter, hasty, Habak. 1.6.
and insolent as ever the Chaldeans were: God has made use of them to chastise
others, and so they are a Rod in his hand, when he pleases against us; and
besides, I tremble at the reading of this Threatening, Zech. 11.6.
for I will no more pity the inhabitants of the land, says the Lord; but lo, I
will deliver the men, every one, into his neighbors hand, and into the hand of
his late King, who very likely would prove a tearing and furious Lion, broke
loose out of his Den, full of Hatred and Vengeance: However, we must fear God
more than them; for it is usual when Men fear any thing more than God, that very
same thing does befall them; and if they walk contrary unto God, Levit. 26.28.
then says the Lord, I will walk contrary unto them also in fury, which Fury
is a consuming Fire, and knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.11.
says S. Paul, out of a consideration of a Judgment to come we would persuade
men, who generally act out of fear of Punishment more than out of love to that
which is good.

If Men should hold their peace, the stones, Luke 19.40.
says our blessed Savior, would immediately cry out; for God never wants
Instruments, but can and does fit them for his Work, and never leaves himself
without Witness: We read how he rebuked Balaam for his iniquity, 2 Pet. 2.16.
the dumb ass speaking with man's voice, forbad the madness of the prophet; much
more does God make use of Men, whom he has endu'd with Reason, and the
knowledge of himself and of his Grace, whom he will have not to halt between two
opinions; if Christ be God, follow him, if he be not, follow him not. To deny
the most holy Trinity, and our Savior's Divinity, is, as much as in a Man
lies, to go about to pull our Religion up by the very root, and quite to
overthrow it: Yet Men are concerned to know that Religion is the Basis and
Foundation that bears up and supports the Civil Government: The true Church of
God shall at last be seen truly to uphold the State, seeing the World it self
stands and shall continue only till the Number of the Elect be filled up, and
then it will come to an end; in the mean while, without Rewards and
Punishments, no Society whether Civil or Ecclesiastical can stand any long time.

Seeing the most holy Godhead it self is stricken at, all are concerned to know
who are the detestable Wretches that made themselves guilty of so impious an
Attempt: The Devil has his Instruments of several sorts which concur with him
in that wicked Work, those Achans the Troublers of our Israel, are some among
us which upon the account of Novelty, Acts 17.21.
always like the Areopagites in Athens, spend their time in nothing else, but
either to tell or to hear some new thing: Others out of a vain Glory or
Affectation of Singularity and Self conceit of Learning: Others whom the Father
of Lies has disposed ever to oppose the Truth: Some others that have been
perverted by the Conversation and Books of such Seducers, wherein that Poison,
as I hope I made it clear, is through Sophistry spread in a specious shape and
plausible manner, and to suffer such Books stuffed with Blasphemies to be
imported and here printed and sold publicly, is dangerous and against Law:
Others of a bold and confident Spirit are ready to own any thing, and some
others out of different Motives, but all out of ill Principles: But withal here
we have a Generation of Men openly allowed, who as much as their Predecessors,
are violent and bitter Enemies to the Lord Jesus, I mean the Jews, who are used
not to be wanting in their endeavors to promote the Blasphemy; to these modern
may in some degree be applied what the Apostle says of the Ancients, to fill
up their sins always, they would not have Christ as Messiah and true Son of
God, 1 These. 2.16.
to be spoken of to the Gentiles, for the wrath is come upon them to the
uttermost: With these and any other Enemies to the Lord Jesus, even with
Mahometans, that Socinian Generation of Vipers, are ever ready to join Heads,
to promote their common Cause. Besides the Jews, here are other. Foreigners
calling themselves Christians, who beyond Sea, for fear of Fire and Faggot,
durst not own such Blasphemies, as here they are bold enough to dogmatize
about. Tho in Men there be a freedom of Thoughts and Opinions, yet when they
are so saucy as to vent and publish their Impieties, 'twere but just their foul
Mouths should be stopped: It makes mine Ears to tingle, and my Heart to ache,
when I read a certain place in Scripture, wherein God complains, and as he
never does it in vain, so if there be no Redress, he is sure to punish for it;
though the whole Verse be not to my purpose, only the latter part, yet not to
leave out any thing thereof, nor to separate that which the Holy Ghost has
joined together, I shall quote it as it is: Now therefore what have I here,
Isa. 52.5.
says the Lord, that my people is taken away for naught? they that rule over
them, make them to howl, says the Lord, and my name continually every day is
blasphemed; we may add almost every where in the Streets, Men Curse, Swear, and
notwithstanding Acts of Parliaments, Blaspheme every way, which often strikes
me with horror, and makes one's Hair stand on end. To what purpose are Laws
enacted if they be not executed? Only to make contemptible the Legislative
Power, instead of that awful Reverence which Men ought to have for it.

My Lords and Honorable, the Question is not about trivial Matters, it is the
Cause of the Lord Jesus, from whom your Dignity and Authority are derived, and
for whom it is expected you would make use of it, for he is the Only Lord and
Potentate to whom all Judgment is committed, and for whom ye judge; the Sword
is put into your Hands for a terror to evil works, Romans 13.3, 4.
such is Blasphemy, and ye bear it not in vain, for ye are the ministers of
God, revengers to execute wrath upon him that does evil; and as ye are Keepers
of both Tables of the Law, God requires of you that when nothing else can
serve, ye should punish the transgressors of the first, as well as those of
the second; in God's Cause, none ought to be idle, but all must set their
helping hand and be active within the sphere of their Station. Thus having laid
open the Disease, I leave it for your Piety and Christian Wisdom to find out
and apply the true and proper Remedy, I mean such as in Scripture Language may
not be called Ezekiel. 13.10, 11, 14, 15.
daubing with untempered mortar. Solomon says, Prove. 14.9.
fools make a mock at sin; in his style, the Sinner is a Fool, and is so
indeed; Sin is a great Distemper, and that Wise Man prescribes a fit and proper
Remedy for it, when he says, chap. 26.3.
a rod for the fool's back; that is, the Sinner ought to be punished for Sin,
and to the Magistrates it belongs to do it. Now there is no greater Sin than
Blasphemy, wherefore it deserves the heaviest Punishment to make the Pain hold
a proportion with the Offense.

In the mean while, I humbly beg leave to lay two Things before you; First,
God's Precepts do contain Promises and Threatenings, which both in his due time
shall be performed. Secondly, God sees and knows when Men do or do not observe
and execute his Laws, for he knows all Things; as to the first, though it be
every Man's Duty to obey him, yet to encourage us to it, he is graciously
pleased to propose Rewards: Are ye for Honors? We know who said, them that
honor me I will honor, 1 Samuel 2.30.
and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. To endeavor to make our
selves precious in God's sight with doing him Service, especially in Things
relating to his Glory, is the true and ready way to attain to Honor; for, Isa.
43.4.
since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and not
before, says God, and I have loved thee; wherefore if thou will continue so,
have a care to preserve thy self in my Love and Favor. Are ye for Riches? 1 Chronicles. 29.12.
Both riches and honor come of thee, says David; and in the case of taking
care of God's House, which is what I now am upon, hear what says the God of
Truth, when that is done, Malach 2.10.
prove me now therewith, says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the
windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing that there shall not be room
enough to receive it; and if to Honor and Riches you desire a long Life in the
enjoyment thereof to be added, it is to be had out of the same Spring, Prove. 3.16
for length of days is in the right hand of the Eternal Wisdom, the Son of God,
and in her left hand riches and honor, all three put together, chap. 22.4. 1
King. 3.13.
by humility and the fear of the Lord, are riches, and honor, and life; and, I
also have given thee riches and honor, says God to Solomon, so are glory,
honor and peace, even in abundance, as to 2 Chronicles. 17.5.
Jehoshaphat; all are God's Gifts, so are Romans 2.10.
glory, honor and peace; but no true Honor without Virtue or true Piety,
which the Heathens were sensible of, when upon their Coins they joined them
together, Honos and Virtus; and their Temple of Virtue laid on the way to that
of Glory.

Or do ye desire Pleasures, which is one of the God's of the World? They may be
had at God's Hand, not the Pleasures of Sin which are but for a season, but
true and solid ones, which the Royal Prophet speaks of, Psalm. 16.11.
in thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore; if then ye care for Rewards, after which in Man is a natural desire,
God to encourage Men to do their Duty toward him, has promised he will
plentifully Reward, both in this Life, and that which is to come. Deuteronomy. 28.
Blessed shall thou be in the City and in the field, in the fruit of thy body,
of thy ground and of thy cattle, etc. then shall our Enemy fall before us, over
whom, as yet, we could get no Advantage; for we must not wonder if God does not
bless us with Successes, nor if hardly any thing we go about does not prosper,
as long as the accursed thing is among us; and if ye will successfully settle
your own Houses, after the Example of the good Kings of Judah, begin with
God's, purge it of all its Filth, and he will take care of yours, prosper and
establish them: If ye mind the Honor of God and the Good of his Church, with
keeping out the Ravenous Wolves that would break into it, then he will guide
and direct in the weighty Affairs which now are, and hereafter shall be before
you, and will preside among you with his Spirit of Wisdom, Knowledge and
Understanding, extricate and overcome the greatest Difficulties, and his
gracious Providence will be as a Wall of Fire round about you.

God's Commands are attended not only with Promises to the Observers, but also
with Threatenings to the Breakers and Neglecters thereof; for this, Scripture is
full of Proofs, and therein God has pronounced a Curse against those who do
his work deceitful, Jerem. 48.10.
in the case of executing Justice and Judgment, and it is but Justice what we
now call for: the very same Person, the Eternal Son of God, whose Cause within
your Station, I do humbly commend unto you, shall at last come into the World
in the glory of his Father with his Angels, Matt. 16.27. chap. 25.
to reward every man according to his works; and the unprofitable as well as
the wicked servant, which with him is but one and the same, shall be cast into
outer darkness where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. When Men neglect
to Secure and Promote the Glory of God, he has in his Hand ways and means
enough to lay their Honor in the Dust: This I speak not of my self, for it is
God's Language, and indeed it ought to be looked upon as the Voice of God not
of Man, because grounded upon God's and not Man's Word; and I could almost be
content never to be able to persuade, if at this Time and Occasion, I could
effectually do it upon these Considerations, that soon or late we all must die,
how soon, God alone knows, not we, for we have no certain Leases of our Lives;
then comes Judgment, and our Works, whether good or bad, shall follow us,
which we must give an account of; and indeed, this should make us tremble, as
well as Felix, Acts 24.25.
when Paul reasoned of judgment to come. The Parable of the Talents shall then
actually become matter of fact, and the slothful and careless for want of
exercising them, shall be severely dealt withal. Negative Sins, though many
mind them not, shall be the cause of Damnation; for we see in the Description
of the last Judgment, made by our Savior, the only Sins named, for which Men
shall be damned, are all of omission, ye gave me no meat, ye gave me no drink,
ye clothed me not, ye visited me not; ye minded me not, and ye did not for me
what ye ought and might have done; Matt. 25.
therefore, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. This is terrible to hear, and shall be more to feel: O
that to prevent this dreadful Doom, in our several Stations we were able with
Bernard to say, Wherever I am, and whatsoever I do, it seems to me as if I had
heard the voice of the Archangel saying, arise ye dead and come to judgment;
this is the ready way to be prepared for it, and to avoid being surprised
therewith, and to live every moment as if that same was the last of our Life,
and the next, Luke 16.2.
give an account of thy Stewardship; this ought to make every one keep his
accounts ready, for though Men are apt to put off till to morrow what can be
done to day, there shall then be no procrastination; whilst it is time, Matt. 24.
let us do our Duty, and blessed, yea, thrice blessed shall that servant be,
whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing, but woe be to him that shall be
found doing the contrary, as if because his Lord delayeth his coming, he was
never to come and call to an account; David gives us the Character of a wicked
Man to say, God will not require it, though he speaks it not with his Tongue,
but only says it in his Heart, and his saying so, is there called a Contempt
of God; wherefore does the wicked contemn God? Psalm. 10.13.
he has said in his heart, thou shall not require it.

Now the Second thing to be laid before you, Heb 4.13.
I shall but name, it is this, all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of
him with whom we have to do; he is present every where, Psalm. 139. and Ezekiel.
11.5.
all seeing and all knowing; he is acquainted with all our ways, all our words,
and he understands all our thoughts afar off, so cannot be deceived nor
imposed upon; and if Men forsake the Lord's Cause, he will forsake them, then
look for nothing but Misery and Calamity, which I think again and again, I now
may safely say, for I hope, we at this time have no Amaziah to speak thus, but
prophecy not again any more of Bethel, Amos 7.1^.
for it is the King's chapel, and it is the King's court, for in such places
they loved not to hear the Truth nor of unpleasant Things, but it is spoken of
the Court of the Kings of Israel, who after the renting of the Ten Tribes, from
first to last proved bad every one, which was not altogether of those of Judah,
where was a mixture of some good and some bad.

Seeing Arguments drawn out of God's Word, the common and general Consent of
the Christian Church since the Apostles time, and out of true sound Reason,
cannot work upon or prevail with a sort of Men hardened and obstinate in their
Opinions, and of whom long ago David said, Psalm. 64.5.
they encourage themselves in an evil matter; and the Apostle foretold of such
false teachers who should privily, 2 Pet. 2.1.
at first and then openly, bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord
that bought them, that is, the Lord Jesus Savior of the World, to be true God,
natural and consubstantial Son of God; I say, it is not improper to apply our
selves unto the Civil Power, that he would make use of the lawful Authority
which God for his own Glory has put into his hands; with some others we have
done our part with offering in this Discourse good Arguments to assert and bear
Record for the Truth, but remembering the Apostle's Rule, a man that is an
heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject knowing that he that is
such, is subverted and sins, being condemned of himself; we think such may
well be condemned by those who have right to do it, thereby to put a stop to the
spreading of a mortal Gargrene, in a most corrupt and backsliding Age.

Herein we go upon Two Heads, Heresy and Blasphemy, against which we have both
Gospel and Law, Divine and Human; no Error more fundamental than that which
impiously strikes at the Nature and Persons of the Godhead. The Blasphemer was
by God's immediate Command, stoned to death by the whole Congregation, Levit.
24.24.
because as the Sin and Scandal were public, so was the Punishment to be; and
here the Law allows the Ecclesiastical Courts to proceed against Offenders in
the Capital Cases of Heresy and Blasphemy; Capital I call them, for if in human
Things, Treason and Rebellion be so, then fundamental Heresy and Blasphemy are
such in those of a Divine Nature, Sir Tho. Ridley's View of the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Laws, p. 59. see the Margin.
against such is provided Sentence of Death, which here has actually been
executed upon some; thus one Bartholomew Legate, for these Arian and Socinian
Blasphemies, was on the 18th. of March in 1611. burnt in Smithfield; and in the
following Month of April, Edward Wightman was for the same burnt at Litchfield.
Queen Elizabeth having heard of some of them in her time, said, She was grieved
to hear she had such Monsters in her Kingdoms. If Bishop Hall was now alive,
how much more cause would he have had to say, Irem. Sect. 23. hoc avo, etc.
In this Age the Souls of Christians are seduced, not only by Papists,
Anabaptists, Antinomians and Pelagians, sed and per infernalem Socinianorum
haeresim, but by means of the hellish Heresy of Socinians, Anti trinitarians,
New Arians, we have cause here in England to fear the utmost and last
Destruction of Christian Religion. Let upon this account no just Cause be given
to renew that Lamentation of Jeremiah, the Law is no more, chap. 2.9.
least out of a just Judgment of God this should follow, the Gospel is no more
for us. I tremble to think how at last God will with a witness take notice of
those who now take no notice of him, nor of his Concerns: We read the Character
of a wicked Man in the Person of Pharaoh, Exodus 5.2.
when he said, Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I
know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go. Well, says God, I will make
thee know me before I have done with thee; wherefore in Scripture by the
Prophets, especially by Ezekiel, in so many places, God's usual Style when
either he threateneth or executes Judgments, is this, and they shall know that
I am the Lord; Ezekiel. 30.19. chap. 20.26.
he says, thus will I execute judgments in Egypt, and they shall know that I
am the Lord; and sometimes these Punishments are inflicted, to the end they
might know that I am the Lord. God grant none in this Land for want of
performing their Duty in his Station, do provoke God in the way of Judgments to
make them know he is the Lord, who both acts and speaks with a strong hand.
Isa. 8.11.


Whether or not the Ecclesiastical Court has in this occasion of Socinianism,
acted its part according to Laws, I must not take it upon me, but leave it for
the World to judge; but this I now do insist upon, that whether or not it be
done, in conformity to Law, the Magistrate is about it to be addressed to, for
in such cases, he at last is to act his part, as ever 'twas practiced by those
Christian Emperors, who upon the like occasion, minded the Glory of God: But
here we must stop a little for fear of being thought to insinuate to our
Superiors any thing relating to the Duty of their place, which we are not so
vain as to think of in the least; but one of the Grounds we go upon is out of
the Book called the Reformation of the Ecclesiastical Laws; began in the days
of Henry VIII. and continued in the time of Edward VI. under the Head of
Judgment against Heresies; these words are positive, Tum consumptis omnibus
aliis remediis ad extremum ad Civiles Magistratus ablegetur puniendus.
Every other Remedy proving useless, the obstinate Heretic must at last be
sent to the Civil Magistrate to be punished. De judiciis contra haereses, c. 4.
de contumacibus Haereticis; and as to the point of Blasphemy, in the first
Chapter under that Head, is pathetically expressed the detestableness of that
most wicked, and in some Sense unpardonable Sin; in Chap. 2d. quomodo sit
punienda blasphemia, it is said, sit igitur hoc a nobis constitutum, ut haec
execrabilis blasphemiarum impietas, quam primum de ea rite constiterit ab
Episcopis, nulla ratione toleretur sed eodem supplicio confixa sit, qua
pertinax haereticorum insania plectitur, etc. wherefore we order thus, that the
execrable Impiety of Blasphemy, as soon as the Bishops have found it out, shall
by no means be tolerated, but shall suffer the same Punishment as is inflicted
upon obstinate Heretics; the constiterit is not so much in relation to
Blasphemy it self, which is easily known when either things belonging to God as
Infiniteness, Eternity, Unchangeableness, Holiness, etc. are denied him and
attributed to the Creatures, or when things contrary to his Nature as to lie,
to deny himself, etc. are fathered upon him, or when Men do curse him; but the
constiterit does regard the Blasphemer and guilty Wretch, when he is found out;
according to this, Ridley in his View, etc. p. 35, 36.
Bishops are to take Cognizance, inquire into, and declare whether or not the
Person or Persons be guilty of Blasphemy, which being clear, he or they are to
be delivered into the Civil Magistrates hands, but if through neglect or
otherwise, any of the Bishops happen not to act their Part, but stop the Course
of Justice, certainly the Magistrate is to look into it, and do his Duty though
others do not theirs, it is nothing but what is very Just, that every Man's hand
should be against those Ishmaels, whose hand is against every Man.

As to the Laws, I mentioned just before, they were by the Excellent Persons
named by the King, collected and finished under Edward VI. the Pious Josiah of
that Age, and so were then received with great and general Approbation; both
Kings, Father and Son, by right of their Supremacy, as we may see it in both
their Letters, gave them a Character of Authority, and if they were not passed
into an Act; the only Cause was the untimely Death of that young Prince who
designed it, and the Business had already been proposed in Parliament, as we
see it out of these words of his Epistle to Archbishop Cranmer, etc. Cum vos
triginta duos viros, ad leges nostras Ecclesiasticas perlegendas and
componendas, juxta vim, formam and effectum cujusdam Acti Parliamenti in tertio
regni nostri anno, etc. So that there is something of a Parliament's Authority,
and if there be any thing wanting, it lies in your Power to set a
Parliamentary Stamp upon it, especially those Heads that relate to the Divine
Moral Law, as do those about Heresy, Blasphemy and Idolatry, wherein God's
Honor is immediately concerned; for certainly we are come to the last days and
perilous times foretold by the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2.
when amidst other Sins, Men shall be Blasphemers: 2 Kings 19.3.
And I think I may be allowed in King Hezekiah's Words to say, this is a day of
trouble and blasphemy, which, I hope, shall by your lawful Authority be
rebuked, as now we do most humbly sue for; and I make bold once to say, what a
Prophet said twice, upon the account of neglecting God's House, Hagg. 1.5, 7.
Thus says the Lord God of Hosts, consider your ways; like Mary, keep and
ponder these things in your Hearts; for what she heard, and you hear, relate to
the same Person, and are the Concerns of the Son of God.

Out of those Words arises in me the Consideration of what our Savior says,
Matt. 12.42.
The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this nation, and
shall condemn it: When those that want Light, go farther in a good way than
they that have it greater, these shall meet with a harder usage; Luke 12.47.
for that servant which knew his lords will, and prepared not himself, neither
did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes: It Is very sad and
afflicting, to think how some Heathens who in some things minded the Glory of
God, may at the last day rise up in the Judgment against some Christians for
too much neglecting it: One I name, Nebuchadnezzar, Ezech. 7.24.
whom God by his Prophet calls one of the worst of the heathen; yet that Man
having seen how God had preserved in the fiery Furnace the Three young Men who
had refused to fall before and worship his golden Image, how much was he
wrought upon? He blessed the Most High God, but stopped not there, for he made
use of his Authority; therefore, says he, I make a decree, that every people,
nation, and language which speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses be made a
dunghill, because there is no other god that can deliver after this sort; this
after the sight of a Miracle: And is not the whole Life of Christ the God of
Christians, a continual working of Miracles? But as to Belshazzar
Nebuchadnezzar's Son, let me take notice of Daniel's words to him, which
declare the cause of his Ruin, and of the Loss of his Kingdom and Life, Dan.
5.23.
And the God in whose hand thy life is, and whose are all thy ways, have thou
not glorified.

But I must not omit to take notice of some Canons and Ecclesiastical
Constitutions agreed upon in the Convocations of both Provinces, Canterbury and
York in 1640. and by Charles the First, for himself, Heirs, and lawful
Successors, by virtue of his Prerogative Royal and Supreme Authority in
Ecclesiastical Causes, according to the Form of an Act of Parliament in the
25th Year of the Reign of Henry VIII. straightly enjoined and commanded by the
said Authority and his Letters Patents, dated at Westminster the 30th day of
June, in the Sixteenth Year of his Reign, to be diligently observed and
executed. I shall mention only the Fourth Canon, against Socinianism, which is
to my purpose to show how at that time they took care to provide against it;
thus it begins, Whereas much Mischief is already done in the Church of God,
by the spreading of the damnable and cursed Heresy of Socinianism, as being a
complication of many ancient Heresies condemned by the Four first general
Councils, and contrary unto the Articles of Religion now established in the
Church of England: And whereas it is too apparent that the said wicked and
blasphemous Errors are unhappily dilated by the frequent divulgation and
dispersion of dangerous Books written in favor and fartherance of the same --
therefore, to provide against this, it is decreed, that no Stationer, Printer,
or Importer of the said Books, or any other Person whatsoever, shall print,
buy, sell, or disperse any Book broaching or maintaining of the said abominable
Doctrine, upon pain of Excommunication ipso facto to be thereupon incurred --
and that no Preacher shall presume to vent any such Doctrine in any Sermon,
under pain of Excommunication for the first Offense, and Deprivation for the
second; and that no Student in either of the Universities of this Land, nor any
Person in Holy Orders (excepting Graduates in Divinity, or such as have
Episcopal or Archdeaconal Jurisdiction, or Doctors of Law in holy Orders) that
is, they who are either able to refute them, or at least in no great danger of
being thereby seduced, shall be suffered to have or read any such Socinian Book
or Discourses, under pain (if the Offender live in the University) that he
shall be punished according to the strictest Statutes provided there against
the publishing, reading, or maintaining of false Doctrine; or if be live in the
City or Country abroad, of a Suspension for the first Offense, Excommunication
for the second, and Deprivation for the third, unless he will absolutely, and
in terminis, abjure the same: And if any Layman shall be seduced into this
Opinion, and be convicted of it, he shall be excommunicated, and not absolved
but upon due Repentance and Abjuration, and that before the Metropolitan, or
his own Bishop at least: And we likewise enjoin, that such Books, if they be
found in any prohibited hand, shall be immediately burned, and that there be a
diligent search made by the appointment of the Ordinary after all such Books,
in what Hands soever. -- And that all who now have them, except before
excepted, be strictly commanded to bring in the said Books, in the Universities
to the Vice-Chancellours, and out of the Universities to the Bishops, who shall
return them -- and shall cause the rest to be burned: And we farther enjoin
that diligent enquiry be made after all such that shall maintain and defend the
aforesaid Socinianism, and where any such shall be detected, that they be
complained of to the several Bishops respectively, who are required to repress
them from any such Propagation of the aforesaid wicked and detestable Opinions.
Here is the Judgment of the Church against Socinianism called a damnable and
cursed Heresy, and contrary to the Articles of Religion now established in the
Church of England, which hitherto has taken care how to suppress it, and it is
a Precedent for these Times to follow; for our Zeal should be no less than
theirs was, now when the Danger is greater and the Poison more spread, thus
worse should be prevented: The Skill of a Physician who does prevent an Evil
and Sickness, is more commendable than his who cures it when broken out;
however in this last Case Remedies to do it ought to be used, and never despair
of a Cure, as long as there is sign of Life, let the Distemper be never so far
gone, or by unskilful Doctors be counted uncurable; great Distempers are
reserved to be cured by the Skill of great Physicians, and if your Honors be
pleased but to mind this, and in earnest go about it, you may, by the Grace of
God, find it within your reach, and not to exceed your Skill and Power to heal
it, which I pray God to move and inspire you to go upon, now when temporal
Concerns are at this time as good as over: And after you hitherto have been
working for Men, be pleased with minding God's Work and his Glory, to make a
happy end of this Session.

From the Bench you sit upon as Judges, be pleased first to look down upon the
Nation; of one side you may see the generality of it, over Head and Ears in
corrupt Principles and evil Practices, wallowing themselves in their great,
many and frequent Sins, which cry loud to Heaven for Vengeance; on the other
side, you may represent unto your selves, a very small Number, who upon their
Knees mourn for all these Abominations, and pray to God to avert his so justly
deserved Judgments; then I beseech you, look up toward Heaven, and observe God
with Thunderbolts in one Hand, and Mercies in the other, speaking thus,
Hitherto with me Prayers have prevailed over Sins, and withheld my Hand from
striking down, but now Mercy and Judgment lie ready, choose which you will have:
O for God's sake, whose Hand is lifted up, take pity on the Nation, and as far
as God will enable you, purge, wash, and cleanse it from blasphemous Opinions
and wicked Practices, or else prepare for the heaviest Judgments; for the
slower Vengeance is a coming, the harder it strikes when come; and it is a
fearful thing, both in this Life and that which is to come, to fall into the
hands of the living God, when he is angry; he overtakes Men, Persons, and
Nations in every kind of Judgment, Hosea 3.12, 14.
therefore, says God, will I be unto Ephraim as a moth: and to the House of
Judah as rottenness; and if that be not enough, I will be unto Ephraim as a
lion, and as a young lion to the house of Judah; Men must not make Ciphers of
themselves, and insignificant, as if they were thus placed only for a sign or a
show, like Blazing Stars and fiery Vapors in the Sky, but rather to have
wholesome Influences upon things below their sphere, to answer the end of him who
lodged them in those high Stations; no true Friend can patiently suffer, nor no
loyal Subject quietly endure his Friend or Prince to be ill spoken of, if he
can help it: And shall not Men do for God that which they do one for another?
but quietly hear him blasphemed and robbed of his due when they ought and can
help it.

My Lords and Honorable,

I hope the Consideration of these things, will, as I hinted at first, though I
be in no public Station either in Church or State, clear me from Blame for the
Freedom I now assume, thus openly to appear, and most humbly to address my self
to you, that is to what next to Sovereignty, is greatest and most sacred among
us, which I may well call the supports of Monarchy, two parts of three of the
Legislative Power, the supreme Court of Judicature, and the Representatives of
the whole Body of the Nation. One thing indeed there is that needs something of
an Apology; I know how short Epistles are usual and proper, especially when so
highly addressed as this is, which is long, and may be, tedious, which if it
be, I humbly beg Pardon; but I thought the Matter and Nature of the thing, the
Greatness and Nearness of the Evil, the Danger of worse, the present Necessity
of a Remedy, and several other weighty Circumstances attending the State we now
are in, might plead for an Excuse: And as this is the first time that ever I
appeared in your sight in this Capacity, and is like to be the last, so about
this important Matter, I have longer than ordinary allowed my self the liberty
of speaking my mind to the full.

As I wish, so hope this most humble Request for the Cause of the Lord Jesus,
shall not be in vain, however I enjoy the satisfaction to have given in my
Evidence for the Truth, whereupon, I call Heaven and Earth for a Record, and by
the Grace of God shall ever be ready to do it again in a due and proper manner,
without being either ashamed or afraid to own and declare out of what Springs
we draw these living Waters, Acts 17.2.
with S. Paul, reasoning out of Scriptures; though with a sorrowful Heart let
it be spoken, we have among us too many Men unconcerned, who, Gallio like, care
for none of those things; Chap. 18.17.
for they are very narrow hearted: But I hope that what is wanting abroad as to
Piety, Virtue, and Concernedness for the Honor of God, shall by his Grace be
found within your Walls, till by your Care and Zeal that great and good Work be
brought to its Maturity and full Perfection, which that ye may be able to do, I
beseech the only wise God, the Father of Lights, from whom proceeds every
good and perfect Gift, to endue you from above with both Wisdom, which consists
in choice, and Prudence in Foresight, that of two Goods you may choose the
greatest, and of two Evils the least, and foresee the Advantages of doing him
Service, and Dangers for being wanting therein, which is the earnest Desire and
hearty Prayer of

Right Honorable and Honorable, Your Honors most humble and most obedient
Servant, J. GAILHARD.

THE PREFACE.
IT is indeed very sad in a Country where the Light of the Gospel has so
clearly shined, to see the Enemies of Christ so brazenfac'd, as not only to
Print and Publish, but even at the Doors of both Houses of Parliament to
Distribute their Books full of Blasphemies, and no other Check put upon them,
but burning one Copy, may be of Thousands dispersed abroad, which Impunity is
for them an Encouragement to continue in their Crime.

In Commendation of the Parliament of Scotland, I must take notice of the Act
which in one of their last Sessions was passed there against Blasphemy, whereby
not only they ratified the Twenty First of the first Session of Charles II. but
also Enacted farther, that whosoever in Discourse or Writing shall deny,
quarrel, argue or reason against the Being of a God, or any of the Persons of
the Blessed Trinity, or against the Authority of the Holy Scripture, or
Providence of God in Governing the World, shall for the first time be
Imprisoned till he has in public acknowledged the Offense: For the second
Offense, Imprisoned and a Fine besides; and for the third, Death, as obstinate
Blasphemers. For indeed, Blasphemy and Idolatry, by God's express Command,
ought to be destroyed out of the Land. Every thing has its proper Center,
heavy things go down, and light fly up; and since the Glory of God is the
proper Center of Man, for he was created to Honor and Serve him, Why then does
he not as well as other Creatures answer that end, and with his Heart and
utmost Endeavors, promote his Glory, and prevent any thing that tends to his
Dishonor? For want of which, when it is his Duty and in his Power so to do, he
becomes guilty of, and makes himself accessory to the Crime. Certainly, neither
Law nor any Judge ought to spare at all those Creatures who will not at all
spare their Creator.

The Emperor Theodosius decreed that after Death, an Action might lawfully be
commenced against a Manichee or a Donatist, to render the Heretics memory
infamous: C. Cod. 1.2. Tit. 5. de Haeret. and Manic. Leg.
For if Traitors, though in their Graves, are yet branded in their Posterity who
are deprived of State and Honor, though the Father died unimpeached; How much
more reasonable is it, that the same course should be taken in Matters of
Religion? a Care, I confess, highly commendable in a Christian Magistrate, at
least strictly to be practiced against alive Socinians as dead Manichees. Here
I must not omit giving the University of Oxford their due Commendation for
their Decree of 25th. of November, 1695. for appearing in their Station, and
justly condemning as false, impious and heretical, the Notions and Expressions
of three infinite distinct Minds and Substances in the Trinity, etc. which some
had taken upon themselves to speak and write for, there are no more three
infinite Minds and Substances, I shall make use of the words in the Athanasian
Creed, then there are three Eternals, three Incomprehensibles, three
Almighties, three Infinites and three Gods, which all are a mere Contradiction;
and Hierom was very cautious about acknowledging three Hypostases in the Deity,
because he thought the word to denote Substance, for fear of owning three
Substances; but when I think of such, I remember what I read of a Greek
Philosopher, who willing to abound in his own Sense, would not be satisfied
with the Definition or Description of Man given by others, how it is a Rational
Animal, but he scorning to follow the steps of others, forged one of his own,
and said, Man is a two footed Animal without Feathers; whereupon another having
plucked off a Cock's Feathers, brought it into his School, and setting it before
his Disciples, said, behold such a one's Man, and so ridiculed the Philosopher:
Thus deserves to be any one, who being wise only in his own Conceit, does
affect singularity, and in things of this nature, leaves the good trodden way
to follow his own by paths; whosoever in defense of a Cause refuses to take up
Arms, because once they were made use of by others, either declares himself an
Enemy to the Cause, or else has a mind to betray it; in this case it may be
said as that of an Army marching thorough an Enemies Country, or toward an
Enemy: For Orders sake, and by reason of the Danger, no Soldier ought to
straggle out of the way under pain of Death, for every one that does so,
ventures to be knocked in the Head, and as much as in him lies, hazardeth the
whole; so thus acting contrary to Rules and his own Safety, it may well be
supposed, he does so with a Design to desert, the like may be said of
stragglers in this Cause and Warfare.

As formerly, so new in the Christian World we may say, Christ is again
crutified between two Malefactors, the Socinian Blasphemy of one side, and the
Popish Idolatry on the other. Yet now it is worse than at his Death, for one of
the Malefactors was converted and became good, but now they both are stark
naught; the one strikes at his Person and Grace, the other chiefly at his
Grace; one sets up his Reason, the other his Traditions above and in opposition
to his Word; the first believes worse but would seem to practice better; the
last believes somewhat better, but practices worse.

Socinians which hardly have any thing of Christianity besides the bare name,
are so puffed up with Pride and Self-conceit, and do so much abound in their
own Sense, that they despise all Ancient and Primitive Authority, because
indeed therein they find their own Condemnation. I must say how the Consent and
Belief of the Primitive Church in their Councils and Writings of their Doctors,
ought not to be heard against Scripture, yet not to be slighted or rejected in
things wherein they are Orthodox, and when they agree with it.

They keep a great pother about Reason, but they must explain themselves, or
else they do but leave things in a confusion; we know every rational Man ought
to be guided by Reason, but even rational Men do often differ about it:
sometimes that which is Reason with one, is a Nonsense with another; but to
bring a Carnal Reason to be a Judge in Spiritual Things, 1 Cor. 2.11, 14.
is a very gross mistake, for, the things of God knows no man, but the spirit
of God, and the natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for
they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned; if this Reason they mean in Matters of Religion, it must
be quite turned out, for Scripture declares it in such things not to be a
competent Judge: But if by Reason they mean the Reason of things, then I own
nothing ought to be admitted that is contrary to it; yet in this Sense, no
reasonable Man but will own Reason in very many things, though in some more or
less, to be very lame and weak, but perfect in nothing, for considering the
Perfection either of Parts or Degrees, we all may be said to know nothing
perfectly, though Learning and Experience do come in to help us, yet still
something is wanting; what one said well, Nemo unquam omnes fefellit, neminem
unquam omnes fefellere, never one Man deceived all, nor ever all Men together
deceived any one, may with some alteration according to the diversity of the
Subject be said here, never as yet one Man knew all things, neither did all Men
ever know one thing so perfectly, but that it might still admit of some
additional Degree of Knowledge and Perfection; yet I will suppose an unpossible
thing that one Man should by strength of Reason know all things, which is one
of God's Attributes; however, when this Reason happens to be in competition
with a Line or two of Revelation, is not that Man according to true Reason,
bound to submit to it? For my part, I declare I shall ever prefer the Authority
of one only Text of Scripture before all the Reason of the World, whether
laying in one Head or many; and my Reason is, that Scripture is the Word of an
Infallible God, when all and every Man in the World are fallible. Alas, how
many things in the World are given for Reason, which have only a show and
appearance of it: Besides, it must be granted, there are things above Reason,
the most thinking and learned, if not much self-conceited, will by their own
experience find this to be true, even in natural things, how much more in those
of a spiritual and divine Nature, which to Men's understanding are past finding
out; wherefore I affirm it to be but reasonable for them in such things to
submit Reason to Faith, which is a Mystery to our natural Reason, 1 Timothy 3.9.
so called by S. Paul, Holding the mystery of Faith in a pure conscience, when
he was writing this, Faith with its Object was clearly revealed, yet still he
then calls it a Mystery, and I hope no Socinian dares say he knows the Nature
of Faith better than that great Apostle did.

As for Scripture, they pretend to own and do quote it, so also could the
Devil, but mis-apply'd it: Before him whom he knew to be the Son of God he
could say, it is written: And as in the beginning of the Predication of the
Gospel, so in the renewing of the Truth of it by Reformation, Tares sprung up
with the Grain, some Men would not order and regulate their Opinions according
to Scripture, but would bring it to be subservient to their Notions, and of it
to make a Nose of Wax to serve their turn; hence it is that they wrest things
that therein are so plain, which if we believe Peter, 2 Pet. 3.16.
must be to their own destruction. I know of no wrong the Son of God has done
them, that in all their Writings they should so slightly speak of and so much
below him: Of late one S -- among others, Page 20.
says of the Lord Jesus, In that great Instance of Magnanimity, he has
outdone all the mentioned Heroes of Greece and Rome; he would seem to speak
much in his Commendation, but latet anguis in herba, there is a Malice in the
bottom, to enervate the Truth of our Savior's Life, as if there were in it some
of the Tales and fabulous Accounts which are found in the Lives of the Heroes
be mentions: They would have him a Man, and nothing more, though upon all
occasions, even before that wicked Counsel of the Priests, Scribes, and Elders,
Matt. 26.63, 64.
being by the High Priest adjured in the Name of the Living God, to tell
whether he was the Son of God? He owned himself to be, which he would not have
done if it had not been true, and so had died to maintain a Lie, which is the
part of an Impostor, and this Confession of his being Son of God, was the very
ground of his Accusation, Condemnation, and Execution; we have a law, John 19.7.
said they, and by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of
God, and at the time of his Death, all their Revilings and Injuries against him
did run upon this, Matt. 27.40, 43, 54.
If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross, and he said, I am the Son
of God; it had been very strange if he had suffered for saying he was that
which he was not, in the Sense he spoke it and they took it: To deny this is to
be worse than the very Heathens the Roman Soldiers; for the Centurion and they
that were with him, having seen the things that were done, said, Truly this was
the Son of God, thereby pointing at the Cause of his Death, as if they had
said, He was what he affirmed himself to be, and what he dyed for, that is,
Truly the Son of God.

What S. Paul says in another Caese about the Resurrection, Acts 26.8
Why should it be thought incredible with you, that God should raise the dead?
We may say it in that of the Incarnation of the Son of God; for if God,
attended by two Angels in the shape of Men, Genesis 18.
more familiarly to dine and converse with Abraham, showed how he could assume
the Figure of a Man, why might he not in time take upon him our humane Nature?
The Scripture being so full of Evidences that he could, he would and has done
it: But what can we say of People, who deny it to be day, though the Sun
shines never so brightly; like the Philosophers Maid, who being blind would
not own it, but said the Room she was in was dark; this is the case of those in
whom the God of this World has so blinded the Minds, that they cannot, and
their Hearts that they will not see.

I wish God may be pleased in this high Concern of his, to stir up the Hearts
of every one to act in his Station whether Civil or Ecclesiastical: They which
in this last Capacity are Men of Piety and Learning, might, out of Presses and
Pulpits, be very instrumental in asserting the Truth, if they were pleased to
consult with Scripture preferably before their own Reason; for the Word of God
being the Spring of right Reason, will afford Reasons enough to confute and
convince Blasphemy and Heresy: Therein lies our strength about these Matters:
This ought to be the method and manner of those who engage in the Cause. Let us
all well observe what is said of Apollos, who in this same Subject was
concerned against an unbelieving and obstinate Nation, Acts 18.24.
that he was mighty in the Scriptures.

About these Controversies some thing has already been attempted by Men
otherwise of Learning and good Parts, but upon the account of some Principles
of theirs, little good is herein to be expected from them; Arminians I mean,
whom I look upon as not very sit to write against Socinians, no more than
Arminus would not write against Socinus, though they were contemporary; when I
am reading Socinian Disputes, I often in my way meet with Worstius, Episcopius,
Bertius, Curcelaeus, and such others who favor them, if not in all, yet in too
many things wherein they go hand in hand, and they will mince the matter with
them; but if after what several Men have written heretofore, some other Persons
of Learning, and sound in the doctrinal part of the XXXIX. Articles, would now
appear as a Reverend and very able Prelate has in some Points effectually
done, then it might be hoped, through God's Blessing, for us to see those
impious and Heterodox Opinions justled out of doors, to the Honor of God, the
Peace of his Church, and clearing the Land of such a Generation as in some
respect may be called worse than the Devils, Matt. 8.29. Mar. 1.24 and 5.7.
Luke 4.34, 41. and 8.28. Psalm. 119.126.
who publicly owned the Lord Jesus to be the Son of God, of the most high God,
the holy one of God, whom they confessed to have the Power not only to command
but also to torment and destroy them, whilst these Men deny him truly to be
such: With David we must say, It is time for thee, Lord, to work: for they have
made void thy law.

In the mean time, though very sensible of my Weakness and Incapacity, I
presume to appear in public, trusting in him whose Cause we defend, that he
will make his Virtue perfect in our Weakness, and with the gracious Influence
of his holy Spirit, supply that which is wanting in us: Herein I handle not
only some things of the Controversy, but also do in some measure bring in the
doctrinal part, which is a great help to the Elenctical, and upon which indeed
this last must be grounded; for I writ not only to refute, but also to instruct
and afford a Preservative against the Poison: And though sometimes I bring in
things which directly relate to the Jews, yet they reach Socinians as well as
Jews, for both are Enemies; the first indeed deny Christ to be the Messiah,
though the Ancients owned him to be God, and Socinians own him to be a Messiah,
but deny him to be true God. I omit, the Debate about the Divinity of the Holy
Ghost, and of the high Point of Christ's Satisfaction, etc. The Meditation on
the most holy Trinity and the Lord Jesus his Divinity, affording Matter enough
to fill up these Sheets, wherein, I hope, the Truth is cleared and confirmed,
and Error refuted: If the Reader finds good by it, as I pray God be may, as
it does come from God, so from first to last, let him return the whole Praise
and Glory to him whom alone it belongs unto.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. OF the Persons of Head Socinians and of their Opinions, page 1. Chap.
II. Of Divine Essence, p. 13. Chap. III. Of the Persons of the Godhead. p. 16.
Chap. IV. Of the Holy Trinity, p. 22. Chap. V. Of Christ's Divinity, p. 46.
Chap. VI. Christ is true natural Son of God by Eternal Generation, p. 84. Chap.
VII. Essential divine Attributes belong to Christ, p. 138. Chap. VIII. Works
proper to God belong to Christ, page 161. Chap. IX. Worship proper and due to
the true God belongs to Christ, p. 185. Chap. X. The Socinians Objections
answered, p. 260. Chap. XI. Animadversions upon a Book called Christianity not
Mysterious, p. 315.
CHAP. I. Of the Persons of head Socinians, and of their Opinions.
OUR blessed Lord and Savior, in his Parable Mat. 13
of the Sower and the Tares, does plainly declare and forewarn us of what
should befall his Church from his time, which was that of her Birth, unto the
end of the World: In general, the Field is the World, but in particular, it is
his Church; the Sower, as he explains it, is himself, both in person and by
means of the Laborers his Disciples, and other Servants of his; the good Seed
are the Children of the Kingdom, and the true sound Doctrines thereof, taught
by his faithful Ministers; but the Tares are the Children of the wicked one,
not only as to Persons, but in relation to false Doctrines, Errors, and
Heresies, which whilst Men that ought to have watched, slept, Christ's Enemy,
which is the Devil, took that opportunity, for he loses none, and in part,
through the fault of the Watchmen, did his work: This Mystery is by S. Paul
represented under the notion and name of a Building, whereof the Lord Jesus is
the Foundation; for, says he 1 Cor. 3.11, 12.
, other foundation can no man lay; the wise and faithful Builders do upon that
Foundation build Gold, Silver, and precious Stones; but the unfaithful and
mercenary are not content to raise a Superstructure of their own, which is
Wood, Hay, and Stubble, but also attempt to overthrow the Foundation, and in
opposition to the City of God, would build a Babel of their own; yet I make no
doubt, but through God's just Judgment, it will at last end in their Confusion,
as (...) happens unto all that Acts 5.39.
be found even to fight against God.

Surely in the superlative degree, they fight against God, who reach, and as
far as they can, do strike at divine Nature and at the Godhead it self, which
any one does that speaks or writes against the holy Trinity of Persons, or
denies the Divinity of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, as Socinians do: To what
I said Serious Advice to a Preservative against, etc.
elsewhere of the Authors of such Blasphemies, I shall add some few
Circumstances of their Rise and Progress, whereby it will appear how, as the
Devil at our Saviors coming into the World, was very busy to use means, and
by Herod, to destroy his Person, so by the Scribes and Pharisees, to oppose the
Preaching and Progress of the Gospel. Thus about the time when God dispersed
Popish Errors, Darkness and Ignorance, and through a happy Reformation, caused
the Light of the Gospel again to shine, the same Enemy to God and Mankind,
stirred up Instruments to stop the Work, or at least to corrupt and hinder it
from coming to its due perfection.

These hellish Instruments were Michael Servetus, born in Artagon, one of the
Kingdoms of Spain, who having past his Youth in Africa, amongst Jews and
Mahometans, was infected with their Blasphemies; and being come back into
Europe, did in 1525. write Books entitled, The Divine Nature of Christ, and
the Errors of the Trinity, etc. that Wretch made such an abominable and hellish
Comparison of the most adorable Trinity, that I abhor to think on it, much more
to set it down upon Paper. He came to Geneva, where neither the Writings of,
nor Conferences with Calvin, could work upon him; so that at last, in the Year
1553. he there was put to death for Blasphemy and Sedition.

The next is Valentinus Gentilis, of Cosenza in Italy^ who forged the Blasphemy
of Three Gods, and otherwise corrupted the Doctrine of the Unity of Essence and
Trinity of Persons: This Man, after Servetus's death, was in the same Town put
in Prison, and recanted; soon after he went away, but returned to his Vomit;
for he again asserted it in public, and dispersed it in Poland and
Suitzerland, but being taken in the Canton of Bern, in 1566. was there put to
death.

Laelius Socinus, Son to Marius Socinus, a famous Lawyer of Siena, came also to
Geneva, which, at that time, was the great place of refuge for those who went
out of Italy and neighboring Countries to forsake Popery, where he was known
to Calvin; and thence he went to Zurich; but Calvin having found him out, did
write him two sharp Letters, one in 1552. the other in 1555. at Zurich he did,
but under the borrowed Name of Martinus Bellius, write something to show how
Servetus had unjustly been put to death: In his Commentary upon the first
Chapter of John, he lays the Foundation of whole Socinianism, which, indeed, is
but a Chaos and Confusion of natural and spiritual Ignorance, and a mere
Contempt of the Word of God; Zanchius was one of the first that refuted it.
This Loelius, all the while he conversed with Zanchius, never opened himself to
him, only seemed to propound him Questions according to the Schoolway, to
exercise his Parts, but not to be positive; so that indeed he imposed upon him
and Melanchton, so cunning was he not to discover his Opinions.

Bur his Nephew Faustus, born in Siena in 1538. was a bolder Man, of acute
Parts, but a Sophister, and consequently fit to perfect the Heresy which the
other was broaching: He, with his Uncle, went first to Geneva, afterward to
Zurich: at Basil he made acquaintance with Sebastian Castellio, of whom he
learned something in the Hebrew and Greek Languages, and the That Christ is
merely Man, and had no Being till his Incarnation.
Samosatenian Heresy. His Uncle being dead in Zurich in 1562. the 37th of his
Age, at which time Faustus was 23 years old, as soon as he heard of his death,
he went to the place to secure his Manuscripts (which he had desired him to
publish in due time) for fear they should fall into other hands: with these
Faustus went into Italy, where for about Twelve Years he lived about the Duke
of Florence's Court, whence he returned to Basil in 1574. the 35th of his Age,
and there lived Three Years, thence he went into Transylvania, about 1577.
lastly into Poland, in 1579. about the 40th of his Age, where he made it his
whole business to propagate his Uncles Opinions: There he published Castellio's
Pelagian Dialogues about Predestination, Election, Free Will, and Faith, with a
Preface of his own, under the Name of Felix Turpio, which Book, Arminians,
because it served their turns, caused to be reprinted with Additions at Gouda
in Holland, in 1613. He also in the Year 1582. being in Cracovia, published a
Tract of his upon a part of the Seventh Chapter to the Romans, wherein he
endeavors to prove how in that place S. Paul speaks of himself not as being a
regenerate Man; and in that too he disguiseth his Name, as the manner is among
pestilent Heresiarks, the more easily and safely to spread the Poison, and
wound Souls with an unknown and invisible hand; in that Book he calls himself
Prosper Dysidaeus, which answers to his true Name Faustus Socinus, as also does
his other borrowed Name of Felix Turpio; for the three Latin Words Prosper,
Felix, and Faustus signify the same; also the Words Dysidaeus, Turpio, and
Socinus have the same signification; the first is Greek (...), which signifies
filthy and deform, so does the Latin Turpio, also the Italian Socinus from
Sozzo. Thus, though his true and borrowed Christian Names be not proper for
him, because such a miserable Wretch may not be called happy, yet his
Sur-Names, whether true or borrowed, are to signify his filthy, hellish, and
monstrous Blasphemies. Sozzo, whence comes the Word Socinus, as by him owned in
the Names which in his Books he calls himself by, in Italian signifies foul,
nasty, filthy; and here we may say, convenient rebus nomina saepe suis; for in
his Opinions he was as impure a Man as ever was born of a Woman. He lived in
Cracovia in Poland, whence, toward the latter end of his Life, he removed to a
Country Town about Nine Miles distant, called in Latin Luclavicia, and in
Polonish, I think Luklow, or Luklowi^z, where he dyed in 1604. and of his Age
65.

This I have been the more particular upon, because he is looked upon as the
chief Promoter and Publisher of an Heresy, which, of all the rest amongst
Christians, is the most unworthy of the Name of Christ, whereof it has but the
shadow, and in some respect, is worse than Heathenism, makes way for
Mahometism, Judadaism, and Atheism, and under a false Notion of Piety, laughs
at, despises, and perverteth all Articles of our Faith, and, in short, goes
about to form a new Religion.

Hereunto I shall add only this, how these Heresies had some other Followers,
which made some noise in the World, George Blandrata of Saluzze, and Paul
Alciati of Milan, both Italians and Physicians, after Servetus's death and
Gentilis's Recantation, fled into Poland: Bernard Ochinus (a true Disciple of
Socinus, as the other two were of Gentilis) who, for some impure Dialogues of
his, had been expelled out of Zurich and Basil: all of them were in the Year
1565. banished out of Poland, by reason of their Heresy: Alciati went into
Turkey and embraced Mahometanism: Ochinus into Moravia to the Anabaptists, and
Blandrata fled into Transylvania, where, by the Favor of one Francis David, he
was entertained as Physician to the Prince; this David differed from Socinus,
in that he denied Jesus Christ should be adored, or any Prayers to be made in
his Name. This is that hellish Covy of abominable and pernicious Fowl, and that
Generation of Vipers, out of which sprung since, and now more than ever, many
of the kind; so that Den is, like Babylon, to speak in Scripture Language
Revel. 18.2.
, become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a
cage of every unclean and hateful bird; for the profane, Deists and Atheists,
etc. fall into them. But that Poison infected not only those forenamed Parts,
it also spread into Hungary and Germany, nay, as far as Heydelberg, where one
Neuserus, with two or three more, privately taught those Heresies, yet at last
boasted he had Seventy Five unanswerable Arguments against the Trinity; but
through the care of Prince Frederick III. the guilty being punished, the
Infection ceased there; a Precedent for other Princes and States to follow; And
from such Wretches, what else can be expected but Overturnings and Confusions
in Church and State?

Thus, having said something of the Persons, We must name some of their ^hief
Opinions, and then speak of the Cause: As to the first, they have much
confounded the whole Doctrine of Religion from first to last: They believe that
Man, before his Fall, was naturally mortal; so God's threatening, the day that
thou eatest thou shall surely dye, was frivolous; then that by the Light of
Nature, no Man can have the knowledge of God; that Man before his Fall had no
original Righteousness, and that there is in us no original Sin, as it imports
Deformity of Nature: They say there is in us free Will to that which is good;
that the Causes of Predestination are not in God, but in Men; and that he does
not predestinate to Salvation any particular and certain Person; and that
Predestination may be frustrated: As to Providence, they assert that God has
no fore-knowledg of Contingencies determinately, but alternatively; and as to
most of these Matters of Grace and Providence, they are agreed with Arminians:
Further, they say that God could justly pardon our Sins without any
Satisfaction; that Christ, by his Death, did not satisfy for us, but only
obtained for us Power to satisfy for our selves by our Faith and Obedience;
that Christ dyed for himself, that is, not for his Sins, but for the Mortality
and Infirmities of our Nature which he took upon him; Christ became not our
High Priest, nor immortal nor impassible before he ascended into Heaven; that
everlasting Death is nothing else but a perpetual Continuance in death or
Annihilation; that Eternal Fire is so called from its Effect, which is the
eternal extinction or reducing to nothing of the Wicked which shall be found
alive at the last Day. They would have Christ's Incarnation to be against
Reason and Scripture, they deny him to be truly God; the like of the Holy
Ghost: That there is in One God no Trinity of Persons; and that the Old
Testament is needless for Christians, etc. All these and other Blasphemies are
found in the Works of Socinus, in the Racovian Catechism, whereof Smalcius is
the Author, of Ostorodius, Crellius, Wolkelius, Vaydovius, etc. but we shall,
by the Grace of God, insist only upon some of their greatest Blasphemies. Now
to the Cause:

Matters of this high Nature and fundamental Concernment to our Holy Religion,
must not be prostituted to the captious scanning of Men of corrupt Minds, nor
the ways of God be made layable to the Judgment of Men, rather humbly to be
adored with Submission of Mind and Obedience of Faith to the Revelation
declared in God's Word; and herein we ought the more to be sober and cautious
that we know Errors to be linked together, and to have a dependency one upon
another; he that strikes at the Grace of the Lord Jesus, will afterward make
no Conscience to fly out against his Person; he who denies him to be a Prophet,
will soon disown him to be a King and a Priest; for as one Depth calls to
another, so an Arminian can easily become a rank Pelagian and Socinian:
Wherefore it is necessary, at the very beginning, to oppose Errors, defend every
inch of ground against such as will daily grow worse and worse, as do the James
1.8.
double-minded men, that are for their own, more than for the Truth's Interest;
for they are unstable in all their ways: and the more Hands orderly employed,
the better is the Effect like to be, This Consideration makes me to appear
amongst those who heretofore did, and now do, oppose false Teachers, who not
only privily, but also in public, bring in again those damnable Heresies,
which, of old, Truth and Learning exploded and baffled out of the World.

The Divinity of Christ was the Stumbling Block to the Jews, who could not
endure to hear him call himself the Son of God absolutely and without
limitation, and thereat were enraged, which made 'em take up Stones to cast at
him, John 8.59. and also at another time, Chap. 10.31. the Doctrines about the
Holy Trinity and the Person and Deity of Christ, do stand and fall together. In
our Savior's time it began to be opposed by the Jews, and since from time to
time continued to be so by the Devil's Instruments raised to that same purpose,
and within the last Age revived by the forenamed Blasphemers against the Rock
of the Church, which is built on the Confession that Christ is the Son of the
living God, not by any special Favor or any such Restriction, for then there
would be only a gradual difference between his and our being Sons of God; but
he is simply the Son of God, yea, his only begotten.

Before we enter upon this important Matter, some things to clear the state of
the Question must be premised, so that we must show wherein we agree, before we
speak of that wherein we differ, as to the first this Foundation must be laid,
there is a God the Cause of all, the Effect of none, who has made all, and is
made by none, who has given all things their Being, and has his own of
himself: This is not denied, so I shall not go about to prove it, the Light of
Nature, the Book of Scripture, and the Testimony of Conscience, do sufficiently
convince Men of it. The next thing is, what God is? He being infinite cannot be
defined, but imperfectly described, only according to what he has in his Word
revealed of himself, how he is infinite, independent, self-sufficient, eternal,
unchangeable. But such is the blindness of some Men's Judgments, or the
Perverseness of their Hearts, that they will cavil at the Nature, Names,
Attributes, and Works of this eternal and infinite Being.

But about this fundamental Truth, our Faith must be directed by the Revelation
which God has made of it in his holy Word, herein Men must not follow their
own fancy; for (...) Mat. (...)
no man knows the father but the son, and he to whom the son will reveal him:
Now the sum of this Revelation in the Word is, that God is One, that this One
God is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; that the Father is the Father of the Son,
and the Son the Son of the Father; and the Holy Ghost the Spirit of the Father
and of the Son; and that they are distinct one from another in respect of this
their mutual Relation; by this Rule we must be guided how to know, believe,
worship, love, fear, and obey him, that is the Father One true God, the Son One
true God, and the Holy Ghost One true God, to be believed, worshipped, and
obeyed.

Now for our Edification and further Instruction, th^^ Doctrine admits of some
Enlargement and Explanation to prevent undue Notions of God, which, by reason
of the Blindness and Ignorance we are naturally involved in, our Minds are
liable unto; thus out of the Revelation that God is One, we easily deduce he is
so in respect of his Nature, Essence, or Godhead; and how being. Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, he does subsist in these Three distinct Persons; thence also is
derived the manner of their Subsistence, what are their mutual respects to each
other, and such like things by a necessary Consequence from the Revelation:
Upon these Grounds were compiled the Nicene, Athanasian, and other Creeds or
Articles of Faith, in opposition to the Heresies of those Times; for therein
was explained the true Sense of Scripture about those matters, which were
wrested by the Enemies of the Truth; and though the Orthodox Doctors and
Councils, to oppose the Error, and lay open the Venom, made use of some Words
and Expressions which in so many Letters are not set down in the Word of God,
yet they were not to blame; for they were drawn out of it by lawful and
necessary Consequences; Men may lawfully conceive in their Minds what is the
nature of the Things or the sense of the Words according to the scope of the
Spirit of God in the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, and also as to the
Analogy of Faith, or else we are no better than Brutes. So that if the chief
Assertion contained in the Revelation be true, so must also be whatsoever is
therein included, and in the Explication thereof drawn by a true and right
Consequence: Wherefore, seeing God has declared Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to
be One God, it necessarily follows they are One in Nature; because therein only
they can be One: And this is the ground of any other Unity; and seeing it is
also declared they are Three, it must be explained of three distinct Persons or
Subsistences wherein only it is possible they can be Three.

The Revelation is clear, there is One God, this God is Father called God, Son
called God, Holy Ghost called God; and here the Enemies of Truth should begin
their Opposition, which is the true way and method, yet they do not, but they
except against the Explication, which only tends to farther Edifying and
Instruction, and quarrel with Words, as Essence, Trinity, Persons, etc. Divine
Nature is One, yet common to Three; in the Mystery of the Trinity we must learn
the Truth, the Height and Excellency thereof; the Truth does not depend upon
our Apprehension and Understanding of it, but upon the Consent of the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments; and though, under the first, Men were
more in the dark, yet there was Light enough to make 'em believe it with humble
Faith and Piety; but under the last, that Truth is clearly apparent, it is by
John 5.4.
Faith only that we are enabled to overcome the World: so 2 Cor. 5.7.
we walk by faith and not by sight; to show our Religion is matter of Faith
more than of Fact, to be attained unto through Belief, and not through Senses,
whose Object is visible and temporal, but that of Faith is 2 Cor. 4.18.
spiritual, invisible, and eternal; the holy Mystery of the Trinity cannot be
comprehended by the Light of Grace nor of Glory, much less by that of Nature.

Controvertes about Principles are more intricate and difficult than about
Conclusions, especially in things relating to God, the Principal of all Beings;
and that for two Reasons, the first, because the infinite and incomprehensible
Majesty of God, does far exceed our Understanding; the second, upon the account
of the Blindness and Vanity of Man's Mind, which either will not depend upon
the Revelation, without which we can never know things of that nature, or else
goes about with its wrong Notions to depravate it, not so much as to the Words
as in the Sense and Doctrine wherein Heresy does consist: Now, as it is a
damnable Presumption in those who in these Matters do pervert the true Sense of
the Word of God, so I must say, it is a great Imprudence in those who undertake
to refute them, to abound in their own Sense, leaving the trodden way, and
slighting Arguments made use of by the former Assertors of these Truths, to set
up new Notions and Hypotheses of their own, which render those Points more
abstruse, and these new Lights of theirs, instead of clearing make them darker,
instead of proving they do not so much as illustrate the matter; the Proofs
ought to be drawn out of the Revelation, and in the Explanation thereof it is no
Shame nor Loss of Reputation to follow the Steps and Methods of Learned and
Orthodox Men who went before, and, with great Success, opposed Error and
Blasphemy; I do not hereby intend to deny a Man the liberty of making use of
the Parts and Learning which God has endued him with above others, and improve
them to a further Confirmation of the Truth; but I would not have them to
depart from the Foundation laid before them, nor to exercise their wandering
Thoughts about the adorable and incomprehensible Nature of God, merely to
affect Singularity, and thereby to be applauded.

This very thing has, of late, led if not tumbled some into strange and horrid
Precipices, which, to avoid, they more and more entangled themselves therein,
as has well been observed by others; it is no good Consequence for such to say,
that if a Person be a Mind, a Spirit, and a Substance, then Three Persons must
be Three distinct Minds, Spirits, and Substances, as distinct as Adam and Abel,
though not separate: But the Error of the Hypothesis lies in this which opens
the false Ground thereof, namely, because Mind, Spirit, and Substance, in their
proper signification, are absolute; but Person, in its proper signification, is
a relative Term: because King William is King of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, must we argue, that since a King is a Man, an Animal, a Substance,
therefore, because of Three distinct, substantial Kingdoms, he is Three
distinct Men, Three distinct Animals, and Three distinct Substances; not so,
because Man, Animal, and Substance are Terms absolute, but King is relative.
Suppose (as one said before, and to the purpose) a Man were Dean of Paul's, of
Westminster, and of Windsor, should we thence conclude, that since a Dean is a
Man, an Animal, a Substance, therefore because of Three distinct Deanaries, he
is Three distinct Substances? I think not, because Man, Animal, Substance are
Terms absolute, but Dean is relative. It is very sad now to see the blasphemous
Heresy of the Threetheites or of Three Gods revived among us by such as might
do better; in every well-ordered Christian State Idolatry and Blasphemy ought
not to be tolerated, but severely punished.

I know there are certain Terms to be explained in the Discussion of these
Controversies, especially in the Schools, as, may be, Essence, Existence,
Subsistence, Substance, Individuum, Suppositum, Hypostasis, or Person, wherein
they agree, and wherein they differ; but I conceive they who writ for a public
good, and would make these Points intelligible to most, if not to all Readers,
might well avoid too far engaging in Metaphysical Notions; I humbly conceive it
were better, because more profitable^, in a Theological way to write and
explain that which is most necessary to be understood according to the Pattern
of Scripture and the Practice of the Orthodox Primitive Church, and of its
Doctors, against Heretics, as we have it in the three Creeds, which are a
production of their universal Consent: But for some Men, herein thus far to
indulge their fancy, as to let it spatiate as much as it will, and give it a
full Latitude to wander, and then express it self in such Terms as one of a
Hundred Thousand can hardly understand the meaning thereof: Nay, upon
reasonable grounds, it may be doubted whether the Author does well understand
them; this is only to intricate the Matter, to puzzle the Reader, and that
which is worse, to want a due respect for the Majesty of God, whose Mysteries
ought to be handled with an awful Reverence; no Man may presume to know of him
beyond what he has been pleased to reveal himself; for if we cannot well and
perfectly know things created, much less the Creator, neither can the less
comprehend the greater; and if Romans 11.33.
God's Judgments be past finding out, much more is he himself. Besides that,
this way of thus managing these Matters does much prejudice the Cause, and
gives the Adversaries thereof ground to say of us, They cannot among themselves
agree how to defend it.

CHAP. II. Of Divine Essence.
HERETICS Dispute against the Words Essence, Trinity, and Person used in the
Primitive Church; but sound Faith contendeth not about Words, when the Truth of
the thing is agreed upon: Trinity is the abstract whereof three is the Concret,
expressed 1 John 5.7. as that of Jehovah and Lord signify the Essence rendered
by him Revel. 1.8.
Which is, which was, and which is to come: as for Persons, though it be not as
to the Letter in Scripture, yet it is virtually, first in the word (...),
equivalent to that of Heb. 1.3.
Person; then in the very same word, but spoken of 2 Cor. 1.11.
Men, where it signifies an Individuum or a Person, and though just the very
word is not used in Scripture, it is not material, because in Divinity; not the
Word but the Thing, not the Sound but the Sense, are to be minded: And though
the word Person be deduced from Stages and things not serious, yet we ought to
look to the Use more than to the E^ymology or Derivation; and what if it be
taken from things created and very unlike to God? So we may say, Are all Words
purified from their original Imperfefection? But for the abuse of a Word or a
Thing, we must not leave the right use of it.

When Scripture says, there is One God, this Oneness can relate to nothing but
to the Being, Essence, or Nature of God; for in this respect, God is one; so we
have reason thereby to represent the Unity of the Godhead; there is in
Scripture mention of God's Godhead Romans 1.20.
, and of his Nature; when they which by nature are no gods Gal. 4.8.
, are excluded from being Objects of our Worship: So when Scripture reveals
there is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, it makes a distinction between them, yet
calls every one God; have we not cause thereupon to call them Three Persons,
and affirm, that in One Essence or Godhead are Three Persons? Do not these
Words express the thing, without doing it any Wrong or Injury; for they are
neither profane nor unworthy of God; if the Words Essence, Unity, Trinity, be
not in so many Letters in Scriptures, no more is the Word Sacrament; yet though
the Name be not in, the thing is. But herein they are more peevish than their
Father Socinus, who tells Francis David Vol. I. p. 778.
, that though the Terms of Essence and Person be not in Scripture, if the Sense
be, it is no matter, and that they who went upon such Grounds exposed their
Cause. The Method which the Enemies to this Truth ought to take, should be
this, Whether they own, according to the Revelation, the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost to be One God? Which, if they deny, we want no Proofs; but if they own
it, then let them proceed to a Debate, whether they are One in Nature and Three
in Persons, or how the Case is to be stated; for it is very unreasonable to
dispute about Words and Explication of any thing concerning the Relations or
Manner, till the thing it self be plainly confessed or denied.

Now by the Grace of God, we must proceed, and though I love not a (...), a
Dispute about Words, yet as Words do signify Things, so some are so
fundamental to the matter in hand, that something I must say about 'em; the
first is Essence, (...), derived from (...), he which is; what Exodus 3.14.
we call Essence or Nature, is not an imaginary thing, and existing only in the
Mind as in an Idea, neither is it a thing separated from the Persons, but
always inherent in them, whereby they subsist; so that if there were no
Individuum of such a Species, there also would be no Essence of that Species,
as in the case of Human Nature, which comprehends a rational Soul, and an
organical Body; then Humanity is that whereby every Man is a Man, but this
Nature does not subsist without Men, but is so inherent in Men, that in case
there were no Men, there could be no human Nature, or Humanity: Thus in God,
the Divine Essence is not a thing Existing without Son, Father, and Holy Ghost,
as if it was a fourth thing wherein these Three be contained; but as we say in
Philosophy of the Soul, est tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part, so divine
Nature is whole in the Father, whole in the Son, and whole in the Holy Ghost,
and that in an infinitely more excellent way than either Nature or the Soul are
in us; for they are finitely in Men, but infinitely in every Person of the
Trinity, and exactly and perfectly the same; for indeed the Essence of God is
nothing else but his Nature, namely the Deity or the Godhead; God is not
divided into diverse Essences, but distinguished into diverse Persons; God cannot
be divided into several Natures or Parts, so the Persons which subsist in that
One Essence, are only distinct, and not separate one from another: He who says
a Person of the holy Trinity, says One Essence common to Three Persons.
Hereupon we must know how in the most Holy Trinity something is common to the
Three Persons, such is the Essence, and something incommunicable and proper to
every one in their respective relations: We ought further to know how the Words
Essence, Substance, and Nature, though in some respect they may admit of some
difference, yet when spoken of the Godhead they are taken for one and the same:
Whereunto may be added Deity and God's being, there is in Schools of Divinity
and Philosophy but one Greek word (...) from (...) to be, to signify Essence
and Substance, and therefore let me speak to some by way of warning, that they
may multiply Substances no more than Essences, for it is but one and the same
thing, without running into Tritheism or the Blasphemy of Three Gods; neither
may they entertain the Notions of Three Minds, Beings, or Spirits; for as there
is but One divine Nature and Being, and but One God, so that same God is but
One Spirit: Wherefore in these times Men should follow the Christian Prudence
and Moderation of the Doctors of the Church in former Ages, who were very
cautious not to rush into new Notions of their own about these Matters, or
rashly to run into new fangled Opinions or Hypotheses, as they call them, or
Suppositions of their own, when it would be much better for them to follow the
Theses of the Text, among Attributes of what we call Essence, Metaphysicians
reckon this to be one, that it is to be participatively indivisible, because
it is equally imparted to those whose Essence it is; for if there was any
Addition, Diminution, or Alteration, it would not be the same; much more and
upon a better account does this hold about that Divine Nature by the Apostle in
the very words attributed unto God, 2 Pet. 1.4. In the Godhead there is no
Division, only Distinction, the Essence and Persons not really but rationally
distinct; for the Essence is whole and indivisible in every Person, but the
Persons be really distinct one from another, by means of some incommunicable
Attribute; for the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father, nor the Holy
Ghost either Father or Son.

The Essence is, as Schoolmen say, the Quiddity of the thing, that whereby the
thing is what it is; concerning which this is to be observed, the Essence
neither begets nor is begotten, it neither breaths nor is breathed; this
is the Attribute of the Person not of the Nature; nevertheless, in the
Generation and Breathing is the whole Essence, because it is indivisible,
communicated to the Person begotten, the Son, and to the proceeding, the Holy
Ghost, and it is true, the Son is begotten of the Essence of the Father, for he
is God of God, Light of Light, and to his only begotten Son the Father has
given all things, except to be Father, according to that saying of our blessed
Savior John 5.26.
, as the father has life in himself, so has he given to the son to have life
in himself.

CHAP. III. Of the Persons of the Godhead.
BUT this leads me to speak of the Persons, and upon the matter it is fit to
know in general what a Person is, namely one particular thing indivisible,
incommunicable, living, reasonable, subsisting in it self, and not having part
of another; the first, because no general Notion is a Person; the second,
because a Person may not be divided into many parts; the third, because tho one
may communicate his Nature, yet his Personality he cannot communicate; the
fourth, no Person without Life and Reason; the fifth, because every Person is a
Being that has its own proper subsisting; thus Christ's Humanity is not a
Person, because it does not subsist in it self; the sixth, because that which
is part of another is no Person; thus the Soul of Man separated from the Body
is no Person. Now the words (...) and (...) are of a larger extent than that of
Person, for they are spoken of any individual Substance; but a Person is an
individual Substance, complete, rational, and as we said, differing from
another by means of some incommunicable Property: Hence we say that a Person in
the Trinity is whole God, not absolutely or simply considered, but by means of
some personal Propriety; it is not a Species of God, or of the Deity, nor part,
nor a thing different from the Deity, nor a bare relation, or only a manner of
being and subsisting, but it is the Essence of God with a certain manner of
subsisting, (...), neither is it a Compound of the Essence or of the manner of
subsisting.

So then a Person of the Deity is usually described to be an incommunicable
Subsistence of the divine Essence; for in One and most simple nature of God are
several Persons distinct, to whom the infinite and singular Nature of One only
God is common; for Scripture does teach us, that there is but One God, and
Three distinct Persons, to whom it does attribute the Proprieties of God,
whence we may conclude, that there is in God Oneness or Unity of Essence and
Plurality of Persons: This is matter of Faith to be believed, and not of Fact
to be cavil'd at: Hence we find how in Scripture the word God is sometimes
taken for the Essence and Nature of God, and at other times for certain Persons
of the Godhead, as we shall have occasion to show; the Father has his Essence
originally in himself, and from none other; the Son and the Holy Ghost have the
self-same increated Essence in themselves, as well as the Father, but not from
themselves; the Son and Holy Ghost are (...) of the same nature with the
Father, not in the same sense as Men are among themselves, for Men are divided
one from another, but the Persons of the blessed Trinity not so, for they be
absolutely undivided, so that the Three are but One God. The Greeks call (...)
a Person in the same signification as we use when we say the Person of the Son
and of the Holy Ghost: Now Scripture names them as things distinguished between
themselves, individual, subsisting, etc. as we said just before, if they be, as
they are, working and acting, then they are Persons according to the Axiom in
Philosophy, actiones sunt suppositorum: Now if the Father be such, if the Son
and Holy Ghost be such, what can hinder us from saying, the Father is a Person,
the Son is a Person, the Holy Ghost is a Person? The Greek Fathers made use of
the word (...), which in Heb. 1.3.
Scripture we find in the same sense, that is, Person, as we use it, where
Christ is called the express Image of his [the Father's] person: I say, they
made use of it against Heretics who denied Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be
Three things, so different as that the one is not and cannot be the other;
though as I already said, in Scripture we have not in so many Letters the Words
of Unity, Trinity, Essence, and Person, yet we therein have the things
themselves whence they be derived, and the very Words we find used by many of
the ancient Fathers.

Now Person and Personality are in divine much different of what they are in
human things, because the one is infinite and the other finite; human Nature is
One, but in Specie in many Persons, as Peter, James, Paul, but divine Nature is
but One and the same in number, existing in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; as far
as we are able to apprehend, the Person differs from the Nature not really but
rationally, as the manner. of a thing from the thing it self, as may be a
degree of heat from the heat it comes to: Divine Essence is whole in every
Person, but not as the whole is in its parts; for it is not divided as we said,
but indivisible; now the manner of subsisting of the Divine Essence, which is
but One in number in Three Persons, is incomprehensible and unexpressible, and
the manner how the Godhead is attributed to the Three, is singular and
wonderful, which no Reason can demonstrate, nor Example illustrate; to which
purpose, says our Savior Luke 10.22.
No man knows who the son is but the father, and who the father is but the son,
and to whom the son will reveal him: By virtue of that Revelation, the manner
of knowing the Father is not the same as is in the Son; yet Nature does not
produce Nature, nor Nature Person, nor Person Nature; but Person does Person,
not of the Essence, but in unity of the same Nature, common to the Three
Persons, neither does it produce without it self as in corporeal things,
because no Penetration of Dimension, but within it self, for it is infinite: Now
the Father gives Nature to the Son, and both to the Holy Ghost, not by
Alienation, but by Communication, which is so imparted to the Receiver, as that
it still remains in the Giver, as one Light has it from another, without any
Diminution: Hence it is that one Person does not subsist without the other, as
it is in Men, but all Three do, one within another; this made our Savior say
John 10.38.
, The father is in me and I in him, and Chapter 14.10.
I am in the father and the father in me: Yet this hinders not but that they
are distinct among themselves; for they are not so one in another as the
Accident is in its Subject neither is one predicated and spoken of the other,
as Man is of John; for the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Holy Ghost,
it is enough they are personally distinguished, and in their manner of
subsisting, the Father unbegotten begets the Son, the Son begotten of the
Father, the Holy Ghost proceeding from both; as this is ad intra, inwardly and
among themselves, so outwardly; though the outward Works be common to the
Three, yet it seemed good to divine Wisdom, particularly to attribute unto the
Father the Work of Creation, to the Son that of Redemption, to the Holy Ghost
that of Sanctification; Works of Power in Schools of Divinity are attributed to
the Father, of Wisdom to the Son, of Mercy and Goodness to the Holy Ghost. In
these Works ad extra, as Creation, Salvation, Sanctification, essentially there
is but One Cause and Principle; for there is but One God, but personally there
are Three, because Three Persons, which not (...) but (...) do freely
cooperate; and as these Persons in subsisting are distinguished in order, so
also in their working, one does not operate without the other, and this
Operation follows the Subsistence; the Father is and works from none, the Son
from the Father, and the Holy Ghost from both; yet this order of working does
take away the Equality of Persons no more than does their Order of subsisting.

Now the Acts whereby the Father has begotten the Son, and both produced the
Holy Ghost, are in several senses voluntary and necessary; the first, because
no Violence or Compulsion, but very freely; the second, it is not voluntary but
necessary, if we take Voluntary in opposition to Natural; for Voluntary
signifies Contingent, that which can be or not be; but it is so necessary, that
the Father could not but beget the Son, and both breath the Holy Ghost; and
this from all eternity, otherwise some new thing had befaln divine Nature,
which is absurd: And this Generation and Production are not as in human things,
where the Father is in time before the Son, but here the Son is coeternal with
the Father, and the Holy Ghost with both, not forcibly but necessarily, as
Light is from the Sun, and Heat from the Fire; so the Father is no more without
the Son and the Holy Ghost, than the Sun is without Light; God is not without
his Wisdom and his Virtue, and this from all eternity, I mean that called
imparticipata, or a part ante and a part post, that is, without beginning or
ending, incommunicable to the Creature; and herein indeed does differ this
divine Production from that of the Light of the Sun and Heat of the Fire,
wherein is a succession and a difference, the Light of the Sun to day is
sometime different from that of yesterday, but the Son is to day the same he
was yesterday; Heb. 13 8.
Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

There is also an order among the Three Persons, the Father is first, as Matthew,
28.19.
, Baptize the nations in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; thus the
Father is named first, 1 John 5.7.
the Son next, then the Holy Ghost: In the Creed, the Father is also named
first, the Son the second, the Holy Ghost the third; the Father of himself, the
Son of the Father, and the Holy Ghost, as already said, of both, yet all Three
may be called and are (...) self God, as we shall by Gods Grace speak of more
hereafter: Neither does the divine Nature, though subsisting of it self, as
single, and individual, make any fourth Person in the Godhead distinct from the
Three, because it subsisteth in a certain manner, and only in the Persons of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; these Three Persons are not of another or
different Nature, nor of the like or (...), under which word the Arians would
have sheltered their Error, nor of a common as Men who have a common Essence
but not the same in Number; but this divine Essence in Three Persons is the
very same in number. All this is a great Mystery, revealed in the Word of God,
professed by the Church from Christ's time to this, though Satan's Rage against
the Son of God, 1 John 3.8.
who came to destroy his works, did from time to time raise up Instruments to
blaspheme against it, and we ought humbly and devoutly to adore, and not
presumptuously and profanely dive into it.

CHAP. IV. Of the most Holy Trinity.
ALthough the matter about the divine Nature, and the Three Persons which we
have already spoken of, be but one and the same with that of the most adorable
Trinity, as indeed they in Discourse are Parts one of another, and so twisted
and connexed together that what we speak of one has a Relation to, and
Dependency upon the other, yet before we come to the Polemical or Controversial
Part of these Points, we by the Grace of God, shall under the Head of the
Blessed Trinity, continue to speak of the Didactical or Doctrinal Part of our
Discourse, the more to inculcate into the Minds of the Readers less acquainted
with these Disputes, what Grounds they ought to go upon, and to believe
concerning these Fundamentals of our Faith, and necessary Doctrines of our
Salvation. What we believe about it, is above, not against Reason, for we
believe not One God to be many Gods, nor Three Persons to be but One Person: If
in Human Things I should say absolutely, I James, am Father and Son, it were a
Contradiction indeed, but to speak it relatively, there is none at all; I
cannot say, I am Son and Father to my Father, or Father and Son to my Son, but
I may very well say I James one Man, am upon a different Account, and in a
different Relation, Son and Father, in regard to my Father I am a Son, in
relation to my Son, I am a Father; let the great Masters of, or pretenders to
Reason, herein show me a Contradiction; no more can they, when I say, in the
Godhead is one Essence or Nature, subsisting in Three Persons, and Three
Persons existing in One Essence, Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity.

This great Point is not only very hard and difficult by reason of the Mystery
of the Eternal, unspeakable and incomprehensible Generation of the Son of God
by the Father, but also of a most high Concernment; First, Upon the Account of
God's Glory, for to deny this Doctrine, is to deny the True God, because 1 John
2.23.
whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the-Father. Secondly, Upon the
Account of our Salvation, which by no means can be obtained without it, let
Arminians say on the contrary what they will. For, John 17.3.
this is eternal life to know thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent: And who is he but 1 John 5.20.
the Son of God, the true God, and eternal life.

We say, Trinity or Triunity not Triplicity, for this last implies a
Composition of Three Parts; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are alius and alius,
not aliud and aliud, other and other, but not other thing and other thing;
Three distinct Persons, but One and the same Nature; we distinguish the
Persons, says De Trin. and Unit. cap. 11.
Austin, but divide not the Deity or Essence; they are not distinct
Essentially, for there is but one Essence, but personally, that is, one Person
is not the other, the Father not the Son, nor the Son the Father, and the Holy
none of the other two: Peter, Paul and John, are not only distinct amongst
themselves, but also divided one from another; so they are three Men, though
but one specifical Nature, because created and finite; but in an infinite Being
it is otherwise, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, though distinct, yet not divided;
for there is but one numerical Nature, the three are Consubstantial or
Coessential in Nature, Coeternal in Time, and Coequal in Power.

The Knowledge of One God may be had by the Light of Nature, but that of the
Holy Trinity, only out of Scripture, for the one is according to Reason, but
the other above it; two ways there are to know God, the 1st. Nature, the 2d.
Revelation; that, is defectuous, this is perfect to which God tied his Church,
which alone knows and calls upon God according to what he manifested of
himself in his Holy Word, and thereby her Religion is different from that of
all the rest of the World, and there is no other saving way to come to God but
by Christ, whose Gospel is preached as the only Doctrine of Salvation; and we
must not have of God such Notions as our Fancy or natural Reason suggest unto
us, but such as he has declared in his Word, for he is a voluntary Cause of
all, whose Ways and Methods we ought to observe, and be guided by, in our
Religion, for Ephesians. 1.11. and v. 5.
he works all things according to the counsel of his own will, and according to
the good pleasure of his will: Yet this Holy Mystery is a stumbling block unto
the Jews and unto the Greeks foolishness, and both look upon it as Heresy,
though if God's Word be the Word of Truth, this, as we hope to show, is
certainly the True, Sound Doctrine, because grounded upon it, though unsound
Men will neither believe it nor consent about it to the Faith of the Primitive
Church and Orthodox Doctors of all Ages nor to the Confessions of Faith of all
Christian Reformed Churches, as if the Spirit of God and of Truth was departed
from them All, to be only amongst Socinians.

Second Substances do exist only in the First, Man in general existeth only in
James, John, that are individual, and Words are what Use makes them; an
Indivisible and most single Essence abstractively considered, may and does
concretively exist in Three Persons; no Man may well say, that an infinite
Essence does not admit of three Modes or Manners of Subsistence, but he only
which fancies within his shallow and finite Intellect, to understand perfectly
an infinite Nature with her Modes of subsisting, which to pretend to, implies
Absurdity and Impiety: And to affirm that to be One in relation to its Essence,
and many as to the Modes, is no more contradictory, than to say the same Man is
real in respect of his Essence, and modal as to his Subsistence; wherefore they
who would terminate an infinite Essence only to one manner of subsisting, so
that it may not be communicated to another Person; either they understand not
what an infinite Nature is, or else misTake the meaning of the word Terminate
or Confine, which is not to prescribe limits, for that an infinite Nature does
abhor; but the meaning is, that an Essence as may be the Father's, is so the
Father's Essence, as may not be the Son's in the same manner, but it may be in
a different way.

Upon this Matter, it ought carefully to be observed how the Divine Essence is
considered either Absolutely or Relatively to the manner of existing; in
respect to both, the Father is of himself, in relation to the first, the Son
also is of himself, but as to the second, he is from the Father, so is the Holy
Ghost of himself in respect to the first, that is absolutely considered, but as
to the second, he proceeds from both Father and Son: Wherefore the Father is
absolutely (...), self God, because both as to his Essence and as to his Person
he is not from another, but the Son and Holy Ghost are also Self God, though
not as to the Person, the Son being begotten by the Father as the Holy Ghost
proceeds from both; but as to the Nature, because both are by that Essence
which is not produced by another, or depend upon another, but that same which
of it self and by it self, does exist from all Eternity; the Three Persons have
but One and the same Essence, and they are not essentially distinstinguished.
The Son is from the Father by Generation, not as to his Essence, but in
relation to his Person; not absolutely as God, but relatively as Son, for the
Son has the same Nature and Substance as the Father, Self God as he, though
not in the same manner; the Father may not be called Essentiator, if I may so
say, of the Son or Holy Ghost, nor these Essentiated, the Son is God of
himself, though not Son of himself; the manner whereby theSon is said to be
from the Father is in Scripture described by the word Generation, which is
nothing else but a Communication of one and the same Essence or Life that is
Eternal and Indivisible, as expressed Psalm. 2.7. and John 5. v. 26. which are
not to be confounded with, nor measured by physical Generation, there being
neither priority nor posteriority of Duration, no mutation or passing from
Power to Act, from a not Being to a Being, from a division and multiplication
of Essence, from a formal Reason of active and passive Generation, from a
dependency of him that is begotten upon him that has begotten, or from a
greater to the lesser; so there is no such Imperfections as are in Natural and
Metaphysical in which are priority and posteriority of Nature, though not of
Time: So there is no Consequence to be drawn out of one for the other; thus
though a natural begetter does efficiently beget of himself, materially from
himself, terminatively out of himself, no such thing is to be conceived of this
Generation of the Son of God, for though in Human Things the begetter and the
begotten do sometimes differ in the genus, sometimes in the species or kind; in
Divine Things they differ only in the modus or manner: This Generation is
without any Motion, has no beginning nor ending, because he that begets and he
that is begotten are Coeternal.

What we say of the Son, may be affirmed of the Holy Ghost, who is from the
Father and from the Son by way of procession, not as to the Nature but as to
the Person, for the Essence and Self-being of the Holy Ghost is just the same
with that of the Father and of the Son, he is Self-God Actually though not
Originally, Essentially though not Personally. Now these Three Persons of the
Godhead are distinguished by their Names, Orders, Attributes and Workings,
which Distinctions do not prejudice either the Unity or Simplicity of Essence,
for it is not composed of Persons, which are not before it, either in Time or
Order, but, every one has the whole Essence; neither can the Persons be said
to be composed of the Essence, because it is not before the Persons, neither
does the manner of subsisting induce any Composition into the Essence, only a
Distinction, and is said to modificate not to multiply it: Now the modus or
manner is here improperly taken, for commonly it is posterior to the Subject it
does modifie: But in this, it is not so, there is not in the Persons of the
most Holy Trinity such a real Distinction as is between Things and Things, for
the Person is not a different Thing from the Divine Essence, but it is the very
Essence with the manner of subsisting.

In some natural Things the manner of them is hard, and sometimes impossible to
be understood: Can a Man upon sure Grounds find out how Grass and Corn grows?
How the Wind is formed? Whence it comes and whither it goes? and several such
things in Nature; we no ways doubt but that there are in the World those who
pretend to know all things, and pretend for most things to give Reasons, such
as they are, But can a Man know how he himself was made and formed? How his
Soul came to be united to his Body? This Ignorance in common Matters we daily
see and feel to be in our selves; and what must it be in those Spiritual and
High Ones which are such as no Eye has seen, nor Ear has heard, nor ever
entered into the Heart of Man, and which it is impossible for the Wit of Man to
conceive; which Consideration should curb the Idle Curiosity of vain Men, who
as with a little short Line, would with their shallow Brains fathom the
bottomless and unsearchable Depths of these adorable Mysteries, when with the
Apostle 2 Cor. 12.4.
that was caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable Words, they should cry
out, Romans 11.33.
O the depth, that cannot be fathomed.

Yet to show we are not altogether unacquainted with the Notions and Hypotheses
of others about these Matters, in a stammering manner, let us say, that the
Psalm. 147 5.
infinite Understanding of God never is or was Idle, and as it is his very
Being, so from all Eternity, it ever was taken up, and this Understanding of
God being All in All, it cannot meet with any thing but himself, so it did
understand and conceive it self; as in a Looking-Glass, a Man does conceive and
beget a perfect Image of his own Face, so God in beholding and minding of
himself, does in himself beget a most lively and perfect Image of himself, and
this in the Blessed Trinity is the Son of God, who is called Heb. 1 3.
the perfect Image of God; just as if we may use such Comparisons, Wax upon a
Seal has the engraven Form of the Seal, so the Son of God whom his Father has
begotten of his own Understanding, is the very Form of his Father's
Understanding, and when one is seen, the other is seen also, as he says to
Philip, Joh. 14.9.
he who has seen me has seen the Father; and under the Name of Wisdom, he
says, when there were no Depths, and before the Mountains were settled, Prove.
8.23, 24, 25.
I was brought forth.

And as in God's Essence there is an Understanding, so there is Isa. 46.10.
a Will, and by this Will God according to his own Mind, applies his Power,
where, when, and how he thinks good; and as his Understanding does so his Will
everlastingly works upon himself, as it has no other Thing to work upon but it
self, it delights it self in the Infinite Goodness which it knows in it
self, and that Delight which God or his Will has in its own Infinite Goodness,
produces a Subsistence in God, which is the Holy Ghost, and that mutual Love
whereby the Father takes Delight in his Son, which is his own Image conceived
by his Understanding, and the Son likewise rejoices in his Father; now this
Action of the Will when it is fulfilled, is Liking and Love, as when a Man
looks in a Glass, if he smiles, his Image does so too, and if it takes
Delight in it, it takes the same in him, for they are both One, and from these
Two does result the Third, all Three are in One Face, of One Face, and but One
Face: Thus if we will make use of our Reason in these Mysterious and
Incomprehensible Matters, we must stutter and stammer; wherefore the best is
chiefly, and only to stand to, and depend upon the Revelation thereof that God
has made in his Word, beyond which. Men ought not to presume, for in Matters
of so High a Concernment to speak true and certain Things there is some Danger
of the contrary: Herein we can give no Examples, because there is nothing like
God; we have no natural Grounds and Principles positively to prove these
Truths, all Comparisons from the Sun, the Soul, the Rainbow, a Triangle; and
of my speaking as I, my Word, and my Breath are Three several Things different
one from another, yet I am but One Man, and such like lame Comparisons fall
very short of Illustrating these Mysteries, if we cannot understand how
Original Sin is propagated in us, seeing our Soul is not ex traduce, begotten
by Parents, how much less can we comprehend that Infinite and Eternal Being of
One God in Three Persons.

After this, is it not Just that Men should own how the Trinity is a High
Mystery which falls not under Senses, and is infinitely above our
Understanding? rather to be believed than felt or understood, whereof the
Revelation ought to be the sufficient and only Rule, as when Scripture says, 1 John 5.7.
there are three in Heaven, the Father, the Word and Holy Ghost, and these
three are one; I must not puzzle my Brain to know how this can be; thus when
the Apostle reveals there is to be a Resurrection of the dead, when some Men
will say, 1 Cor. 15.35, 36.
How are the dead raised up, and with what body do they come? This is the
rational Man who will dive too far, the Apostle for his pains calls him a Fool,
thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die; so in Matter
of God's Decrees, thou will then say unto me why does he yet find fault? The
Apostle's Answer is, Romans 9.19, 20.
Nay, but O man, who art thou that reply against God? This is to curb that
idle and presumptuous Curiosity of vain and foolish Men who work their shallow
Brains to find out things which can be known no otherwise than by Revelation;
wherefore let us stick to that Rule about the Holy Trinity, we can and must
know no more than is revealed in Scripture; and herein we must follow the
Example of the Doctors of the pure Primitive Church, who borrowed no Arguments
of Philosophy against the Heretics that troubled them, but only out of
Scripture, the more because in Matters of so great a Concernment as are the
Mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation, the Devil has used his strongest
Batteries; but he that trusts to his own Reason, will fall short of the
necessary Knowledge thereof, and in this case, I may say what is spoken in
another, that if Men had been satisfied to make use only of their own Eye,
without any other help, they could never have found out the magnitude of the
Sun, etc. if so in the Secrets of Nature, much less in Things of Divine
Concernment and of Deity it self; in human and finite Things we conceive well
enough how in the same Nature are many Persons to whom it is communicated, but
that that Nature is but one and the same, and that so many Individuals make but
one Man in the kind no Mind can conceive; but in Men the Reason of the
Multiplication is in the finite Individuals, which are not only distinct one
from another, but also have their several Bounds, and that universal Nature is,
as if it were, rented into so many Parts; but as God is Infinite, the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost is Infinite, the Infinite cannot so much as in thought be
separated, wherefore it must not be thought an absurdity if in Divine Things
there is no multiplicity of Gods as there is of Men in human Nature; but still
after this reasoning I return within the Circle to consult Scripture, more than
to stretch our Reason, with Job let us say, Job 11.7, 8, 9.
Can thou by searching find out God? can thou find out the Almighty unto
perfection, etc. O Isai. 55.8, 9.
my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways says the
Lord. Every Man may in this Matter apply to himself what is said, in the Book
of Proverbs Chap. 30.2.3, 4.
, Surely I am more brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a
man. I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy. Who has
ascended up into heaven, or descended? who has gathered the winds in his
fists? who has bound the waters in a garment? who has established all the
ends of the earth? what is his name, and what is his sons name, if thou can
tell? This is by way of defiance.

In this Controversy Three several things are to be taken notice of; first,
The truth of the thing, namely, that there is a God, but One God and Three
Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which to hold is necessary to our Faith.
Secondly, the Explanation thereof relating to the Doctrine which we already
have said several things about, whereunto we now shall in part repeat, and in
part add these few things: Divine Essence communicable to Three Persons is
neither multiplied nor divided, as it is in Men and Angels; for though their
Natures be but one and the same in Species, yet it is different in Number, but
in the Deity not so; for the same Nature in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is but
one and the same in Number: in the Persons is an order of origin, according to
which proceeds not Essence from Essence absolutely considered, nor Person
from Essence, nor one God from another God, but one Person from another Person,
and from other Persons very God of very God; for the Three Persons are One God,
and every Person is perfect God; in every Person is to be considered the common
and the proper Mode; in God we may not conceive any thing besides One Essence
and Three Modes, whereby with the Essence are constituted Three Persons, in
these Persons one is not before or after the other, only in order and manner of
subsisting, whatsoever is essential is common to the Three, and what is
personal is proper to every one of the Three; the Mode or Personality is the
Abstract, but the Mode with the Nature is the Concret: Here is no Accident, no
Genus, no Species, no Difference, no specific Unity in God, but an essential
and individual Nature. The Difference of Hypostases or Persons in Divine Nature
is from the different relation and manner of Subsistence, which cannot be
confounded. There are essential and relative Properties, the first belong to
every Person, because every Person has the same Nature; but not the second,
whereby they are distinguished one from another; the Son is not the Father, nor
the Father the Son: This also is to be taken notice of, that a finite Nature is
capable of Division, which an infinite is not, or else it were not infinite;
therefore in this, God's Nature admits of no Comparison with any created one
whatsoever.

The Third thing to be observed in this Controversy is, the Proof, not to be
taken out of Nature or Reason, but out of Scripture, of both Old and New
Testaments; and herein we must be very cautious how we draw and press
Consequences from the Creature to the Creator, because there is an infinite
Disparity and Disproportion between them, as there is between a finite and an
infinite Nature; this last fills all when the other is confined within narrow
bounds; for the infinite, as we said, being communicated, is neither divided,
multiplied nor alienated: Scripture calls God, the True God, God's own and
proper Son; yet Socinians have rather in the Christian Religion to admit two
Gods, whereof one is a made, feigned, titular God, than a plurality of Persons
in the Unity of Essence, which Opinion of theirs is really more absurd than
they would have the Truth we own to seem to be; because it does quite destroy
divine Nature; for a made and secondary God, is absurd and a mere
Contradiction, as good as to say, God no God: This is a Notion borrowed from
the Heathens who had their Semi-gods, that is Men, who in their lifetime
having done some great Actions, were after their death, by Apotheosis, deifi'd
and reckoned among their gods: According to this fancy our Savior may be such
a Hero and God, as their Hercules was: This is their good Christian Doctrine.
The ground of their Error is, that they think the number of Persons does
multiply the Essence; also they make a Confusion between being and the manner
of it: And they ask us, why we do not rather multiply Essences in the plurality
of the Persons, than Persons in the Unity of Essence? whereunto we answer, that
we therein follow the Doctrine of the Holy Ghost in the word, and he who makes
Three Essences does also make Three Gods, but he that says there is One divine
Nature in Three Persons does not make Three Gods; now Scripture and Reason
teach us there is but One God, and the same Scripture says also, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost are but One God; and it is to be observed how the word Father,
when used alone, as it is in the Lord's Prayer, without relation to the Son, is,
as well as that of God, common to the Three Persons, but when it signifies a
Person of the Trinity first in order, then it is relatively to the Son.

Now the Plurality of Persons in One divine Essence is proved by Arguments
drawn out of Five several Heads, whereof the First does consist in several
clear Testimonies out of Scripture. Secondly, from the relatives or opposite
Relations, as Father, Son, Spirit, to beget, to be begotten, and to proceed
from the Father and from the Son. Thirdly, by distinguishing Properties, as
Creator to the Father, Redeemer to the Son, Sanctifier to the Holy Ghost.
Fourthly, by peculiar Apparitions to be read in both the Old and New
Testaments. And Fifthly, by different Operations; the Four last I shall not
insist upon, only some of them I shall have occasion to speak of in some place
of my Discourse; but the first I intend by the Grace of God chiefly to enlarge
upon: These Scripture Proofs are of three kinds, the first speaks of a
Plurality of Persons in God, the second of Three Persons, and the third
mentions the Son by himself, and the Holy Ghost by himself; for about the
Father there is no Dispute, yet to avoid Prolixity, we shall make use only of
some few places out of the many which Scripture does afford.

We shall begin with that of Genesis Genesis 1.1.
, In the beginning God created: in the Hebrew the Word God is in the Plural
Number, not Eloah which is the Singular, but Elohim the Plural; surely there
must be some reason why a Nominative in the Plural is joined to a Verb in the
Singular as Bara is, that signifies created; certainly this shows some kind of
Plurality in the divine Nature, we may well say it is not without cause that in
a Tongue whereof in a special manner God is the Author, and in which are many
Names in the Singular Number, yet this in the Plural is made use of to signify
God, not only in this place but very often and in many more: There are many
other Names of God; but none more frequently used than this in the Plural: Why
then, if in the Godhead there be but One single Person, should God delight so
much in being called so often in the Plural? I say farther, that as the History
of the Creation could not be written but by help of Revelation, and that God
chose Moses a Man of very great Wisdom, so (...) being inspired of God,
inserted therein nothing (...) might be called rash and superfluous; so 'twas
(...) at a venture that he chose that Word amongst so many others to name God
in the great Work of Creation, which being terminated outwardly, is common and
belongs to the Three Persons of the Trinity; and a thing very observable is,
that in that first Chapter of Genesis, no less than Thirty two times that very
same word Elohim in the plural is construed with a Verb in the singular, when
in the Second Chapter that of Jehovah, which is a singular, is Eleven times
joined to the Verb of a singular Number: What else can the plural Number in God
signify but some Plurality?

The Name Elohim is the first given to God in Scripture, and though it be
plural, yet it is not personal but essential, and according to the Hebrew Idiome
is spoken both of the Nature and of the Persons; hence there is only One
Elohim, not Three, as in the Athanasian Creed it is well observed, that the
Father is Almighty, the Son Almighty, the Holy Ghost Almighty, yet not Three
Almighties but only One; now the Name Elohim being derived from God's Power,
there are not Three Elohims, no more than Three Almighties, wherefore it is
joined with an Adjective singular, Elohim Zaddik, Deus just, O God, righteous,
Psalm. 7.10. which they who are for Three Spirits and Three Substances are
desired to take notice of, and how their Hypothesis is herein contrary to the
Athanasian Creed.

Farthermore, in the beginning of the Exodus 20.2.
Decalogue, this word Elohim is joined with the Pronoun possessive in the
singular thy, though the word God be in the plural; and Josh. 24.19.
elsewhere we have it joined with an Adjective in the plural, and with a
Relative in the singular, he is an holy God, he is in the singular, God and
holy are in the plural: Nay, we have it also prefixed to a Verb in the plural,
where Abraham said Genesis 20.13.
, When God caused (this Verb is in the plural) me to wander: So we have it
elsewhere 2 Samuel 7.23.
; hence we may conclude, how in the Text in hand, not by chance, but by a
special divine direction, the Name God is in the plural Number, and in the
place already quoted in the Preface of the Ten Commandments, God makes use of
the Lord Jehovah and God Elohim, the one as it seems to declare the Unity of
his Nature, and the other the Plurality of the Persons. Adonai a Name of God
also in the plural Number, is frequently used either when God speaks of
himself, or Men to or of him.

Another Text to prove the Plurality of Persons in the Godhead is this Genesis
1.26.
, Let us make man in our image, and after our likeness, which is an Exhortation
to the other Persons that had a hand in the Creation, the Verb and the Pronouns
are used in the plural; it is not said let me, but let us make; it is not said in
my but in our image, not after my but after our likeness: This manner of
speaking so different from the foregoing, is not in vain, but with a purpose to
give us, for whose sake that History was written, a Subject to meditate upon. I
know they say, God there speaks, as it is usual with Princes, in the plural
Number, for Majesty and Greatness sake; and what if great men do so, must this
through man's wanderings be fathered also upon God? Princes do represent their
People, and also they comprehend their Counselors; whence it is that in every
Proclamation we have that Form, By the Advice of our Privy Council, which God
does not want: Let us more seriously consider this, does God speak it to no
body, (I am necessitated to make use of that Expression) or to some? Surely no
man that has any regard to God can say or think, that in so serious a matter
God speaks to nothing; if to some, then either to Angels or to some other
Creature, not to Angels for they are not of God's Council, nor to any other of
the Creatures which had neither Soul nor Reason, and the next Verse does decide
the thing Verse. 27.
, So god created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him, and
not after the Image of Angels, or of any other Creature; neither did God speak
to the Souls, for as yet they were not created. To what I said of Angels I
shall add, that this could not be spoken to them, for they neither principally
or instrumentally had any hand in the Creation of Man; for they could not, the
Work of Creation requiring an infinite Power, but it must be to the other
persons of the most holy Trinity, the Word and the Spirit. As to the Enallage,
or that manner of speaking in the plural for Greatness sake, we own it has
place in some Languages, but we deny it ever was in the Hebrew Tongue in the
Old Testament, no Man, no person in Authority, no Priest, no Judge, no King ever
spoke of himself in the plural Number: Well has the Prophet said Isai 40.12,
13.7.
, Who has directed the spirit of the Lord, or being his counselor has taught
him? But for any one, Grotius not excepted, to say that the plural Number is
used for Greatness or Majesty sake, is certainly to prevaricate in the Cause of
God; for as it is contrary to the Idiom of the Hebrew Tongue, so to the practice
of all those former times, and it is but a modern Use and Invention, which so
support, some Men, contrary to all true Reason, have forged in their
imagination. Besides that in these latter times wherein the Use has been
introduced, no Emperor, King, or Prince in any Language uses his Proper Name
or Appellative in the plural Number, We Leopolds, Williams, Henrys, Emperors,
Kings, etc. but always in the singular, Leopold, William, Emperor, King.

Well, though no Man of what rank soever spoke after that way, we find God has
in other places, as after Adam's Sin Genesis 3.22.
, Behold, the man is become as one of us, not as I, but one of us; then there
is more than One person, for God speaks of himself, of the Deity, not of
Angels, whom he makes no comparison with, when in the Transfiguration the Voice
came from Heaven, saying Mat. 17.5, 8.
, This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased; it is observable the
Apostles saw no Man save Jesus only, that it might appear, it was not spoken
of Moses or Elias, but only of the Lord Jesus: Another place there is also to
the same purpose, where upon the occasion of the building of the Tower of Babel
Genesis 11.6, 7.
, The Lord said, let us go down and there confound their language; it is not
said I will, but let us go ^^wn, in the plural Number, as speaking of many,
which may not be understood of the Nature which is most singularly One, but of
the Persons. Socinians say to this, that though out of this we could prove
Plurality, yet we must not conclude for a Trinity; but the Cavil is vain, for
it is enough that the Name of God is in Scripture attributed only to Three,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to infer a Trinity, and it is well known how Three
is the first Number of the plural: Hence Hebrews and Greeks do distinguish the
plural Number from the dual; neither do we read of any more Terms or Words than
two of divine Emanations, namely of the Son by Generation, and of the Holy
Ghost by Procession.

Our second kind of Arguments consists of those Texts of Scripture, which do
expressly declare a Trinity, as is that when our blessed Savior sends his
Apostles to Mat. 28.19.
baptize the Nations in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost: Hence the Son and Holy Ghost are proved to be Persons, because we are
distinctly baptized in their Name; to baptize in one's Name is to make him
disciple, or initiate and bring him under the Discipline of him in whose Name
he is baptized; now if the Father, in whose Name we are baptized, be a Person,
so must the Son, so must the Holy Ghost be, because in every circumstance we
are baptized in their Name as well as in the Fathers: And observe, it is not
said in the Name of God, whereby the Essence only might absolutely be taken,
but of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to show that relative Equality which is
between the Persons that have but one and the same Nature: In this Text our
blessed Savior with his own Mouth declared the Trinity.

Another place very plain and positive to our purpose is this 1 John 5.7.
, There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
holy Ghost, and these three are one: Here the Trinity of Persons and Unity of
Essence are so clear, that the Adversaries have nothing to say, but first to
call in question the Verse, as if it had been inserted, because it is not in
some Greek Copies, out of which the Enemies of the Truth did formerly take it
away, but we have it in so many others, even before the Council of Nice, in
Cyprian's time, that there is no just ground left to doubt of its being true
and authentic, which place was by Athanasius made use of against Arrius: In
this Text the Apostle does treat of confessing and believing Jesus Christ to be
the Son of God, which he to confirm does bring in the Article of the holy
Trinity, whereof he is the second Person, and to any one that does seriously
consider the sense and scope of the place, it will appear, how without that
Verse there would be a breach in that part of the Chapter to bear a proportion
of Three that bear witness in Heaven, with the Three that bear it on Earth.
Their next Cavil upon this place is, upon the latter part of the Verse, and
these three are one, that is, say they, not in Nature but in Mind and Consent,
which is as absurd as if one would say, when Scripture affirms Deuteronomy. 6: 4. Mark
12.29.
, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord; the meaning is only the Consent of
many Wills; but does not this Oneness of Will argue a Unity of Essence? For how
can there naturally and essentially be one Will and Consent, if there be not
one Essence and Nature? How can it essentially be one Will, if there be not one
but many divine Natures? Rather there shall be many different Gods, whose
different Wills shall oppose one another, than the which nothing can be more
absurd. Again, either those Persons are finite or infinite; if finite, then
they have not divine Nature, which is infinite; if infinite, then they do
penetrate one another; for they most perfectly and infinitely know and love one
another; now Love is an earnest. desire of Union, so then they be most entirely
united. The Apostle makes the necessary difference, of the Three on Earth he
says they agree in One, but of the Three in Heaven he says they are One.

Moreover, either one knows something which the other does not, or loves
something which the other does not love, or can do something which the other
cannot do, or not; if the former, how are they God? For God knows and can do
all; if the last, then not only they have one Will, but also one Mind, one
Power, one Knowledge, one Love. Now let Man think upon several Natures of the
same kind, which mutually do penetrate themselves, and by a mutual inclination
do embrace and unite themselves inseparably, and have the same Thoughts, Will,
and Action; does not all this conclude for one and the same Nature? And that
there is no difference but in some manner of Existing, which because they are
such, are distinct one from another, without Confusion; all which from Oneness
of Will, leads to Oneness of Essence; for the Will of God is not a thing
different from his Nature.

Another Text wherein the most holy Trinity is demonstrated, and not only may
be read but also be heard and seen, is that about our Savior's Baptism, where
the Father speaks from Heaven and calls him his Son: Christ the Son is
baptized, and the Holy Ghost appears in the shape of a Dove; if Men do believe
Scripture, this they must believe to be true: S. Austin looked upon this Text as
a strong and convincing Proof of that divine and essential Truth; Vade ad
Jordanem, etc. says he, Go to the River Jordan, and there thou shall find the
holy Trinity, and be convinced of the Verity thereof. Besides these we have a
Cloud of other Witnesses to prove this Truth, where the Three Persons are
mentioned under their proper Names; and first Acts 2.22, 23.
, This Jesus being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the
Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, the Three Persons are plainly named:
Again, the same Jesus Christ was declared Romans 1.3, 4.
to be the Son of God, with power according to the Spirit of holiness:
Elsewhere the same Apostle says Tit. 3.4, 5, 6.
, God saved us by the washing of regeneration and renewing, of the Holy Ghost
through Jesus Christ: And in another place Gal. 4.6.
, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts; by the word God
is meaned the Person of the Father Heb. 9.14.
, How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit
offers himself without spot to God: Furthermore Ephesians. 2.18.
, Through him [Christ] we both have an access by one spirit unto the Father.
Our blessed Savior himself out of his own sacred Mouth does plainly and
positively speak to this purpose, when he says John 14.16.17.
, I will pray the Father, and he will give you another comforter, the Father, I
the Son, and the comforter, whom he calls the Spirit of Truth, are Three
Persons, which in the next Chapter Chap. 15 26.
is by him repeated; But when the Comforter is come whom I will send to you
from the Father, even the Spirit of truth. One Text more I shall bring to
confirm this 2 Cor. 13.14.
, The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God that is the Father,
and the communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all. And in the Text of another
Apostle 1 Pet. 1.2.
are contained the Workings of the Three Persons in the Trinity; Elect
according to the fore knowledge of God the Father, through the sanctification of
the Spirit unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ.

As the New Testament is full of Proofs to confirm this holy Doctrine; for
indeed these Mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation are more clearly and
fully therein related, so out of the Old Testament we have enough to confute
the Enemies of this Truth; and because we look upon Socinians in their
Principles to be a sort of Jews, and as well as they, Blasphemers against our
holy and blessed Savior, so we will bring such Arguments against them, as we
would if we were disputing against unbelieving Jew^, only a few Texts out of
many. We begin with the Book of Genesis, Chap. 1. wherein is contained a
relation of the History of the Creation, which is a Work common to the Three
Persons of the Trinity; and though we may not look upon it as the clearer upon
the matter, yet in it is Light enough to show the Truth we now assert. I shall
say nothing of the Name God under that of Elohim, which already we have spoken
of, as representing the plurality of Persons in the most holy Trinity; but we
may say, that though the Name God was there (which it is not) in the singular,
and taken for the Person of the Father, yet the Son had a hand in the act of
Creation; for it is, God said, here is the word, which is the proper Name of
the Son our Lord Jesus Christ, who in Scripture, especially by S. John, is so
often called by that Name, the Word: God saying and speaking is that which made
the World. We read, God said, when any thing was created, which being compared
with what is spoken by John John 1.3.
, All things were made by him, that is the Word, the Person of Jesus Christ;
for actiones sunt suppositorum, acting is proper to Persons, and without him
was not any thing made that was made; now that Word God said, is that which
created every thing; so then here is the Person of the Son, but we also find
the Person of the Holy Ghost, Genesis 1.2.
the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters, by his acting represented
by motion, to cherish, give life and motion to things, as a Hen does when
sitting upon her Eggs; for the word in the Original signifies such a thing:
This sense is given by a competent Interpreter Psalm. 33.6.9.
, By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host thereof by
the breath of his mouth: Here we can read distinctly the Lord, if it were to be
understood only of the first Person, about which there is no dispute, the Word,
and the Breath or Spirit; this, though it be clear, I could set in a greater
Light, with comparing it with other places, which I now forbear to do, because
I shall have occasion to make use of them in some other branch of my Discourse.

Another Text is this Isai. 42.1.
, Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights: I
have put my spirit upon him; besides the Person that speaks, namely the Father,
here we have the Son under the name of his Servant, of his elect, in whom his
Soul delights, whereby none may deny the Lord Jesus to be understood, and the
Holy Ghost or Spirit: Nothing better than this can quadrate with the History of
our Savior's Baptism Matthew. 3.16.
. And in another place of the same Prophet I^al 6.3.
, when he saw the Vision, and heard that Trisagion, or holy, holy, holy, which
long after was also heard by John Rev. 4 8.
, that threefold repetition of God's Name compared with the proper Hypotheses
of the ancient Jews', that it signified three things in God, is adapted to the
Trinity of Persons; in S. John's Vision we have some enlargement as to the Lord
Jesus represented by the Lamb; for the same Twenty four Elders and Four Beasts
Rev. 5.8, 9, 13.
fell down before the lamb, and sung a new song: and every creature which is in
heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, paid
the same Worship to the Lamb as to him that sits on the Throne. Again, the
same Prophet Isai. 61.1.
, The spirit of the Lord is upon me, for he has anointed me, this to be
understood of Christ, as applied, Luke 4.18. and of the Holy Ghost by the
anointing, for he was anointed with the Oil of Gladness, that is the Graces of
the Spirit. These Three are also to be read amongst the last Words of David 2 Samuel 23.2.
, saying, The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and the Word was in my tongue;
here is the Lord, the Word, and the Spirit. To the same purpose speaks another
Prophet Hagg. 2.5.
, according to the word that I covenanted with you, when ye came out of Egypt,
so my Spirit remains among you; the Father, with the Word his Son, and his
Spirit made a Covenant with Israel.

There are several other Texts in the Old Testament, of the Nature of One which
I already made use of, I mean of the thrice holy, wherein the Name of God or
Lord is thrice repeated; I own I have such a persuasion of the infinite Wisdom
of God, as to believe there is nothing at all in his Word but what there is a
particular reason for it to be in, and in this belief of mine I am confirmed by
what our blessed Savior says in earnest, and with a strong Asseveration Matt.
5.18.
, Verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle
shall in no wise pass from the law till all be fulfilled; and I am sufficiently
satisfied, that though through the Infirmity of our Nature in the Ignorance of
our Mind, we cannot apprehend the Causes of many things in the Word of God, yet
therein is nothing without a Cause: So out of that Principle, I dare say, God
means something when in the Blessing which he prescribed to be pronounced to
the People, the Lord's Name is thrice in it thus, Numb. 6.24, 25, 26.
The Lord bless thee and keep thee, the Lord make his face shine upon thee and
be gracious unto thee, the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give
thee peace; and when God speaks unto Moses, he dictates what he was to speak to
the Children of Israel when he was come to them in his Name, that is, The Lord
God of your Fathers, one would have thought this had been enough, but no, for
he adds, Exodus 3.15.
The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob; it was the same
God, yet thrice named. So when the Law is given, he says Exodus 20.5.
I the Lord thy God am a jealous God; once Lord and twice God, which is the
same; so in another place, the Psalm 136.1, 2, 3.
Psalmist exhorts thrice to give thanks, to whom? unto the Lord, unto the God
of Gods, to the Lord of Lords. One more I shall quote, and it is this, Isa.
33.22.
The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King: Why
thrice and no more? Surely God aims at something, for as he does nothing, so he
says nothing in vain, these things are not in by Chance; and seeing with a
full assurance, I believe according to Revelation a Trinity of Persons in the
Divine Nature, Why should not I also believe that these things relate to it?
Now if one would seriously attend upon these quoted places, and compare them
with others of the same kind, may be God would impart upon the Matter, greater
Discoveries than I for the present am able to give, only this I shall add, how
the Name Jehovah, called in Greek, Tetragrammaton, because it originally
consists only of four Letters, signifies both God's Self-existence, for the
Root whence it is derived does denote to be, and also his Eternity, for it
contains all times, to come, present and past; one, out of the two first
Letters draws the Words beginning and to live, and the third having a Virtue of
copulating or joining together, is for Love, whereby is denoted the Holy Ghost,
as by the two before are Father and Son, and because the second Letter h is
twice in, he would have both Natures in the Second Person of the most Holy
Trinity to be meaned: though I have nothing to say against these mysterious
Interpretations which may be well grounded, yet we build not our main Arguments
thereupon; however, knowing that essential and incommunicable Holy Name to
confist of three different Letters, I can see nothing to hinder me from
believing, that that same Nature is communicated to Three Persons, and as the
same Letter is twice in, it does signify Two Natures in One Person, especially
it falling upon the Second Letter relating to the Second Person of the most
blessed Trinity, and as God is the Author of the Name, Why may not he in his
Infinite Wisdom therein denote some Mystery? This I take to be Rational.

Here I must not omit for Proof of this great Truth, to bring in our Creed
called the Apostolical as an Evidence; I meddle not with the others, for the
Adversaries will not own them, though they ever were by better, more Learned,
more Pious and Sound in all Ages than they are, or I doubt can be: I know the
World has afforded some Men who out of a vainglory, and to seem to be
something, through a trial of their Parts, have attempted to enervate with
their Criticisms the Strength and Orthodoxy of these Creeds, but as to this,
Socinians themselves can except against it, no more than they do against the
written Word of God whence this is extracted; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are
all Three named in the Creed, and as the Word God is expressed when joined with
the Father, so it is understood of Son and Holy Ghost, thus I believe in God his
only begotten Son, and I believe in God the Holy Ghost, for to them it also
does belong, and as there we profess to believe in, that is, to put our whole
Trust and Confidence, not only in the Father, but also in the Son and in the
Holy Ghost, so thereby we own and declare them to be God as the Father; and in
the Lord's Prayer which is part of the Worship we render unto God, though we
name but One that is the Father, yet we mean all, for the Word is taken
Essentially, for Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and not personally, only for the
first Person, because the whole Trinity are our Father in respect of Creation,
Preservation, and Redemption for every such outward Work, as said before, is
common to the Three Persons, and so we address our Prayer to all Three.

Now I shall lay down some few Arguments to prove the Truth: this is one, he in
whose Name we are Baptized, is the True Eternal God, but we are Baptized in the
Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, therefore they Three are True Eternal
God, the major is clear, for Baptism is a Covenant not with Man or any
Creature, but with God alone, as it appears out of 1 Pet. 3.21.
Peter, where Baptism is called a Stipulation or Answer of a good Conscience
toward God. Secondly, They in whose Name we are Baptized, do justify us, but
we are Baptized in the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; wherefore they
justify us, and consequently they be True Eternal God, for none can justify but
Romans 4.5. and chap. 8.33.
God alone. Thirdly, They who regenerate us are the True Eternal God, but they
in whose Name we are baptized do regenerate us. Ergo, They are the True Eternal
God, such as Father, Son and Holy Ghost, if they deny those in whose Names we
are baptized to justify and regenerate us, we prove it, for the Washing in
Baptism signifies our Justification and Regeneration which is performed by
those in whose Names we are baptized, which is clear out of St. Paul's Words,
That Ephesians. 5.26.
be, Christ, might sanctify and cleanse it, the Church, with the washing of
water by the word; and in another place, He Tit. 3.5.
saved us by the washing of regeneration; and another Argument is this, they
who save us are True Eternal God, but Father. Son and Holy Ghost do, therefore
they are the True Eternal God; the major Proposition is proved out of the
Prophet, Isa. 45.15, 17, 21.
O God of Israel, the Savior; also, Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an
everlasting salvation; and, I the Lord, and there is no God else besides me, a
just God and a Savior, there is none besides me; the Expression in the Name of
the Father, is observable, for the Name signifies Malac. 1.6.
Authority; now because the Authority of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, is but
one and the same, for we are equ^lly baptized in their Name, so the Dignity is
the same, if so then these Three Persons are but One God, for none can have
equal Dignity with the Father, except he be God, such a Dignity have the Son
and Holy Ghost; against this they object how the Fathers are said 1 Cor. 10.2.
to be baptized unto Moses, but that is not to the purpose, it is of a different
Nature, in that place the Design is to show the Sacraments of the Jews to be
the Types and Figures of ours, but here the Question is about the Name and
Authority whereby we are baptized, they were baptized under the Ministry, but
not in the Name of Moses, so now Ministers do baptize but not in their own Name
or Authority.

CHAP. V. Of Christ's Divinity.
NOW I must come to the Third Classis of my Proofs out of Scripture, namely
those Texts which speak singularly of the Son as True Eternal God, the like of
the Holy Ghost. As our Blessed Savior from the beginning of the World to the
time he was manifested in the Flesh, was the Chief Object of Prophecies,
because in him through an eternal and unchangeable Decree was the Ground of the
greatest of all outward God's Works, for I look upon Redemption on some
Account, greater than Creation, so from time to time God took care to renew and
confirm the first gracious Promise of the Seed of the Woman, under several
Names of Shiloh, Messiah, Emmanuel, the Branch, etc. and to describe him with
several Names and Circumstances, that when he was come, there should be no just
Cause to mistake or deny him to be he and the same, and withal it was declared
what he should be in his Person, and do in his Office, so also what he was
before he came, namely God by his Nature and Attributes, all which after his
Incarnation was so highly confirmed both by a farther Revelation and many
Wonders; but as Luke 2.34.
he was set for a sign which should be spoken against; so then he was opposed,
and so is now by the Enemies to his Person, Offices and Doctrine; but against
such detestable Wretches he has not left himself without Witnesses to make
himself known to be what he really is, even God blessed for ever; wherefore our
Savior commands us to John 5.39.
search the Scriptures, for they testify of him, therein we shall find his
Deity; this course himself took, when beginning at Moses and all the Prophets
he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the Things concerning himself.

To this purpose the Word does afford such a plenty and variety of Matter in
such an essential Point of our Faith, and so necessary to be known, that indeed
it would go near to run one into some Confusion, except some Method be used to
prevent it: the Difficulty lays not in what to say, but how to say it,
wherefore our Discourse and Arguments must be reduced under several Heads and
Classes, as may be Names, Attributes, Works and Worship of God. Some Words used
in this Matter, are in Scripture, as (...), Godhead, which some would have to
differ from (...) Divinity, as cause an effect, the first the Essence, the last
a Gift communicated; though in Scripture they be synonimous, and both
translated Godhead; in Scripture are also (...) One, (...) Three; (...)
Subsistence or Person, (...) is: others are derived, as from (...) One, and
(...) Three, are derived (...) Unity, and (...) Trinity; from (...) Being or
Existing come (...) Essence. St. John alone calls the Son (...) the Word, and
St. Paul alone, or the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews calls him (...) the
Character of the express Image of the Person of the Father.

Of the Names of God, some signify the Essence as Jehovah, Proved from the
Names.
Jah, Ehejah; others the Attributes as Elehim Schaddai, Adonai, etc. and in the
New Testament (...) God, and (...) Lord, are frequent. Jehovah signifies God's
Essence in Three manners; First, First, Jehovah.
That he is of himself and of no other. Secondly, All other Things are from
him, not from themselves, or from any else. Thirdly, That he is true in his
Promises and Threatenings; (...) when absolutely attributed to God, answers
that of Jehovah, for he is, (...), Self-Lord and of his Nature. The Name
Jehovah is properly, absolutely, and without any adjection attributed to the
Son, as it must amongst other places be understood in that wherein it is said.
Genesis 19.24.
The Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord;
the Lord from the Lord is a Tautology, and a gross one too, which God is not
capable of, were it not that as the Father has committed all Judgment to the
Son, upon that occasion, the Son executed Judgment against those wicked Cities,
and to prove the Truth of this Interpretation we have two undeniable Evidences,
the Expressions of one are just as in this place; and of the other, they are to
the same purpose, David is the first, Psaim 110.1.
The Lord said unto my Lord, which our Savior explains of Mat. 22.44.
himself; the other Witness is Hos. 1.7.
Hosea by whom God says, I will save the house of Judah by the Lord their God;
not only he calls him their Lord, but also their God. Here we have the True,
Eternal, and Infinite God, whose Word came to the Prophet, saying, he will have
mercy upon the House of Judah; and I hope hitherto we are agreed, he promises
to save them, By whom? By the Lord their God, that is the Lord God of Judah,
for he speaks to, and of the House of Judah; he then by whom they are to be
saved is the True God of Israel, for certainly the God of Judah and Israel is
one and the same God, and not two; for their Savior is their God: the next
thing to be known is, who is meaned by this Lord God of theirs; not properly
and immediately the Person that speaks, for then he would have said, I will
save them by my self, as upon another occasion he said, Genesis 22.16.
By my self have I sworn, and in some other places; wherefore here another
Person is to be understood, or else the designation of another had been
superfluous and not to the purpose; but here is a visible distinction of
Persons, he that speaks and promises to save them, and he by whom they shall
be saved; according to the whole Analogy of Faith, this Prophecy relates to
the Messiah, the Son of God whom the Father out of his own Bosom was to send
into the World to save it; and the Lord Jesus was the Messiah which at that
time was to come, and came since, who by the Prophet is called the Lord God of
Judah, which was fulfilled when the Angel said unto the Shepherds, Lu. 2.11.
Unto you is born this day in the City of David a Savior which is Christ the
Lord; who came to save his People, the True Judah and Israel of God, not
according to the Flesh, but the promise, from their Sins and from the
Punishments which thereby they had deserved, so the Lord Jesus is the True Lord
God of Israel, for the House of Israel or Judah has no other Prince and
Savior to Act. 5.31.
give them repentance and forgiveness of sins, but the Lord Jesus who in this
same place is called Prince; now the Title of God of Israel, the true, eternal
and undoubted God, does in many places of Scripture appropriate to himself, and
communicates to none besides; Joh. 1.49.
Nathanael called Jesus Christ, the Son of God and the King of Israel, and we
know he spoke Truth as did David when he says, Psalm. 22.28.
the Kingdom is the Lord's, and he is the governor amongst the nations, and we
are sure that Psalm has a relation to the Lord Jesus, and if any doubt
remains, it is explained in the Person of the Rev. 12.5.
man child who was to rule all nations with a red of iron; and this is fully
interpreted of the Person whom the Lord has said to, thou art my Son, and has
given to, Psalm. 2.7, 8, 9.
the heathen for his inheritance, etc. which he shall break with a rod of iron.

In the Old Testament we read of an Angel who appeared at several times, and
spoke as to Hagar, he is called the Angel of the Lord, and was the Lord Jehovah
himself Genesis 16.13.
for she called the Name of the Lord that spoke unto her, thou God see me; a
second time he appeared unto her and said, lift up the lad Ishmael, for I will
make him a great nation, this certainly was an increated Angel, namely, the Son
of God, for no created Angel could make such a Promise, it being beyond the
Power of any creature to perform it, and that Angel is called Jehovah, upon the
occasion of sacrificing Isaac, and that he was God himself, it appears not only
from the Nature, but also from the Words he spoke, Seeing, said he, Genesis 22.11,
12, 15, 16.17, 18.
thou have not held thy Son, thine only Son from me; now that Son was to have
been sacrificed to God and none else; and this is confirmed beyond all doubt
when it is said, And the Angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of Heaven the
second time, and said, by my self have I sworn, etc. that in blessing I will
bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the Stars of heaven,
and as the sand that is upon the sea shore, and in thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed. This is elsewhere represented under the shape
of a Man who Genesis 32.24, 28, 30.
wrestled with Jacob, (might not the Name Man relate to the future Incarnation)
however it is most certain under what Name soever, that same was God; for he
said to Jacob, Thou have power with God: and when he asked his Name, Jacob
received no other Answer but this, Wherefore is it that thou do ask after my
name, which as a Prophet says Isai 9 6.
, is wonderful; Jacob, though he asked his Name, knew who it was; for he says,
I have seen God face to face, and the same is called Man, God, even the Lord
God of hosts, Hosea 12.3, 5. and in the same place is called the Angel, verse
4. So the Names Man, Angel, and God Lord of hosts do belong to the same; and as
upon that same occasion one of the Names belong to the Son of God, by the same
reason must all the rest; and him Jacob remembers, when blessing Joseph's
Children he says Genesis 48.15, 16.
, The angel which redeemed me from all evil bless these lads; and just the
verse before, he calls him the God of his fathers Abraham and Isaac. The better
to know who this Angel is, let us hear him speak himself to Jacob Genesis 31.11,
12, 13.
, The angel of God, says Jacob, spoke unto me in a dream, and what says he? I
have seen all that Laban does unto thee. I am the God of Bethel, where thou
anointedst the pillar, and where thou vowedst a vow unto me. Surely this could
be no created Angel: The same it was that appeared unto Moses in the Bush,
mentioned by Stephen Acts 7.35.
, by whose Hands, Authority, and Power, Moses became Ruler and Deliverer of the
People out of Egypt. Now in the same Chapter Stephen says, v. 32. that he that
appeared unto Moses in the Bush, was the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob; and that same God he afterward calls the angel which spoke
to him in mount Sinai, v. 38. To be short, this is the Angel of the Lord which
appeared unto Moses out of the Bush, which is called Lord and God, and calls
himself Exodus 3.^, 4, 6.
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. The Adversaries
cannot deny this to be the true and proper Character of the true God. Moreover,
this is the Angel promised to be sent before the People; let us hear what a
Character God gives of him Exodus 23.20, 21.
, Beware of him and obey his voice, provoke him not, for he will not pardon
your transgressions: for my name is in him: If this had been one of his created
Angels, would God have spoken of him after this manner? Why God's Name in a
most special manner, more in him than in another? Here his Name signifies his
Nature; and can any but the true essential God pardon Transgressions, as it
depends upon the Will of this Angel to do or not to do? According to promise
this same Angel appeared unto Joshuah, under the Name of Josh. 5.14, 15.
captain of the host of the Lord, and of him required the same humble Obedience
as before he had received of Moses; and this the Apostle does point at Heb.
2.10.
, when speaking of Christ, he calls him the captain of our salvation, of which
the Deliverance out of Egypt was a Type and a Figure; for he was the Rock 1
Cor. 10.4.
that followed them in the Wilderness: He is farther called Isai. 63.
the angel of God's presence, God in him is present wheresoever he is, because
he is God, but he there is also called their Savior, he saved them; is there
any Savior besides the Lord Jesus the Son of God? He also is called the
Messenger Mal. 3.^
or Angel of the covenant: Is not God's Covenant with Men made in Christ Jesus?
Has he not procured and published it? It was to strengthen the Faith and
confirm the Hopes of his People, that God by the last of his Prophets does so
positively promise he shall come; surely he then was and existed, though he was
not yet come: The Prophet adds, whom ye delight in; would to God this were
true in every Christian; but his Enemies can take no delight in him. However it
remains true, that no Creature whatsoever could be this Angel, and that seeing
it was not the Person of the Father, it must be that of his Son, who is another
himself; and I think that to prove the Deity of the Messiah, is to prove the
plurality of Persons in the Godhead; for as I said before, Trinity imports the
Divinity of the Son, and the Divinity of the Son implys plurality of Persons in
the Divine Nature.

This Angel under the shape of a Man, attended by two Angels, appeared unto
Abraham Genesis 18.
, and in the same place he is called the Lord or Jehovah, and Man, and behaved
himself both as Lord and as Man, and as both was received by Abraham: Thus it is
neither impossible nor contrary to Scripture, that God should in human Nature
appear unto Men, as then he did unto Abraham: In his Promise to Abraham of a
Son by Sarah, and as to the Judgments upon Sodom he behaved himself as God, as
he did as Man in visibly walking, discoursing, having his Feet washed, resting
and eating, and as herein by acting the true part of a Man he was a true Man,
so he was a true God; for there he is six or seven times called Jehovah, and
five Adonai; and he speaks like the Judge of the World, in whose power it lies
to punish or pardon; and the Adversaries can bring nothing against the Union of
divine with humane Nature in the Person of Christ, but what this Instance of
the appearing can refute; for indeed the personal Union of the divine with
human Nature can be no better nor more plainly represented than by this
Example; and if this appearing was a sign and forerunner of Christ's dwelling
and conversing among Men, certainly it became him to be such as he then
appeared, namely God and Man. Now that this was a foresight of his Incarnation,
our Savior himself declares it John 8.56.
relating to this, Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it
and was glad: And upon the same account he upbraids them when he says, John
39.40,
If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham, but ye seek
to kill me, that did not Abraham; for he never offered to kill as a Blasphemer
that Man whom with two others he recieved into his House, and who carried
himself as God; on the contrary, he all the while behaved himself toward him
as being God, and at that time the same Person that appeared unto Abrham is not
only called the Lord, v. 1. the Lord appeared unto Abraham, but also the judge
of all the earth, v 25. a Property belonging to none but the true God; and that
Christ is to judge all the Earth, it appears out of Acts 17.31. and 2 Cor. 5.10,
as indeed the Destruction of Sodom and Gomorah was a figure of the Destruction
of the World and of Christ's second coming: The Father says Christ has
committed all Judgment to the Son, John 5.22.

Here I shall add a Text which may have a place in another part of my
Discourse; it is this, God by the Prophet Isai. 40.9, 10, 11.
speaks to Zion, Jerusalem, and the Cities of Judah, Behold your God, behold
the Lord will come with strong hand, etc. here certainly by your God is meant
the God of Israel; for the God of Z^on, of Jerusalem, and of the Cities of
Judah, is the same with the God of Israel; now who that Person is, here called
God, it does appear out of the scope of the place, wherein the Prophet does
certainly speak of the coming of the Messiah, who is Christ, as it is plain out
of v. 3. The voice of him that cries in the wilderness, prepare ye the way for
the Lord, make straight in the desert a high way for our God: Beyond all doubt
this is spoken of John Baptist, for he applies John 1.23.
it to himself, and if we want other Witnesses, Matthew Chap. 3.3.
will serve for one, and Zacharias, as recorded by S. Luke Chap. 1.76.
for another; now I take it to be as unquestionable, that John was the
forerunner of Christ, who is the same Lord God for whom he prepared the way:
Further, that in this place of Isaiah, Christ is the same Lord God that was to
come, it appears by the description therein made of him, He will come with
strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him; behold, his reward is with him,
and his work before him, v. 10. The Miracles he wrought by his own Power upon
the sick, blind, dumb, lame, dead, commanding Wind and Sea, and the Devils
themselves which observed him, did convincingly demonstrate him to be the Lord
God, if any doubt should remain, it is cleared, v. 11. He shall feed his flock
like a shepherd, he shall gather the lambs with his arm; the comparison of the
Shepherd and Sheep our Savior does much insist upon, and several John 10.
times gives himself the Name of Shepherd; and S. Paul calls him Heb. 13.20.
, the great shepherd of the sheep; and by another 1 Pet. 2.25. Chap. 5.4.
, the shepherd of our souls, and the chief shepherd: This being his great
Atrribute, as Head of the Church, and Mediator, his Person must necessarily be
designed by the Prophet, who to him attributes the words feeding and
gathering; the Person here spoken of by the Prophet Isaiah, called Lord God, is
the same mentioned by another, who calls him king of Zion and of Jerusalem; and
as he speaks of the same as Isaiah does, so he speaks to the same Zech. 9.9.
, Rejoice greatly. O daughter of Zion, shout O daughter of Jerusalem, behold
thy king comes unto thee; both Prophets speak of the same Person's coming to
the same place, he is just and having salvation, lowly and riding upon an ass,
and upon a colt the foal of an ass; these very words of the Prophet are quoted
upon the occasion of our Savior's entering into Jerusalem Matthew. 21.4, 5.
, and applied unto him, as indeed this same Prophet speaks in several places
which I mention in this Discourse of Christ the Son of God as of the great and
mighty God, Chap. 2. calls him Lord of Hosts, sent by the Lord of Hosts to the
Nations, who was to come and dwell in thee, O Daughter of Zion, who was to
speak peace unto the heathen, and his dominion to be even from sea to sea, and
unto the ends of the earth, Chapter 9.10. that was to be sold for Thirty pieces of
Silver, which were given for the Potters Field, Chap. 11.12, 13. and that was
to pour upon the House of David and Inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of
Grace and Supplication, (that same Spirit which was in the Prophet is called
the spirit of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.11. or the Holy Ghost, by whom they were moved,
2 Pet. 2.21.) so Chap. 13.7. the Lord of Hosts calls him his fellow; did the
Lord of Hosts ever call any mere Man his Fellow, my Companion, that is united
to me in Substance, equal with me in Power? Thus God does honor Christ in this
Name to show the Unity of Essence, and the Union of the Will of the Father and
of the Son the Mediator, who is in the same Verse called my shepherd, which is
spoken of Christ; for unto himself he applies it, Matthew. 26.31.

Before we fall upon examining other Texts of the Old Testament to prove the
essential Names of God to belong to his Son the Lord Jesus, we must compare
some places of both Testaments, to show how many things belonging to God are
applied unto Christ, as first, that just now quoted of Isaiah Isai. 40.3.
, The voice of him that cries in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the
Lord, or Jehovah, Luke 1.76. John 1.23.
applied one to John Baptist the other to Jesus Christ there called the Lord:
This is another Isai. 6 1, 2, 3, 9, 10.
, I saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne high and lifted up, and his train
filled the temple, above it stood the Seraphims, and said, holy, holy, holy is
the Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory: this in the John
12.40, 41.
Gospel is applied to the Son. Again Isai. 8.13, 14.
, Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be
your dread, and he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling, and
for a rock of offense to both the houses of Israel, for a gin, and for a snare
to the inhabitants of Jerusalem; applied unto Christ Luke 2.34. Romans 9.33. 1
Pet. 2.8.
. David says Psalm. 45.6
, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever; which is applied unto Christ: Heb.
1.8.
But unto the Son he says, thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever. The same
Royal Prophet says Psalm. 68.17, 18.
, The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels: the Lord
is amongst them, as in Sinai in the holy place, thou have ascended on high,
thou have led captivity captive: thou have received gifts for men; yea, for the
rebellious also; all which is applied Ephesians. 4 8.
unto Jesus Christ: So is this Ps. 110.1
, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand; applied to the Son
Matthew. 22 44.
. We read in the Prophet Isai. 45.23.
, I have sworn by my self, the word is gone out of my mouth, that unto me every
knee shall bow; which is attributed unto Christ Romans 14.11. Phil. ^2.10.
. Of old, says David Ps. 102.25.
, have thou laid the foundations of the earth: and the heavens are the works of
thy hands; which is by the Apostle Heb. 1.10.
declared to be meant of the Son. Isai 44.6
Thus says the Lord the king of Israel and his redeemer the Lord of hosts, I
am the first and I am the last: Our blessed Savior says the same of himself
Rev. 1.17. and 22.13.
. God Almighty Ps 26.2. and 7.9.
does try the reins and the heart; and our glorified Savior says Rev. 2.23
, I am he that searches the reins and hearts. God says Zech. 12.10. and Rev.
1.7.
, I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem
the spirit of grace and of supplication, and they shall look upon me whom they
have pierced; the same whom they have pierced says, he will pour the Spirit of
Grace, which none but the true God can do, which is applied to our Savior. And
again another scripture says, they shall look on him whom they pierced John
19.37.
; they never pierced God the Father. It is said of the Children of Israel Psalm.
106 14. Numb. 14.22.
, They tempted God in the desert; and S. Paul applies it to Christ 1 Cor. 10.9.
, Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted; they tempted
Jehovah, and that Jehovah is Christ, who brought them out of Egypt through the
Wilderness into the Land of Canaan, who certainly is the only true God, maker
of Heaven and Earth. It is to be observed how in another place. David speaking
of the Peoples tempting God in the Wilderness, uses very strong Expressions,
for he says Psalm. 78.41.
, They turned back and tempted God, and limited the holy one of Israel, the God
whom they tempted is the same holy one of Israel whom they limited, and the
same who, verse. 56. is called the Most High God; they tempted and provoked the
Most High God. Now the Adversaries must own, that the holy one of Israel, and
the most high God is such by Nature; so that wholly to clear this matter we are
to find out, who it is whom they tempted in the Wilderness; we can have no
better Interpreter than S. Paul in the fore quoted place, who declares 'twas
Christ, neither let us tempt Christ as some of them also tempted, and those
very same that tempted him were destroyed of Serpents; so then the Consequence
is easy and natural, that Christ is the holy one of Israel, and the most high
God, Ps. 16.10. Acts 2.27. and 3.14. 1 John 2.20.
and the Title of Holy One is spoken of Christ, if we must believe Peter and
John; now all these things, as Paul says, are written for our Admonition and
Instruction.

Furthermore it is said, he shall be called Jehovah, Jer. 23.6. and 33.16.
the Lord our righteousness, that is, a righteous branch, a king that shall
reign and prosper, in whose days Judah shall be saved; a Prophecy of the
Messiah explained of Christ 1 Cor. 1.30.
, who is made unto us wisdom and righteousness. If I would go on in this, it
were an endless business, for Scripture does abound in such Evidences, whereof
several more may be seen applied in the Book of the Revelation; and what would
it be if I should bring in so many Circumstances as there were foretold by the
Prophets about the coming and suffering of the Messiah, which are fulfilled in
the Life and Death of our blessed Savior, as in their places they be observed
by the Evangelists; but I think I have under this Head said enough to prove
Jesus Christ to be Jehovah, the true eternal God; to this only I shall add two
places out of another Prophet Hos. 13.14.
, I will ransom them from the power of the grave: I will redeem them from
death; which S. Paul does allude unto when he says 1 Cor. 15 55, 57.
, O death, where is thy sting, O grave, where is thy victory? etc. we have the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ: And in another place formerly quoted
says the same Prophet Hos. 1.7.
, I will have mercy upon the house of Judah, and will save them by the Lord
their God; which was fulfilled in the Person of Christ, who is called and
actually is both their Lord and their God in a true and a proper sense; whence
we must necessarily conclude him to be the Lord God of Israel, about whom is
the question; for they deny him to be the God of Israel; but that it is
undisputably spoken of our Savior, it appears by what Peter says Acts
4.12.11.10.
, Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is none other name under
heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved; we may know whom he speaks of
by the Description he makes of him in the foregoing Verse, This is the stone
which was set at naught of you builders, which is become the head of the
corner; which saying of David, Ps. 118.22. is by our Savior applied unto
himself, Matthew. 21.42. and in case any doubt should remain, that this of the
Prophet is to be understood of Christ, Peter, in that same place, Verse. 10.
names who is the Lord their God by whom they are to be saved, Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, whom ye crucified; and if the Testimony of this one Apostle be not
enough, let us hear the joint Evidence of all the other Apostles, who
unanimously said unto the chief Priests Acts 5.29, 30, 31.
, God has exalted with his right hand Jesus to be a prince and a Savior, for
to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins.

Whosever shall call upon the name of the Lord, faith another Prophet Joel 2.32.
, shall be delivered and saved, which in the same words is by two Apostles Acts
2.21. Romans 10.13.
applied unto the Lord Jesus; and in that remarkable place of the Prophet Zech.
11.12, 13.
, Jehovah, the Lord speaks of himself, they weighed for my price thirty
pieces of silver; and the Lord said unto me, cast it unto the potter; a goodly
price that I was prized at of them: And did not Judas Matthew. 26.15. and 27.7,
10.
agree with the chief Priests to betray the Lord Jesus for Thirty pieces of
Silver? And after that Wretch had returned the Money, did not they with it buy
the Potters Field? How wonderful and plain is the Harmony between the Old and
New Testaments, between the Prophecies and the fulfilling thereof, to
demonstrate our Savior to be the Jehovah, the Lord God and Savior of Israel;
whence we may argue, that the Savior promised is Jehovah, Christ is the
promised Savior, therefore he is Jehovah, which Name not only was known, but
also was of great account among the Heathens which were Neighbors to the
Jews, as Philistines, Arabians, Idumeans, Egyptians, Syrians, etc. which
according to the Idiom of their Languages, with some small alteration they made
use of, thus the last named it Jehuvo, whence the Greeks derived their Jevo,
and the Romans called it Jove or Jupiter, their chief and great God, whom they
named Divum hominumque patrem, the Father of the gods and of men, which they
made his Proper Name, and never spoke it of any other, but him alone they gave
it to; and according as the Jews did in relation to the true God, so they in
respect to their false gods, they attributed it only to the Head of them, and
to all the rest made it incommunicable.

Here before we proceed, we must say that the Name Jehovah is not common or
appellative, but proper to God, it is derived from Jah, a word which signifies
fuit, a Being, for the strength of the word does betoken the Nature and Essence
of God, Exodus 3.14. wherein the Jews observe three different Spaces of time,
future, present, and past; whereunto answers that of S. John Rev. 1.8.
, which is, which was, and which is to come, which the Son of God there speaks
of himself, and in the same place of Exodus v. 15. God, whom we ought to
believe, says, this is my name for ever, which elsewhere he confirms Isai.
42.^.
, I am the Lord, that is my name, and my glory will I not give to another: So
then that Name God accounts to be his Glory, and that Name he would not give
the Angel we have spoken of before, in whom God said was his Name, except he
was his true Son, and partaker of his Nature; this is by another Prophet Jer.
16.21.
confirmed, I will cause them to know mine hand and my might, and they shall
know that my name is the Lord; and by another Hos. 12.5
, even the Lord God of hosts, the Lord is his memorial; what follows is worthy
of a most serious consideration Psalm. 83.18.
, that men may know, that thou whose name alone is Jehovah, art the most high
over all the earth; so then if God speaks truth, Jehovah is his Name alone, and
of none else. Another Prophet is not silent upon the matter Amos 5.8.
, Seek him that makes the seven stars and Orion, and turns the shadow of
death into the morning, and makes the day dark with night: that calls for the
waters of the sea, and pours them out upon the face of the earth, the Lord is
his name: One thing more I add, how after the People had seen the Fire of the
Lord fall upon Eliah's Sacrifice and consume it, and all round about, they fell
on their faces and said, the Lord be is the God, 1 Kings 18.38, 39.
the Lord he is the God: Who after these plain and convincing Evidences can be
so much a Child of the Devil, I mean a Liar, as to deny the Name Jehovah to be
God's proper Name, and consequently deny Christ, who is Jehovah, to be the true
natural God. By Jehovah and Jah is primarily denoted the Essence proper only to
God, whereby God is understood to have his Being of himself, and to be
efficient, principle in a way of Excellency of all other Beings, and the Name
was not altogether unknown before Moses; for in that place Exodus 6.3.
the Question is not properly or formally about the Word, but the Thing, as of
the Unchangeableness of the Divine Truth, and of the Deliverance of his People.
The Jews are so scrupulous about the Word, that they would not have it
pronounced but with some change of Letters; they impiously give a magical
Virtue to the Characters, whereunto they attribute all Miracles done by our
Savior; the Name Schaddai signifying God's Self-sufficiency, is also
incommunicable, but it is of Attribute, as the other of Nature.

They cannot deny that Christ or the Son is called Jehovah, wherefore they
betake themselves to another Shift, which is to deny the Name to be
incommunicable; for say they, it is attributed to Angels, and to other things,
as unto the Mount where Abraham would have sacrificed his Son; to Jerusalem,
and unto the Ark: As to the first, it is not to be understood of any created
Angel, but of that Angel whom we proved to be God truly and properly, whom the
Name does belong unto in a proper sense: When spoken of the forenamed things,
it is not to be taken as a Name, but as a Commendation, Testimony, Sign, and a
Symbol; as if one should say, There John lives, there James reigns, by a
kind of Metonimy used in human things, when the thing contained is put for the
containing; as to the Ark, when Moses says Number. 10.35.
, Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, he does not speak to the
Ark, a material Creature, unable to hear and of it self to move, but to Jehovah
who had his Seat in it: Of this we can have no surer Interpreter than David,
who says Psalm. 132 8.
, Arise, O Lord, into thy rest: thou and the ark of thy strength; the Prayer is
directed to God, not to the Ark, which were Idolatry: the Ark does neither rise
nor return, but after the manner of Men it is attributed unto God: So in
another place Ps. 68.1.
, Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered; besides, these words of Moses
were spoken when the Ark was upon a motion, or at rest, wherefore it had been
improper to say to the Ark, Rise, when 'twas going on, and Rest, when it was
fixed; so it must be to God, who had appointed it there to manifest his special
Grace or Glory. Thus the Name Jehovah is considered either relatively or
absolutely; the first, when joined with some thing, as we said of Jerusalem and
of the Ark, not to be absolutely but relatively understood, as Jerusalem the
City wherein Jehovah dwells: God's Worship was tied to the Ark, for there, as
promised, he spoke with Moses Exodus 25 22. Levit. 16.2. 1 Samuel 4 4
; the second, when God takes that Name to himself Exodus 20.2.
, I am Jehovah, or the Lord thy God; and Isai. 42.8
, Whose name is Jehovah, the Lord of hosts: Thus Moses and People say in their
Song Exodus 15.3.
, Jehovah is his name, and that according to the Etymology, which is, as said,
from a word that signifies, is, has been, and herein we can agree with
Crellius, shall be, which properly denotes the Essence not generally, but
specially, an infinite eternal Being, existing of it self. Now this figurative
way of speaking in this kind is often used in Scripture, whereof the following
Text Psalm. 24.5, 6.
is a considerable Instance, This is the generation of them that seek him, that
seek thy face, O Jacob, where Jacob is put for the God of Jacob; to seek the
Face is a Duty relating to God, not to Jacob or any Man, pressed upon us in the
Word; for the Psalmist not being satisfied to have said, Psalm. 105.3, 4.
Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord, he adds this Command
reiterated, Seek the Lord and his strength: seek his face evermore: It Is then a
Duty which God requires of us; for he says Psalm. 27.8.
, Seek ye my face; and the obedient and dutiful Soul answers, My heart said
unto thee, thy face, Lord, will I seek: Hence it appears how this religious
Duty, to seek the Face, is not directed to Jacob, but to the God of Jacob, who
in the latter end of the foregoing Verse is named the Lord God of our
salvation. Thus after this figurative way of speaking the Name Jehovah is
spoken of the Mount and of the Ark, which are Jehovah no more than Jacob was;
and therefore when God's most holy Name is concerned, Men must not be so rash
as to fancy and vent their profane Notions, and attribute unto any Man, or
other Creature whatsoever, that which God has reserved as proper to himself.

Tertullian tells the Heathens how their Philosophers called the Maker of the
World by the Name the Word, Second, The Word.
which agrees with what S. John says John 1.3.
, All things were made by him; how they came to that knowledge I shall not be so
positive as to determine, but in the Verses fathered upon Orpheus, the Creator
of the World is called (...) the Word, so it is in some of the ancient Books of
the Caldeans; but we must draw out of purer Springs than these; for our blessed
Savior the Son of God, is in the New Tewament called (...) the Name (...) the
Word, because, as Speech of Word is the Production of the Mind, so is the Son
of his Father; and as a Man declares the meaning of the Heart by the Words of
his Mouth, so God John 1.18. Heb. 1.2.
reveals his Will and Mind by his Son; and because it is he whom the Father
promised to Adam, Abraham, and Patriarchs, to make his Promises of Salvation
sure unto them: The second Person is the Word of the Father, begotten from all
eternity by Communication of a personal Being, from whom, as from the Father,
proceeds the Holy Ghost: Here the Word is not a thing such as Speech may be,
but it is a proper Name of a Person, in a Discourse it ever takes place of the
Subject never of the Predicate; it is the Name John 1.14, 4. and 13.16. Matthew.
2.17. Romans 14.2 1 Cor. 1.19.
of the Son of God our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; he is called the
Word in relation both to his Person and Office; as to the first, because he is
from God's Mind, and is the Image of the Father, wholly representing the
Father; as to the Office, because by him all things were made, and he declares
the Father's Will to Angels and to Men; he is known in three Capacities, as
God, as Man, and as both, in which last relation he is the Head of the Church;
as God and as to his absolute Essence and Being, he is of himself, as to the
manner he is from the Father, always he was, is, and ever shall be begotten;
for absolute Eternity has no term before or after, and is always whole without
succession; he is called not barely the Word, but Word of Life 1 John 1.1
, because it contains Life in himself; for in him was Life Joh. 1.4.
, and is the Author of Life in others.

Now it becomes an Historian, such as S. John is, who in his Gospel writes the
History of Christ, if he will write things clearly and in order, and not make a
Romance, to set down the true and proper Name of the Person whose History he
does pen, specially when the Name is not well know nor much in use, or else he
will seem to have a design of imposing upon the Reader: To apply this to the
matter in hand, if S. John, when he was about giving the World an account of
the Life, Actions, and Sufferings of our Savior, had called him by a Name that
was not his own and proper Name, but metaphorical, as Socinians would have it,
far from being acted by a real desire to inform his Readers, he might be
thought to have intended to mock and deceive them, for if the Name, the Word
which had been unknown under the Old Testament, and was not used till by him,
was only a figurative, improper and borrowed Name, then not to say worse, the
Evangelist had not acted the part of a true and judicious Historian, for in
such things, the first to be known is the true Name of the Person whose History
is written; and certainly if ever he intended to have informed the Reader, and
had his Gospel read, he had thereby fallen into the readiest way to prevent it,
for as soon as it had been found out that without Reason and Necessity the
Author had with obtruse and intricate Names drawn a curtain over the first
Line, then presently the Reader would have laid aside the Book; thus far goes
the Opinions of these unreasonable Men, which how injurious it is to the
Evangelist, I leave any rational Man to judge; how ever, we must say that
seeing of the Four Evangelists, John alone, before he made any mention of the
Name of Jesus Christ, in his first Line calls him the Word, and goes on till
past the 14 Verse, we must own there was special cause for it, no less than
Divine Inspiration, for we find in that part of the Vision he had in the Isle
of Patmos, that he who sat upon Rev. 19.11, 13.
the White Horse called faithful and true, representing our blessed Lord and
Savior, it is said there his name is called the Word of God, but Socinians make
this Opposition and rise all this Dust, because to rob him of what they can,
they would have him called the Word, only because he has declared us the Will
of God; that he has done it, is true, but not the whole Truth. But this
relating to the first Chapter of John, we shall have a farther occasion to
speak to it; let this be observed how the Name Word signifies a Substance not a
Sound in the Air, and also only the Divine Nature in Christ.

The Name (...) Lord, belongs, and is proper to Christ to show his absolute
Dominion; Third the Lord.
the Septuagint rendered the Word Jehovah by this, and so in the New Testament,
Evangelists and Apostles make use of (...) to signify Jehovah, which both are
translated Lord, it is taken either primarily and absolutely or secondarily and
relatively; in the first it signifies the infinite and independent Dominion, by
reason of Right and Extent, as of Duration: About this, Socinians do mistake,
for they would have God's Dominion to be meaned when it is with the Article, and
without it that of the Creatures, but it appears how the Word when spoken of
the Father, has sometimes the Article, as Matthew. 22.44. the Lord said unto my
Lord, and sometimes not, as Mark 12.29. and when of the Son, whom they would
have to be a Creature, it has no Article say they, but it has, John 20.28. so
there is no reason to consider the Article in the Word, but rather the Subject:
This Word, against Socinus's Opinion, is a Proper Name not an Appellative,
because in a strict Sense it is attributed unto God alone, as in Deuteronomy. 6. Mark
12.29. The Lord our God is one Lord, and elsewhere, 1 Cor. 8.6.
to us there is but one God and Father of all, and one Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
and Ephesians. 4.5.
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, God alone is the King of Kings and Lord of
Lords. 1 Timothy 6.15.
When soever the Name Lord and God be absolutely taken, they are reciprocal
with one true Lord, one true God: the word Lord in the Subject when joined with
God, does signify the True God, as when Christ says, Matthew. 4.7.
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God; the like Examples we have, Gen 15.2.
Isa. 51.22. Mark 12.29. Joh. 20.28. which for brevities sake, I do but point
at; now when this Name is absolutely spoken, or reduplicatively, as Matthew. 7.21.
not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, or with an Emphasis, as Lord of
Lords in the fore-quoted place of Timothy, or with an Idiom, and Property as
Psalm 135.5.
great Lord, or with an Energy, as Rev. 4.11.
Thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory and honor and power; whereby the
Worship due to him is expressed, it properly belongs to God alone; in the New
Testament it is mostly appropriated to our blessed Savior, which he owns as
the fore-quoted Text, not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, and when he
speaks of the Day of Judgment, when the Son of Man shall come in his Glory,
Matthew. 25.44.
they will say, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered; and about the time of his
washing of his Disciples Feet, he said, Joh. 13.13.
ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am: when after his
Resurrection he appeared, John said to Peter, it is the Lord, John 21.7. that is
the usual Name which the Apostles in their Writings do call him by. It Is
observable, how after his Ascension there are two Things peculiarly called by
the Lord's Name, that is, the 1 Cor. 10.21.
Lord's-Table, and the Rev. 1.10.
Lord's Day.

Now we must come to another Thing and show how the Word (...) or God, is in
Scripture in a true and proper Sense given to Jesus Christ, Fourth, GOD.
but something must be premised before we come to the point; in the question
what God is, we must distinguish either absolutely or relatively, that is
considered either (...) Essentially, or (...) Personally, the one relates to
the Nature and essential Attributes, the other to the Persons of the most Holy
Trinity, and to their Attributes: Here we assert two Things against Socinians;
First, the Name of God with Attributes, is not a Name of Office, as Emperor,
King, Consul, Judge, etc. but of Essence and Nature as are the Names, Spirit,
Man, Lion, etc. Secondly, The Name God in its first and proper signification is
not appellative but proper, for it signifies an Essence of a most singular
Nature, though we know it to be also improperly used and abused, as the Idols
of the Ammonites and of several other Nations, are called their Gods, but there
are with it such Circumstances as make us easily know the difference. Commonly
there are such Epithets when the True God is mentioned alone with it, as the
God of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Israel, One God, True God, Eternal Life, God
blessed for ever, which leave no doubt that the True God by Nature is spoken of.

The Word God in the New Testament does properly first and chiefly signify the
True God, and such by Nature, but secondarily and improperly those that are in
high Places of Office and Power, which Sense Socinians would restrain it to
when it is spoken of our blessed Savior, but it is spoken of him not only
attributively but subjectively, as it is in that place, When ^al. 4.8.
ye knew not God ye did service unto them which by nature are not Gods; for if
there that Name had been of Office and Dignity, the Galatians might have
excused themselves that they did serve those that were Gods by Dignity and
Place, though not by Nature, but the Apostle reproves them for it; so though they
be called Gods, yet if they are not such by Nature, they are no Gods, according
to what the Lord says by the Prophet, Jerem. 2.11.
Has a nation changed their Gods which yet are no Gods? The reason is by the
same given elsewhere, because Chap. 16.20.
man makes them Gods unto himself; the proper Character which another Prophet
gives of the True God is, he Isa. 43.10.
before whom there was no God formed, neither shall there be after him; for
being of himself, he has no beginning, and shall have no end, such is the Son
of God the Savior of the World, before whom there was no God formed, upon
which account he is by the Prophet called, the ancient of days, Dan. 7.22.
neither shall there be after him; thus he must needs be such by Nature, and
every one knows that neither Angels nor Magistrates are Gods, because not such
by Nature, as is the Son of God, which by God's Grace we shall demonstrate, and
neither the Galatians nor none of the Gentiles, could well know God, and as he
ought to be, till God was manifest in the Flesh when this Second Person of the
Godhead took Human Nature in the Virgin's Womb. The Word God is either first
and properly spoken of the True, Eternal God, or of the Creature, if of the
Creature, then the Creature shall properly be called and properly be God, which
is Blasphemy; but if it be spoken of the High, True and Eternal God, then it
must signify his Essence and Nature, seeing God is such from all Eternity
through the perfection of his Nature, not upon the account of any Dignity or
Power different from his Nature; the Name of God if absolute, denotes his
Nature and not any Office, but if it be relative, and signifies only an
Office, then from Eternity God was not God. They would have the Word God
without an Article, as we observed of the Word Lord, to signify those that are
Secondarily such, but with an Article only the True God, both which Notions are
false; for first, the True God is sometimes denoted without an Article, as Joh.
1.6.12.13.18. so is the Inscription of the Romans 1.7.
Epistle to the Romans, and in other places; so is the other Notion false, for
the Word God attributed to false Gods, is sometimes with the Article, as Act.
7.43. and 2 Chronicles. 4.4. both which Examples are joined together in the
fore-quoted place to the Galatians; so then the signification depends not upon
the Article but the Nature of the Subject, but to leave off such Criticisms of
the Schools, and not to bestow our time upon Words more than upon Things; I say
the Word God is Jesus Christ's proper Name, for God and Christ are so
unseparably united, that Ephesians. 2.12.
they that were without Christ, were also without God in the world.

So then the Name God signifies the Essence or Nature, not barely the Office
and Dignity, for otherwise it would follow it should belong to God only in
relation to Creatures; but it is most true, it absolutely belongs to him, for he
was God before there were any Creature; now our God by Nature is opposed to
those that are only called so, the Apostle says, 1. Cor. ^.5, 6.
Though there be that are called Gods, many, etc. to us there is but one God;
and by the Epithet True God is distinguished from them; therefore when the Word
God is spoken of the True God, it is not appellative or common, but proper, for
if it were not so, God would not absolutely be one, for that is common which
belongs to many, and proper, that which belongs only to one, and the Name of
one only thing must needs be proper, since Scripture teaches us there is but
one God, the Name of God must needs be proper: and farther, when a Name does of
it self belong to one, and to others in relation only to that same one, it must
be accounted to be that one's proper Name; thus the Name of God of it self
belongs to God alone, not in relation to any thing else, but to others it
belongs only in relation to the only True God; and as the Word God, spoken of
the True God, is, as already said, taken Essentially or personally, so is the
Name Father either for the Essence of God or for the first Person of the
Trinity; now the Person is taken either abstractively or concretively, when we
say the Word God is taken personally, we do not mean abstractively or
separately from, but concretively or jointly with the Essence; so the Name
Father is taken either essentially or personally, in the first manner when in
the Lord's Prayer, we say, our Father, and personally when in the Creed we say,
I believe in God the Father.

Thus far we in these matters do agree with the Adversaries that there is but
One God, and that Isai. 42.8.
he gives not his Name and Glory to another; for to whom God does communicate
the Honor of his Name and Titles, to the same he thereby imparts his Glory. Now
there is a Name of God proper, and another appellative; this is given to the
Creatures, and it is either properly or figuratively; in the first Sense the
Word is not always to be understood to be the absolute Being but a relative
one, as when some Nation does through Error and Idolatry, name to herself some
Divinity or other, in this Sense God and People are relatives, so the Name God
taken in the predicament of Relation and not in that of Substance, may properly
be spoken of a Creature; thus I speak properly when I say, Chamos is the God of
the Moabites, and Malcom of the Ammonites, but when I come to examine the
Opinion of those Nations, it is very true that they are the Gods of such
Nations, but it is not true that they are Gods in Nature and Substance, they are
but erroneously looked upon as Gods by such Nations; so this is not a
substantial and absolute Truth, only Relative, which the Adversaries may not
affirm of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, as being feigned and invented Gods
between which the Word of God makes a difference, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9.
Ye turned to God from Idols to serve the living and true God: Now the
figurative signification is, when by reason of some likeness, God's Name is
attributed to some Creatures, Psalm. 8.
thus Angels are called Elohim, and Job 1.6.
Sons of God by reason of the Excellency of their Nature, Magistrates are
called Psalm. 82.6.
Gods and Sons of God upon the account of the Dignity of their Office.

But here the Case is very different, the question is, Whether the Name of God
be properly or improperly, and figuratively attributed to the Son and to the
Holy Ghost? I mean the Name taken appellatively, denoting in him that is so
called, the Divine Nature and Essence: Socinians, though they be brazen-faced
enough, yet not to that degree, as to say, that the Persons of the Son and Holy
Ghost, are called God only by way of Figure, but they cavil that the Word
signifies not a Nature but an Office, so the proper signification of the Word
they extend to Angels and Magistrates, as if the Word God signified Governor,
Preserver and Benefactor, etc. but before their Heresy broke out, no Man ever
taught so, then no Language gives that Sense to the Word; for (...) in Greek,
signifies the Nature, for some accounted to be Gods, are false ones, Gal. 4.8.
which by nature are not Gods; and Philosophers reckoned the Gods of the
Heathens amongst the Animals, (...) speaking and rational, and the Hebrew Word
Elohah, does certainly, properly signify the Nature, as being given to the
supreme Being, which is so called, not relatively, but absolutely; when to the
first Man the common Name is attributed, he is not simply called Adam till that
became his proper Name: Now as to the Origin or Etymology of the Word, it is
falsely deduced from the signification of governing, helping and preserving, but
truly from the Notion of the word Worship and Adoration; we must not think that
our first Parents were so wanting in their Piety toward their Maker whom they
worshipped so devoutly, to call him by a common Name proper to Creatures, as if
afterward it had been attributed to him by way of Excellency; And is it likely
that God had been so wanting in what related to his Honor, as being himself the
Author of the Hebrew Tongue, the Knowledge whereof he infused into Adam and
Eve, as not to provide a Name proper to distinguish his own Nature? For having
instituted for himself a Religious Worship and Adoration, he must need also
have declared a proper Name incommunicable to any Creature whatsoever.

Now the Name of God is given the Son, not only attributively, Joh. 1.1.
the word was God; and Romans 9.13.
Christ, God blessed for ever; but also subjectively, 1 Timothy 3.16.
God was manifested in the flesh, and Acts 20.28.
, God purchased his church with his own blood; even in the Old Testament Psalm.
97.6, 7.
, The heavens declare his righteousness, and all the people see his glory, etc.
Worship him all ye gods. Now the Adversaries do confess that as often as the
Name of God is spoken subjectively, as they call it, it signifies a Substance
and Person, but of God the Father of Christ; still they own it signifies a
Substance and Person of the Godhead; but why only of the Father of Christ? that
is (...), merely their Opinion, without any Proof. As to that which they say
about the Article in the Greek, I showed already it is an idle Distinction; for
out of some places of Scripture I showed how the word (...), signifying the
true God, is sometimes with an Article and sometimes without, as 1 Timothy 3.16.
God was manifest in the flesh, (...) is the same as (...), says Thomas Joh.
20.28.
, my Lord and my God, he spoke to one whom he knew was to be worshipped with
religious worship, and he owned it so; yet Scripture commands, and often
repeats, that the Lord our God alone is to be worshipped, which our Savior
Christ confirmed Mat. 4.10.
with his own Mouth, and Paul Gal. 4.8.
after him; and the Angel no less than twice does direct to the true and only
Object of worship, when he said Rev. 19.10. and 22.9.
worship God: But this belonging to another Head, I now shall proceed no
farther in it.

Now to remove all improper and figurative meaning, when the word God is
attributed to Christ, and to prove his Consubstantiality with the Father,
Scripture sets down Names and Epithets, which not only distinguish him from and
raise him above all and every Creature, but also make him equal with God the
Father: Thus he is called 1 John 5.20
the true God, and Tit. 2.13 Re. 19.17.
, the great God; so Romans 9.5
, God over all, blessed for ever; also Jude 4.
, the only Lord God, etc. Hence the Name Jehovah is jointly, equally, and
comparatively given unto the Son; as Psalm. 2.11, 12.
, serve the Lord with fear, etc. and Isai. 25.9
, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is the
Lord, we have waited for him, we will rejoice in his salvation: Now
comparatively, or in a Parallel, Christ is the same Isai. 8.13, 14.
Lord of Hosts which shall be for a Sanctuary, a Stone of stumbling, and for a
Rock of Offense to both the Houses of Israel, as confirmed Luke 2.34. and Romans
9.32.
. Christ is he, who being by the Right Hand of God exalted, and having received
of the Father the Promise of the Holy Ghost upon the day of Pentecost, shed
forth those Gifts we read of Act. 2.3.4.33.
; and it is the Lord God of Israel, unquestionably the true God, that promises
Joel 2.28.
in the last days to pour out his spirit, etc. so it is the same Lord God of
Israel, the Lord Jesus is the same, who is first and last; comparing Isai. 44.6.
Isaiah with S. John Rev. 1.17.
. The Son of God says Isai. 48.12, 16.
, He is sent from the Lord God, and from his spirit, after he had said, v. 12.
I am the first, and also am the last: So the Titles proper to the true God are
given Christ, as King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; as by God's Grace we shall
show when we speak about the Attributes.

So then the Son is true God, as we observed before (...), though not (...),
Son of himself, when we speak of the Son simply, and without relation to the
Father, we properly call him Jehovah, and self being, for he has it of
himself; but when considered relatively to the Father, then we say he has his
Being from the Father; the Son is by himself not of himself, his Essence has
no Spring, but his Person is from the Father, the Essence is not communicated
to the Son, but only the manner of subsisting in the Essence; when the Son is
called God personally, then he is not called the manner of subsisting, but an
Existence with the manner of being; now the modus or manner is understood with
the Essence, because as the manner of Divinity is not Divinity it self, so the
mode of Essence is not Essence it self; thus when he is called God personally
it is in the Concret not in the Abstract.

If Christ be not God by Nature, he is not true God, for nothing is really such
but what is so by Nature: The Adversaries say, that those things which
comparatively are called such in Scripture, are truly such as Christ is called
Joh. 1.9. Chap. 18.1
, the true light, and the true vine, though he be so called by way of a
Metaphor: But we do not deny, how sometimes the Name true is appropriated to
those things that are so called metaphorically, but then the sense of the
Metaphor does not really belong to them; for in every Metaphor there is true
and false in the manner of it; thus Christ is called the True Light; for though
in a metaphorical way he be a Light, that is, spiritually works the same Effect
as a corporal Light does bodily, in the like manner he is called a True Vine,
because that the Metaphor is truly proper to him; but here the question is not
about the truth of Words taken metaphorically but properly; for when the word
True is joined to those that are properly taken, then it signifies the very
Nature of the thing; so when the word true is joined with that of God, it
necessarily signifies the Nature of God; and whenever the Name of True God is
given any thing, thereby is Divine Nature attributed to it: This shows how
Socinians do not own Christ to be the true God, because, according to
Scripture, there is but one true God, they deny him to be that only true God:
When God is called the only Maker of Heaven and Earth, and the only true God,
it is not said only by way of Excellency, as comparing God with the Creatures,
but we thereby exclude all others; for in those places the only true God is
opposed to false gods, in relation to which he is not called true by way of
Eminency, but because it is the truth; for they are true gods by no means, and
the true God is ever opposed to false gods and Idols, wherefore called the
Living God, Psalm. 36.9.
because, says David, with thee is the fountain of Life.

He that is God only by Participation and not by Nature, is not true God; for
Participation does import a Likeness, but Likeness of a thing is never the
thing it self; and if they would have Christ to be God only by Participation,
this in effect is to deny him to be true God, that is, to make him an improper
and metaphorical God; and after that way Men and Angels might be called true
Gods, which is not only Folly but also Blasphemy to say and think: But they
say, if God and Angels be not true Gods, then God does mock when he calls them
so; but it is no Mockery to give one some Name in an improper and figurative
sense, or else when Christ calls his Apostles Matthew. 5.13, 14.
, The light of the world, the salt of the earth, and a City that is set on an
hill, he would have mocked too; so would Paul calling 1 Cor. 3.11. and Ephesians.
2.20.
Christ a foundation, and a chief corner stone: Seeing the Apostles are not
true Light, only improperly and metaphorically, and Christ a Stone
figuratively, they that are Gods only by Likeness and Communication and not by
Nature, are not Gods: Every thing is called true, as I hinted before, according
to its Nature, a true Man, true Gold, true Silver, from the Nature of Man,
Gold, and Silver: Now as to Christ, can he be esteemed as a true God, who first
had a Being according to their Principles, and was not God, then was God, and,
like the Popish Wafer, God by degrees, was God more and more, till he came to a
perfection of the Godhead, and we may say, was accidentally so, for such
Accidents have their degrees; for they say, Christ, during his whole Life, was
not a perfect God or a perfect Lord, and by these means Christ's Excellency was
greater for being Man than for being God; for to be a Man is to be a Substance,
but to be a God, is, after that rate, to be an Accident, but every Substance is
more excellent than its Accident.

Nay they grow worse and worse; for as they would not have him to have been a
God from the beginning, so at last they will have him to cease from being a
God; for if Christ be called true God only by virtue of that Power he has over
Believers, and in that respect only to be worshipped as true God, then after
the last day he will be God no longer, for then he shall be deprived of that
Power when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom unto God even the Father,
which Text I shall elsewhere have occasion to explain; so that he shall be
reduced to the common condition of other Believers, and have no Advantage over
any of them. O take notice what a God they make Christ to be, for every
Believer could be such a God: No Man of sound mind cannot but see such an
Absurdity, Impiety, and Blasphemy. Here farther we could show, that as
Socinians own not Christ to be true God, so they deny him to be true Man,
because, they say, the Body he had of the blessed Virgin is gone, under the
notion, That Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God: They also
teach, the Soul of Man does not subsist by it self, as Socinus page 79.
taught against Puccius: So, according to them, Christ, such as he was, is gone
and perished both in Body and Soul; this I take notice of only by the way, to
come to other things.

The Name God is spoke substantively and subjectively, not only predicatively
of Christ; for if it be not necessary it should substantively be taken of him,
then neither adjectively; for the Name God is also predicatively taken of the
true God, as 1 Kings 18.21.
, if the Lord be God follow him, and so in other places: When in Scripture the
Name of God is given Christ, we do not mind so much the Word, as the Person
signified by the Word, who is God blessed for ever, to be adored, whereby is
meaned the true God, though it be spoken by way of Attribute. What Socinus
says is false, how when the word God is spoken subjectively it never
signifies Christ, as it appears out of several Texts; First, The Lord of Hosts
is sent by the Lord of hosts, the words of the Lord of Hosts are related thus
by the Angel Zech. 2.8, 10, 11.
, after the glory has he sent me to the nations, after his Glorification; and
he that says so adds, for lo I come and will dwell in the midst of thee, says
the Lord, which is the proper Character of the Messiah; who to that purpose is
called Hagg. 2.7.
the desire of all nations, and only in the time of the Messiah after his
Resurrection, all * Nations were by the Apostles called to believe.

Here out of that place of Haggai one thing I must observe, which is the
Comparison made by the Prophet between the first Temple and the second, wherein
the Preference is given to the last; for therein it is said not only and I will
fill this house with glory, says the Lord of hosts, but also in the next Verse
but one, the glory of this latter house shall be greater than of the former: I
ask wherein could this greater Glory consist? Not in the Stateliness and
Magnificence of the Building, wherein the last was much inferior to the first,
as God by the Mouth of the same Prophet declares it, when he says, Who is
left among you that saw this house in her first glory? And how do you see it
now? Is it not in your eyes in comparison of it as nothing? v. 3. in so much
that many of the priests and Levites and chief of the Fathers who were ancient
men, that had seen the first house, Ezra 3.12.
when the foundation of the last was laid before their eyes, wept with a loud
voice: As indeed what a proportion could there be between a Temple built by a
poor remnant of a long Captivity, who for Means to do it were beholding to
Heathenish Princes, and who met with so much Opposition in the carrying on
their design from open and secret Enemies, I say, what a Proportion could such
a House hold with the Temple of Solomon, toward the building whereof David had
for several years before made so rich and great Provisions, which his Son the
most glorious King that ever sat upon the Throne of Israel, did so much
increase, and erected a Temple, which, for Magnificence and Riches, was a
Wonder of the World: So then the Glory of the second Temple could not upon any
such account be greater than that of the first; nor in reference to the
Manifestation of God's Presence in the Ark, at the Mercy-Seat between the
Cherubims, and of the Cloud which filled the whole House, more conspicuous in
the first than in the second Temple; wherein then could this Glory consist? Our
Prophet declares it, And I will shake all nations, and the desire of all
nations shall come, and I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of
Hosts. I take it to be beyond all Dispute, that by the desire of all Nations,
the Messiah, the Lord Jesus is understood, who came whilst the second Temple
was yet standing. Christ the Messiah is called the desire of all Nations, he
whom all Nations were to desire; because according to the Promise unto Abraham,
in him all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed, Blessedness is certainly
a thing most desirable: It was then his Presence that made its Glory greater
than the former's, for things in the first Temple did but represent him, and
were the Shadow and Figures, whereof he was the Body and the Truth: Solomon,
tho never so glorious, was by no means to be compared with him, as he plainly
declared it to the Scribes, Mat. 12.22.
Behold a greater than Solomon is here: According to all human appearances,
Solomon being every way compassed about with Glory, was beyond expression
greater than Christ, a Person persecuted and derided by most Men, chiefly by
the great ones of the World; and if we must speak of Gifts, Solomon was
glorious not only in Riches and Honor, but also great in Wisdom; for his
wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of the East country, 1 Kings
4.30, 31.
and all the wisdom of Egypt, for he was wiser than all men; yet for all this,
Christ says, in Wisdom, he was greater than he, Matt. 12.42.
which could never have been if he had been a mere Man; in that respect every
thing was against him, therefore that preference can have no human ground, it
must be by virtue of a natural Privilege and of a divine Prerogative, which is
the same he had over David, Solomon's Father, whose Lord he was; the same he
had over Abraham, Pre-existence, before Abraham was I am, which could not be as
to his Humanity, wherefore in him there must be another ground, namely his
Divinity, only therein can lay the advantage he had over them all: Not only he
was greater than all these, but also than the Temple it self, a place so
eminently glorious by reason of God's immediate Presence in it, that it was
called not only Holy, but the inner part of it was called the holiest of all,
into which none but the High Priest might enter, and that only once a year, not
without Blood; yet says our Savior, Matt. 12.6, 8.
I say unto you, that in this place is one greater than the temple, which can
be said of none but of God; there he also calls himself Lord of the Sabbath,
not as Man but as God, Temple and Sabbath the two holiest things in Israel.

The second Text is this Isai. 35.4, 5.
, Behold your God will come with vengeance, even God with a recompense he will
come and save you; then the Eyes of the blind shall be open, and the Ears of
the deaf shall be unstopp'd, which our Savior applies to himself, who when
John's Disciples asked him Matt. 11.3, 5.
, Art thou he that should come? or do we look for another? Jesus answered them
by this, the blind receive their sight, etc. which were the Signs wherewith
Isaiah had prophefied God would come; these things he commands them to give
John an account of, wherein he looked to the Prophet, who foretold such things
should be done by the Messiah, whom in that place Isaiah calls God, when he
says, God himself will come and save you, which must not be understood of the
Father; for first, we never read that God the Father came into the World to
save us, but that he sent his Son to do it; he that sends another in his place,
cannot properly be said to come himself. Secondly, there is an Energy in the
word he himself, whereby is meaned, not that another in God's stead, but God
himself, by himself would come, and though God be said to come when he shows
some gracious effect of his Power, yet when he is said to send another, it is
not to be understood in that same manner: And tho Socinus denies him at that
time to be God, only that he was appointed hereafter so to be, he is refuted by
his being in that Text at that time called the God of Israel, your God, whom
you worship.

The third Text is that wherein God says Mal. 3.1.
, Behold I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and
the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his temple: Now who that God is
before whose face John prepared his way, is clear enough, that he spoke of the
Lord Jesus, not of the Father's coming after him, which he pointed at when he
said, John 1: 26, 27, 29.30. compared with Act. 13.24
There stands one among you whom ye know not, he it is that coming after me
is preferred before me; and to make it clearer, he points directly at the
Person of Christ; for, the next day John sees Jesus coming unto him, and
says, behold the lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world, which is
he of whom I said, after me comes a man which is preferred before me, for he
was before me: Can there be a plainer Designation of a person than this? To him
alone, by means of his Preaching, he prepared the way; and that which is
remarkable, our Savior explains of himself the Text of Malachy, This is he of
whom it is written, behold Luke 7.27.
I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee;
and the word my face in the Prophet he renders thy face, that is, of Christ; so
he quoteth the place not according to the Words, but according to the Sense;
Luke 1.76.
Thou child, says Zechariah of John, shall he called the Prophet of the
highest: (a high Name, proper to God) for thou shall go before the face of the
Lord to prepare his ways; it is then most certain that John prepared the way
for him that was to come after him, and to converse with, and dwell among Men,
not the Father but Christ came after John, therefore he is that God that sent
his Messenger as in Malachy: Socinus his Phrase, is no where in Scripture to be
read, that God came in Christ, he sent Christ his Son, but came not in him, the
Father is said to be, and dwell in Christ, not to come in Christ, he sent him
in his own Name.

Though Christ under the Name Word be called God absolutely, Joh. 1.1.
and without any restriction, in the same manner as the True God is absolutely
called God, without any thing to pretext an improper appellation, and the
repetition of the Word God in the same Signification, does sufficiently
demonstrate it; 1 John 5.20.
nay, though he be not barely called God, but the True God, whence we must
necessarily conclude he is true essential God. Yet they would have the Father
alone to be God, and that when the Name of God is absolutely set down, it is to
be understood only of the Father, not of the Son, nor of the Holy Ghost, so
they conclude Father, Son and Holy not to be One God, to which purpose they
wrest some Scripture out of the Old and New Testament, which in due time we
shall by the Grace of God take an occasion to answer; but because the
Adversaries use their utmost pernicious Endeavors to oppose these Truths, we
to make clear these most important Doctrines which our Faith is grounded upon,
must somewhat more enlarge upon it, though we take notice of some things we
said before, or to the same purpose.

First, We say God is a Name of the Divine Essence or Nature, as Man is of
Human Nature, but whereof there is a different Reason from that of all Names of
other Natures; for all Individuals are asunder one from another, their Nature
according to the mental Notion is one, but not really so, wherefore in them,
Nature is the species or kind which is predicated and spoken of every singular
and individual Person as James is a Man, and of many too, as Matthew, John and
Luke are Three Men, but as in God the Essence is but One in number, and not
only in the mental Notion, but also is really and most simply One, though in
Three Persons, this Name of God is not predicated as a species of every Person.
but according to the priority or posteriority of their Origin and Order, as
thus, the Father is God, but unbegotten, the Son God, begotten, the Holy Ghost
proceeding from both. Now if the Name God was as species spoken of the Persons,
it would follow that the Persons should make several Gods different in Number
and Nature. Secondly, We say where the Name of God is absolutely used, it does
not always as the Heretics would have it, signify the Name of One of the
Persons, but sometimes the Person and sometimes the Nature; and herein lays
their Mistake, that they suppose the Name of God ever to be taken Personally,
and the Comparison is the cause of the Mistake, for the infinite Essence is not
multiplied as the finite, now when the Name of God is taken for the Person,
either something is added which gives a Notion of the Person, as when God is
said, Act. 20.28.
to have purchased the Church with his own blood, which is understood of the
Son, or else the Persons are compared among themselves, and then the Name of
God is taken for the Person of the Father, for because the Father is the Spring
of the Godhead in relation to the Order and Origin of the Persons, so in the
comparison of the Persons the Name of God is by Excellency attributed to the
Father, especially where mention is made of the Mediator, for whenever Christ
speaks himself, or is spoken of, as, and in the Person of the Mediator, he
retains a middle degree between God and Man, and then by the Name of God is
understood the Father.

Thirdly, When the Name of God is put instead of One Person, and it signifies
One Father, then is thereby understood the Godhead which is common to Son and
Holy Ghost, who are Author and Maker of all Creatures; for though the Son does
exercise the Office of Mediator, yet he has not thereby lost the Glory of the
Divinity with the Father, neither is his Essence inferior or secondary to the
Father's or his Godhead Essentiated. Fourthly, When God's Name without any
personal Attribute or Comparison of one Person with the other, is simply,
indefinitely and absolutely used, then it signifies the Divine Nature and
Essence which is Father, Son and Holy Ghost, One God. Besides, in these Texts
of Scripture where the Name of God is mentioned in opposition to false Gods or
Creatures, it is by no means to be restrained to the Person of the Father only,
but is indefinitely spoken of Father, Son and Holy Ghost; as for instance, if
when the Law commands to adore One God, the Father alone, and not the Son is to
be understood, it would follow that the Son who is to be adored, is another
God; likewise when God calls himself the God of Israel, he by this mark
distinguishes himself from all false Gods, How then might it be said of one
Personal one, whether Father or Son? 2 Samuel 7.22.
Who is great as thou art, who is like unto thee? for several of the Arians who
denied the Consubstantiality or the Sameness of Nature, yet owned a likeness
between Father and Son; and in the Prophets where God's Name is absolutely
taken, often it adds an universal Negative or Exclusive; but if the Name of
God belongs only to the Father, and if Father, Son and Holy Ghost be but One
God and Savior, and One Nature, it will follow that Son and Holy Ghost are
excluded from Things attributed unto God, for it is said of the True God of
Israel, that he is the only God and Savior, and that there is no other God
besides and without him. Moreover, seeing the Father alone is One God, and they
own also the Son to be God, and the Holy Ghost to be God, though not that One
God, then it follows there are Three Gods, which is Blasphemy,

These Things being premised do afford Matter of answer to their Sophistical
Cavils against this Truth, and so show how the Word God absolutely used in
Scripture is to be understood, not only of the Father, but also of the Son and
Holy Ghost, whence also appears the Mystery of these Doctrines one with
another, and they are so twisted, that they stand or fall together: So, no
wonder if under one Head we say somethings belonging to, and spoken of in
another; here they form thus an Argument against us. The God of Israel whom the
Israelites ever adored, is that One God whom the Law and the Prophets speak of,
but the Father of Christ is that One God mentioned in the Law and the Prophets,
therefore he is that One God; but the Argument concludes nothing against us, we
altogether grant it, the Father is the One God of Israel, for we do not say
that there is another God, another Nature in the Father, than that same, which
Law and Prophets call the only God, and God alone; and we on our part do Argue
thus, The God of Israel is One God, but Christ is the God of Israel who
appeared to the Fathers, and by whose Spirit the Prophets being inspired,
spoke; therefore Christ is that only God. For there is in Christ no other
Godhead, no other Divine Nature, than what is in the Father, as the Father is
One, so is the Son One God, and both together are One God in Nature: But if the
meaning of their Argument be that of the Three Persons of the Trinity, only the
Father, not the Son, nor Holy Ghost, is the God of Israel, then we deny their
minor Proposition, for out of Scripture the Son is the God of Israel whom they
adored, for not only under the Name of God they adored the Messiah whom they
believed to be God, but even they made a distinct mention of him in their
Prayers, as we read when Jacob blessed Joseph's Children. God before whom my
Fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which fed me all my life time to
this day 3 the Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless these Lads; and
this is spoken of the true ancient Jews, for as to those that believed not when
our Savior himself spoke to them, who owned only the Father of Christ the
Messiah, for their God, we may say, they knew not the True God in a true
manner, seeing Joh. 14.6.
none comes to the Father but by the Son, and Mat. 11.
none (...) the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son (...) veal him;
wherefore since they rejected the Son (...) wanted the true Knowledge of the
Father, and (...) stead of God the Father, they adored the Idol (...) their own
heart; wherefore when Jesus said to (...) Matt. 8.44.
If I honor my self, my glory is nothing, it is my Father that honors me
whom you say to be your God; he upbraids them with their Vainglory who boasted
to be the People of God, but falsely, by reason they owned him not to be God; in
the mean while against their aspersions he asserted his Glory, because they
looked upon him as very much below Abraham and other Patriarchs; he in his
Capacity of Mediator and as a Man, owns a difference between him and God, whom
he declares to be the Author of his Glory, and he often mentions his Father,
to the end, in this Comparison of Persons all Things may be acceptable unto
him; but hence it does not follow that Christ is not of the same Nature with
the Father, seeing they are not compared in relation to the Essen^^ but herein
he does condescend to their Capacity, whom not owning his Deity, he would by
degrees bring to the knowledge thereof.

As to the use of the Name of God in Scripture, the remaining Evidences are
reduced under two kinds, First, In some the Name of God is absolutely taken for
God the Father. Secondly, In others is added an exclusive Particle which is by
some joined with the Name of God, and by others with the Things spoken of and
attributed unto God. Out of the first, nothing may be deduced contrary to this
Doctrine, for in all those places by them quoted, which anon we shall mention,
is a Comparison of the Persons, wherein the Name of God is properly attributed
to the Father upon the account of Order and Origin, but it is inconsequent to
say, that in every place where the Name of God is absolutely taken, that is,
without Comparison of the Persons, it is to be understood only of the Father,
for in several places where the Word God is indefinitely set down, yet it is by
no means to be reduced to the Father alone; as to the other sort of Proofs
wherein an exclusive Particle is expressed, that exclusive Particle relates to
the Creatures, and to every thing which by Nature is not God, whither they be
things in Nature, as Sun, Moon and Stars which Heathens worshipped as Gods, or
else those which are Effects of Man's fancy and imagination, such are several
Idols by foolish Men worshipped as Gods: wherefore, seeing the True and
Essential God is opposed to those which by Nature are not Gods, it follows that
by the Word God may well be understood Father, Son and Holy Ghost; likewise
though sometimes mention be made only of One Person, we must not take it as if
thereby the other Persons were excluded, but only that which by Nature is not
God, and that this is a right Interpretation, it may well be proved out of
several places of Scripture, as for Instance, when God says by Isa. 43.11.
the Prophet, I, even I, am the Lord and besides me there is no Savior; and by
another, Hos. 13.4.
For there is no Savior besides me. Here in the Adversaries Opinion, Salvation
is attributed to the Father, but that the Son is not excluded, it appears out
of several places, amongst the rest, out of this, Act. 4.12.10.
Neither is there Salvation in any other, that is, in Jesus Christ who has
been crucified; and we know Scripture does not contradict it self, and if out
of the Prophet's, one would exclude the Son, he might as well out of this
exclude the Father. Again, the Lord Jesus says, No man knows the Father but
the Son; now if all but the Son be excluded from knowing the Father, as in the
foregoing Text he would be excluded from being a Savior, so in this from
knowing himself, also the Holy Ghost would be excluded from knowing the Father,
though he be said, To 1 Cor. 2.10.
search all things, yea the deep things of God; in this very same Sense, Paul
said, Chap. 2.1, 10.
I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ and him
crucified; he does not thereby deny that he determined to know the Father and
the Holy Ghost, but he means, he knows nor owns no way of Salvation out of
Christ, and v. ^1. The things of God knows no man, but the spirit of God; but
in other places we read how Joh. 5.20.
the Father knows the Son, and the Son knows the Father, and the Father shows
the Son all things that himself does; hence we may conclude how the Apostle
speaks exclusively only of Creatures, not of the Son nor of the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. VI. Christ is True Natural Son of God by Eternal Generation.
BUT we must by the Grace of God come to another Head, as Scripture gives
Christ, truly, properly and essentially the Name of God, so it does give him
that of Son of God; the First we showed already; the Second whereby he is
declared the Second Person of the Blessed Trinity, we must now speak of, as we
observed that the Word God in Scripture is spoken in several Senses, as the
True God properly, Angels and Magistrates improperly, and Judge. 9.2 l. 46.
Idols, 2 Cor. 4.4.
the Devil, and the Phil. 3.19.
Belly abusively. So here I must say how the Name Son of God admits of Three
different Significations, for God has three sorts of Sons, for all others are
reduced under these three Heads; the First is by Creation and Preservation
which is a continued Creation, for Act. 17.28.
in him we live and move and have our being; thus Adam is called Luke 3.38.
Son of God, and Men Genesis 6.2.
Sons of God; on this Account, God is Father of all Creatures, whether in
Heaven as Angels, nay, of the Sun, Moon, Stars, of the Birds of the Air, and on
Earth, of all Men, Beasts, Plants, etc. and of Fishes under Water, this in
relation to Nature, and in general to the whole Creation. The Second kind of
God's Sons or Children, is by Adoption and Grace, such are his Elect and
People; of these in a special manner God is called the Father.

In a Third way Scripture speaks of a Son of God, and of none else, thus the
only begotten from all Eternity, namely, our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, who is not Son according to the first manner, which being common to all
Men, would make no difference between him and others, and bring him into a
Crowd of the whole Work of Creation; neither is he Son of God upon the account
of Grace and Adoption which they would have him to be, but if he be by
Adoption, how can he be the Only Begotten Son, seeing that through Grace God
has adopted so many; adopted Sons once and before their Adoption were not Sons
of God, which cannot be said of the Lord Jesus that the time has been when he
was not Son of God; all and every adopted Son of God were once Ephesians. 2.
dead in trespasses and sins, and by nature children of wrath even as others,
once Colos. 1.13.
under the power of darkness, and Romans 5.10.
enemies to God, none of which things may without Blasphemy, be spoken or
thought of the Lord Jesus.

He is called Son not by Creation, for Colos. 1.16.
all things were created by him, and one cannot be Creator and Creature, nor
by Adoption, for Ephesians. 1.5.
in him we are adopted; nor by any Dignity or Eminency over inferior
Creatures, as are Angels, for the Heb. 1.4, 5.
Apostle denies it, nor also upon the account of a personal Union or
Incarnation, as he is called Son of Man, because manifested in the Flesh, he is
not called Son of God upon any such account, or in any of these Senses as
Socinians would have him; 1 Job. 4.14.15.
for they cannot deny the Lord Jesus to be called God, Son of God, for that
Name is given him in so many places of Scripture, and herein they would seem to
agree, but not sincerely, for they cavil about the manner, and disagree as to
the true Sense; he is called Son of God, by reason of an Eternal Generation by
the Father, wherefore he is called God's Romans 8.3, 32.
own and proper Son, and Joh. 3.16.
only begotten Christ is from the Father by Generation, and the Holy Ghost by
Spiration; to be from the Father by Generation, is to be generated or begotten
by the Father, long before the fullness of times, and his appearing in the
Flesh, God absolutely said to him, Psalm. 2.7.
thou art my Son this day have ^^begotten thee; this represented with
Comparisons as when called Prove 8.
Wisdom, for as Wisdom is produced by the Mind, so is the Son by the Father,
and in the New Testament by the similitude of Colos. 1.15.
an Image of (...) Father's Heb 1.3.
Person, and of the brightness of his glory, and of the inward Job. 1.1.
Word in the Mind, for as an Image is not every likeness, but the express
Effigy or Representation of that whereof it is the Image, so the Son in his
Essence and Essential Attributes is so much the express Image of the Father,
that Joh. 14.9.
whosoever sees him, does see the Father also; as the brightness of the Beam is
from the Sun, so the Son is from the Father, as Light from Light, as equally
the glorious Image of his Nature, as a Letter does exactly represent the
Character out of which it is drawn; thus the Son does exactly represent the
Father, by whom he is begotten, as (...) the Word, is conceived by the Mind,
and remains in it, so is the Son begotten by the Father, and remains in him;
and as the Wisdom, Image, Brightness, the Word, are one thing from another, so
the Son is of the Father from the Father, not as an Essence is from another,
but as a Person is from a Person, because he is the Character or express Image
of the Person of the Father; all these in created Things are accidents, but in
the Son who is in himself and by himself, they are essential; hence appears how
in this there is a true distinction of the Persons begetting and begotten.

So then Christ is called the Son of God, not by reason of any gracious
Communication of Existence, or of Power, but upon the account of a secret and
incomprehensible Generation of the Father of his Essence, for he is the true,
proper, only begotten, highly beloved Son of the Living God, and the
prepositive Article (...) the, (...), the Son, frequently joined to this
Subject, does denote a Filiation or Sonship, altogether of another kind from
that of Heb. 1.5.
Angels or Men, which can be no other than an essential one; a True Son is
begotten of the Essence of his Father, but the Son of God is a True Son,
therefore he is begotten of the Essence of his Father. Again, the proper Son is
said to be, and is he that has his proper Father; now he is the proper Father
who has begotten his Son of his own Essence: Farthermore, the Only Begotten
Son, is only he that is begotten of the Substance of his Father, which is
demonstrated by the Opposition of natural and adopted Sons, who are loved for
the sake of the well beloved natural Son of God; that Confession of Peter in
the Name of the Disciples, thou art not Matthew. 16.14, 16, 17. repeated
John the Baptist, nor Elias, nor Jeremias who had been great in God's Favor,
nor none of the Prophets, they were a mere nothing in Comparison of Christ,
but, Joh. 6.68, 69. Ver. 17.
thou art Christ the Son of the living God; is not only in its true Sense
approved of by our Savior, but he also there attributes it to Divine
Revelation, as of an incomprehensible Mystery; Blessed art thou Simon
Bar-^^^as, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my father
which is in heaven.

Isaac as they object, is called Gen 23.2. and Heb. 11.17.
Only Begotten Son, but he is not absolutely so called, but relatively secundum
quid, because he was the Only Begotten Son of Abraham, by Sarah in a lawful
Marriage, and thereby made his only Heir, to the exclusion of Ishmael, whom he
had before by Hagar: he was Only Begotten Son in relation to the Promise which
is expressed in the following Verse, Heb. 11.18.
of whom it was said, that in Isaac shall thy seed be called. The excellency of
Filiation is between those who differ in Degrees, but here the Difference is
greater than in the whole kind, as Heb. 1.4, 5. Isaac was a Type of Christ in
relation to the Sacrifice, but not of the Generation; the Father has begotten
his Son thorough the Communication of his Nature, and so of a true and proper
Generation, but not of a Physical or Natural, such as Man's, and of other
animated Creatures, but by a Supernatural, whereby God begets according to the
Truth of his Word, for the more Excellent he is that begets, so the more
Excellent is the Generation, as it appears by the Example of every thing that
does generate, that which is esteemed a Perfection in natural Generation, is in
an infinitely most Eminent Degree attributed unto God, as to beget that which
is like unto himself, and by the Communication of his Nature, as to the thing
it self the Generation, besides its being asserted in the Word of God, the
secundity of God's Nature, is a reason for it, for it requites a Communication
to several Persons according to that of the Prophet, Isa. 66.9.
shall I cause to bring forth and not bring forth, or beget my self, says the
Lord, as if he had said, shall I make others fruitful, and be barren my self;
that in relation to the Son and to the Holy Ghost may be done in two ways after
the manner of Spiritual Substances, namely, begetting the Son by a natural
Intellection, and by the same Will or Love breathing the Holy Ghost both
consubstantial to himself, and of the same Nature and Perfection, distinguished
amongst themselves and one from another, only by their personalities and
personal Attributes; this consideration serves to demonstrate, not only the
Generation of the Son, but also the Procession of the Holy Ghost, and
consequently the whole Trinity, for Scriptures describe Son and Holy Ghost, as
existing of themselves as the Father, working, understanding, witnessing,
sending, etc. taken not only passively which is of Things, but actively, which
is of Persons, for it belongs to none but Persons endued with Reason, and as I
said before, to Persons it belongs to act.

The high Names of God's Own Son, Only Begotten, etc. which in Scripture are
given the Lord Jesus, are not upon the account of his miraculous Conception in
the Womb of the Virgin, as Socinians would have it, we confess therein God had
a special Hand, and it was effected in an extraordinary manner, but this is not
enough to entitle him to the Filiation, which the Question is now about, to
distinguish him from all others in the World called Sons of God, as anon we
shall have occasion to speak of Adam had also a miraculous Birth, yet the Names
of Only Begotten, and God's Own and Proper Son do not belong to him; in
Christ's Conception and Birth, God did not concur materially, but efficiently
with his Power, but not with his Substance, seeing Christ, as to the Flesh, was
not of any invisible Seed of God, but of the Romans 1.3.
Seed of David; what Brothers he had, are quite of another Romans 8.29. Heb. 2.12.
Order and Quality, they are such not by Generation but by Regeneration, by
Adoption, not by 1 Job. 1.12. 1 John 3.1. 1 Pet. 1.23. Jam. 1.18.
Nature as the Texts quoted in the Margin which may be perused, do declare;
wherefore Christ is Son of God in another manner than men are, so he is called
the Image of God, and the Character of his Person in a most different way from
that whereby Adam is said to be made according to God's likeness.

As in Creatures it is a perfection to beget their similes, or that which is
like unto themselves, that may not be denied God; now as we cannot conceive a
communicability of a Nature which is spiritual and ad intra, but by the two
Faculties of Understanding and Willing, whose Operations are immanent, so it
may well be said, that there can be but two Processions in God, one by way of
Intellection, whereby the Son is begotten, who is called the Word, Wisdom, and
Image of the Father, and the other by way of Volition whereby is breathed the
Holy Ghost, who for that reason is specially called Love; and though the Son
does also understand himself, yet he begets neither himself nor another; for he
understands himself not of a notional Intellection to generate, which belongs
only to the Father, but with a notional one which is common to the Father and
to the Holy Ghost. This is said not to prove our Faith, but only to demonstrate
that what we believe is not contrary to Reason, though it be above it; for all
these matters, as I observed before, and as all Orthodox and learned Men that
writ upon them are agreed, are to be grounded on Scripture, rather than upon
human Reason.

The chief part of our Comfort and Salvation lies in the Belief of this
Doctrine; for as in Christ is but one Person, so there are two Natures whereby
he is in a capacity of perfecting our Redemption, which otherwise he could not
be in; we own he is called Son of God (...) eminently, and by Excellency; but
besides he is also called (...), beloved, proper, only begotten, whereby he is
distinguished from adopted Sons, and by his being called Son of the living God,
distinguished from Elijab, Jeremiah, and such extraordinary Persons that had
been in the World, which concludes his Consubstantiality with the Father; for
it had been a monstrous Generation, if out of the Father's Bosom had come a
Son of another Nature: He that was to be born of a Virgin, was to be called the
Son of the Highest, not by reason of a miraculous Conception, as pretended by
Crollius out of Maldonat the Jesuit, but because of an eternal Generation
chiefly, as also by reason afterward of a personal Union of both Natures; for
though upon that account he might also be called the Son of God, yet that could
not entitle him to be the only begotten, because he is dear and beloved, but he
is dear and beloved because the only begotten of the Father: Christ the first
begotten in respect to adopted Brethren, not because their Sonship is of the
same Nature with his, but only thus far as Adoption imitateth Nature, as
Civilians say, so their Adoption 1 Pet. 1.23.
and Regeneration is a kind of Imitation of his eternal Generation; and to him
belong all the Privileges of the Firstborn, and is called (...) the Colos.
1.17, 18. Rev. 3.14.
beginning of the Creature not passively but actively: Christ is called the
Beginning of the Creation of God, or of all things by him created, that is the
beginner or the first efficient Cause of all Creatures according to a style
used in Scripture, when the Thing is set for the Person, as when the Jewish
Nation is called by the name of Romans 4.9. Gal. 2.9.
Circumcision, the Act for the Agent, and the Abstract for the Concret; thus
Christ is said, of God made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption; that is, he makes us wise unto Salvation, makes us righteous, for
he is our Justifier, Sanctifier, and Redeemer; thus he is often called 1 John
2. and 4.2.
the Popitation for our Sins, and our Salvation, for Propitiatour and Savior.

Though there be an infinite difference between Christ's and human Generations,
yet herein they agree that it imports in him that is begotten a Communication
of the Nature of the Begetter; it is said of Adam Genesis 5.3.
that he begat a Son in his own likeness, after his Image; is this to be
understood of a like Nature only, and not of the same? Undisputably he begat
him out of his own Substance, and his own Nature and no other he communicated
unto him, well represented by the words in his own likeness, and after his
image; the word Likeness does not show any Disparity or Difference but an
Equality and Sameness of Nature, which here by the by I observe in relation to
a thing I shall have occasion to mention about the Honor to be rendered unto
Christ, that all men should honor the Son as they honor the Father, for they
would have it only to be like but not equal or the same, when here Likeness is
taken for Sameness and Equality: Now as of Seth, so we must say of Christ the
Son of God as the other was of Adam; for as Seth had not been Adam's Son except
he were of the same Nature, so Christ could not truly and properly be God's
Son, except he were of the same Nature with the Father; Seth was begotten after
his Father's Image, that is, of the same Nature; and the Lord Jesus, more
strongly to show the Sameness in Nature with the Father, which he had in a more
eminent way than ever Seth had his from Adam, is not said to be after his
Father's Image, but in more noble, expressive, and lively Words said to be the
express Image of his Father's Person: It Is in vain that they cavil out of God's
words, Let us make man in our image, and after our likeness; for the Question
is about Generation, and not of Creation; God made man, that is, created him,
as in that place of Genesis, explained in the following Verse; but it is never
said that God made but begat his Son, as of Adam, not that he made but begat
Seth in his own likeness after his Image. Thus the Son of God is truly and
really begotten of the very Substance of the Father, and this by Immanence and
Communication. Heathens feigned a Minerva the Goddess of Wisdom and Prudence to
be born ex Jovis cerebro, out of Jupiter's Head and Brain, a dark Notion of
this high Mystery, as was their cara deum soboles, magnum Jovis incrementum, as
expressed by the Poet.

The Lord Jesus is called not only Heb. 1.3
(...), the express Image, but also (...) the Brightness of the Glory of God,
by a Metaphor taken from the Sun Beams, which if the Sun was eternal would be
eternal too: wherefore in the Nicene Creed is well called God of God, Light of
Light, so not only like, but also Phil. 2.6.
equal with God. This eternal Generation to be looked upon with the Eyes of
Faith more than of human Reason, is first, not transient but immanent,
secondly, terminated (if we may use the word) not in an absolute Existence, but
in the Subsistence or manner of subsisting; for the Essence neither begets
nor is begotten; neither through this Generation is God absolutely constituted,
but the Son is relatively. Thirdly, It is eternal without any difference of
time, so that the Son may not be said begotten and not begotten, existent and
not existent, but always begotten. Fourthly, The Begetter and begotten are
always the same in Nature and in Time, or rather Eternity. Fifthly, Through
that same Generation the same Divine Nature is communicated to the Son, not in
Species but in Number, not in part but wholly, not to be or exist but to
subsist in such a manner. Sixthly, The same is natural, and so simply, not
voluntary nor involuntary, that is necessary but not forced. But as to the main
thing, it is enough to know that Christ was before he manifested himself in the
Flesh, for therein he appears to be eternal, which Eternity of his we shall
have occasion to prove.

In the Scripture none but the Lord Jesus is in the singular number called
God's Son, Abraham is called his Friend, Moses his Servant, and in the Parable
of the Vineyard and the Husbandmen Luke 20.9, 10, etc.
, to whom God, under the name of the Lord of the Vineyard, sent his Servants,
whom they beat and wounded; then, said he, I will send my beloved son, it may
be they will reverence him when they see him; but they said, this is the heir,
let us kill him that the inheritance may be ours. I say in that Parable where
the Lord Jesus spoke of himself and against them, as they perceived it, v. 19.
we may observe what a vast difference he makes between himself and all that
came before him, who were all but Servants, but he gives himself the Character
of God's beloved Son, whom they ought to have reverenced when they saw him, who
was the Heir of all things by his Nature, and not by any Privilege of Dignity
by Favor bestowed upon him as upon Men and Angels Heb. 1.4, 5.
, Being made so much better than Angels, as he has by inheritance obtained a
more excellent name than they; what this Name is, is expressed in the next
Verse, For unto which of the Angels said he at any time, thou art my son, this
day have I begotten thee, etc. We see the difference of the Sonship, a Son not
created nor adopted but begotten; for that Name comes to him by inheritance, as
in the Text, that is by his own natural Right and Property, and not by Grace.

Then the Lord Jesus is Gods natural Son, because called his own and proper Son
Romans 8.3.32.
, every one knows how those Sons that are naturally begotten by their Parents
are called their own Sons, and on the contrary, those that are not so, are not
proper Sons, but Strangers; so that proper and Strangers are so called and
distinguished according to Nature only; therefore seeing Scripture does not
indifferently call Christ Son, but God's own Son, thus by this special
Attribute distinguishing him from all others, it means natural Son, and of the
same Essence; the more because he calls God John 5.18.
his own Father, for which cause the Jews would have stoll'd him, for they well
understood, as expressed in the Text, how thereby he made himself equal with
God; thus he is called God's own Son, in opposition to adopted Sons; one may
adopt another to be his Son, but can never make him his own natural Son
begotten of his Substance; and as Christ is God's own Son, so is God his own
Father, then from Eternity, or else there had been in time a new relation in
God which had not always been, that might be called a kind of an Accident, so
contrary to the simplicity of his Nature, and according to this, God had within
these 1700 Years been made that which he was not before, namely, Father of his
own Son, whereby Changeableness is fathered upon him, and his Immutability that
is an incommunicable Attribute thereby overturned. Now in the same Chapter the
Apostle to express own Son, makes use of another word, which fully and clearly
does decide the Question, which is, Whether the Lord Jesus be properly God's
Son? for if he be properly so, then all improper Applications are out of doors:
Now the word (...), used by S. Paul Romans 8.32.
signifies proper; so if the Lord Jesus be God's proper Son, we must properly
understand and believe him to be such, although our shallow Brain can neither
conceive in its Thoughts nor express in Words the incomprehensible and
unexpressible manner of that Generation, which is wonderful Isai. 9.6.
as his name is, yet we must believe it because God in his word has declared
it to be so.

The word (...) proper, they mis-interpret, and do render by special or
peculiar, as if Christ was God's Son only in a special manner above others; but
none can be called proper Son to any one except he be begotten of his Blood and
Substance, which being not, he may not be called such a one's proper Son: Thus
they would confound proper and peculiar, which two words are very different;
for one may be a proper Son who has nothing peculiar above the rest of his
natural Brethren, for when a Father has many, all are his proper and own Sons,
begotten of his Substance, yet no one may happen to have any thing particular
above the rest; likewise one may happen upon a special account to be called
such a Man's Son, yet not be his proper Son; thus an adopted, though he excel
never so much above the rest, yet that can never make him to be a proper Son.
To refute some Cavils of theirs, one thing more we are again to take notice of
upon this matter, how the the word God is in Scripture sometimes taken
essentially for the most holy Trinity, and sometimes personally for one of the
Persons, as when it is said Acts 20.28.
, God has purchased his church with his own blood, which is meaned our
Savior, the second Person of the Godhead: In the first sense must be
understood those places of Scripture wherein it is said, The name of the Lord is
one, and there is none besides him, there is but one God, and others to the
same purpose, to show the Oneness of the Nature, which as well as they, we do
affirm; but as to teach well, one must distinguish well; so for want of
observing this Rule, that which is spoken of the Essence of God, they mis-apply
it to the Persons, and so make a Confusion between things to be distinguished:
We already proved, how the Unity of Nature does not take away the Trinity of
Persons, nor the Plurality of Persons destroy the Unity of Nature, which
Mistake of theirs does also hold in the Mystery of the Incarnation, or of the
Word being made Flesh, and about our Savior's Person in whom they confound the
Natures; so that which is spoken of his Humanity they mis-apply to his Divinity.

The second Argument whereby Christ is proved to be God's natural Son is drawn
from the word only begotten, which for greater confirmation is attributed to
Christ in several John 1.18.
places, wherefore in Scripture Christ is called the Son of God, to show he is
the only begotten, for that is the signification of the word; and Heb. 1.2 verse.
5.
Paul's interpretation of it; for he says, Such is the Son, to whom only God
says, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee, and other places of
Scripture: By the words God's only begotten Son, do all mean Christ only: The
Adversaries would have him to be called so only in a special manner above the
rest, as we already have taken notice of in the instance about Isaac, whereunto
here we shall add that of Solomon, which also they made use of, called, say
they Prove. 4.3.
, only begotten in the sight of his mother; but they must not go about to
impose upon us, for in the original the word begotten is not in, but only,
which in our Bibles is according to the sense of the place explained by
beloved, only beloved; one may be the only, yet not only begotten Son, when of
many Children one alone is remaining, and the rest are dead; as to Isaac, we
already observed he was the only begotten in relation to Sarab, by Promise, but
Christ is so called God's only begotten Son, that it was never said to any one
else, Thou art my Son, etc. whence we may conclude him so to be God's Son, as
to be the only begotten of him, that is, according to his Nature; in the word
he is properly and absolutely called the only begotten John 1.14.
, We beheld his glory as of the only begotten of the Father, the Particle
(...), as, is not comparative, as only denoting a likeness, but as Chrysostomus
observes well is expressive of the truth, as being really, as if one willing to
describe a Royal State and Carriage of a King should say, as, that is in a
manner becoming and proper for a King, and farther the Evangelist adds, v.
18. The only begotten son which is in the besom of the Father, he has declared
him, where Christ is called the only begotten, (...) it being his own proper
Name, signifying how besides him there is no true natural Son of God; again
John 3.16.
, God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son, and 1 John 4.9.
, God sent his only begotten son into the world: See what a care the Spirit of
God has taken to confirm and make that Truth known, how Christ is properly and
absolutely God's only begotten Son; now he is absolutely only begotten, that
is, not only so called, looked upon and loved as such, but that is really so,
and indeed we know our blessed Savior is called Joh. 20.17.
Brother of his Disciples, and of Heb. 2.17.
Believers, but not in a proper and strict sense: The relation of Brotherhood
has a great latitude; for among the Jews, Persons belonging to any branch of a
Family, to a Tribe, or to any of the Tribes, were called Brethren: Gal. 1.19.
James and John were called the Lord's Brothers, and in another sense our
Savior calls Mat. 12.50.
his brother, his sister, and his mother, whosoever shall do the will of God:
He is our Brother in that he has taken upon him our human Nature, all Men are
Brothers in human Nature, but Adoption cannot be the ground of his, as it is of
our being called the Sons of God, he is never called adopted as we are, neither
can he be adopted with us, seeing we are adopted in him, we are the Branches of
the wild Olive Tree that have been grafted in him, who is the true natural
Olive Tree, and thereby are become Members of his mystical Body. How can our
blessed Savior be called God's only begotten Son, if he be not partaker of the
same Nature? And the more to enforce this in that s^^e Chapter and Verse, John
18. it is added, which is in the bosom of the Father; can he be in and from the
Bosom of the Father, and not be of the same Nature? All other Children of God
are made, but this is begotten and only begotten, none but he is properly
begotten.

Our Third Argument is taken out of our Savior's Question to the Pharisees
Mat. 12.41, 41, 4^, 44.
, What think ye of Christ, whose son is he? they say unto him the son of David;
he says unto them, how then does David in spirit call him Lord? By this way of
arguing he showed how in him, besides human Nature, there was another, namely
the divine; according to which, he by no means might be called David's Son but
David's Lord, which to the Pharisees proved an unanswerable Argument; for upon
this same it is positively said, v. 46. and no man was able to answer him a
word; one would think this should also stop the mouth of Socinians: Indeed
there the Lord proposes the Question about the Nature of Christ or the Son,
whose natural Son he was? Whereunto the Pharisees returned an imperfect Answer,
for only they said he was the Son of David, but the Lord Jesus, out of
Scripture, which they could not deny, concluded that since he was by David's
confession his Lord, he must in him have another Nature besides human,
according to which he might not be called David's Son; for if only upon some
borrowed account or accidental reason he were David's Lord, as may be some
Power and Dignity above him, then Christ's Argument would quite loose its
strength, which wholly lies in this, if he be his Lord, how can he be his Son?
Upon some extraordinary account and relation it may happen that a Son may
become a Lord over his Father, but here Christ is certainly asserted to be Lord
over David, and in some sense it is impossible for David to become Lord over
Christ, which can be upon no other account but of his divine Nature; besides
that he was David's Lord in David's time and before his Birth of the Virgin
Mary: His Son he was according to the F^esh and his Humanity, and his Lord
according to the Spirit and his Divinity.

The Fourth Argument whereby Christ is proved to be God's natural Son, is taken
out of the Words whereby he declares himself to be such a Son as is one with
the Father, not any other way to be understood than by Nature (...) for this
the Jews took to be his meaning, and for that same cause called him a
Blasphemer, and would have stoned him, and thereupon our Savior did not go
about to show they were mistaken, though his Life was concerned; on the
contrary he used Arguments to make 'em believe he was so, though to them it
seemed incredible and blasphemous. Chap. 5.
And in another Text he affirms himself to be such a Son of God as is of an
equal Power with and can do the same Works as the Father; so that what things
soever the Father does, this also does the Son likewise; the Son does nothing
without the Father, nor the Father without the Son, by reason of their Oneness
of Nature and Equality of Power: Though the Jews out of these words of his, v.
7. My father works hitherto and I work, concluded he made himself equal with
God, yet though they were offended at it, and he thereupon did run the hazard
of his Life; though he never was so uncharitable as to give any one just ground
of offense, nor so rash as unnecessarily to venture his Life, yet he would not
deny his Equality with the Father, but on the contrary, with several Arguments
he confirms it from v. 19. to 22. and this not to be understood of an Equality
only in some respects, for the Unity of natural Power and Operation argues an
absolute Equality, and as in Power so in Nature John 10.30.
, I and my Father are one, and v. 38. you may by my works believe that the
Father is in me, and not only so, but I in him; as for greater confirmation chapter
14.10
repeated out of that place of John, I and the Father are one: Augustine's
Pereant vaniloqui and mentis seductores, etc.
words are to be taken notice of, let vain and Seducers Arrius and Sabellius
perish; Christ said not, I and the Father am one, but I and the Father are one;
when I say one, let the Arian take notice of it, and what I say; we are, let
the Sabellian mind it, let not the Arian divide one, nor the Sabellian take
away are; one we refer to Nature, are to the diversity of Persons.

The Fifth Argument is taken out of the Lord Jesus his own words, and we know
him not only to be true, but truth it self John 14.6.
, though he bears record c. 8.14.
of himself; this is when in a legal way, being asked by Caiaphas, and Mat.
26.63, 64.
adjured by the living God to tell whether he be the Christ the son of God:
Mar. 14.61, 62.
the Christ the son of the blessed, he owned it, and said, Thou have said, I
am: For which Confession he was accused of Blasphemy, and condemned to death;
for said they to Pilate Joh. 19.7.
, We have a law, and by our law he ought to dye, because he made himself the
son of God; so he suffered for owning himself to be the Son of God, which
Confession of his S. Paul takes special notice of in the Charge he gives his
Disciple 1 Timothy 6.13.
; the meaning is, that he was the true natural Son of God, or else it would not
have been accounted a Blasphemy for any Jew to have called himself Son of God,
no more than God's People, Abraham's Seed by virtue of the Promises and
Privilege of the Covenant and Grace, and God they call their Father, John 8.41.
yet thought not they were Blasphemers for that; therefore Christ's Words they
took in another, that is, in a strict and proper sense. Indeed the High
Priest's Question was a Snare laid for Christ; for though they sought false
Witnesses, and many came, yet their Witness did not agree together, wherefore
they sought to have something out of his mouth wherewith to accuse him. The
Question was amongst other things, grounded upon what our Savior had said of
himself in the Fifth and Tenth Chapters of John, whether he was of the same
Nature with God, and in Power equal with him, which is the same as to be
natural Son of God, and of the same Essence, which he having affirmatively
answered unto and said he was, thereupon having gained their Point, they rent
their Clothes and said, What need we any farther Witnesses, and upon this very
Confession he was accused, condemned, and executed: Hence I ask Socinians, Did
Christ speak the truth when he said he was the Son of God, one with him, or of
the same Nature, and to him equal in Power? I farther ask, whether the High
Priest and the rest did not well apprehend this to be the true meaning of his
words? If so, as certainly both are true; if Socinians had been in the place of
the Jews, they would have used him as they did, and would do the like if ever
it were in their power; for some of them, when they write and give a Character
of our blessed Savior's Person, they seem to take a pleasure to say, he was by
the Senate or Council of Scribes and Pharisees in Jerusalem condemned and
executed for Blasphemy, in that he had said he was the Son of God: that he said
so, it is most true out of John 10.36. but I ask again, when the Lord said so,
did he speak the truth or not? If the truth, why do Men not believe him, that
is in the sense the Jews understood it, true, proper, natural Son of God, equal
with God? For this they took his meaning to be; but if he was not what he owned
himself to be, then he must be supposed to have spoken a lie, which is a Sin:
To such Blasphemers our blessed Lord speaks in defiance, as once he did to the
Jews John 8.46.
, Which of you convinces me of sin? We know he suffered as a Blasphemer, a
Deceiver, and a Transgressor; but was he really so? The Apostle says 1 Pet.
3.18.
, He suffered the just for the unjust, as a Lamb without Blemish and without
Spot. It seems these Socinians set their Hand and Seal to his Condemnation; the
same Question as was between our Savior and the Jews is now between Socinians
and us; he said he was Son of God, equal and one with the Father, which
Socinians no more than Jews are willing to believe, and do flatly deny in the
sense for which he was condemned, namely for calling himself the Son of God,
and making himself equal with God, when the Devil himself was not so
peremptory, for he made it but questionable, when at the time he tempted him he
said, if thou be the son of God, yet at several other times those wicked
Spirits owned him to be the Son of the living God.

But Socinians give him the lie when he does several times call and suffer
himself to be called Son of God in the true sense, and contrary to that of
Socinians: Surely he who is the Truth would not have spoken against it, nor
allowed others to tell a lie: Now it is most certain that he calls himself Son
of God, not only in the fore-quoted place of John, where he owns he calls
himself the Son of God according to the sense which the Jews had given his
words, and had made himself God in opposition to man, that is, God by Nature,
which no man is, but also in other places, as when he asked the blind Man, Do
thou believe in the Son of God? Which he declared himself to be, in whom the
Man ought to believe and to worship him, as he did; and it is certain that Men
must believe in and worship the only true God: Also Martha Joh. 11.27.
declares, she believes him to be the Christ the Son of God, by a gradation
from his Office to his Person for the Christ or Messiah which should come into
the world. The ancient Jews according to several Prophecies, believed the
Messiah to be the true Son of God, and God by Nature, which that Second Psalm
does clearly prove among many others, thou art my Son; wherefore the Psalmist,
v. 10. exhorts kings to be wise, and the judges of the earth to be
instructed, and to serve the Lord with fear, and to kiss the Son, to kiss his
Feet in token of Obedience and Submission, lest he be angry, and they perish
from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little, a little Wrath is
sufficient to break the Heathens and the uttermost parts of the Earth, and to
dash them in pieces like a Potter's Vessel: All this is spoken of him, to whom
it is said, Thou art my Son, and in the latter end of the last Verse, the
Prophet declares blessed are all that put their trust in him; and Men are not
to put their trust in any, but in the true God by Nature; in which sense
Scripture shows how Christ is called God and Son of God, not only in that
positive Text, I and the Father are one, but also out of this other John 8.19.
, Ye neither know me, nor my Father; for if ye had known me, ye should have
known my Father also, because we are one, and he that sees me, sees him that
sent me, because he is the express Image of him that sent him: And all this is
confirmed in that other notable place John 12.45. chapter 14.9, 10, 11.
, He that has seen me, has seen the Father, for, I am in the Father, and the
Father in me; this truth must needs be very important, for it is affirmed in one
Verse, and confirmed in the next, which truth appears yet farther, v. 7. If ye
had known me, ye should have known my Father also: and from henceforth ye know
him and have seen him; the reason must needs be this, because ye have seen me,
and in the same Chapter to show that Oneness and Sameness of his in Nature and
Power with the Father; he says, Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that I
will do, which for greater assurance and confirmation, is repeated in the next
Verse, If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it, I my self, there
being no need for you to go to any one else.

S. Paul, speaking of the Mystery of Godliness 1 Timothy 3.16
, whereof the first part is, that God was manifest in the Flesh, says it is a
great one; by his Expressions the thing is unquestionable and most certain; for
he says, Without controversy great is the mystery of godliness; but Socinians
are of another mind, for they make not only a great Controversy, but give a
flat denial of God being manifest in the Flesh, and one of them here among us
has lately reprinted and set his Name to a Book with this Title, Christian
Religion not mysterious, as it were to give the Apostle the lie, on which I
intend by the Grace of God to make some few general Observations toward the
latter end of my Discourse; we must do our Duty, tho others neglect theirs, and
endeavor out of Scripture to convince or confound the Enemies of the Truth,
who are suffered with bare face to sow their Tares and spread their Poison and
Blasphemies; as if it be only a Problem and a disputable Case, whether or not
the Lord Jesus did justly or unjustly suffer for Blasphemy, for having affirmed
himself to be Son of God: Good Lord, what times are we come to, and how great a
Darkness is the Nation falling into, after so much light?

And now we are upon the matter of Blasphemy, let me observe how in Scripture
there is enough said about it to prove Christ to be the Essential Son of God,
let the Etymology and Derivation of the word Blasphemy be what it will, it is
most certain, that in Scripture Rev. 13.5, 6.
it is used to express when any thing is said or done against God in his Nature
or Attributes, or when one does assume and arrogate unto himself that which
belongs to God alone, in the first sense we read when Hezekiah heard the words
of Rab-shakeh, 2 Kings 19.3, 6, 22.
he said, This is a day of Blasphemy, and God called it so within few Verses
after, The servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me; and again, whom
have thou blasphemed. In the second sense the Jews called our blessed Savior
Blasphemer, We stone thee not, say they to him John 10.33.
, for a good work, but for blasphemy, and because that thou being a man, make
thy self God, and so after his Confession before the Chief Priests, they said,
ye have heard the blasphemy: Wherefore if Blasphemy be against God, truly and
essentially taken, may we not conclude the Lord Jesus to be truly essentially
God? He calls Blasphemy what the Jews had said against him Mark 3.22, 23.
, that be did cast devils by Beelzebub prince of devils; the Evangelist lays
upon occasion of the Abuses put upon him after he was brought before the High
Priest Luke 22.65.
, And many other things blasphemously spoke they against him, and Paul, what
before his Conversion he said or acted against, he for that same calls himself
1 Timothy 1.13.
a Blasphemer, and when he made others to do as he did, that he calls Acts
26.11. 2 Timothy 3.2 Act. 18.6.
he compelled them to blaspheme. I believe the Spirit of God pointed at
Socinians among others when he said by the Apostle, that in the last days men
shall be blasphemers, as were those that opposed Paul when he preached Christ,
wherein they blasphemed.

We have many Heads more, and abundance of Texts of Scripture to prove the Lord
Jesus to be true natural Son of God, begotten of the Father from all Eternity,
and these places we in the following part of our Discourse shall have occasion
to make use of, one of the fullest and plainest we shall begin with, afforded
by John Joh. 1.1.
, In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was
God: Which to corrupt, the Heresiarch Socinus used his utmost wicked
Endeavors; the word is said to have been in the beginning, not as if he then
had begun to be, but that then he was existing, and so from all Eternity,
before any Creatures were made, there was no time, only Eternity: Christ is
called the Wisdom of God, to show he as well as the Father, is from
everlasting; it were Blasphemy to think that ever there was a time when God
wanted his Wisdom, which, speaking of himself, says Prove. 8.23.
, I was set up from everlasting, and God by him manifested himself in the World
in the Creation thereof.

That Christ the Word is eternal, that is, he was before his Incarnation,
before the Virgin Mary, and before the Gospel began to be preached, it appears
out of John's Evidence, In the beginning was the word, out of which both his
Deity and Eternity are proved; the other Evangelists do write of Christ's
Humanity in relation to his Birth or temporal Generation, when he took upon him
our human Nature, and in time was born of the blessed Virgin Mary; for in her
Womb the word was made flesh, and his Body therein formed out of her Substance,
without company of Man. But John falls immediately upon his Divinity, and calls
him the Word, for he was the Davar promised unto the Fathers; now this was in
the beginning, that is, before any thing was, when things began to be made, he
then was when the World was not yet made, afterward he indeed was made Flesh,
but had a pre-existing Being: Socinians cavil that by the beginning is meant
the preaching of the Gospel, which is clearly false; for that does not answer
the scope of the Evangelist, whose design is to prove the Word to be God, which
to do, he draws his Argument from his Being in the beginning; so by the word
Beginning that must be understood which concludes the Word to be God: Their
Interpretation agrees with that of Arius, That time had been when the Word was
not; and because it is in that sense taken in some places Mark 1.1 Luke 1.2.
for a temporal Beginning, that is, the time of his Incarnation, it does not
follow that it is so to be taken in S. John, for Mark begins his Book with
these words, The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God, he
writes the Gospel, for he is an Evangelist, and in his very first words he
gives the Contents of what he is writing; but herein the Person of Christ is
not immediately concerned; he, with other Evangelists, gives an account of his
Humanity, but John speaks of his Divinity, he alludes to Moses, who had given
the History of the Creation, and begins his Gospel in the words wherewith Moses
began his Book of Genesis, In the beginning God created the heaven and the
earth, and he his Gospel, In the beginning was the word. But our Evangelist is
not satisfied to say the word was with God, but adds in the next Verse, the
same was in the beginning with God, and so v. 3. he falls upon speaking of the
Creation, for all things were made by him, etc. we know how in Scripture the
word Beginning, as well as several others, has different Significations, but
in this place such a sense destroys the Analogy of Faith, and contradicts
those Texts which affirm the Eternity of God's Son, which hereafter we shall
have occasion to mention, as that of the Prophet Isai. 53.8.
, Who shall declare his generation, it is ab impossibili, as if he had said, no
Man can declare it; and elsewhere, under the Type of Solomon it is said, Psalm.
72.17.
his name shall endure for ever, etc. not only of an Eternity, a part post,
but also a part ante, as without ending so without beginning, as expressed in
the Prophetical Psalm of Christ's Kingdom and Priesthood, Psalm 110.3.
from the womb of the morning thou have the dew of his youth. And now I am upon
this first Verse of the first Chapter of St. John, I shall observe three Things
much to our purpose, the First that the word Beginning absolutely spoken does
in Scripture relate to the Creation or beginning of the World, out of several
places so well known in Scripture, I shall now only quote one and more
hereafter, as I shall have occasion for, has it not been told you from the
beginning, have ye Isa. 40.21.
not understood from the foundations of the earth; here by Beginning is
signified the Foundation of the Earth. The second Thing I observe is this, the
Word was with God, here is a personal Distinction between God and the word who
was with God, as if he had said, resided till he was made Flesh, and in respect
to this Incarnation, he is said to have come down from the Father. The third
Thing observed is this, the word was God, the Person called the Word, as it
appears by the Article, is the Subject here called and asserted to be God, that
is in the same essential Sense, as the God with whom the word Was is said to be
God, that is by Nature, for as in this Verse, but one Word, though thrice
named, is to be understood, so but one true God in Nature, though thrice named,
is meaned in the place: Thus the Essentiality and Eternity of the word who is
the Son with the Father, are here evidently set forth, but this is more at
large set down in the next Reason.

But a second Reason is, that John makes the Word equal with God, when he
says, the word was with God, which has a relation to his Eternity, it was
always with God, for here not only he distinguishes the Persons, but makes the
Word equal with God the Father, he says the Word that was in the beginning was
one, and God the Father whom he was with, another; the Persons of the Son and
of the Father were distinct indeed, but in making them Coeternal, he makes them
Equal; for them to say that the word being with God signifies that the word was
known to God, but not to Men, does them no good; the knowledge of this does
comprehend the whole Mystery of our Redemption which the Son who is in the
Bosom of the Father has revealed unto us; but to the thing, if this imported
no more but that Christ was known to the Father, What could he thereby have
more than we? No Prerogative at all, for before the Foundation of the World God
knew us, and We were present with him: Christ was with the the Father, that is,
had a real Existence, did subsist in himself, which cannot be said of us or of
any Creature, wherefore the Word must need have been before his Incarnation.

In the Third place it is said, (...), the Word was God, which is properly to be
understood, as is 1 John 5.20.
that other place, we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ, that is
the true God and eternal life; and elsewhere, Tit. 1.3.
God has in due time manifested his word through preaching, which is committed
to me according to the commandment of God our Savior, repeated Chap. 3.4. and
Chap. 2. he is called Tit. 2.12. Rev. 19.17.
the great God our Savior Jesus Christ; and in another place he is named, 1 Timothy 1.1.
God our Savior and Lord Jesus Christ; now this God, Lord and Savior is but
One, and this is Jesus Christ whose Apostle he owns himself to be, and the
Gospel he preached, Gal. 1.12.
he was taught by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, who again is called, 1 Timothy
2.3.
God our Savior. There must be special Cause why the words God and Savior are
so often joined together, and both attributed to One Person, the Lord Jesus, he
is God as truly and really, as he is Savior, which we hope the Adversaries
will not have the confidence to deny him to be in the strictest Sense, though
otherwise they rob him of what they can, he is then a Savior by Office, and
God by Nature; to save Men from the Dominion of Sin, from the Curse of the Law,
from the Devil, Death and Hell, requires a true real Divine Power, which none
but a Divine Nature is or can be possessed of. Moses was relatively called God,
and Cyrus God's Anointed, or Messiah, but they were but Types of the great
Deliverer. Every one knows Moses was not God, nor Cyrus the Messiah; but to say
Christ Jesus is called God, though he be not, is the effect of a brazen faced
Impudence, of an invincible Ignorance of the Mind, or hellish Perverseness of
the Heart; as good as to conclude, that because it is said, he is of God made
unto us, 1 Cor. 1.30.
Wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption, therefore he is neither;
nor God by Nature, when he says, Joh. 15.5.
without me you can do nothing, which may not be said of Men.

The Fourth Reason out of St. John is this, Joh. 1.3.
all things were made by ^him, and without him was not any thing made that was
made; certainly the Work of Creation does evince the Eternity of the Word, for
the Workman must be before his Work, and the Creator before the Creature; now
the Word being the Maker must need be before Mary; here they would cavil and
confine this making of Things within the Work of the New Creation, or renewing
of the Creature, but the following Words, without him was not any thing made
that was made, are universal and comprehend every thing Temporal or Spiritual,
Creation of the World, or Regeneration of Men; though we own the Creation of
the World is the scope of the place compared with Coloss. 1.15. All things were
created by him and for him, which does appear out of ver. 10. the world was
made by him; and God created all things by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.9. and to
remove all grounds of Exception, we have it in the Plural Number, which does
include all, Heb. 11.3.
the worlds were framed by the word of God. Another Reason might be brought out
of ver. 14. of this same Gospel, the word was made flesh; but this we shall by
the Grace of God bring in under another Head.

In Scripture we have several places which either do express or imply two
Natures in the Person of our blessed Lord and Savior; the Prophet Isaiah does
among others afford us Two very considerable, the first is this, Isa. 7.14.
Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son and shall call his name
Immanuel; this affords several things seriously, but now briefly to be thought
upon; this Prophecy is a sign given Ahaz King of Judah to Comfort him, when the
Kings of Israel and of Syria came up against him, with a Promise that they
should not prevail, and that he might be confirmed and assured of the
performance, he is bidden to ask a Sign, which he refusing to do, gave for
Reason, he would not tempt God, whereupon is made this Gospel-Promise, which
was performed at the time of the Conception and Birth of our blessed Savior,
whose Mother was a Virgin, and whose Name was Immanuel, a Name given him at
that time by the Prophet through God's own appointment, and when the Angel
delivered his Message to Mary, he makes use of some of the Words of the
Prophet, Luke 1.31.
thou shall conceive and bring forth a Son, and shall call his Name Jesus,
because he was to save his People; and when the thing was fulfilled, the
Evangelist does point at, and quote this Prophecy, adding the Interpretation of
the Name Matt. 1.21.
Immanuel, God with us. So there is no doubt to be made that this wholly and
only, related to our Savior; never any other Virgin did conceive and bring
forth, never was the Name Immanuel given any one else, and cannot be wrested
so, as to be given to any Son to be born of Ahaz, for some Reason which I
presently shall produce; Immanuel is God with a Divine Essence, Christ is the
Immanuel, so we must conclude he has the Divine Essence, for God with us has
the Divine Essence, and God with us is Immanuel; the Name God is not spoken of
Angels, of no King or Magistrate, of no Idols, which are the several
significations of the Word God used in Scripture; wherefore he whom this Name
is given to, must be the true essential God; and this same Evangelical Prophet
in the next Chapter but one after this, calls him by the Name used in this
place, and the Word El, which makes the latter end of the Name, does not barely
signify God, but the Mighty God; this Word makes part of that of Michael whose
signification is, who is like unto thee, thou mighty God; and he that bears
it, is called Jud. 9.
Archangel, Prince of Angels, for Angels are called Rev. 12.7.
his and him they Worship: This very Name of Michael is given to the Messiah,
Dan. 12.1.
and at that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince which stands for
the children of thy people; which is a Prophecy of Christ's coming, wherein he
is called El, Michael, and the Great Prince; to this Emmanuel relates what the
Evangelist says of the Word that is Christ, how being made Flesh he dwelt among
us, is not this the same as God with us? And this not obscurely, for he adds,
Joh. 1.14.
and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the father; he
not only had Glory, but is called Lord of Glory, before his Ascension into, and
Glorification in Heaven; and for certain, the Name of Lord or King of Glory, is
proper to the true essential God, if David Psalm. 24.10.
speaks Truth; now this dwelling of God is not said to be in, but with Men,
which does import a Person living and conversing with Men, fully expressed in
the following Text, Rev. 21 3.
Behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them and they
shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God; all
this done, not by proxy but in Person, it is said, God himself; so that great
and infinite God, whom the Heavens of Heavens cannot contain chose our Human
Nature, to dwell in as in a Tabernacle, whereof the Tabernacle in the
Wilderness was a Type, as the Temple was afterward; we know there was a Vail,
this the Apostle alludeth to, when he says, Heb. 10.20.
thorough the vail that is to say the flesh; so that his Body and Human Nature
is the place he chose to dwell in, and that same Nature is as a Vail to qualify
that Glory which no Man could behold, for as the People could not behold Moses
his Face, when he came from God, so that it was necessary he should put on a
Vail, How then could Man have beholden the Glory and Brightness of the Son of
God; and how could he have dwelt amonst, and conversed with them, except he had
put on the Vail of his Flesh? We must then necessarily conclude he was El the
Mighty God, before he was Immanuel, God with us.

As to that great incomprehensible and adorable Mystery of the Incarnation of
the Second Person of the most Holy Trinity, whereby the Divine and Human
Natures were mediatly, and the Person immediately united to the Nature; it is to
be observed, that it is not by a Consubstantial Union, such as the Three Persons
of the most Holy Trinity are united one with another; neither is it a
Substantial Union only by Essence and Virtue, as the Essence of Christ is
present with every thing, not by a presence of Grace only; not Physical as Form
and Matter are united, not as one Friend is united to one another, as the Soul
of Jouathan was knit with the Soul of 1 Samuel 18.1.
David, not mystical only or in the same manner as Christ dwells in
Believers; not Sacramental as Christ is in the Bread and Wine of the Lord's
Supper, but it is a Personal Union, and that without any Change of or in the
Divine Person, without a renting of the Natures against the Nestorians, or
Confusion of the same against the Eutychians, also without any Change and
Separation.

Now I am upon this high Mystery of the Incarnation by the Evangelist expressed
in these words, the word was made flesh; I shall take notice of some few
things: does not the expression which is parallel with this, 1 John 4.2.
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, mean that Christ the Word was in being
before he was made Flesh or came in the Flesh, and that this Being was
according to the Spirit, which in Scripture is opposed to the Flesh, and that
he had a spiritual Existence before he took our human Nature signified by the
word Flesh? for according to Scripture, Flesh signifies human Nature; so to be
made Flesh, to assume human Nature, let one place serve instead of many, Gal.
2.16.
by the works of the law shall no flesh, that is, no Man be justified. The Son
of God was first, afterward he was manifested; as, to make use of a Comparison
in a thing which admits none, in matters of God's Decrees, the Decree is before
the Declaration of it, for the Decree is from all Eternity, but the Declaration
only in time; what is said of Christ, Gal. 4.4.
that he was made of a woman, is considerable, for it implies that he was made
Man, and took upon him our Nature, not out of the Substance of any Man, but
only of a Woman; his Body was formed in the blessed Virgin's Womb, without any
help of Man, so he became Man only by the Woman's side, but he was Son of God
before he was made of a Woman, and he must need have had a Being before he was
sent forth, he was with God before God sent him, which is opposed to his
appearing and being manifested to the World, 1 John 1, 2.
we show unto you that eternal life which was with the Father, and was
manifested unto us; he was with the Father, existed and had a Being, before he
was manifested unto us, dwelt and pitched his Tabernacle among us; it is
observable out of that place where it is said of our blessed Savior, Heb. 2.16.
he took on him the seed of Abraham; the word took in the Original signifies
also to take and lay hold or caught hold as he did of sinking Peter to save him
from drowning, so he caught hold of Mankind when it was ready to sink.

Against this they say there can be no such Union of Divine and Human Nature in
one Person, but that such an Union is not unpossible, it may be illustrated out
of the Union of our Soul with our Body, which are of two different Natures,
spiritual and material, invisible and visible, immortal and mortal; and though we
cannot conceive the Reason, it ought to be no Prejudice, neither can we
conceive the manner of their Union, which yet is true and certain; we most
certainly believe some things to be, though we do not at all comprehend the
manner of it; and although there be an infinite disproportion between God and
Man, yet that is no just Prejudice against the Union of Divinity with Humanity;
with harboring such Notions, Men do too much measure God by themselves, who
because they are evil are not capable of so much Goodness, and out of Pride are
apt to say, so much Condescension becomes not God; but God knows better than we
what becomes him, and what we cannot comprehend of him we ought to admire and
adore; God's Ways are not like our Ways, nor his Thoughts like our Thoughts;
and though he condescends never so low, yet is ever sure of his Greatness, which
nothing can take away from him: This Humiliation or Condescension is a
wonderful Argument of God's Goodness, which is the greatest Glory of Divine
Nature; this is cause of Thankfulness, not of Cavils and Exceptions; he knows
what is best and fittest for him to do, and wants not our Counsel; had the Son
of God appeared as a great Prince, he probably would thereby have made more
Hypocrites than real Converts, and not so well persuaded Men to Holiness and
Goodness, for Arguments to do it must not be fetched from the Pomp and
Prosperity of this World, but from the great Rewards and Glory of that which is
to come. But before I leave this Point I must take notice of that place wherein
the Apostle makes the Son of God upon his coming into the World speak thus,
Heb. 10.5.
but a body have thou prepared me; the Body was prepared against his coming
into the World, and that prepared Body at his coming he took, so then he was
before the Body was prepared for him, and before his coming into the World, for
nothing can be said to be sitted, as the word implies in the Original, for one
who is not; hence we conclude how the Son of God was before his Incarnation and
had a Being; but we now return to our Proofs.

The next place is of the same Prophet, Isa. 9.6.
For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the government shall
be upon his shoulders; and his name shall be called wonderful, Counselor, the
mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; of the increase of his
Government and Peace there shall be no end, etc. I ask, Is this appliable to
any Son that was to be born of Ahaz? For this is the same Person mentioned in
the fore-quoted place, and may be seen if compared together: Observe how the
different Expressions do denote different Natures, the Child is for Humanity,
the Son for the Divinity; the Child is born, but the Son not born but given, in
relation to Human Nature he had a beginning and a progress, he was a Child
before he was a Man, but the Son not so; a Child is not before he be born, but
the Son had a being and did exist before he was given, yet both united in one
Person, for the Child was not one Person and the Son another; for all along,
the Prophet though he had named a Child and a Son, speaks in the singular
number, his Shoulder, his Name, his Government; as his Name is wonderful, so is
the manner of the Union, these two Natures are in one Person without Confusion,
the Divine retained her Proprieties, so has the Human, and yet these different
Proprieties are so united in one Person, that the Person may be called by the
Name of both Natures; Christ is God; and Christ is Man in the Concret, though in
the Abstract, it may not be said Divinity is Humanity, nor Humanity Divinity,
they are united, but without Confusion.

But to return to our Point, there was never so many glorious Names joined
together to describe one Person, as we find to be in this place, to him alone
they all belong, because the Spirit of Truth says so, which if they were not
properly his by right, he would not give them: Wonderful in his Name, in his
Nature, in his Person, in his Incarnation, Wonderful every way: Counselor,
for he is the Wisdom of the Father, without which the Only Wise God never does
any thing, the Mighty God, most proper to God, and never in the singular number
given any Creature, Isa. 10.21.
the remnant, says our Prophet, shall return, even the remnant of Jacob unto
the mighty God, the true essential God, the God of Israel is meaned in the
place, it is such a Name as is made use of when in a most Eminent way God is
described, Deuteronomy. 10.17.
your God is God of Gods and the Cord of Lords, a great God, mighty and
terrible: And, Nehem. 9.32.
now therefore our God, the great, the mighty, and the terrible God; and
elsewhere, Jerem; 32.18.
the great, the mighty God, the Lord of hosts is his name; and when the
Question is to know, who is the King of Glory? the Answer is, the Lord strong
and mighty; this High and Divine Name is here in the place a^^^ibuted to Jesus
Christ the Son of God, about whom is the Prophecy; that which follows is no
less considerable or incommunicable, the everlasting Father, or as (...) Father
of Eternity; nothing more Noble or becoming. God can be said, than to call him
so; nothing ^ut the True God is Eternal, and nothing more prop^^^ to God than
Eternity; How can a Child or any meet mortal Man be called everlasting Father?
Now what can hinder us hence to argue thus; the mighty God and everlasting
Father is true God by Nature, but Christ is such out of this place, therefore
Christ is true God by Nature: Two things more are here said of this Son of God,
he is the Prince of Peace, for by his Death he made our Peace with God, and
procured an inward Peace of Conscience, and reconciled things in Heaven and on
the earth; he came into the World in time of universal Peace, when the Roman
Empire, the greatest in the World, fully enjoyed it, and for a Sign, the Temple
of Janus in Rome was shut up; nay Herod and Pilate, Luke 23.12.
both his Enemies, were before his death upon his account reconciled one to
another. Secondly, it is said of him, The government shall be upon his
shoulders, and of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no
end: After the Father had said to him Psalm. 2.7, 8, 9.
, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, he promises to give him the
Heathens for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth for his
Possession, thou shall break them with a Rod of Iron, thou shall dash them in
pieces like a Potters Vessel; whereunto agrees another Scripture Rev. 12, 5.
, of the Man-child that was to rule all Nations with a Rod of Iron; this he
declared unto Pilate John 18.37. Rev. 11.15. Luke 1.33
, I am a king, to this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the
world: So then; the kingdoms of this world are his, and he shall reign for ever
and ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end.

The New Testament does also in several places demonstrate two Natures in the
Person of Christ, S. John having affirmed the Word to be God, which relates to
his eternal Generation, he does afterward speak of his Incarnation, when he
says Joh. 1.14
, The word, that was God, was made flesh, that is, the Person called the Word,
the Son of God took upon him our human Nature, and so united two Natures,
divine and human, in one Person; for this Word is in the whole Chapter spoken
of as of a Person, acting, making or creating, coming, all this is the
Character of a Person, and what John expresses thus, the word was made flesh,
S. Paul calls it 1 Timothy 3.16.
, God was manifest in the flesh, if by the word Flesh human Nature be meaned,
as certainly it is, then this imports that God appeared, made himself known,
and was manifest in assuming our human Nature, and that the God that was thus
made Flesh, and was manifest, is Christ Jesus, the second Person of the
Godhead, who being in the Form, that is, in the Nature of God, for the Nature
is the being of a thing, and the Form gives that Being; well Jesus Christ in
the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God Phil. 2.6, 7.
, because it was his right, (...) took upon him the form of a servant, and was
made in the likeness of men, and being found in fashion as a man; he was God
before he was made in that likeness, this is plain, that a God became man, he
was made that which he was not, yet ceased not to be that which he was: That
this God that was made Flesh, and manifest in the Flesh, and found in the
likeness of men (here is explained what we must understand by Flesh) was the
Son of God, the second Person of the most holy Trinity, is declared elsewhere
Romans 8.3.
, God sending his own Son in likeness of sinful flesh: All these representing
Christ as God and as man, does clearly demonstrate him to be both God and man.
Another place there is much to our purpose, it is this Romans 9.5.
, of whom (the Israelites) as concerning the flesh, Christ came who is over all
God blessed for ever; this restriction, as concerning the Flesh, does imply,
that Christ came not from the Jews concerning some other thing, this settles
two Relations in Christ, one according to the Flesh, as expressed Acts 2.30.
what must the other be? Scripture usually does oppose the Spirit to the Flesh,
and the Flesh to the Spirit, so in Christ there must be a Principle that is
spiritual, or else this restriction, according to the Flesh, were frivolous and
not pertinent, one thing cannot be distinguished of it self, a thing is in it
self but one thing, and Distinctions are between different things; for no one
thing does differ from it self: Now that as there is in Christ a principle
concerning the Flesh, and another according to the Spirit, anon we shall by the
Grace of God have occasion to speak of; but now thus far we must say, that as
by the Flesh his Humanity is meaned, so is his divine Nature by the Spirit; for
1 John 4.24. 2 Cor. 3.17.
God is a Spirit.

The Text we now are upon is remarkable upon several accounts, our blessed
Savior, as it is very well known, was a Jew born, of the Seed of Abraham, of
the Tribe of Judah, and of the Family of David; this is the Apostle's meaning
when he says, of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ came, which does
necessarily imply, he came not of them, concerning some other thing in him, the
Pedigree of his Manhood was indeed derived from thence; but it had been in vain
there to have sought for another Genealogy of this Melchisedec: The Article
(...) joined with (...), shows how in him, besides human Nature, there was
another; for S. Paul, who troubles not his Readers with superfluous
Expressions, would not have added those words, except in Christ had been
another Nature, or to what purpose say, according to the flesh? if he had been
a mere man; and herein chiefly lies the Prerogative of the Jews, that Christ,
who is God, was born amongst them: Their Privilege does not herein consist,
that Moses, Jo^huah, Elijah, John Baptist, etc. were born amongst them, they
all were but Men, but that Christ was because he is God; for this he adds as
the great reason, and speaks of his divine Nature, who is over all, God
blessed for ever, he says not is called but is; he is God over all the Fathers
of the same stock tha^ were born of the Jews, before him, or over all things
whatsoever. The words blessed for ever are in Scripture attributed to the true
eternal God, and even in our Savior's time, when the Jews said the blessed,
they meaned the true God: Thus the High Priest asked the Lord Jesus Mark 14.61.
, Art thou the Christ the son of the blessed? which another Evangelist
expresses thus Luke 20 70.
, Art thou the son of God?

In another place the same Apostle affords a convincing Proof of this Truth,
that in Christ are two Natures, where he speaks of them thus Romans 1.3, 4.
, Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David
according to the flesh, and declared to be the son of God, with power,
according to the spirit of holiness by the resurrection from the dead: Wherein
S. Paul teaches in what respect Christ is the Son of God; not according to the
Flesh, for thus he is the Son of man, of the Seed of David, but according to
the Spirit of Holiness, which is the Spirit of God's Nature, and according to
that Spirit, he has been declared to be the Son of God with Power: Certainly
the Opposition used by the Apostle, shows he cannot be Son of God upon both
accounts, but only upon one; for if he had been according to both, Paul would
have said, declared the Son of God as to the Flesh and as to the Spirit, and
herein would have made no difference between the Son of God according to the
Flesh and according to the Spirit; for as it is contrary to Romans 9.5
Scripture, to call the Lord Jesus God according to the Flesh, for God and
Flesh are opposite, so it is contrary to say Christ is Son of God according to
the Flesh; for by the same reason one is said to be Son of God, by the same he
may be called God, as we see it both joined Psalm. 82.6.
, I have said ye are God's, and all of you are children of the most high: And
we read where the Jews upbraided our Savior Joh. 10.33, 36.
that he made himself God, that is, absolutely, he renders the words thus, I
said, I am the son of God.

Jesus Christ is said Phil. 2.5, 6, 7, 8.
to be in the form of God, and made in the likeness of men; it is not said, Made
in the form of God, but being, his being is related to God, and made to man, he
was God but made man, he was made in the likeness of men, and formed in fashion
as a man; certainly here are two Natures asserted, divine and human, whence we
say, that as by his Incarnation he was really man, so as surely his being in
the form of God; signifies that he was really God before he became man, as he
was man after his being born of the Virgin Mary: These Expressions conclude for
both his Deity and Humanity, and if there was any difference, the words for the
first seem stronger than those for the last; for to be in the form is more than
to be in the likeness, because forma dat esse rei, a thing has being from its
Form or Nature; but he gave sufficient and great demonstration of both Natures
in him to those among whom he did converse.

Socinians would wrest the Text of Luke 1.3 (...) The Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and the power of the highest shall over-shadow thee; therefore that
also which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God: They would
have the Particle therefore to signify the Cause wherefore Christ was to be
called the Son of God, that is that miraculous Conception by the Holy Ghost,
but no such thing may be deduced; it is not the Cause but the Consequence or
Inference which is signified by the words therefore and wherefore, by which
Particles we usually draw Conclusions from Premises, whether they be Causes,
Effects, or Signs, or that which upon any other account whatsoever may be
deduced therefrom: And in this place out of the scope thereof, it cannot be
demonstrated out of any Circumstances, that the Conception by the Holy Ghost is
the true cause why Christ was to be called the Son of God, it is not upon the
account of that manner of his Conception; for then for that same cause either
Christ would call himself or be called by others Son of God, else the Angel's
Prediction should prove false, by which reason he rather should not be called
than called the Son of God, even according to their Principles which deny the
Holy Ghost to be true God; but the words of the Angel do import, not that he
should be called once, or by some few, Son of God, but always and generally by
all that should own him to be the Son of God. Besides, this Exposition of
theirs, they can bring no Example to confirm it; for in abundance of places we
read Christ to be called Son of God, but find none at all wherein he is called
Son of God according to the Flesh: And the Angel does not say, therefore he may
happen to be, but absolutely and publicly declares he shall be called;
wherefore seeing he no where is called Son of God according to the Flesh, we
may necessarily conclude he is not such in that sense; to be called is
sometimes really to be as in that Text 1. John 3.1.
, Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should
be called the Sons of God, that is, that we should really be owned and declared
to be the Sons of God, such as truly we are, being adopted in Christ his true
natural Son.

The word holy, used, gives a strong Evidence that Christ was to be called Son
of God for a much better and higher reason than that he was to be born of a
Virgin; he shall be called Son of God because he is holy, therefore not upon
the account of the Flesh, but by reason of his Holiness, because the Holy Ghost
coming upon the Virgin, some holy thing was to be born of her; that makes the
Angel say, Therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be
called the Son of God; not as to the manner of Conception, but as to the thing
to be conceived, though by the Angel it be not expressed; how great was that
Holiness, we may well conceive it to be that highest and infinite Holiness as
becomes the Son of God; wherefore Isaiah in his Prophecy of him, calls him, as
already observed, the mighty God; Elizabeth calls him Luke 1.43.
her Lord; the Angel calls him Chap. 2.11.
Savior, Christ, the Lord; and Daniel Dan. 9.24.
He was anointed the most Holy. Before the wise Men fell down and worshipped
him, which they were sent to do, and to that purpose guided by a Star Mat. 2.2,
11.
, and according to the Prophecies Psalm. 72.10.
, offered him Gifts and Presents as to a King, for under that Name his Birth
was declared to them and promised; therefore the Holiness of Christ is the
Holiness of God, and of him who is by Nature Lord and King.

The Particle (...) and or also which follows therefore, is not in vain, but
shows a Comparison, and is related not to the word called but to be born, and
the sense is, not only that word which from Eternity is born of God is Son of
God, but that holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son
of God, because that eternal Son of God shall take human Nature, and be born of
thee: And this is one of the things which the Holy Ghost coming upon the Virgin
was to do, namely, that she should conceive without Man, and conceive a Man,
him who from eternity is according to divine Nature the Son of God, which could
not otherwise be effected than with the Holy Ghost uniting human Nature, which
was to be formed out of her own Blood and Substance, sanctified before and
preserved from Sin and Corruption, with the Person of the Son: Men must not
think there is in Scripture the least tittle or word without cause, for the
Holy Ghost does and says nothing in vain.

Another reason is, the Angel says, Christ shall be called the Son, not of the
Holy Ghost, but of God the Father: Now if the manner of this Conception was the
cause of his being called Son of God, he should properly be the Son of the Holy
Ghost, not of the Father, for he is said to be conceived by the Holy Ghost (but
they deny the Holy Ghost to be a Person, yet actiones sunt suppositorum, is a
Rule in Philosophy) and this Conceiving being an Act, the Holy Ghost must be a
Person; for I defy them to show any thing to be done but by a Person.
Scripture in the quoted place, Romans 1.3. the Question being about Christ's
being the Son of God, excludes the Flesh to attribute it to the Spirit; but
Socinians would have it according to both, yet S. Paul's scope is to teach how
he is Son of God according to the Flesh, and how according to the Spirit; as to
the first, he explains himself when he says, which was made of the seed of
David; as to be second, he declares his meaning when he says, he was declared
Son of God with power, whence we may conclude he says Christ to be called and
really be the Son of God, not according to the Flesh, but to the Spirit, or
else he had not sufficiently declared in what sense he is the son of God; and
it is clear how he opposes the Flesh to the Spirit; according to the first he
was made of the Seed of David, according to the last he was declared the Son of
God.

Withal, Scipture would have such a Son of God as is without Father, etc. such
as Melchisedec, no mention being made of his Father, Mother, or Genealogy, he
seemed not to be born on Earth, but rather fallen from Heaven, having neither
beginning of Days nor ending of Life, but made like unto the Son of God,
whereof he was a Type, showing these Attributes to be more proper to, and true
of the Son of God, which cannot be otherwise understood then thus, either that
the Son of God has such a Nature as does by no means come and is derived from
earthly and carnal Parents, without beginning or end, and so eternal to all
eternity, such as is divine Nature, or else that both Natures of Christ, divine
and human, are denoted human without Father upon Earth, divine without Mother
in Heaven, and either overthrows the imaginary Notion of Socinus of Father
according to the Flesh: This must not be understood of the Priesthood, about
which the Question is not, but about his Origin and Genealogy; he is said to
be without Father or Mother, not but that he had some, only there is no mention
nor description made of it; for the Greek word without Genealogy signifies not
the Genealogy it self, but the description of it; besides that, the words
without beginning of Days or ending of Life, may by no means be applied to the
Priesthood; wherefore he is said to have no beginning of Days, not but that he
had, but is brought in as if he had not, to answer him whose Type he was; Days
and Life are not referred to a Priesthood, but to a Being, a Person, an
Existence, and Life, the beginning or ending whereof absolutely no mention is
made at all; so then in this place the Comparison is not about the Priesthod;
but about the eternal Person of Christ; for Christ's Priesthood had a
beginning, as is expressy set down in Scripture Heb. 5.5, 6.
, For he glorified not himself to be made an High Priest, but he that said unto
him, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; as he says also in
another place, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec: So
then in that sense it cannot properly be applied to Christ; it is frivolous to
say, as if it were to be understood of any Family, for the Apostle absolutely
speaks of beginning of Days not of a Priesthood, to speak absolutely of a
Beginning, and of a beginning of a Family, are two things, and that is to wrest
the Apostle's sense and meaning, and make him say a thing which he never
intended: We don't deny but that the Apostle speaks of the Priesthood of
Melchisedec and of Christ's, but it must be owned he also speaks of other
things, as of Melchisedec's being King of Righteousness, King of Salem, King of
Peace, etc. and his being without beginning of Days or ending of Life, relates
to his Person and Life, for no mention is made of his Birth or of his Death,
though both besel him, but from the Eternity of his Person the Apostle
infers the Eternity of his Priesthood: So then when the Lord Jesus is said
to be (...), in the Person of Melchisedec, the two last are not to be
understood of his temporal Generation and Birth of the Virgin; for two
Evangelists have written his Genealogy, but of his eternal Generation; and of
this speaks the Prophet Isai. 53.8.
Who shall declare his generation? An Expression equivalent to this, no Man
can, it is eternal, incomprehensible. When our Savior was born of the Virgin,
he was born in time, Gal. 4.4.
When the fullness of the time was come, as Scripture calls it: Now this
Parallel between the Type and Antitype, Melchisedec and Christ, does not run
upon our Savior's Birth, according to the Flesh, and about his human Nature,
but about something higher, his Divinity; wherefore the Apostle in the place
where he says Melchisedec to be without Father, etc. does ascend higher,
saying Heb. 7.3
but made like unto the Son of God.

The more ^o prosecute this Argument, we must say, how Christ in his Childhood,
even in the Womb, was God; for he is Immanuel God with us from the Virgins
Womb; the thing is clear out of this that God being not Flesh but Spirit, can
have no carnal only spiritual Sons, the true Birth makes the true Sons, and
this is of two sorts, those that are born of the Flesh are carnal, those of the
Spirit are spiritual; for says Christ Joh. 3.6.
, That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the
spirit is spirit; now to be born of the Flesh is to be born of a carnal Seed,
as to be born of the Spirit is to be born of a spiritual Seed, wherefore Peter
Pet. 1.23, 24, 25.
mentions two Seeds, one corruptible, the other incorruptible, that of the
Flesh, as Grass, withers away, the spiritual endures for ever: If then
Christ was born of the Spirit, as not long before we took notice the
Adversaries would have him to be, because he is said to have been conceived by
the Holy Ghost, then that Birth of Christ would be spiritual, but not according
to the Flesh. It Is not without cause that when Scripture speaks of our Blessed
Savior in several places, it makes a restriction according to the Flesh, and
an Opposition to it according to the Spirit; thus it is in the fore-quoted
places, Romans 1.3, 4. and Chap. 9.5. thus, The word was made flesh, the Word and
Flesh do signify two different Principles distinguished and in opposition one
to another. So the Apostle says 1 Pet. 3.18. Chap. 4.1.
Christ was put to death in the Flesh, but quickened in the Spirit; and again,
He has suffered for us in the flesh, that is, in his human Nature; then in him
is a Nature in which he suffered not, and 1 Timothy 3.16.
God was manifest in the flesh: In one and the same Subject are two different
Natures, divine signified by the word God, and humane by the Flesh: What mean
those words of S. Peter Acts 2.30, 31.
, how God had sworn unto David? That of the fruit of his loins according to the
Flesh he would raise up Christ, and that his Flesh did not see corruption, but
to show that in Christ was another Being different from that according to the
Flesh, according to which he was not David's Son. Thus S. Paul, as already
quoted, said, God sent his Son in likeness of sinful Flesh, there is a
difference between being Son of God and being in the likeness of sinful Flesh:
And elsewhere Ephesians, 2.15. Colos. 1.22 Heb. 5.7. Chapter 10.20.
, Having abolished in his Flesh; and, You has be reconciled in th^^body of his
Flesh: again, Who in the days of his Flesh; and, Through the vail, that is to
say, his Flesh; that visible Vail did hide some invisible thing. Now, I say, it
were in vain in Scripture to see so often mention made of Christ's Flesh, if
there was in him no other thing as the ground of the Distinction; thus when we
speak of Man's Body, it is to distinguish it from the Soul; so of his Soul to
distinguish it from the Body; for though in one Man there be Soul and Body, yet
the Soul is not the Body, nor the Body the Soul: So in Christ, though he be but
one Person, yet that Person consists of divine and human Natures, one
expressed by Spirit the other by flesh, a necessary Distinction to make us know
which Nature in him is spoken of, for they ought not to be confounded, each
having its proper Attributes.

But as their way of arguing is altogether Cavils and Sophistries, so they
would put a false Gloss upon our Savior's fore-quoted words, That which is
born of the Flesh is Flesh, etc. as if he were speaking of that which is
naturally done, but Christ's Conception and Birth is supernatural; but see what
a wrong Principle they go upon, for the Conception by the Spirit they reckon to
be natural, as if the Spirit of God bestowed upon us in a spiritual Generation
or Regeneration was natural to us, when it is a supernatural Gift of divine
Grace: Now seeing the Lord Jesus, according to the Flesh, is not born of any
spiritual but a carnal Matter, he is not properly born as of a Seed, and so may
not be called Son of God according to the Flesh, though through the Operation
of the Spirit he was born of fleshly Matter: But, that one may properly be said
to be born of the Spirit, it is not enough to have the Holy Ghost be the Author
of his Birth, but also he must be born of spiritual Seed, to the end there may
be a Proportion between a spiritual and a carnal Birth, or else if to have one
to be properly born of God, it be enough for God to create a carnal Seed, then
it would follow that all things which at first were created out of the Earth
and Water through a Production of Seeds by God, might be said to be properly
born of God, which is absurd; so that after that manner, Christ may not be said
to be properly born of God, and be his Son.

The Knowledge of this matter is of so high a Concernment, that I must somewhat
more enlarge upon it: Socinians would have Christ to be truly and properly Son
of God according to the Flesh, because, say they, God acted the part of a Man;
but we say, how, to the end one may, in point of Generation, act the part of a
Man, it is not enough to afford any matter of Generation, but it is necessary
it be out of his own Substance; for if he affords another and foreign Matter,
that which is born may upon the account of such Matter by no means be called
his Son, nor be said to be born of such a one, because he is not of his own
Matter and Substance, neither may he be accounted to be true Father to one so
born; he that is not born of the Flesh and Blood of a Man, may not be called
such a Man's proper Son: Certainly if a Woman should beget a Son of another
and not of her own Substance, she might not be called his true Mother, for she
communicated nothing unto him: By the same reason one may not be called a true
Father who is Author of Generation not of his own Body and Substance, but of
another's; to be a true Son one must be begotten not only by the Father but
also of the Father, by the Father efficiently, and of the Father in some manner
materially, that is, either of the Father's own Substance, or out of that which
is derived therefrom. Hence it appears how in the Generation of Christ,
according to the Flesh, the Father acted not properly the part of a Man,
because he communicated not his own Substance, but made use of that of another;
wherefore Christ may not, according to the Flesh, be properly and absolutely
called Son of God, but only secundum quid, and in some respects, as Adam by God
formed out of Clay is indeed called Luke 3.38.
Son of God, but improperly, for he was not begotten in the manner of a Son; so
Christ, according to the Flesh, must not properly be called Son of God, not
being begotten of God's Substance in the manner of a Son; to be properly a
Father is not to supply the part of a Father, as Socinians say, but really to
beget of his own Substance, or else he may not properly be called such a ones
Son. Our Savior indeed, as to his human Nature, is properly Mary's Son,
because begotten of her Substance; but in this Generation of Christ, God
supplied indeed the part of a Man, as much as relates to the absolute
Generation of a Man, but not as to the Generation of a Son; so that in relation
to God it may be called a Production rather than a Generation: A Man by God's
Will may be made of nothing, or of any matter, but a Son being a Relative to
the Father, with whom he has a Consanguinity and Unity of Blood, he must be
formed of the very Substance of his Father. To say that God created a new
Matter in the Virgin's Womb, is to talk at random, without the least ground for
it in Scripture, neither was it necessary; for God could out of the Virgins
Blood have caused a perfect Generation of a Man: Wherefore we conclude, that
since Christ is called God the Father's proper and own Son, he must be begotten
of God the Father's own and proper Nature and Substance.

Hence we do also infer, that the Name of Son of God signifies some essential
thing in Christ, and not an Office and Dignity, as appears out of the Acts
Acts 8.37.
I believe, says the Eunuch, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God; for if to be
Christ and Son of God signifies the same thing, then the words would contain
this Tautology, that Christ is Christ; but upon this solemn occasion of his
being about to be baptized, in answer to what Philip had said, that he is to be
baptized in the Name of Christ, so he must make a declaration that he believes
in Christ, and of what he believes him to be, namely the Son of God; so that
the Name Son, is not the Name of an Office, as that of Christ, but the Name of
the Person that exercises that Office, as good as if he had said, This Jesus
Christ whom thou have preached to me, is not to be considered only as the Son
of the Virgin Mary, who dyed and was crucified, but also as the Son of God who
lives for ever: To be Christ and to be the Son of God is not the same thing,
but different relations; the Sonship has a relation to a Father, as the
Patornity has to a Son; but the relation of the word Christ is either to God
who Heb. 1.9.
anointed him, or to the Church over which Zech. 9.9.
he is made King: So then, according to the formal Reason, Son of God and
Christ do not denote the same thing, neither could Christ by virtue of his
Office, which he received but in time, be properly called Son of God and equal
with God, as it appears John 10.33, 37, 38. compared with John 5.18.
he made himself and really was.

No sort of Men more prone to wrest Scripture than Socinus and Socinians,
wherefore in the matter now in hand, in that Confession which Peter made of and
to our Savior, Matthew has these words Mat. 16.16.
, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God; and John upon another occasion
John. 6.69.
, We believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God;
but because Mark says only Mark 8.29.
, Thou art the Christ; and Luke Luke 9.20.
, The Christ of God; wherefore says he, the Name of Christ contains the full
meaning of Son of the living God: But who knows not the diversity by the
Evangelists used in their Narrations, one more at large, the other more
briefly, one sets down all, the other only some part, as it is observed between
Matthew's and Mark's Relations. If after the Socinian way, from the comparison
of words one could conclude all to be but one and the same sense, many
Absurdities would arise therefrom; as for instance, Matthew relates that our
Savior said to the man sick of the palsy Mat. 9.2
, Son, be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee; but Mark leaves out the
words Mark 2.5.
be of good cheer, saying, Son thy sins be forgiven thee; and Luke, instead of
the word Son, uses that of Man Luke 5.20.
thy sins are forgiven thee; then, according to this way of arguing, it may be
concluded how the words Son and Man are but one and the same, and signify but
one and the same thing; for whom Matthew and Mark call Son, Luke calls Man; so
after this rate Man and Son now do not differ as an absolute Name that denotes
Nature, and a relative signifying a relation to a Father. It is said how in a
Vision Cornelius saw an Angel of God, Acts 10.3. and v. 30 he said to Peter,
Behold a man stood before me in bright clothing; what he saw in the same Vision
is called an Angel and a Man; must we conclude an Angel to be a Man?

After the same manner they would wrest some other places, as when Matthew
says Mat. 26.63.
, The high priest said unto him, I abjure thee by the living God, that thou
tell us whether thou be the Christ the Son of God; and Mark Mar. 14.61.
Again the high priest asked him, are thou the Christ the Son of the blessed?
and Luke Luke 26.66, 67.
, The chief priests and the scribes led him into their counsel, saying, art
thou the Christ? Tell us. Where the Name Son of God is omitted, the Heresiarch
does conclude that the words Son of God and Christ are the same: But we already
showed the Falseness of such Consequences, and this is farther to be observed,
how though the relations by the Evangelist be not contrary, yet they sometimes
differ, and are not expressed in the same words; Matthew uses the Name Son of
God, Mark calls him The Son of the blessed, where the words God and blessed
signify the same thing, though one expresses the Nature, the other the
Worship: This difference of relating does farther appear, that Matthew and Mark
say the High Priest asked, but Luke says it of the Chief Priests and Scribes,
shall we then conclude that the High Priest and the Scribes are the same? But
withal, the word Son of God is not quite left out by Luke; for we find it v.
70. Then said they all, art thou then the Son of God? Here by the by take
notice how what our Savior said of himself under the Name of Son of Man, by
reason of what is said of sitting on the right hand of the Power of God, they
well took the meaning to be Son of God, which Christ confirmed, and indeed, he
often declared himself to be true Son of God, but we read no where that ever he
denied it. But to return to our Text, hence appears the insignificancy of
their Exceptions; for all the Evangelists do join the Names of Christ and Son
of God: And we are to take special notice, how after our Savior had affirmed
he was the Son of God, they all concluded he had blasphemed, which there had
been no cause for them to say, except thereby had been meaned he who is
begotten of the Essence and Nature of God, and therein equal with him.

It seems they will not be persuaded but that Christ and Son of God are
synonimous, to which end they farther make use of other places, whereof the
first has these words 1 John 5.1. verse. 5.
, Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God; the next is
thus, Who is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus is
the Son of God? The last is this Chap. 4.15.
Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him, and
he in God: Whence they would infer, that the Names of Christ and Son of God are
the same, because they are put one for the other; but the Consequence is not
good; for, all that follows is this, that Christ and the Son of God are the
same, which we own, and is true, both do meet in the Person of the Lord Jesus,
for he is Son of God and Christ, but we deny the Name of Christ to be the same
with that of Son of God, because this last is a Name of Nature, and the first
of Office; and to say he is Son of God, because he is Christ, is a mere begging
of the Question: Christ is called Immanuel, Wonderful, Counselour, Mighty God,
The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace, by Isaiah, and The Lord our
Righteousness, by Jeremiah Chap. 23.6.
, all which Names are given to one and the same Person, yet none may say they
do formally signify the same thing, no more than Prudence, Courage, and
Liberality can be said to be the same, because they meet in one and the same
subject, and the same Person may be prudent, courageous, and liberal. It Is bad
Logical from the Unity of the Person to argue for the Unity of Names, seeing
one and the same Person may be called by several Names; God is merciful and
just, yet though Mercy and Justice be in God, they differ one from another
between themselves abstractively taken, though we know in God they are one and
the same thing. Thus though the Words Son of God and Christ belong to one and
the same Person, yet in themselves they differ one from another, as do God and
Lord, which in Scripture are often joined together as the Lord God, and put one
for another, yet God is a Name of Nature, and Lord signifies his Dominion, they
in themselves denote different things, tho pertaining to one and the same
Subject, or else every Lord were a God; thus a Husband were a God unto his
Wife, because Sarah called Abraham her Lord, the Lord of the unfaithful Servant
were his God, because he calls him his Lord, the Lord of the Vineyard were the
God of the Vineyard, because called it is Lord, and many more such Instances:
And I shall illustrate the thing by a trivial Saying among us, A Servant may
say, his Master is Lord, but not God, at home.

The Text that says 1 John 2.22, 23.
, Who is a liar but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? He is Antichrist
that denies the Father and the Son; whosoever denies the Son, the same has
not the Father; these words do import, how he that denies Jesus to be the
Christ, does thereby deny the Son, not that Christ and the Son do formally
signify the same in themselves, but because to be Christ and Son of God do
meet in one Person, so that none but the Son of God is Christ and Redeemer of
the World. Withal after this Socinian way of arguing, it would follow in this
Text, that the Names Christ, Father, and Son, do signify the same; for here
the Apostle offers two Propositions, the first, He is a Liar that denies
Jesus to be the Christ; the last, He is Antichrist that denies the Father and
the Son. The Adversaries make them both equivalent, for in both is the same
Object of denial; whence they infer, that Christ and the Son are of the same
signification; but according to this Kule it may be concluded, that Christ, the
Father, and the Son, signify the same, because in the first Proposition Christ
is the Object of the denial, and in the last the Father and Son together. Any
one may see the Absurdity of such Consequences.

But because Christ, to prove himself to be the Son of God, speaks to the Jews
about his Sanctification by the Father, which Sanctification is the anointing
spoken of by Peter Acts 10.38.
, wherefore they would have that to be the cause of his being Son of God; but
if there was no other reason of that divine Filiation but the Sanctification
and Anointing, then the cause by the Angel given in Luke 1.35.
Scripture were false. So then Christ is called the Son of God not only upon
the account of his extraordinary Birth and of his kingly Office, as Socinus
says, but for being of the same Nature and Essence with the Father, which that
Text of John 10. is not against; for in that place our Savior does not give in
the cause why he is Son of God, but only goes about to refute the Slander of
Blasphemy by the Jews cast upon him, not by an Argument a pari, taken from
equal things, but from the lesser to the greater: He had said v. 30. I and my
Father are one, thereby expressly asserting his Consubstantiality and Oneness of
Nature with the Father, whereupon they took Stones to stone him, because of
that pretended Blasphemy, in that he being man made himself God, which
Objection he answers with an Instance from less to greater. Thus, if those
are without Blasphemy called Gods who exercise a divine Office in their ruling
and judging of Men, much more and upon a better account may Christ the Messiab
from eternity begotten by the Father, and in time sent down from Heaven into
the World, be called God, wherefore there is no Blasphemy, nor have ye any just
cause of stoning me, because I said I am the Son of God, one with the Father:
The Name Son of God relates to the eternal Generation by and Consubstantiality
with the Father, therefore not a Name of Office but of Nature and Person, and
the Names Christ and Son agree as to the material in one Person, but not in the
formal; the Name Son is by reason of an eternal Generation, and that of Christ,
upon the account of a temporal Anointing to an Office: In the mean while we
retain the proper and literal Sense of the word, and not the metaphorical, till
we see cause to the contrary. And this we leave for them to prove, how because
Magistrates, by reason of their Office, are called Children of the most high,
therefore not because of an eternal Generation and Coessentiality with the
Father, but for his Royal Dignity the Lord Jesus is called Son of God.

To be short, we have other Texts to prove how the Name God's Son signifies
some essential thing in Christ, as that heretofore quoted, Christ was made of
the seed of David according to the Flesh, etc. the Flesh signifies his
Humanity, as does, Declared the son of God according to the spirit of holiness,
his Divinity; for we see Dan. 9.24.
, To anoint the most holy, does denote by the most holy his divine Person, and
by to anoint, his Office of Mediator: So we have that of the Angel to the
Virgin, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall
overshadow thee, therefore also that holy thing that shall be born of thee
shall be called the Son of God. The Angel's meaning is, that in Christ's
Conception the Power of God was necessary, to the end he that was to be born
might be called Son of God; but if that Name had related only to the Office,
and he that was to be invested with it had been a mere Man, no need of that
Power of the Spirit in the Conception; now the Angel calls holy that which it
Essential in Christ, he was holy before he should be born, and that essential
holy thing is called the Son of God: The (...) signifies not that Man that was
to be born, not holy in the Concret, but holy in the Abstract. Withal, seeing
in Baptism the word Son does not in Christ signify his Office but his Nature;
for the Names Father and Holy Ghost do not denote any Office but Persons, so in
Christ it signifies his divine Nature not his Office: All this may also be
proved out of other Texts, as this John 3.16.
God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. compared with
Romans 8.32.
, He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, wherein
God's Love toward the World and us is so highly commended, which if it were
only an Office laid upon Christ, would come very short of that inflnite Love of
God, which as Paul says Ephesians. 3.19, 18.
Passes knowledge, and gives it the four Dimensions, breadth, length, depth and
height: But to say that God spared not his own beloved and only begotten Son,
but delivered him to death, this is Love indeed. The same we may learn out of
this Heb. 5.8.
, that though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he
suffered. What Man is he that would sacrifice his Son to the Safety and
Preservation of his Enemies? Yet God has done it, having exposed his Son out
of his Bosom to all the Abuses which the Rage and Malice of Devils and Men
could inven^ and to the shameful, painful, and cursed Death of the Cross. Take
notice how the same Apostle in the same Chapter, having applied the words of
the Psalmist to the Lord Jesus verse. 5.
, thou art my Son, he calls the time of these Sufferings verse. 7.
the^ days of his flesh, to make a difference between his divine and human
Natures; and thus such a Son and in such a manner, as his Name to distinguish
him from all Men, was never bestowed upon any Person in the singular Number;
Abraham, as observed before, was called God's Friend and Moses his Servant, but
to neither of them, nor to any one else, it was said, Thou art my Son; it is
said Christ was faithful to him that appointed him; Heb. 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and Moses also was faithful in all God's house, but with what a vast
difference, Moses as a servant, Christ as a Son, over his own house which he
had builded himself, but he that built all things is God. Thus much I could not
forbear taking notice of those Texts tending to our main purpose and for
Christ's Divinity. But to return to the exceeding greatness of God's Love to
us, it would be extremely lessened if Christ had been considerable only for his
office and not for his Person, but Romans 5.8
God commends his love toward us in that while we were yet Sinners, Christ
his own, proper, well beloved and only begotten Son, dyed for us; that Christ,
who according to Peter's confession, is the Son of the living God: which
contains two things, first that Christ is the Messiab, the second, that he is
the Son of the living God.

This they object, Heb. 5.4, 5.
Christ glorified not himself to be made an high Priest, but he that said unto
him, thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee; Wherefore, say they, he is
called Son in respect to his Office? In answer we say, if by these quoted
Words, Christ was constituted Mediator, then he was constituted Mediator only
after his Resurrection, for after his Resurrection Paul said, Act. 13.33.
God said, thou art my Son this day, etc. Furthermore, all that can be deduced
out of these Words is this, how Christ was by him that begot him called to the
Office of Mediator, which we grant, but deny him only by these Words to have
been constituted Mediator, Rev. 13.8.
for this day have I begotten thee, do not contain the Institution of Christ's
being a Mediator, but a Declaration and Manifestation thereof; he was a
Mediator from the beginning, being the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the
World; he could have been no Mediator except he had a being and subsisted. Out
of all that has been, and many more things that might be said, and of some
others which by the Grace of God afterward I shall add, it may appear how to
the Lord Jesus do truly and properly belong the Names proper to the Essential
God, as Jehovah, Lord, God, Son of God, God's Own, Proper, Only Begotten Son,
the Word, how he was begotten from Eternity, and in him is a Divine as there is
a Human Nature, etc.

Against their wresting the true Sense of the Scriptures which they are so much
inclined, apt and study to do; we may consider how several Expressions therein
do tend to condescend to our weakness and infirmity, according to the Capacity
of some of those whom they were spoken or written to, or afterward were to
read them; thus our Savior said to the Jews, Joh. 5.31.
If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true; and because John was in
great esteem among them, he appeals to the Testimony he had given of him: That
Argument was good with the Jews, Mat. 21.26.
for all held John as a prophet; however, to show he was above such things, and
that his due Glory depended not thereupon, lest it should thereby suffer any
Prejudice in their Opinion, he said John 5.34, 41.
, I receive not testimony from man, but these things I say that ye might be
saved: and I receive no honor from men like a tender Father he had compassion
on them, and would help their Weakness and Infirmity, and relieve their
Frailty; but when his Right and Due were questioned, then he expresses himself
in another manner; for when the Pharisees had said unto him Chap. 8.14.
, Thou bear record of thy self, thy record is not true; then upon such an
occasion he is not wanting in asserting his divine Prerogative; for he
answered, Though I bear record of my self, yet my record is true; for I know
whence I came, and whither I go: He might bear record of himself, and to
strengthen his own Evidence, he says it is not single, for he has another
infinitely above that of John; for Verse. 16.18. compared with chap. 7.32.
, If I judge, my judgment is true; for I am not alone, but I and the Father
that sent me, who bears witness of me; though, as Peter said Acts 10.38.
, He went about doing good, yet his Right he asserted when called in question;
so no Consequence against his divine Nature, Attributes, or Actions, is to be
drawn out of his Humiliation, when in the days of his Flesh, out of his
infinite Love and Compassion toward poor lost Sinners, he earnestly did
solicit, and as it were beseech Men to come to and believe in him, for that
was the proper Work of the day, in the time of his Humiliation, to bring about
our Redemption; so what himself, or the Evangelists and Apostles spoke of him
in that state of his, ought not to be wrested or mis-applyed to derogate from
that Glory and Honor which he had from, and shall have to all Eternity, it is
neither just nor fair to do it, it is an abominable Abuse of his Mercy, and to
turn the Grace of our God into Lasciviousness and detestable Unthankfulness.

Some things in Scripture of a certain Nature, and attended with particular
Circumstances, as may be Types and Comparisons, must not be pressed overmuch,
it is enough they agree in the thing for which they are made use of, or else
they will fail, though they agree in many things yet not in every thing; it
will be as when a Man blows his Nose, if he presses too hard he will be in
danger of squeezing Blood out of it: So in things of the nature of those we now
are upon, we must not indulge our own Fancy, or suffer our Minds to wander up
and down, and want the Reverence due to such holy Mysteries; we may and must
often part with our own Reason, but never with the Revelation, which that
Reason, though never so strong, must be ruled by; and therein the Analogy of
Faith is to be observed: Thus when between our Adversaries and us there happens
a Dispute about the meaning of a Text, and we give an Interpretation different
from theirs, this Interpretation of ours ought to be grounded upon some other
place of Scripture, and we have reason from them to expect the like; for
neither they nor we must be Judges in our own Cause, and Scripture ought to be
explained by Scripture: But a great general Fault in them is, to force a sense
upon the words that is contrary to the scope of the place and to the Analogy of
Faith, and to give unusual Meanings and different from the whole course of
Scripture, as we made it appear in several places, and yet give no good reason
for it, nay sometimes none at all: They must pardon us if we have no such
implicit Faith as to take their bare word, though they boast never so much of
their strength of Reason: We now know better than to approve of the old Saying,
Magister dixit, ergo verum, the Master said so, therefore it is true; indeed in
relation to our great Lord and Master we agree to it, but not so when it is
applied to any Man or Sect whatsoever.

We see by experience how commonly in these things one Depth calls to
another, and when once Men are fallen in into a wrong way, the longer they go
in, the farther from the true one: Hence it is, that Errors in Judgment are
attended with others in Practice: That People that think they know all, will
also believe they can do all things, as they are of opinion nothing is or can
be above their natural Reason, so out of Self-Love and Conceit they will easily
be persuaded that nothing is beyond their natural strength: Thus as they can
easily know what God is, so as easily they can do what he commands; and such
Pharisees will not question but that they may fulfill the Law; they can repent
and believe if they please, for all such Free-Willers are of that mind; yet of
so many Instances I shall bring but one wherein the word of God does confute
and confound them, indeed it is one, if not the main, about Men's ordering their
Carriage and Conversation in the whole course of their Life, it is called Steps;
for as we are Pilgrims and Passengers in this World, so our Actings therein are
in Scripture expressed by Walking: Now our Adversaries will say their Actions
are guided by their Reason, against which I bring two Evidences without
exception, Father and Son both great Men, and both in several things Types of
Christ the Son of God; for David says Psalm. 37.23.
, The steps of a man are ordered by the Lord: And Solomon declares Prove. 16.9.
, A man's heart devises his way, but the Lord directs his steps: Reason
indeed subservient to Revelation, and guided by Faith, is a good Companion; but
postponing, or putting first last and last first, and altering the order of
things, is in these contrary to true Religion: The Prophet knew better than so
when he said Jer. 10.23.
, O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that
walks to direct his steps: But these Matters of Grace I elsewhere discussed
somewhat at large, A Plea for Free grace against Free Will.
wherefore now I shall not engage in it.

Only in relation to what a little before I spoke about Comparisons, I shall
say, how though we must lay no stress upon them in Matters of this nature, nor
screw up Consequences for divine from human things, by reason of an infinite
disproportion between them: Yet notwithstanding that Disparity, to convince
some sorts of Men, even among those natural things, God has not left himself
without Witness, in relation to the great Mystery about God the Father and God
his Son, grounded upon a Comparison drawn from the Sun and its Beams: First,
the Sun in relation to the Beam, is of it self, and the Beam of the Sun; so is
the Father of himself, and the Son of the Father. Secondly, as the Sun in order
of Nature is before the Beam, but in time they both are co-existent; so is the
Father in order of Nature before the Son, though in Existence both coeternal.
Thirdly, as the Sun without Diminution or Division of its Substance or change
in its Nature, produces the Beams, so is the Son begotten of the Father.
Fourthly, as the Sun cannot be seen but by the Beam, no more can the Father but
by and in the Son. Fifthly, as the Beam is never separated from the Sun, nor
can the Sun be without the Beam, no more can the Son be from the Father, nor
was the Father ever without the Son. Sixthly, as the Beam is distinguished from
the Sun, so that the Sun is not the Beam, nor the Beam the Sun; so it is
between the Father and the Son. Notwithstanding the infinite Disparity in it,
this Comparison I have chosen as the most sit and proper to illustrate that
adorable, incomprehensible, and incomparable Mystery, after what the Apostle
said of it when alluding to the Sun, he calls the Son Heb. 1.3
The brightness of his Fathers Glory. The next thing I am to do, is to show how
true divine and incommunicable Attributes do also belong to him.

CHAP. VII. Essential Divine Attributes belong to Christ.
OF God's Attributes some are Negative, as Infifinite, Independent, Immortal,
Unchangeable, etc. which remove from God all manner of Imperfection, and though
these teach not what he is, yet they teach what he is not; others are
Affirmative, as Eternal, Almighty, All-knowing, etc. these are not so strong as
the others, because they represent Things but imperfectly; other Attributes
there be, as Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, Justice, etc. which in some Degree God is
pleased to impart unto the Creature, but these I intend not to speak of, only
of those that are essential and incommunicable to the Creature; and this Rule
must be laid, that whenever any of these Attributes are in Scripture given to
God essentially taken, they are attributed to Christ, because he is essentially
God, as I hope is sufficiently proved.

But before I proceed, something in general may be spoken about Divine
Attributes. The Attributes of God are those Proprieties whereby he makes
himself known unto us, and shows the Difference that is between him and the
Creature; these Attributes in God are not as Attributes in the Creatures, for
they are no Qualities nor Accidents, nor Things different from the Essence, or
from one another according to the Rule that nothing is in God but what is God
himself; God's Infiniteness and Eternity, are God Infinite and Eternal;
wherefore because we cannot comprehend God's Infiniteness, Eternity,
Simplicity, etc. we say we cannot comprehend his Essence and Nature. The
Knowledge that is in us, comes in by Parts and Degrees, How then can we know
one Attribute of God as may be his Simplicity and Absoluteness which has no
Parts? For it does not consist of any Genus and Difference, Substance and
Accident, Power and Act, nor of Ens, being and Essence; and as to his Immensity
or Infiniteness according to which he is (...), wholly, whole, whole in
himself, whole in all, whole in every one, and whole out of all; he is neither
circumscribed, defined by, included in or excluded out of any place; all these
are past Understanding, not only of Men, but of Angels also. Let those who
pretend to know all Things, and that to them nothing is a Mystery, take notice
of this: Thus much in short of the incommunicable Attributes, or as otherwise
called of the first Order. And as to those of the second and communicable to
Creatures which yet must be well understood, for a thing may be said to be
imparted or communicated in two ways, either when the same thing in Number and
Species is imparted to another, or when the same is by Analogy in likeness and
proportion. In the first way, no propriety of God can be communicated to the
Creature, because all infinite and the same with the Nature, but in the last in
some measure and degree they are, in as much as some Effects like unto his
Attributes according to their Capacity come out of them.

The Attributes of this last sort may be reduced under these three Heads Mercy,
Wisdom and Power; Mercy moves and wills, Wisdom does contrive and dispose,
and Power executes, all three in God Infinite and Eternal, all three to be
found in the Son in the Works of Creation, Preservation and Redemption; in
relation to the two first absolutely considered, in his Divine Nature, and to
the last in both Divine and Human in the Capacity of Mediator, wherein he is
both God and Man, for indeed the Office of Mediator required a Person that
should be both, to perform those things that were to be done in relation to
both; because to suffer and die was the part of human Nature, which the Divine
is not capable of, but to overcome Death and our spiritual Enemies, could not
be effected but by a Divine Power; withal it became the Majesty of God, that
the Mediator should be God, for that Majesty is so great that none but one that
is intimate and equal with the Father, could interpose between God and Man:
Angels themselves could and dared not undertake it, for they stood in need of
Christ to be confirmed in their state of Integrity; besides that, they are not
pure in God's sight, much less any Man merely such. I ask, Who but a God could
destroy sin, appease God's wrath overcome the Power of Satan, with natural and
eternal Death? Who could make expiation for Offenses committed against an
Infinite God, but he that is Infinite himself? By whose Intercession could
God's Anger be pacified, but thorough him that is his beloved Son? By whose
Power could Satan and the whole Power of Darkness be overcome but by him that
is stronger than all Devils and Hell? And who could conquer Death, but he that
has destroyed him who has the Power of Death? And as none but a God could
deliver us from all these Evils, under whose Power we were; so none but a God
could restore us to the Goods we had lost; Who could have restored us to a
perfect Righteousness, but he that is Righteousness it self? Who to God's
Image, but he that is the express Image of his Person, and the Brightness of
his Glory? Who could make us Children of God, but he that is his natural, only
begotten and beloved Son? Who could bestow upon us the Holy Ghost, but he from
whom the Holy Ghost proceeds? And who could give us eternal Life, but he that
is Life it self? And by whom could we come to God, but thorough him that is the
way? Out of all this it appears how none but a True and not a made God, could
be a Mediator between God and us. 1 Samuel 2.25.
If one man sin against another, says Eli, the judge shall judge him; but if a
man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? No mere Man can, only he
that is Lord God himself.

Divine Essence is necessarily attended with the Divine Attributes, First,
Eternity.
and it being most simple, they are not otherwise distinguished then after our
manner of Conceiving, so that out of the foregoing Evidences they must
necessarily be attributed unto the Son; and first Eternity; having already
proved Christ's Deity and his eternal Generation, we have spoken many Things
belonging to this Head: Eternity is Indivisible, as the begetting Power of the
Father is Infinite, so it has a terminus an Object of Infinite Perfection,
namely his Son Coeternal and Coessential, and because the Generation is from
Eternity, so is it true that the Son was continually and perpetually begotten,
for we must not say God was first God and then Father, but without beginning
always God and always Father; and seeing he ever was Father, he ever had a Son:
This Reason is much to our purpose, and we could easily farther enlarge upon
it; yet in order to prove this Eternity, we must draw Arguments out of
Scripture, without which in these Matters, all our Reasons are no Reasons at
all.

Both Testaments do abound in Proofs, but out of many we shall make use of few:
First out of the Old, and begin with the place where it speaks of Christ's
Kingdom, and of the Glory and Power thereof. He says, Psalm. 110.3.
From the womb of the morning thou have the dew of thy youth; the Meaning and
Sense of the Words is, thou art from Eternity, Morning implies a Day, and the
first part of it too, Day imports a Time which began with the Creation; for
before, there was no Time, all was Eternity; now Christ whom here David calls
his Lord, is not said to have the Dew of his Youth from the Morning, but from
the Womb of the Morning, that is, before there was any Morning, any Time at
all; for before any Creature be brought forth, it is in the Womb, and what is
the Womb of Time but Eternity, which is the Day spoken of in another place,
Psalm. 2.
this day have I begotten thee; with God there is no Time, with Him all is one
Day, a Day of Eternity; that saying so to him, is not of a present Generation
or Constitution, but the Revelation of a Thing that was before; wherefore in
that same Verse it is called a Decree, I will declare the decree; it is the
declaration of the Decree, not the time of it; now all God's Decrees are
Eternal without beginning, consequently the Time therein mentioned is meaned of
Eternity, which the Psalmist's manner of speaking does confirm more, when in
that first place he says, thou have the dew of thy youth; the Dew falls on the
first part of the Morning, so in that beginning of Time he had not his Birth or
Childhood, but his Youth not only existed, but had his whole Strength and
Vigor; all this way of speaking is with condescending to our weak human
Capacity, to make us understand how the Person therein spoken, is from
Eternity, as it is plainly expressed by Prove. 8.21, 22, 24, 25.
Solomon, when bringing the same Person to speak under the Name of Wisdom,
says, the Lord possessed me in the beginning of his ways, before his works of
old; I was set from everlasting, from the beginning or ever the earth was, when
there was no depths, when there was no fountains with water, and before the
mountains were settled I was brought forth, that is, before there was any
Creature; now that Christ is the Wisdom of the Father, 1 Cor. 1.30.
who of God is made unto us wisdom, etc. no Man ought to doubt of.

Another Text to prove this Eternity, is one of the Names whereby the Prophet
calls Christ when he fore-telleth his Birth in the place which we had occasion
to speak of before Isa. 9.6.
the everlasting Father, here is Eternity in the very Spring, he not only is
Everlasting, but is the Father of Eternity itself in the abstract. A farther
Proof we draw out of another Prophet, who speaking of the place where the
Messiah was to be born says, Micha 5.2.
Out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in Israel, whose
goings forth have been of old from everlasting. Upon the occasion of knowing
the place where Christ should be born, the Matt. 2.4, 5, 6.
Evangelist says, how all the Chief Priests and Scribes quoted this very place
to Herod; so that as certainly as he was to be born and was actually born
there, as certainly his goings forth have been from of old from Everlasting;
this Prophecy was made several hundreds of years before his Birth, yet at that
very time he was said to have gone forth from of old; what is to be understood
by this, from of old, he there explains it thus, from everlasting; the Hebrew
word signifies from the Days of Eternity, whence we may surely conclude that
the Person spoken of in that place, namely, the Lord Jesus has been, and is
from Eternity; here two goings or comings forth, be expressed, one passed, from
of old, from everlasting, the other to come, out of thee Bethlehem shall he
come forth, etc. Daniel calls him the ancient of days, which is the very same
Name in ver. 13. of the same Chapter given the True God of Israel, whether
taken Essentially or Personally, whereby is denominated the true everlasting
God. Now out of the New Testament, on my way, I shall take notice of the place
where he is called Colos. 1.15.
the first born of every creature, which (as the Adversaries would have it)
does not include him amongst the Creatures, rather it declares him not to be a
Creature, if he was not made with the Creatures in time, then he was before all
Creatures were made that is from Eternity; for he that was before all Creatures
is not created, so he was first born, because born before any Creature was, far
from being a Creature, he is the Creator; for he created all things as anon we
shall have occasion to show.

Before I go on this, I must say how Socinus's unhappy Design and great Mistake
is to interpret Scripture merely by Criticisms upon the words, without any
regard to the scope of the place, or the analogy of Faith, thus he searches
into all the Senses that they are possibly capable of, till he can find one,
though never so forced to serve the Opinion he is prepossessed of, and before
hand, though never so contrary to the plain and natural Sense of the place. In
the Preface to his Explication of the first of John's Gospel, he owns, not
wihtout Vanity, how his Interpretation is, new, quorum verus sensus, etc. the
true Sense of which words, says he, seems to have been hid from all the
Expositors that ever were extant; how proudly is this to applaud himself, as if
he alone had known God's mind, as if the Spirit of God had not assisted, but
departed from all Good and Learned Men for 1500 years after Christ, this is an
over-affected singularity of his, to turn all into Allegories, such shifts to
defend a Cause, do declare it to be bad, for it is only to preserve it from
sinking,; and if once a Man has leave to suppose what he pleases, then he may
prove what he will; of this, now I shall give but one Instance, if by the word
beginning which we read in John 1.1. we must as he does, contrary to all
particulars of the Text, and the scope of the Evangelist, understand the
beginning of the Gospel; then according to this way of explaining, by the word
beginning which we read in Genesis 1.1. we may understand not the beginning or
Creation of the World, but of the beginning of the Mosaical Dispensation, and
so the Creation of Heaven and Earth to be the Institution of the Jewish
Religion, and so several other things of the same Nature; this
misinterpretation of Holy Scripture is very injurious to it and dangerous, for
after such Notions and Fancies, no Error, though never so absurd, can want one
pretense or other to set up against the scope of Texts and Anology of Faith.

But now we must go on, Joh. 1.1.
In the beginning was the word, says St. John, in that beginning the Word was
with God, and in the same beginning the same Word was God, it being granted
that Christ is signified by the name Word, that the Word is God; the Eternity
of Christ may easily and naturally be understood by the Word Beginning, it
appears how the Evangelist's Design is to assert the Divinity of Christ,
wherewith he abruptly begins his Gospel under that name he speaks of him in the
fourteen former Verses of his first Chapter, and then mentions it no more; he
says nothing of his Birth nor of any Circumstance of its Time, Place or
Person, but barely when, where, what he was, and what he did; this is plain
enough, if some Men of perverse Judgment had not thorough vain Deceit and
Cavils, gone about to darken and wrest that Truth. By this beginning of time,
is here, as in other parts of Scripture, when spoken without limitation,
understood the beginning of the World, it having here, as I observed before,
the same Signification, as in the first Verse of the Book of Genesis, in the
beginning God created, etc. and that this is the meaning of this place, it
appears out of the second and third Verses; in the second is repeated what is
said in the first, the same was in the beginning with God; upon what occasion
was he then with God? Certainly, about the Work of Creation. for ver. 3. it is
said, All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that
was made; and what I say is the meaning of the word Beginning, I can make it
appear out of Scipture, and that what they say, to reduce it only to the
beginning of the Gospel, is a false gloss of theirs put upon the Words to
pervert the Sense; Prove. 8.23.
the Son of God speaking of himself under the Name of Wisdom, says, I was from
the beginning; the meaning of the Word is there well expressed in two several
ways, though but to one and the same end, I was in the beginning or ever the
earth was, where it is very plain that the word Beginning is understood before
the Earth was, and in the first part of the same, it is said, I was set up from
everlasting; then by the word Beginning is meaned from Everlasting for indeed
before the beginning of the World, it was Eternity; this I am sure does not
agree with the false gloss of the beginning of the Gospel.

No more do the following; our Savior speaking of Adam and Eve, says, Matthew.
19.4, 8.
He which made them at the beginning, made them male and female; and somewhat
lower, John 8.44.
from the beginning it was not so; and our Evangelist says, he, the Devil, was
a murderer from the beginning. Furthermore, Heb. 1.10.
Thou Lord in the beginning has laid the foundation of the earth, and the
heavens are the work of thine hands; and elsewhere, where Christ is spoken of,
1 John 2.13.
ye have known him that is from the beginning; and in the same Epistle, chap.
3.8.
the devil sins from the beginning. Now I ask, Are these Texts with others I
could produce, to be understood of the beginning of the Gospel, or of the
World? Nay, the Gospel is not of so late a Date as they would have it to be,
for if we may believe Gal. 3.8.
Paul, it was preached unto Abraham; that Word which in time was made Flesh was
in the beginning when the World was made, so not to be understood when he took
our Human Nature, seeing he was long before, even before Abraham, and to take
it of the beginning of the Gospel, as they do, the Sense must be this, in the
beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ was, altogether
unbecoming the Wisdom of the Spirit of God; it is said in the Praeter-Tense was
with God, not has been, the word was has its weight to show that he began not
to be in the beginning, but that he was already, and shall continue to Eternity
without ceasing or interruption according to the place before quoted, this day
have I begotten thee; this Day of Eternity, for with God there is no Time nor
Succession; it cannot be said of our Savior's Birth, which happened so long
after, but there the Holy Ghost pointed to Eternity, which is ever present;
that in that Psalm, Eternity is meaned, the subject Matter does demonstrate,
for the Question is about him in whom we must put our Trust and Confidence
which ought to be Jerem. 17.5.
in God alone, now God's Duration is no Time but Eternity, which is an entire
and continual perfect possession of an endless Life or an Infiniteness not
successive but permanent, wherein three things are to be considered, First, no
Beginning; Secondly, it has no End; Thirdly, admits of no Continuation, it is
free from any Succession; the two former are agreed on, but the third they
Dispute; but as God and Eternity are the same, for nothing in God but what is
God himself, so God were not whole, for that Eternity is not whole, which is
subject to a continual Succession; Fourthly, God were divisible as is a
continual Succession, which has several Parts; and Fifthly, it would admit
access and recess, as does every Succession: This I set down as necessary to
understand what Eternity which we now speak of is.

Now again to our Text, in the beginning. I say, that though it had been before
instead of in, their perverseness in going about to make Scripture subservient
to their ill Opinions and Designs, and not to make it the Rule thereof, as they
ought to do, in endeavoring to find out the true meaning of it; yet still they
would have endeavored to pervert the true Sense; but what is here said in, is
the Description made of God's Eternity, expressed by the word before, Isa.
43.13.
yea before the day was, I am he; the Gospel is the Luke 2.10.
good tidings of great joy of Christ's the Lord being come; and what could the
Evangelist have done better than to set in the very front and beginning of his
Gospel, how when Christ was announced, that he had been, as indeed he was at
the time of the first Promise made of the Messiah when the Gospel was preached
and declared to our first Parents, Genesis 3.15.
the seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpent's head.

If by the word Beginning is to be understood the Time when the Gospel was
preached, it makes the thing very doubtful Matthew begins it from the Birth of
Christ, Luke from the Conception of St. John Baptist, and Mark from the time
when John began to preach, Paul from Christ's first preaching, and Peter from
the Day of Pentecost, when the Spirit cam^ upon the Apostles, so that it would
be very uncertain which of these Beginnings is meaned by the Evangelist, for
there is nothing in the Text to determine it, every one of these is attended
with some incongruity as to say that Christ was when he was born, or when he
preached, or that he was fifty Days after his Resurrection, I can find no
proper or good Sense in any of these, nor in the other which they declare for,
and it is that, when John began to preach, which was on the thirtieth of his Age
or thereabouts, and between him and Christ, there was but six Months
difference, which being so inconsiderable, what need then why the Evangelist
should say Christ was, when he was past twenty nine? And when there was no
ground to doubt of it, does this become the Wisdom of the Apostle inspired by
the Holy Ghost? Is it fit to say and cry out as John did, I am sent to prepare
the way for the coming of one that is already come, Joh. 1.26.
that stands among you whom you know not, and whom he does point at when he
says, ver. 29.
this is the lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world; to speak
thus, Does it become one who has the right use of his Reason? Besides, it
cannot be supposed the time when John began first to preach here to be
understood, for he says, the Word or Christ was before he mentions any thing
of John's Being or Preaching, for he speaks of him but in Verse 6th. but in the
very first he says the word was, he could not say John had preached before he
had said he was; but this needs no longer being insisted upon.

Another Text we make use of, is this, Joh. 1.15.
he that comes after me is preferred before me, for he was before me; this
precedence may not be understood literally of the Birth and Manhood of Christ,
for John was born before him, wherefore it must be upon a nobler Account, he
pre-existed before John, so he had another Being, which not being Human nor
Angelical, must need be Divine, according to which he was in the beginning of
the World, which concludes for Eternity; this Priority they interpret of
Dignity, not of Time, we do not deny that in Gifts and Office Christ was much
beyond John, and suppose we should understand the Words preferred before me, of
a Dignity, what will they say to the following Words for he was before me?
according to their Sense, the meaning will be this, he is preferred before me,
for he was preferred before me, which is to prove the same by the same; when
will they give over destroying the Analogy of Faith, tearing Scripture in
pieces, and pulling it over head and Ears to serve their Turn, and their Ends?
If we consider Christ only as a Man, John as to that time had the priority of
Gifts, for as he was conceived before the Body of Christ was; so Luke 1.15.
he was filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his mother's womb; as to his
Office he exercised it before Christ did his, for he went not about it till
after he had been baptized by John, after which he was forty Days in the
Wilderness tempted of the Devil, and he began his Ministry, Matt. 4.12.
after he heard that John was cast into prison; wherefore this before me, must
be taken in some other Sense than relating to Gifts and Office; for this would
not sufficiently commend God's great Love toward us, if only he had endued his
Son with excellent Qualities, as does perfectly his not sparing but delivering
him up to be put to Death for us, his own Son whom in four places the John
1.14, 18. chap. 3.16, 18.
Evangelist calls God's only begotten Son; it is to be taken notice of, that
John does not say he is preferred before me, because he is, but because he was
before me; Why should he make use of the Preterimperfect-Tense but to denote
the time when Christ was preferred before him; so that he was before John, when
he was made so eminently Excellent; his Office was put upon him when thirty
Years old, but he had long before been endued with those heavenly Qualities
which he was invested with, and there was never a part of Christ's Life,
wherein that Son of God was not more Excellent than John; so his Office could
not be the Cause of his being so highly preferred above John.

The next Verse makes the matter plainer, of his fullness have we all received
and grace for grace, wherein John does attribute unto Christ a priority of
Cause as of Dignity, for he thereby owneth that whatsoever Excellency is in him
and others, is derived from the Fullness of Christ as the Stream is from the
Spring; the Fullness was in Christ first, and thence John and others received
it; wherefore he is said to be before John, as the Head-Fountain is before that
which flows out of it; How then could that be, that John and every one else he
meaned, when he said, we all, had received of Christ's Fullness and Grace for
Grace, before he had taught, baptized with the Holy Ghost, or done any Miracle?
This is explained in the next Verse, for the Law was given by Moses, but grace
and truth came by Jesus Christ; the Lord being the sole Dispenser of Grace and
of Truth; no wonder if we all for the present and in time past, received all we
have out of his Fullness; now this Fullness is not only in one but in all kinds,
Colos. 1.19.
for it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell; not excepted
the Fullness of the Godhead: chap. 2.9.
for in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. But how can this
agree with their Opinions? For if Grace and Truth has not been bestowed by
Christ till after he had preached and revealed it; How could John Baptist and
others before they heard Christ preach, receive it? if Christ was a mere Man,
he could not communicate Grace before he was born, to those that were before
him; wherefore he must need have some other Way and Capacity to do it, namely
according to his Divinity, which Truth if unreasonable Men would but own and
give God Glory, and not wander against Scripture after their own Fancies and
Imaginations; this would set all things at Right here; because like a drowning
Man, they are content to lay hold upon any thing that lays in their way; out of
the thirtieth Verse, they object that John calls him a Man, we never denied
Christ to be a Man in which respect he was after John, but we also own him to
be the Word God according to which he was before him: We read of Angels under
Man's shape by Abraham and Lot received into their House they were both Angels
and Men, but under a different Notion, not Angels as Men, otherwise all Men
would be Angels, not Men as Angels, for thus all Angels would be Men; wherefore
they were Angels in one respect, and Men in another. Somewhat after this
manner, John calls our blessed Savior, sometimes God and sometimes Man, that
is now after one Nature, then after the other, for the Person of the Lord Jesus
is both God and Man.

To prove Christ's Eternity, we make use of a third place in the same Gospel,
John 8.58.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, before Abraham was I am; the words are very
plain, upon the occasion of Christ's saying, that Abraham rejoiced to see his
day, which the Jews interpreting of a real Vision, they objected an apparent
Contradiction, thou art not fifty years old and have thou seen Abraham? for
they inferred that if Abraham had seen his days, then he had seen Abraham, who
lived so long before, and so they looked upon it as an impossible thing; but he
confirms what he had said with these words, before Abraham was I am; they fell
into a Rage, and took up Stones to cast at him; for they had a right Notion of
what he aimed at in his Discourse, namely, to raise himself above all the Men
in the World; amongst them they looked upon Abraham, whom they boasted to call
their Father, to be the Chief, and they believed none under God was greater
than he; wherefore after he had said, if a man keep my saying, he shall never
see death; they grew mad against him, and presently said, Abraham is dead, so
are the Prophets, and so asked him, Whom make thou thy self? they concluded
it could be no less than God, whereby it appears how all along they had a true
apprehension of his meaning, though they were enraged at it, and could not hear
it. It is a wonder to see how Socinians go about to corrupt and tear this Text
all to pieces with their vain Sophistry; indeed the place is so close upon
them, that they will leave nothing unattempted to wrest it; the Question is
about Christ's Age, the Jews would measure it by what appears of him, and as he
is a Man, in which respect he denies not what in their Sense they say about
his Age, but he will lead them farther, and make them look higher, and consider
him for what he was, as he had said to them from the beginning, namely, the Son
of God sent by the Father to save the World. To that purpose upon this occasion
he mentions that his appearing unto Abraham in the plain of Mamre, for it is
said, the Lord appeared, Genesis 18.1, 2.
and Abraham knew him among the two Angels in the shape of Men, by his
addressing himself to him, paying the respect of bowing himself toward the
Ground, and calling him my Lord; this Visit under the Figure of a Man, whereby
he gave him earnest and assurance, how he would dwell among Men, when of his
Seed he would be made Flesh; this, I say, was a notable means whereby Abraham
saw his Day and rejoiced, the Day of that Visit he saw with the Eye of his
Body, and the Day of his Incarnation, with the Eye of Faith, which our Savior
in this present Text of John lays not upon the Promise of his coming, but upon
his preexistence unto his Incarnation.

Now contrary to this scope of the place, Socinians do forge this to be the
meaning according to a transposition they make of the Words, I before Abraham
be made, say to you that I am, that is, Christ, not considering that Abraham
was long before, and dead as the Jews said, but then they go farther, with his
being made, they understand Father of many Nations. I shall say but very few
words as to the Grammatical Construction; for indeed the Matter and true
Meaning, is plainly this, I was, existed and had a Being before Abraham was
born, but was renders the Sense when be or is does alter it, because it being
spoken of Abraham, does relate to time past, and not to come. Genesis 17.^.
Abram had his Name changed into that of Abraham, signifying a Father of
Nations, a Thousand and several Hundreds of Years before Christ; yet they would
have him to be such, only after the coming of our Savior into the World, as if
he had not been so before; when Paul calls him the Father of us all believers.
They rise a Difficulty also about the word I am instead of I was, which is an
usual Enallage in Scripture, when the present time is used for the praeterit or
past, and here there is a Reason for it, which is this, that the present Tense
is more proper than the praeterit, to represent God's permanent Being; besides
that, the Evangelist uses the present, least Christ should seem to speak of a
non-perpetual, of a discontinued and interrupted Being and Existence, by reason
of the several Opinions about him, as if he was John Baptist raised from the
dead, Elijah, Jeremiah, or some other. Now the use of the present Tense was
very proper to remove all Grounds of entertaining such Thoughts, and to signify
a constant, permanent and unchangeable Being; in Scripture we have Instances of
this, how when God is described, the Verb I am in the present Tense, answers
together to the Verb of the praeterit, as Psalm. 90.2. and Prove. 8.24, 25. this
does most properly express an uninterrupted and immutable Being, which passes
not away; such is God's, such also is Christ's, fully and unquestionably
described in all Tenses, which is much to our present purpose; Heb. 13.8,
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. Abraham rejoiced at
that Day when he invited and entertained in his House the Son of God under the
shape of a Man; for though there were three, one of them he called my Lord and
chiefly addressed himself to him, Genesis 18.
who promised of himself, and in his own Name to give him a Son by Sarah; shall
I hide said the Lord, from Abraham that thing which I do, and afterward
communed with him; surely Abraham was glad to see this day. But when our
Savior says, before Abraham was, I am, he intended thereby to give himself
some preference before Abraham; the Name, I am, which on this occasion he makes
use of, is observable, for it does relate to that Name which God gave himself
when he sent Moses into Egypt, Exodus 3.14.
Thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel, I am has sent me; which Name
is proper to God, whereunto in the New Testament answers that of Alpha and
Omega, Rev. 18.11. and 12.13.
which the Lord Jesus attributes unto himself; and if he created the World that
is made of nothing as by God's Grace, we shall prove in its place, Heb. 1.12.
he must need have been before Abraham, and as he made, so he shall destroy or
change it, whether as to the Substance, or only as to the Quality, it is not
material to our purpose; but whilst Heavens and Earth shall wax old and be
changed, it is said of him, but thou art the same and thy years shall not fail;
by these different Expressions, one and the same thing, namely, his absolutely
unchangable and eternal Existence is intended, which being joined with his
other Attributes for our good, may prevent all the Fears, and answer all the
Doubts of those that trust in him.

But let us take notice of the Injury which unworthily they attempt to put upon
Christ, as if he were only in Jest, and to trick the Jews with not answering
the thing in question, which is about the time when Christ was, whether or not
before Abraham? What he was? Whether something more Excellent and more Ancient
than a Man? The Jews Objection was very specious, How could one whom they
looked upon a mere Man, not fifty Years old, have seen Abraham? Well, our
Savior answers directly to the Point, that he was before Abraham, but
Socinians with their wicked Sophistry would unworthily make him shuffle the
matter, for instead of making him to answer how it could be that within such a
vast distance of time he and Abraham could have seen one another, they bring
him only as mentioning the time when he was speaking to them to this purpose,
before Abram be Abraham, that is, the Father of many Nations, I say unto you, I
am the Christ; this quibbling Trick I would think they learned of Papists,
(though I take Socinians capable to forge as bad as any Papists) who in the
case of the Malefactor upon the Cross with altering a Comma, do quite alter the
Sense; our Savior thus speaking to him, verily I say unto thee, Luke 23.43.
to day thou shall be with me in paradise; but to settle their Purgatory
instead of, to day thou shall be, etc. they would have it, I say unto thee to
day. I would find to know what a cause Christ has given them to pass such a
Judgment upon him, who ever used to answer to the purpose, to the Words and
Mind of those whom he discoursed with? What could in so serious a Matter, and
of so high a Concernment as this is, to make him alter his method and differ
from himself, when his main Design, was all along to make himself truly known
for what he was; yet here as much as in them lays, they make him say nothing to
the purpose of the Jew's Question and Objection; as they attempt to rob him of
his Divinity, so they would of that Heavenly Wisdom, Gentleness and Readiness
to do good which ever appeared in his whole Carriage; here not only they make
him not to speak pertinently to the Question, but also they so mangle his
answer, that Men cannot tell what to make of it; Is the Etymology or Derivation
of Abraham's Name to any purpose here? The Jews looked upon it as very absurd
that Christ so young should have been in Abraham's time; the Lord does plainly
and to the purpose answer, before Abraham was, I am, and with this very strong
Asseveration by him used only in Matters of the highest Concernment, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, not once but twice, Verily; now we know him to be Rev.
3.14.
Amen, Amen, the true and faithful witness.

Their Brains are fruitful in idle Inventions, for upon this place they say one
thing more wherein Arminians join with them: How this before Abraham was I am,
is to be understood of a Divine Constitution or Pre-ordination, that is in the
foresight and foreknowledge of God, Christ was before Abraham, but not really
so in Existence; but Christ here says not he was foreordained, but that he
was and existed, I am; we deny not Christ to have been foreordained, for 1
Pet. 1.20.
Peter, says, he was, but we deny that to be the Ground of his Divinity, or
that in this place Christ says so, when the Question is about his Deity; being
pre-ordained of God is no Prerogative of Christ, for it is Romans 8.29.
common to all believers; Is it not ridiculous for one to say he is older than
others, because he was foreordained of God before they were born? This I shall
conclude with one thing more I must say to it, how our Savior in this place
says clearly and positively before Abraham, was I am; the Jews understood how
thereby he made himself to have been before Abraham, which could not be upon
that account of his human Birth, our Savior does not go about to show they
were mistaken, which if it had been, the Evangelist would have spoken of; on
the contrary, he did run the hazard of being stoned; and indeed, he not only is
before Abraham, but also Colos. 1.17.
before all things, and Persons, Adam not excepted.

One place more I shall speak of, and then shall have done with this Head; I am
Rev. 1.8.
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the Lord, which is, which
was, and which is to come; the Almighty. As before Alpha there is no other
Letter in the Green Alphabet, which Language the Book is written in; so before
the Son of God there is nothing, and as of all things that are, Christ existed
the first, so he shall exist the last, and herein the Metaphor does exactly
fit, and is explained by the following words, the beginning and the ending,
which though v. 4. be spoken of the Father, yet it hinders not, but is here
attributed unto the Son, neither is there any thing in the whole Verse, but
what is adapted to the Son as well as to the Father; as to the Name Lord, How
often is the Son in the New Testament called by that Name? As to the
expressions which is, which was, and which is to come, taken out of the Isa.
44.6.
Prophet, which are the explanation of the word Jehovah, they belong to Christ,
as we have before proved the Name does, and so does the Thing, for in a place
already quoted, the Signification is applied to the Lord Jesus, Christ the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever; he that is named Alpha, the beginning, and the
first, and which is, may well be called he which was; and he who is called
Omega, the end and the last, may also be well called he that is to come which
is properly and in a special manner spoken of Christ, as it appears out of this
Heb. 10.37.
yet a little while and he that shall come, will come; and this is spoken of
him in Rev. 17. and 3.11. and 16.15. and 22.7, 12, 20.
several places of this Book. Besides that, in this whole Chapter the Apostle's
Design is to describe the Son not the Father, as it does appear by the
foregoing and following Verses, so it is not likely he would in this v. 8.
describe the Father only, and seeing in this first Chapter, he was to dispose
the seven Churches to receive the Epistles by the Son to be directed to them,
with that Submission and awful Reverence as became them; so to prepare their
Spirits, it was a due Course to make an ample and glorious Description of the
Son; for the Father does not immediately in his Person show himself to or speak
with Men, but the Son does, therefore there is a kind of Necessity that he
should make his own Description; seeing therefore how the Words and the Things
of the Description do belong to Christ; why should not we say that the
Description is adapted for him? This Interpretation of ours is natural with the
words and scope of the place, it neither alters, takes away, or adds
thereunto, as their Interpretation does, with wresting, forcing and restraining
it to the Person of the Father, when the Son absolutely without any limitation
or restriction calls himself Alpha and Omega, beginning and ending, first and
last; but it seems they would teach the Spirit of God how to speak: though
nothing can be said more fully and plainly than this is, he does not say only
(...) am, but joins the Person (...) I, so when in the several Epistles Rev.
2.7.17.26.
to him that overcomes, he promises, to give to eat of the tree of life, and
of the hidden manna, Chap. 2.5.12.21.
the white stone, and the new name, with power over the nations, etc. and Chap.
22.17.
the water of life freely to him that is thirsty; he does not send them to the
Father, but offers it himself as to the John 4.10.
Woman of Samaria; nay, in his state of Humiliation he calls Men Chap. 7.37, 38.
to come to himself; much more after his exaltation and glorisition.

But to conclude this, Matt. 11.28.
and at the same time show how this is simply spoken of Christ, not only in
this 8 verse, but also in the 11 and 17, it appears out of the 12 and 13, where
he turned to see the voice that spoke with him; and in the midst of the seven
Candleiticks, he saw one like unto the Son of Man, this could not be the
Father, and if any doubt should remain, it is cleared ver. 17, 18. for St. John
having known him, fell at his Feet, he said not as the Angel, see thou do not,
but he said to him, fear not, I am he that lives and was dead, which cannot be
spoken of the Father who never died; and these words, I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end are spoken Rev. 21.6.
again, and all the general Words spoken asunder in this Book, are together
repeated, I am Alpha and Omega, Chap. 22.13.
the beginning and the end, the first and the last; and here as they began, so
they will end; for they will own Christ to be the first, because say they, he
is the first that showed Men the way of Salvation; But did not the Prophets and
John Baptist, before Christ was manifested and preached the Gospel, show Men
the way of Salvation? Which way did Patriarchs, Prophets and Miartyrs go to
Heaven, and could be saved if they had not known the way to Salvation, before
Christ began to preach the Gospel? And were not after his Ascension many things
conducing to the way of Salvation, declared by his Apostles? If he be the
first, only because he first taught Men the way to Glory and Immortality, he
being the last as well as the first, must also be the last to enter into it,
which how false it is, let the Enemies themselves be the Judges.

There is one thing more material to prove the Eternity of Christ, which I must
not omit for as what I have said proves him to have been before Abraham and
other Patriarchs, so what remains will show him to have been before the World
it self, the words are plain. 1 John 17.5.
And now O Father glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I
had with thee before the world began. Our blessed Savior never spoke to Men
any thing but the Truth, much more to his Father, but most of all upon this
occasion when he was about leaving the World and going to him; there is a Glory
which Christ desired should be made known to all, namely, that of the Gospel,
which is called the glorious Gospel; and this Glory of Christ was effected in
the Preaching thereof all the World over. Paul alone published it Romans 15.19.
from Jerusalem into Illyricum; the Gospel certainly tended to the Glory of
God, the Father's Mercy being highly revealed therein, and of this he says, I
have glorified thee on the earth, and as he had glorified the Father, making
known his Name and Glory unto Men, which before had never been done to that
degree, this work which the Father had given him to do, being over, he now
speaks for himself; and now O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self: To
be glorified with God, is to be glorified with the same Glory which he has in
Heaven with God, in the Bosom and at the Right Hand of the ^ather, with an
equal Majesty and Honor with the Father, served by innumerable Legions of
Angels, which is a Glory unknown to the World; this is a Glory which the Son of
God had before the World was: This Style of Scripture, before the World was,
signifies Eternity; for there was nothing created before the World, seeing in
the beginning God created Heaven and Earth, and every thing therein contained;
but John says not, in the beginning the Word was made or began to be, but was
had his being, consequently eternal, for beyond the beginning of the World
there is nothing but Eternity; time began at the Creation. I say if Christ had
a Glory with the Father before the World was, then Christ was before the World,
for a Glory he could not have, except he had a Being, but here Christ says he
had a Glory with the Father before the World was, and we believe he speaks
Truth; therefore Christ was before the World; this cannot be understood of
Human Nature, which he took only in time, long after the World was created,
therefore it must be spoken of a Divine Nature; for before the Creation of the
World there was nothing but God.

Notwithstanding this positive Truth, they give our blessed Savior the lie,
and say he had no real Glory before the World was, but only by a Decree and
Appointment, he was ordained to have a Glory: Good Lord! When will this People
let the Son of God have his own? They go about to rob him wholly or in part of
every thing he has. Christ says not, the Glory which thou did decree or
ordain for me, but which I had, was in possession of, and enjoyed. To have a
title to and be in possession of a thing are two very different things; we
defy them even to give any instance how to have, absolutely taken, signifies
to be appointed to have; if after this rate Men allow their Fancies such a
latitude as to forge new and unusual Significations to the words of Christ, we
can be sure of nothing. Whenever any one is absolutely said to have a thing,
it implys him to be at the same time, for he that is not can have nothing; it is
true, we are said 2 Cor. 5.1. Heb. 10.34.
to have a building of God, an house not made with hands. eternal, in the
heavens, and to have in heaven a better and an enduring substance: Believers
are indeed said to have such things, but when are they said so? certainly not
before the World was, nor before they were themselves, but after they are. What
is said also 2 Timothy 1.9.
of the grace which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began, makes
nothing against us, it is one thing to have something given us, and another
actually to have it, the first is the act of the Giver, the second of the
Receiver, we have not now really that which is given us, till after we received
it, one may have a Place in Reversion which may be he shall never have; Lands
may be given me by a Will which I cannot be laid to have till I am actually in
possession thereof, as it never was heard of, that any one gave any thing
before he was, so none can receive any thing before he is; besides in the Text
now in question it is not simply said, that Grace was given us, but given us in
Christ Jesus; now this Grace is so given us in Christ, that he must have it
before he can communicate it unto us; so then we cannot be said to have a thing
when we have it not, though we be appointed to have it: These two things are
different: Who may say that Paul was an Apostle of Jesus Christ, had Faith in
Christ, Charity and brotherly Love when he was an Unbeliever, Contra rationem
nemo sobrius cont. scripturam nemo Christianus, cont. Ecclesiam nemo pacificus.
a Blasphemer and Persecuter. To Socinians we may apply this Saying, No Man may
be called sober that is against Reason, nor Christian that is against
Scripture, nor peaceable that is against the Church; for they speak against
Reason, Scripture, and the general Consent of the Church.

If their Exposition be true, Christ might and would have said, Glorify me
with the Glory which thou have decreed for me before the World was; then he had
said nothing but what every Believer may say, how that before the World was God
foreordained them to the Glory which they shall enjoy at the last day; so
might every one else say, before the World was I was foreordained to have
Wife, Children, Lands, Offices, etc. nay, according to their opinion, at the
same time when Christ asked that Glory he had it, if to be appointed thereunto
be to have it, and if he had it, why should he ask for it? If Christ had said
nothing but this, And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, it
had sufficiently declared the Sense of our Adversaries, without saying any
thing of the Glory which he had with him; so with thine own self, they explain
to be in Heaven, as if he had said, in thy House; but if that had been Christ's
intention, he would have said, Glorify me in Heaven; but since he expresses
himself otherwise, and makes mention of the Glory which he had with the Father
before the World was, if we can believe he well knew what he would have, and
was able to express his Thoughts, then we must say he had very good cause for
all he said.

Now we shall proceed to some other of his Attributes: Christ's Omnisci-
he knows all things, Omniscience and perfect Knowledge and Wisdom Romans 16.27.
which belongs to God alone, whereby God in a divine manner understands himself
and every thing else, does also belong to the Son, who says to the exclusion
of all Creatures, Mat. 11.27.
No man knows the Son but the Father, neither knows any man the Father save the
Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. And Rev. 19.12.
no man knows his name but himself; thus he has a perfect knowledge of his
Deity and of every thing else, even of the most contingent, whereby the true
God is distinguished from all and every Creature; this also belonged to the
Lord Jesus, as he sometimes foretold his Disciples, and in the case Mat. 21.2.
of the Ass and Colt, and Luke 22.10, 13.
of preparing the Passover, and to Peter John 21 19.
the manner of his Death, and all the Prophets being acted by his Spirit,
foretold things to come, that holy Spirit Chapter 16.13, 14.
shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you, and Rev. 13.10.
the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy: And to make this the more
excellent and conspicuous, he attributes unto himself that which no body will
deny to belong unto God alone, Psalm 7 9. and 26.2. and 1 Samuel 16.7
The righteous God tries the heart and reins, the Heart is unsearchable to any
but to God alone, Thou, even thou only, says Solomon 1 Kings 8, 39.
, know the hearts of all the children of men; but Christ does attribute it
to himself Rev. 2.23
, I am, he which searches the reins and hearts, and John 2.24, 25.
he knows all men, and what was in man, and needed not that any (...) should
testify of man, for, Mat. 9 4
he knew the thoughts of the Scribes, and (...). 12.25.
the thoughts of the Pharisees; (...) John 16.19.
be knew the desires of his disciples; withal Chap. 6.64. and Chap. 18.4.
he (...) from the beginning who they were that believed not: and who should
betray him, he knew all things that should come upon him, and in few words, he
know all things.

Christ is present every where, Christ's Omnip^esence.
which argues his Immensity and Infiniteness, which elsewhere I have spoken
of; whereunto I may add, how though absent in the Body he saw Joh. 1.48 49.
Nathanael under the Figtree, whereupon he called him the Son of God, the King
of Israel, a Title which Scripture gives the only true God; and also he
affirms this when he says, Chap. 3.13.
No man has ascended up to heaven but he that came down from heaven, even the
son of man which is in heaven; by the Son of Man he means himself, who, if we
must believe, was in Heaven when to Nicodemus he spoke these words upon Earth,
which cannot be understood of his Humanity which he assumed in the Virgin's
Womb, but of his Divinity, which alone is infinite. But here they take
exception, and say, that by to be in Heaven is meaned only to know and
understand heavenly things according to Paul's saying Phil. 3.20. and Ephesians.
2.6.
, Our conversation is in Heaven: The Conversation of pious Men in Heaven, is
said in opposition to worldly mindedness, when they were said to be quickened in
Christ, and as expressed, to fit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus,
they say, not to be in Heaven, but in and with Christ in heavenly things,
Colos. 3.3.
Our life is hid with Christ in God: We do not intend to prove the Divinity of
Christ barely, because one who is upon Earth is said upon any account to be in
Heaven, but out of this, that Christ is said not only to be descended from
Heaven, and is again to go up, and out of this, that though he be come down
from Heaven, he is still there, whence we may well conclude for his
Omnipresence. Now to descend from Heaven upon Earth, and to ascend from Earth
to Heaven, are spoken of Christ only as to his Person, and thereby is meaned
his coming upon Earth: There is such another place Ephesians. 4.9.
to the same purpose about ascending and descending. This we must say, that
whilst Christ in his human Nature was on Earth, with his divine he filled the
Heavens: Elsewhere he explains it as to places, Mat. 18.20. and 28.20. Christ's
Almightyness.
Where two or three are gathered in my name there I am: As to time, For I am
with you always unto the end of the world.

The Lord Jesus is also almighty: Omnipotency, which is an infinite Power
incommunicable to any Creature, for all are incapable of it, Christ applies it
to himself, when he says Rev. 1.8.
, he is the Almighty. I have already showed how every thing in that Verse
Christ speaks of himself, only I shall add how the same Name is given him in
several other places of the Book, We give thee thanks, Chapter 11.17.
O Lord God Almighty, which art, and was, and art to come, which are the same
Expressions used in that v. 8. and what is the reason of the Thanksgiving, it is
in the latter end of this same Verse, Because thou have taken to thee thy great
power, and have reigned, so who is here said to reign? The Lord God Almighty;
but to reign belong to Kings, and if we go back to v. 15. this we shall find,
The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his
Christ, who is called Chapter 19.16. Verse. 6.
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and if we go back to v. 6. we may hear
Alleluia, the reason is, for the Lord God omnipotent reigns; and in another
place we read of the song of the lamb. which I suppose no Man doubts to be the
Lord Jesus, and what is the Song? Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God
Almighty: He is the Almighty God, and certainly we have as many Evidences of
his Omnipotency as there be Miracles wrought by him: And if God the Father be
Almighty, as they will not deny him to be, the Son must also be Almighty, John
5.19.
for whatsoever things the father does, these also does the son likewise.

Unchangeableness belongs to the true essential God, Christ's Immutability.
but thou art the same, says the Psalmist, 102.27. and Christ is unchangeable
in his Words and Promises, Matt. 24 35.
Heaven and earth pass away, but my words shall not pass away; for 2 Cor. 1.20.
All the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen; and Rev. 19.11.
He is called faithful and true.

Other Names and Attributes there are in Scripture, which though not
incommunicable, yet are so eminently spoken of the Divinity, that they are
almost equivalent to it; so that they be fixed in God as their Spring, and in
the Creature but detivatively and as it were a small Drop in comparison with
the vast Ocean; and these being attributed unto Christ by way of Excellency, do
not only illustrate, but also prove his Divinity: I shall speak but few words
about them; the first is the highest, which indeed I find in Scripture never to
be spoken of Men in the superlative degree: This is spoken of Christ in the
place where it is said Genesis 14.18, 19, 20.
, Melchizedec was the Priest of the most high God, equivalent to the word
highest, and in the two following Verses it is repeated, so that no less than
thrice the Name most high is set down, which I conceive to be not without
cause, and may be in relation to the most holy and blessed Trinity. Well, this
Name is attributed unto the Lord Jesus, as what Zacharias said of his Son John
Luke 1.76.
, And thou child shall be called the Prophet of the highest, for thou shall go
before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways: So the Attribute is given to
the Person therein spoken of, which no Man may question to be the Lord Jesus:
This was given him by the Multitude, and approved by him upon his entrance into
Jerusa^em, for they cried, saying Mat. 21.9.
Hosanna to the son of David, Hosanna in the highest; and though as I said,
this be simply proper to God, and 1 Timothy 6.15.
belonging only to him, yet being joined with the Name of God, is attributed
unto Christ Acts 16.
, These men are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way
of salvation; Servant of Christ is a Title which Paul does usually take upon
him. Who this Most High God is, we read in the next Verse, Jesus Christ, in
whose Name he commanded the Spirit to go out, which he did the same hour. The
word the blessed with an Article, does, as I have had occasion to show,
signify the same as God; and it is said of the Son of God Psalm. 72 17.
, All nations shall call him blessed, and the Multitude, in the fore-quoted
place called him so, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord; and in
that noted place the Apostle joyneth both blessed and God, and gives him Romans
9.5
, who is over all God blessed for ever: Paul says not, Let him be in a way of
Wish and Desire, nor he shall be, as if then the thing was not, but only to
come, but he says, He is God blessed for ever, thereby meaning his Being and
Nature. In Scripture Isai. 14. Psalm. 71.23.
the Name of holy one is given to the only true God whom Israel does worship.
This also is spoken of Christ Psalm. 16.10.
, Thou will not suffer thine holy one to see corruption; and Peter Acts 2.27.
and 3.14.
does certainly declare those words to have been spoken of Christ. The Angel
said to Mary, Luke 1.35.
Therefore also that holy thing, or holy one, for it was a Person, which shall
be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God; before he was born Holiness
was his Attribute; and it is Romans 1.4
according to the spirit of holiness that he was declared to be Son of God with
power; he not only is holy, but also Holiness it self in the abstract: To him
sitting upon a Throne the Seraphims Isai. 6.1, 2, 3.
cried Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full of his
glory, which is by John Joh. 12.41.
applied unto Christ, These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory and spoke
of him; and Rev. 4.8.
, The four beasts ^est not day and night, saying, holy, holy, holy Lord, God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come; which last is in S. John's style a
Description of the first, these words spoken to him who sits upon the Throne,
and I hope none will deny Christ is sitting upon the Throne, as absolutely
expressed in several places of this Book: So Daniel Dan. 9.24.
called him The most holy.

Other Names and Titles Scripture does appropriate unto Christ, which are all
strong Demonstrations of what he is, namely, the natural Son of God; which I
only shall name; for indeed it would be almost an endless Work to insist upon
all Testimonies of Scripture upon the matter: He is then King of Kings and Lord
of Lords, Rev. 17.14. and 19.16. King and Lord of glory; Psalm. 24.7, 10.
compared with 1 Cor. 2.8. Lord of David, Psalm. 110. with Matthew. 22.44. where
it is observable, how the same Name given to the Lord spoken ^f, is also given
to the Lord spoken to, as equally belonging to both, (...), and in this sense
he is in several places of Scripture called one Lord, 1 Cor. 8.6. and Lord of
all, Acts 10.36. because all things were made by him, John 1.3. So the Lord and
Savior, because there is no Salvation in any other, Acts 4.12. Let special
notice be taken of Psalm. 68. where speaking of Christ according to Paul's
interpretation, Ephesians, 4.8. he among other high and great Names, is called the
Lord God, the God of our salvation, and such more, which certainly do belong
only to the true essential God. In Scripture the Names of Lord, God, King,
absolutely taken, or with the distinction of Israel, are attributed to one and
the same Subject, namely, to the true living God, as Isai. 44.6. Zephan. 3.15.
compared with John 1.49. attributed to Christ. We already have demonstrated how
the Names of God and Lord are proper to him; so is that of King simply taken,
as we have it in the Description made of Christ's Kingdom by the Psalmist Psalm.
45.1, 6.
, I speak of the things which I have made, touching the king; where in several
Verses mention is made of his Glory and Majesty of his Throne, of his Scepter
and Kingdom, and is called God, most mighty Lord; Christ to Pilate owned
himself to be King, in the Inscription upon the Cross, he was called King of
the Jews, which is equivalent to that of King of Israel; and thus it is
interpreted by his Enemies, Mark 15.32.
though in derision, Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the cross,
and for all their jest he was so in earnest, not only in relation to his
ecumenical, but upon the account of his natural Kingdom; for essentially he is
King of the whole Earth, he is the King that is set upon the holy hill of Sion,
Rev. 17.14. and 19.16.
whose dominion is from one sea unto another, who has the heathen for his
inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for his possession. The Lamb,
that is, Christ, is Lord of Lords and King of Kings.

The Prophet upon a solemn occasion calls him a King, Rejoice greatly, Zech.
9.9.
O daughter of Sion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold thy king comes unto
thee, he is just, and having salvation, etc. to be compared with Isai. 62.11.
and this was literally fulfilled at the time when our blessed Savior did
solemnly enter into Jerusalem, upon which occasion Matthew does quote the
Prophets words: This I press the more, because the Adversaries would have none
to be true God but he who is the God and King of Israel.

We know, how to do great things is attributed unto God: Thus after the return
from Captivity the Heathen said, The Lord has done great things for them,
Psalm. 126.2, 3.
and they owned it themselves, The Lord has done great things for us; which
great things are also called Wonders, Thou art the God that do wonders: Nay,
he alone, Ps. 77.14.
that is, the Lord God of Israel, does Wonders; for says David, Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, Ps. 72.18.
who only does wondrous things: Wherefore since the Lord Jesus has done the
Wonders which the Lord God of Israel does and can do, upon the Evidence of
these words, it follows that he is the Lord God of Israel; for this same in
the New Testament is spoken of Christ by himself, under the Name of God
subjectively, when he had out of the Man driven a Legion of Devils, he
commanded him to return to his own House, Luke 8.39
and show how great things God had done unto him; in the latter end of the
Verse the Evangelist gives an account how the Man obeyed, in these words, And
he went his way, and published through the whole city, how great things Jesus
had done unto him; so him who had done these great things unto the Man our
blessed Savior speaking of himself, called God, and the Evangelist Jesus,
making use of the very same words, How great things God, Jesus, had done unto
him; whence it appears, that Jesus is the God that does great things, that is,
the great God, chief and primary God, to speak in their Language, though there
be no other true God: Also that the Lord Christ is the God that does Wonders,
as spoken of the true God in the fore-quoted Psalm; for says Peter Acts 2.22.
, Jesus was approved of God among you, by miracles, wonders, and signs.

But to conclude this Head, hence it appears, how those Attributes of God which
he has declared to make us distinctly conceive the Diversity of his
Perfections and Operations, are all applicable and do belong to his Son Jesus
Christ, and to none else but him: they without any difference do enjoy the
Possession of all things, all mine are thine, and all thine are mine, John
17.10.
says our Savior to the Father; both have the same infinite Nature and
unresistible Power; The Lord God, says the Psalmist, Ps. 104.3. Acts 1.9. Rev.
1.7.
makes the clouds his chariot, and the Lord Jesus did so, for he went up in a
Cloud, and he comes and will so at the last day come with clouds: in that
place where the Prophet foretells the coming of Christ, Zech. 14.9.
In that day, says he, the Lord shall be king over all the earth, there shall
be one Lord, and his name one, which compared with Ephesians. 4.5. and Rev. 11.15.
does show Christ therein to be meaned, Colos. 2.10
who is the head of all principality and power, as well as of his Church; and
hereupon what is said in the Book of Genesis is observable, Chapter 4.26.
Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord; that was the beginning of
the Church which was formed in Seth's Family; and this Paul seems to point at,
when he says, Romans 10.13.
Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved, which relates
to the Christian Church from the Name of Christ, which Name began first in
Antioch, Acts 11.26.
then Men began to call upon the Name of God Redeemer Jesus Christ. The Church
is God's House, for so the Jewish Church, whereof Moses was part, is called by
the Apostle; now this Church was built by the Lord Jesus, and thereupon he
gives our Savior that high Preference before Moses, Heb. 3.2, 3, 4.
that he who first built the House must be before the House, and before Moses,
and the reason is, that he that built all things is God; but the Son of God
built not only that Church, but all things besides; so he existed before Moses,
and before the Foundation of that Church, yea, before the Foundation of the
World too; as under the Name of Wisdom he says in the place which several
times we have occasion to mention, Prove. 8.30.
then, that is, before the earth was, I was with him, God, as one brought up
with him, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him; as a Son
brought up in his Fathers Bosom, of the same Essence, not upon the account of
Adoption; a natural Son is opposed to him that is adopted or not begotten of
his Fathers Substance; it is as of a Forreigner that may be called a
naturalized, but not a natural Englishman, admitted to the Rights of an
Englishman, but never an Englishman born.

CHAP. VIII. Works proper to God belong to Christ.
WE now proceed to another argument drawn from the Works. Seeing Christ has
done those things which none but the true Essential God can do, he must be the
true Essential God. This kind of Argument is very strong; for our Blessed
Savior does often use it as a demonstration of what he was, and a proof of his
Divinity, which was the same question between him and the Jews, as is now
between us and the Socinians, who, though they impiously deny him to be true
God by Nature, yet must own him to be a very rational Man, for indeed his works
made him equal with the Father, therefore he says, My Father works hitherto,
John 5.17, 19.33.34, 36.
and I work, and to the end they should not mistake his meaning, as if the
Father did work as God and he only as Man, to show there was no disparity
between his Father's works and his own, he affirms, That whatsoever the
Father does, that also does the Son likewise: and though John was a great man
among them, and had born witness to the Truth, how he was the Son of God;
wherein by the by, more and more to show who he was, and that he wanted no such
evidences, as being far above them, he declared, But I receive not testimony
from man: but these things I say, that ye may be saved. He said it only out of
compassion, and to condescend to their weakness, for he had a more considerable
Evidence; I have, says he, greater witness than that of John, and what is that?
the works which the father has given me to finish, the same works that I do,
bear witness of me that the father has sent me. And upon all occasions he does
appeal to these works, John 10.32, 37, 38.
Many good works have I showed you from my father, for which of those works do
ye stone me. And a few verses lower he offers to be judged by his works, If I
do not the works of my Father, believe me not; but if I do, though ye believe
not me, believe the works: And to show how all this tended to prove his
Divinity, he says, at the latter end of the verse; That ye may know and
believe that the father is in me, and I in him. And even when he was alone with
his Disciples, after he had eaten the Passover, he takes notice how their not
believing his works, was a sign that they hated both him and the father: And
those very works which thorough hardness of heart and unbelief, they would not
be convinced by, should at last be evidences to condemn them: John 15.22, 24.
For, if I had not come and spoken unto them, they had had no sin; but now they
have no cloak for their sin: and, If I had not done among them the works which
no other man did, they had not had sin. O the works of Christ, though sometimes
they are not attended with a convincing, shall at last have both a convincing
and condemning power against those who refuse to own him to be one with the
Father, and the Father to be in him, and he in the Father equally with him God
blessed for ever.

Now these works are of several kinds, attributed to Christ, first in general,
what things so ever the Father does, Joh. ^.19.
these also does the Son likewise: This is absolutely and simply said, without
any limitation and restriction whatsoever, and of whatsoever nature they be,
and this he does without any let or opposition to hinder him, according to the
working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself, all things
without exception: Phil. 3.21.
Then divine works are in particular attributed to the Son as Election, for the
Elect at the last day to be gathered from the four Winds, Matthew. 24 31.
from one end of Heaven to the other, are called his Elect, and Election is an
act immanent, so are also the acts transient which are of two sorts. First of
Nature. Secondly of Grace. Of Nature it is double, either Creation, or
Providence which is Preservation.

Creation is an incommunicable work of God, the power whereof he never imparted
to any Creature, but it is proper to Christ, who has been declared the Son of
God with power in those works that are truly divine and proper only to God, as
Creation is. Isal. 44.24. Job 9.6, 7, 8. etc.
I am the Lord that makes all things by my self, which Job testifies in
several particulars; and this is given as a characteristical mark, to
distinguish the true God from all false Gods, Jer. 10.11.
The Gods that have not made the Heavens and the Earth, they shall perish from
the Earth, and from under the Heavens. But that very same distinguishing
character, is by the Apostles attributed unto the Lord Jesus, All things were
made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made. John. 1.3.
This is asserted, first by an universal absolute Affirmative, All things were
made by him; then by an universal absolute Negative, Without him was not any
thing made that was made: According to all rules, nothing can be more
positively and clearly expressed than this is, all things, even the world that
knew him not, and what other worlds there are, Heb. 11.3.
for the worlds were framed by the word of God; in which place the name word is
the same as by St. John is used to signify the Son of God, who is also called,
the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God; 1 Cor. 1.24. Psalm. ^36.5. Colos. 1.16.
and by his Power and Wisdom made the Heavens, yea, and all things visible and
invisible; under which two heads are comprehended all things whatsoever, Bodies
and Spirits, such as Angels, and to show an harmony between the Old and New
Testaments, in that as well as in this about the work of Creation, the name
word is made use of, Psalm. 33.6.
for by the word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and to show how all the
three Persons of the Holy Trinity had a hand in it, it is added, and all the host
of them by the breath of his mouth: Genesis 1.
This relates to the (...) dixit, God said, and it was so, and the name Word is
by St. John interpreted to be the true God even personally: Now as in Genesis
and in the Psalm, God made all by his Word, so in John, all things were made by
the word, and as in the Psalm it is expressly said, Psalm. 33.6.
by the Word of the Lord were the heavens made, in a literal not allegorical
Sense; why should it not, in John be understood of the natural, created, and
not of spiritual things? Since he speaks of things in the Creation long before,
not of things to be made hereafter at the preaching of the Gospel; so that of
Genesis 1. and Psalm. 33. with John 1. are three Texts parallel relating to the
same thing. Now the same manner of expression deuoteth the same thing: The word
used in the Creation was not Corporal, because before there was any Creature,
but spiritual, and so God, and that word was not directed to Angels but to
things themselves, for God called them by his word, that they should be,
whereunto answers that of the Apostle, ^om. 4.17.
God calls these things that be not as though they were: And by that very
word the Angels were made as every other Creature was, not as by an Instrument;
for the particle by is not a sign of an Instrument, but of an order in the
Creation. Rev. 19.13.
To our purpose, notable is that place, his name is called the word of God,
which makes it appear that the name word of God is appropriated to and
appliable to none but him as a Person; if the name belongs to him, then also
the thing, as indeed every where in Scripture, the Word, Father and Holy Ghost
are distinguished one from another, so John calls him the Word, before he was
made flesh, and before the Creation. Herein we may observe Socinians to be
worse than A^^ians, who owned Christ to have been from the time of the
Creation, when they would have him to have been only from that of his Birth:
But he was in the form of God, before he took upon him the form a Servant, he
existed before, Phil. 2.6, 7.
as indeed before his Incarnation he governed his people, was with them in the
Wilderness, gave them meat and drink, for he was the Manna and the Rock out of
which they had Water; he was the Angel whom God promised to send before them,
and before his being made flesh he reconciled, regenerated, preserved and
interceded for his people: if this be true, as certainly it is according to
Scripture, why should he not have been in the beginning of the Creation, and
have had a hand in it? For there is the same reason for all these; if he
existed but one year before his Incarnation, then we may conclude for a
hundred, and thousands, and so to Eternity, upon the same ground on which he
existed before he was man; it could not be according to his humanity, for no
man can be said to be before he is, but in a different respect from that
whereby he is: nothing can resolve this difficulty, or reduce this
impossibility into an act, but owning him as he is, the Eternal Son of God, who
when all things are said to be made and created, is himself said to be begotten.

Notwithstanding the clearness of this Truth, they use all means to darken it;
first, against the 1. and 3. v. all things were mad^ by him, in the beginning
say they of the state of the Gopel, but nothing more false, if we ^^^sider
every word, and the scope of the (...) was in the beginning, simply said
without (...) relation to this or that, but absolu^^^^ (...) beginning of all
things; then the Evangelist will have us to look higher, when he adds, the
word was with God: And if Christ was in the beginning of the Gospel, then he
was in the beginning of the world, for as I observed before the Gospel was
preached in the beginning of the world, and immediately after the Fall, the
Messiah was promised: but as the design of St. John is to assert Christ's
divinity, he does it by degrees, as first In the beginning was the Word, then
He was with God: and so to go higher, he says, He was God: and to show it
farther, he comes to the effect, namely, the Creation of the world, All things
were made by him, etc. Secondly, they would darken v. 10. the world was made by
him, whereby they understand the world to come; but they forge ambiguities
where there is no cause for it, here is the world with the Article (...)
without any Epithet, and thus it is usually taken for the work of Creation, and
they ought to give a reason why in this place the word world should have a rare
and unusual signification? and why the Evangelist should bring in ambiguous
terms in a thing which he designeth to make plain and clear. Neither are there
instances that the name world signifies an age, or a world to come, which is as
absurd as if one would say this world signifies this Life; and suppose, world
means life to come, as to enjoy it, and to be in Heaven denote the same, it
would follow that Christ made Heaven, which is part of the work of Creation: If
the Evangelist, by the world was made by him, had meant only a new Creation, or
renewing of the old, he would have added something to show it is not to be
understood of the old Creation, but there is nothing to that purpose; on the
contrary he could not more plainly have said that the World spoken of, is the
same as was made by the word: So the Apostle says positively and absolutely,
The world was made by him, but they say it was not made by him, but only
renewed; in this sense they would have these Texts to be understood, He
lights every man that comes into the world, and he is Savior of the world;
but as every man is not enlightened and saved by him, for the world knew him
not, it must be understood, say they, that he does what he can to save and
renew the world; but they ought to know there is a great difference between
giving Christ the title of Savior of the world, and saying He renewed the
world, saved and enlightened every man in the world: after this manner, we might
say, John Baptist, Paul and every Apostle renewed the world, in as much as they
desired and labored after that it might be so, yet it would not sound well to
say the world was made by John and the Apostles, which must be inferred from
thence, if to make the world be only to do what one can to have it renewed: The
world was made by him, expresses two things, the Thing an^ the Cause; the
Thing, the world was made; the Cause, by the Word: and if the first proposition
be true, so is the second. Now an effect is visibly seen out of this assertion,
the world was made.

Another text to prove the Creation of the World by Christ is this: The first
born of every Creature. Colos. (...) 15, 16.
For by him were all things created that are in Heaven; and that are in earth,
visible, and invisible, whether they be thrones, or domi^^ons, or
principalities, or powers: ^ll things were created by him and for him. This
place is clear and full, whence we draw this, he who is the first born of every
Creature is in time before every Creature, not that he should thereby be
reckoned among the Creatures, only he therein is (...) a metaphore d^noted to
be first of all, that in (...) things he may (...) the preeminence, and not
(...) accounted of the same kind with others, for (...) not first created but
first born: Ye^ (...) the first born as to be the only begotten; and he may
also be called a Creature according to the Flesh, and as he is a man, but not
according to the Spirit: The reason given why Christ is so called, it is this,
for by him were all things created, which shows plainly that Christ is not a
Creature, but the Author of all Creatures, so that he is their Father rather
than their Brother, and he by whom all things are created must needs be in time
and dignity before all, and he is called the image of the invisible God, not
for publishing and preaching the Gospel for that the Apostles had common with
him, but because the Son is so like the Father, that he who sees the Son sees
the Father, and he is the image of the Father, not as he is the Son of Man, but
as he is the Son of God. Neither must this be restrained to Angels and Men,
because those two kinds do not contain every Creature, and certainly if it be
granted that every rational Creature was made by him, we may easily conclude of
all the rest, the more because it is universally expressed of every Creature:
The sixteenth verse does explain and much enlarge upon the foregoing, and does
first universally and absolutely affirm the whole work of Creation to be the
work of Christ, then makes a distribution, as things in Heaven and in Earth, of
what nature, rank and degree soever, and this mention of things in Heaven and
of things in Earth here expressed, shows how the Apostles intention is to
speak of the first Creation and not of the second; this last or renovation does
not comprehend all things that are in Earth, but the first does. Wherefore this
last is not spoken of in this place, and tho elsewhere the word Creation be
understood of the new and Spiritual Creation, Ephesians. 3.9.
it does not follow it must be so here; for there it is spoken of the
revelation and predication of the Gospel, which cannot be proved to be here the
scope of the place where is to be seen not only the word to Create or Creation,
but also the things created, are expressed as clearly as may be. Furthermore,
it cannot be denied, but by invisible things, as Thrones, Dominions, etc. are
meant Angels which were created with or before the World, that is very long
before Christ his appearing in the Flesh; but I find no where in Scripture,
that since the first Creation they were renewed or created again: The good
Angels needed it not, for they were never defiled, the bad ones are not, for
they continue as bad and wicked as ever; so it is very strange that amongst the
Creatures renewed by Christ, they reckon the Devils themse^lves, and who
besides them could ever have thought that in Scripture the bare word Creature,
signifies a new Creature; to Create, to Create a New? This is not at all the
style of the word of God, wherein we believe the Apostles spoke with a design
to be understood, and not to clog their Writings with Ambiguities, to cause
doubts and difficulties: for on the contrary, here he makes things as
intelligible as can be to remove scruples, as when he says, all things that
are in Heaven were by him Created, for fear there should be some doubt about
it, he explains it with the words visible and invisible, for in the Heavens are
visible things, as Sun, Moon, Stars, and also invisible as Angels.

Now there is no doubt but the Apostle in that commendation he gives of Christ,
aims chiefly to show his Dignity and Excellency, as being first born of every
Creature; but the Socinians go about robbing him of that Prerogative, for it is
spoken generally of every Creature without exception; but say they, not so,
only of every new Creature; yet the Lord does excel above every Creature good
or bad, high or low, and is Lord over all. If they say Christ is the first born
of every Creature, only as it is a new Creature; then it must be said the
Apostle is to blame for omiting the word new, though so necessary to understand
his meaning, which is no better than as much as in them lies, to ridicule the
Apostles word, how he is the first born of every Creature, in as much as every
Creature is subject to his Dominion, for every thing is subjected to him thus
far, as God has subjected every thing unto him. But seeing they own Christ to
be in time before every new creatures, what shall they say of some who before
his birth of the Virgin, were new Creatures seeing it is he that made them all.
If thus under the New Testament, we must conclude it to have been so under the
Old, for they could not be such, except they were so made by him. Now as the
Apostle begins this verse, so he ends it, by him were all things created, and
all things were created by him; that is to confirm this Truth beyond all ground
of doubting of it, in the same verse, he does twice set it down, and in the
same words with a most important addition last of all, that as all things were
created by, so for him, not as means and a medium, but as an efficient and
final cause, to him, Psalm. 136.5.
says the Psalmist, that by wisdom made the Heavens; it is not said in, but by
wisdom as a Person and efficient Cause; for as such is the Son of God
represented under the name of Wisdom, Prove. 8. where the Attributes therein
mentioned belong to a person, the work of creating the Heavens is a
distinguishing Character of the true God by nature, from false Gods Idols,
Psalm. 96.5.
all the Gods of the nations are Idols, but the Lord made the heavens: And
Christ is the power of God, 1. Cor. 1.24.
and the wisdom of God, by whom the world was created. Let this be added to
prove this truth, God by his Son made also the Worlds, Heb. 1.2.10.
and this Text being joined with the two foregoing does afford this Conclusion,
he by whom God made the world, by whom he made all things, and by whom he made
the worlds, certainly was before the world, before all things, and before the
worlds; now God by his Son Jesus Christ made the world, all things and the
worlds, therefore his Son Jesus Christ was before the world, before all things
and before the worlds, and so Eternal: The words of this place are as plain,
absolute and extensive as of the others, and because some sophistical
distinction of the word world might happen to be invented; therefore to prevent
it, he says worlds in the plural, thereby to cut off the ground of any
distinction as of this world, and that world, and it seems to leave no place
for the distinction by Socinians of the old and of the new world: the original
word is (...), ages, wherein are contained all times and temporal things,
wherein the world and all things in it are comprehended. But here as in other
places they must bring in their own imaginations, for they will have only the
new, not the old world to be understood, though the Apostle speaking
absolutely, leaves no ground for such notions, and to cavil, they say, that to
Make, and to Create, are different things, contrary to the style of Scripture,
which says, Acts 14.15. Chap. 17.24, 26.
in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, which is certainly the same as
created, so, God made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and all things that are
therein: And God that made the world and all things therein. Again, and has
made of one blood all Nations of Men, etc. So he is a great stranger to
Scripture, who denies to Make the World and to Create the World not to be the
same; so, seeing this shift cannot hold they betake themselves to another,
which is, that God made the world by Christ, as a^^ instrumental cause; but
that sort of men will go about overturning Heaven and Earth, rather than to
depart from their damnable opinions, for what can they ground upon this
instrumentality of Christ? For the preposition by signifies no such thing, as
it appears out of the following places: Gal. 1.1. Ephesians. 1.1.1 Cor. 1.9. Romans
11.36. Heb. 2.10.
Paul an Apostle, not of men, nor by men, but by Jesus Christ and God the
Father: And Paul an Apostle of Jesus, by the will of God. Also God is faithful
by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
Elsewhere, for of him and through or by him, and to him are all things.
Furthermore, for it became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, etc. No sign in these or many more places, of the word by signifying
any instrumental Cause, God by whom are all things, Colos. 1.17.
never made the world by and instrument, but by his word: who not only in
Dignity but also in nature and time, is before all things.

The adversaries cannot upon any rational grounds prove that the Apostle meant
the world to come, but we want no good reasons to show how the Creation of the
world is to be understood: for first, it is neither the idiom of the Jews, nor
the style of Scripture by the world to understand the future, for out of these
words of verse 10. And thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundation of
the earth, Heb. 1.10. out of Psalm. 102.25.
and the heavens are the work of thine hands. I see no cause why the Creation
of the world, should not be understood rather than the beginning of the Gospel;
the ancient earth rather than the new one, and the old Heavens rather than the
new: The more because when the Apostle intends to speak of the world to come,
he plainly says it when he speaks of those that have tasted the good word of
God and the powers of the world to come. Chap. 6.5. Chap. 2.5.
So he does, when he says unto the Angels has he not put in subjection the
world to come. So when he has a mind to say a thing he well knows how to
express it. Moreover, if he had said in the present, he males, not in the
praeter tense, he might have left some thing more of liberty thereby to
understand the future, for speaking in the time past he shows how he does speak
of those ages which the praeter tense does fit better than the future.
Furthermore, the worlds or ages in the plural is more proper for ancient times
than for that which is to come, for this world has had several ages, and shall
continue to have till the last day; but after that, the world to come shall
last for ever, and be all Eternity without end: And when Scripture does by the
name world signify the future, not only it does add a distinction, as
whosoever shall for Christ's sake leave all, Mark 10.29, 30. Luke 18.30.
shall in the world to come have life everlasting. But also, ever speaks in
the singular number, the reason is because this world has several ages, and
that which is to come shall have but one: Besides, I must say how the Apostle
understands the world which God already had made, and not that which he was to
make by his Son, that which was made had a being, but that which was to be made
had none, so we must conclude he spoke of things that were, and not of that
which was not.

Now that the Lord Jesus, as principal and efficient cause made the world, and
so that the word beginning is to be understood of the Creation, it appears out
of this, Heb. 1.1, 2.
God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the
Fathers by the prophets, has in these last days spoken to us by his Son, which
our Savior represented before, by the parable of the Vineyard and the
Husbandmen: Ma^^. ^1.33.
This Son he has appointed heir of all things, by whom he made the worlds;
Angels are called only God's Ministers, but Christ is called the Son, the first
begotten, not made, upon which account the Author of the Epistle affirms, the
Son rea^l^ and truly to be God, and proves it out of Psalm. 45.6, 7. Thy throne
O God is for ever and ever: And this the Apostle still speaking of the same,
proves by his having created the world: v. 10. Thou Lord in the beginning have
laid the sound, dation of the earth: Observe how the word beginning is meant of
the Creation of the world, which is attributed to the Son; it is added, and the
heavens are the works of thine hands, which must necessarily be understood in a
literal sense of the Creation of the world, and not of the new Creation of
things by the Gospel out of what follows, v. 11. They shall perish, etc. and be
changed, etc. This shall be the fate of the natural world, which cannot be said
of the work of Regeneration or new Creation, The word was in the beginning, 1 John 1.1.
which is the same with from the beginning, as expressed by the same Apostle;
that is, of the time of the Creation when things began to be made, that is,
from Eternity; by these phrases before the world was, and before the Foundation
of the world, the first born of every Creature, that is, before any thing was
created, Col. 1.15, 16.
as appears by the reason given in the next words; For by him were all things
created, etc. For he could not be before himself, and had created himself,
which is absurd: In the place it is explained, he is before all things in time
or dignity, because the maker is always in time before the thing which he made.

This head we shall conclude with the following Text: 1 Cor. 8.6.
But to us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we in
him: and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. Here the
Apostle upon the occasion of eating things offered unto Idols, says, that an
Idol is nothing in the world, though it be called God, as many things are
called Gods and Lords, yet in reallity are not so, the names of God and Lord do
properly belong only to the true God, whom he here opposes to things falsely
so called: As for us, we own but one God, and one Lord, whom he gives proper
attributes unto; the one God is the Father, of whom are all things, and we in
him, the one Lord is Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him, for
as all things are of him, of whom all things are made, so all things are by
him, by whom they are made; so then as all things are by Christ, he must be
before all, not only in dignity, but also in time. Out of this Text, we learn
first, that as there being but one Lord, even Jesus Christ, does not exclude
God the Father from being Lord, so there being but one God even the (...) does
not exclude the Lord Jesus from being God also, and the Apostle not only
affirms that it is so, but withal, he shows how it is, by means of the
prepositions of and by here used, all things are of God the Father by the Lord
Jesus Christ, all things have the same Principle and Cause, but somewhat in a
different manner, all things are of the Father but by the Son, which in the
work of making all things, shows a sort of distribution thereof in the way of
it, and such a kind of subordination, if I may so call it, between the two
persons, as if neither of them was precisely the adequate cause of all things,
but the person of one God, by the person of one Lord, and the person of one
Lord, of the person of one God, for if all the same things were not of one God
by one Lord, but some of one God, others of one Lord, then the strength of the
words of and by, with the Order and Coherence between one Lord and one God,
would fall, and so the assertion of one God, would be false, because there
would be two equally first and immediate principles of all things, than which
nothing can be more contrary to Scripture and reason, for the one God is he who
is the Supreme Cause, not of somethings only, but of all, and the one Lord is
he by whom not only some, but all things were; and what all these things are,
it does appear out of all the Texts, I upon this point have made use of, being
compared together, which can make the thing plain enough to any unbiassed and
unprejudiced man: If here Christ be excluded from being God, by the same reason
shall the Father be excluded from being Lord.

But it seems nothing in the world can stop the boundless impiety of men, who
with their restrictions will, as far as they can, confine the Spirit of God
within their own Sense: for upon the Text they say by all things we are to
understand only those which belong to the Church of Christ and to Christianity
as such, which is a mere invention of Socinus's Brain, and not of Christ or of
his Apostles: However rather than to be mute, something he will say; that the
word all can have no relation to those things that were before him, that is,
before he was born of the Virgin, wherein he goes upon his wrong principle, as
if he was not at all before he was born of Mary, for though we own that
according to the flesh, Christ was not properly before he was born of her, yet
according to the Spirit he was, as accordingly has been sufficiently
demonstrated; and as to that Spiritual and Divine Being of his, all things were
made by him, and he was Lord over all: But this Dominion of Christ he is
endeavoring to reduce, not only within the time of our Savior's being born of
the Virgin, but also within that of his Resurrection: But therein he makes a
confusion between Christ's purchased and his natural Dominions, which ought
well to be distinguished, the first was indeed after his death and resurrection
grounded upon our redemption, as formerly the special Right and Dominion of God
over the people of Israel, was entailed upon his having delivered them out of
the Egyptian bondage, but tho he had not delivered them, yet still he had been
their Lord upon another and more ancient account; thus before Christ redeemed
us by his death, he had a natural Dominion over all things, he was our Lord
because we were the work of his hands, before he was our Lord by a special
purchase, for before he humbled himself, and took upon him the form of a
Servant, he was in the form of God, Son of, and equal with God, it is said
indeed, Romans 14.9.
that Christ both died and rose that he might be Lord both of the dead and
living, because there the question is about his acquired Dominion; but in this
place both are spoken of, for Christ is opposed unto Idols, upon the account of
both his Dominions, of which both, the ground is contained in the words, by
whom are all things, and all things are said to be by him, not because he is
Lord, but rather he is Lord because all things are by him: He is Lord of all.
Acts 10.36.


The Apostle says absolutely, and without restriction, of whom and by whom are
all things, yet they would have it reduced only to Christians as such, Because
it is said to us, but it is not said of whom or by whom we have all things, or
all things are ours, but barely and generally of whom and by whom are all
things, without any particular relation to Christians, but this would follow
that if according to the several relations we stand in, we should have some
things of one and others of another, namely such as creatures, such as men, and
such as Christians, we would divide the supreme cause, so that there should not
be only one but many, thus not only one God and one Lord, but many, quite
contrary to what the Apostle says: Besides that if such a restriction be put
upon the words, one Lord by whom are all things, the same must be laid upon
the former, one God of whom are all things whereby they shall presume upon the
Father as well as upon the Son, for there is the same reason for both, so that
both ought either generally or particularly to be taken, which how presumptuous
an attempt this is, let any impartial man judge.

Not only the work of Creation, but also that of divine Providence that is
preservation and governing of the world, is attributed unto Christ; Colos. 1.1^.
this is of two kinds, Ordinary, and Miraculous: the first spoken of, when it is
said and by him all things consist, for in the foregoing verse, having said, by
him were all things created, in this he adds, by him all things consist, for
he not only created, but also preserves all things, and as it is said else
where, all things are upheld by the word of his power, Heb 1.3.
in which place, as in the foregoing is showed how he who made the world does
also preserve the same, the two go together, and be inseparable, and in the
preservation of this world and works of Nature by him created, he together with
the Father, John. 5.17.
does work hitherto: Thus spiritual creatures are preserved in their
Individuum, and corporeal in their Species, he gives Food, raiment, and other
necessaries unto all, disposes of Times and Seasons, causes his Sun to shine,
sends rain, etc. without which concourse of his, the world would soon come to
an end, and this is a kind of a second Creation. The exercising of a miraculous
Providence, is a kind of work which manifest's Christ to be the true Essential
God, for such things are beyond and above the power of nature, and a property
of the true Lord God of Israel, who only does wondrous things, and this our
Savior did show upon some extraordinary occasions in matters of nature, Psalm.
72.18.
and also of grace: As to the first, when he changed water into wine, rebuked
the wind and the Sea, gave the blind sight, made the lame to walk, Matthew. 9.33.
John. 9.^2.
curing diseases, healing distempers, virtue daily issuing out of him, which
made people wonder and admire, because such things, had never been so seen in
Israel, nor since the world began, and to say that a great Prophet is risen up
among us, and that God has visited his people and the Gospels are filled up
with such miracles which he did in all kinds, and of what nature soever were
their infirmities and diseases he cured them all, and as Peter said, was
approved of God by miracles, Acts. 2.22.
wonders and signs: And in this virtue and power of his own, he gave others
power to do the like: But they whom he gave that power to, exercised it not in
their or any others but in his name, Matthew. 10, 1. Mark. 16.17, 18. Luke. 10.9.
to show how the power of working miracles was only in and from him: in my name
they shall cast out devils, speak with new tongues, etc. And work miracles by
my power and authority.

Thus the seventy disciples being again returned with joy, said, Luke 10.17.
Lord even the devils are subject unto us thorough thy name: Thus Peter having
healed the lame man, said to the people which ran greatly wondering, why look
ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own power or holiness, Acts. 3.12.16.
we had made this man to walk, men being so apt to look upon and fix on second
causes and instruments, he first goes about to remove those thoughts out of
their heads, he directs them to the cause of the miracle, Christ's name
thorough faith in his name has made this man strong, which in the next Chapter
before the high Priest and Council, they solemnly declared, Chap. 4, 10.
be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel that by the name of
Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified; by him does this man stand here
before you whole: And in another place, he said, to a certain man, Aeneas,
Chap. 9.34.
Jesus Christ makes thee whole: Hereby I show Christ to have been the spring
of miracles, which were done in his name, as before he wrought them himself in
his own name, whereby his divinity is evidenced: The disciples could not at all
times work miracles but Christ could, Lord, said the man, if thou will thou
can mare me clean, Matthew. 8, 2. John 5.21.
and he quickneth whom he will; so he answers the man, I will, be thou clean
and immediately he was cleansed: One thing more must be observed upon this, how
Christ did miracles for his own glory, which is not lawful to say of any man,
be^^ase it belongs to God alone, Prove. 16.4.
to make all things for himself: Thus of the Lord Jesus after his first miracle
it is said, John. 2.11.
This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth
his glory: Thus he said himself, that the sickness of Lazarus was yeor the
glory of God, John. 11.4. Chap. 9.3.
that the son of God might be glorified thereby. And so was the man's being
born blind, that the works of God should be made manifest in him; that is, that
in giving him his sight, he might therein be glorified.

As amongst miracles, raising one from the dead, is the most conspicuous, so
therein at several times the Lord Jesus highly manifested his own divine power,
but in none so much as when he raised himself, for when he by himself had
purged our sins, Heb. 1.3. John. 10.18.
he not only rose again from the dead, but also, sat down on the right hand of
the majesty on high. No man, said he, takes away my life from me: but I lay it
down of my self: I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it
again. I see so much of Majesty in those words, and they are spoken with so
much assurance, that therein I perceive the character of his divine Power and
Nature, I join them together, for I take them to be inseparable, here is the
triumph of the Son of God, Colos. 2.14, 15.
when not only, he has blotted out the hand writing of ordinances, that was
against us, and nailed it to his Cross, but also having spoiled principalities
and powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it, for all
his euemies and ours received their mortal wound, and laid dead under his
Cross, the works of the devil, 1 John 3.8. Hos. 13.14. 1 Cor. 15.54, 55, 56,
etc.
that is sin he destroyed, and invisibly Satan was crucified with him, O death
he was thy plagues, O grave he was thy destruction, he conquered them all, and
thereby death which is the last enemy, is by his resurrection, swallowed up in
victory. After his resurrection, Peter asserted it to be impossible, it should
have been otherwise, or that he should be holden of death: Whence Paul exalts
the exceeding greatness of the mighty power of God, Acts. 2.14. Ephesians. 1.19,
20. Romans 1.4:
which was wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, which same
efficacy, is elsewhere attributed to the spirit of holiness, that is, to the
divinity in the Son distinguished from his humanity, all which agrees with
what our Savior had foretold of the temple of his body, John. 2.19.21.
destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up again, understood of
the temple of his body, he rose not to be, but because he was God; thus much as
to matters of Nature.

But Christ does also works of Grace, all understood under the name of
redemption, which has two parts, impetration or purchase and application,
through his active and passive obedience he has fullfilled the Law for us, and
redeemed us from the Wrath of God, and the Curse of the Law, having fully
satisfied his Justice, and reconciled us unto him, he has obtained the pardon
of our sins, by a sufficient atonement he made for the same, through his Death
and sufferings. He by the mouth of the Prophet, shows what he is at the coming
out of his Grave, Victorious, as coming from Bozrah in his glorious and red
apparel, Isa. 63.1, 3.
I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save, I have trodden the wine press
alone, and of the people there was none with me: No Angel or any other Creature
was joined with him in that work, so that with his own arm he has gotten
himself the Victory: As to the applieation of that purchased redemption, it
comes from him in every part thereof, as Vocation, Adoption, Justification,
Sanctification, which contain spiritual life, and every other grace, and at
last Glorification, which in Scripture are all attributed to the Lord Jesus:
all but the last are wrought in us by the ministry of the word, which
ministry himself instituted, Ephesians 4.8, 11.
by sending Ministers he does continue it, and with his blessing does promote,
and according to his promise will do so to the end of the world: Resurrection
from death is followed with eternal life, John. 6.54. 1 John. 5.20.
both attributed to Christ, who is called the true God and eternal life; for
not only he give life, but also he is life, nay, eternal life; for whosoever
has him, is sure of eternal life.

As to the great work of our effectual Calling and Conversion, that we may
answer the call, he first opens our understanding, Luke. 24.45. Acts. 16.14.
as he opened the understanding of his disciples, that they might understand
the Scriptures: After he opens our hearts, as he did the heart of Lydia, that
she attended unto the things which are spoken by his Servants; he also
bestows all other means of grace upon us, Acts. 5.31. Chap. 11.18. 2 Cor.
7.10. Heb. 12.2.
as repentance, for he is a Prince and Savior, to give repentance to Israel,
such as is called repentance unto life, and unto salvation, without which we
cannot be saved: Faith also is his gift so entirely, that he is called the
Author and finisher of our Faith; from him comes the beginning, progress and
perfecting of it, this made his disciples ask him, Lord increase our faith;
Luke 17.5. John. 1.16.
what Love, Charity, Meekness, Humility, Temperance, Sobriety, Goodness, Joy,
Peace, etc. are in us? Of his fullness have we received it all. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Moreover, he is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption: In few words, he is our all in all, Psalm. 87.7. John 15.26.
and in him are all our springs, he gives the Holy Ghost, rules, governs and
preserves his Church: These few things more I must add, how it is clear out of
Scripture, that he is true and eternal God, who is the author of Salvation and
eternal Life, for this the Lord, the King of Israel attributes to himself, to
be his redeemer, ^^a. 44.6, Chap. 45.15.17.21. and 43.^^.
the Savior of Israel, by whom Israel shall be saved with an everlasting
salvation; no God else besides him, a just God and a Savior, all this
undisputably spoken of the true essential God. Now Christ is the King of
Israel, John 1.49. Matthew. 1.21. 1 John 1.7. Heb. 12.24. Chap 9.15, 16. Gal.
3.15.
that saves his people from their sins, and his blood cleanses us from all
sin; he is the mediator of the new Covenant, of the new Testament, being
himself the Testator, which the Apostle denies to be a man's Covenant; these
several places I quoted, to show how under the Old Testament, the true Eternal
God delighted to call himself, the God, the Savior and the Redeemer of his
people, which being one of the works proper to God, and not only being
attributed, but in a special and singular manner, being applied to Christ, who
is no better known by any name, than that of Saviviour of the world, and in
him, Luke 1.4^. Acts 4.12. Res. 1.7.
as in her God and Savior, the spirit of Mary rejoiced, because there is no
salvation in any other; for he is the Lord our God, by whom the Lord does save
us: This I say, to me does evidence how he who under the New Testament is by
his proper name called Savior, or Jesus, must be if not the same person, at
least of the same nature with him who under the Old was pleased at several
times to call himself the Savior and Redeemer of his people.

But now being upon the divine works of grace, proper to the Lord Jesus, I must
not omit one highly considerable, and most singularly proper to God; which is
to forgive sins, which our blessed Lord appropriated unto himself, Luke 7.48.
Mark 2.5.
when he said to the woman, thy sins are forgiven, and to the man sick of the
Palse, Son thy sins be forgiven thee; whereat the Jews were so startled and
offended, as presently to say, Why does this man thus speak blasphemies? who
can forgive sins but God only: In that thing they were in the right, to say
that none but God can forgive sins, but in the other they were in the wrong,
not to believe Christ to be God; if they had, all had been set at rights, and
their prejudice removed, wherefore to convince them, how they were in an error,
and that he had not taken upon him as a man to pardon sins, but as God, he
presently proved his divinity by a miracle, and cured the man; he who of
himself could work a miracle, had certainly power on earth to forgive sins: And
as he is a Prince and Savior, so he has right to give forgiveness of sins,
Acts 5.31.
certainly he declares himself true essential God, when by his authority he
forgives sins, and gives others power in his name to declare the same, as he
did. Now if to what has been said, we add, that he is the resurrection, and
the life, John 20.23. John 11.25. Chap. 5.26. v. 21. Chap. 6.39.40. Phil.
3.20.21.
and that he that believes in him, though he were dead, yet shall he live,
seeing he has life in himself, and quickens whom he will, also all the
Father has given him, and every one that believes in him, he will raise up at
the last day, wherefore our Conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look
for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it
may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, According to the working whereby
he is able to subdue all things unto himself. All these and many more, which
for brevity's sake we omit, are sufficient evidence to convince any in whom the
God of this world has hot blinded their minds, that Christ is the eternal Son
of God, of the same nature; but to unbelievers he says, if you will not
believe me, at least believe me for the works sake, John 5.36.1
for the works I do, bear witness of me, but alas, all men have not faith, for
faith is a gift of God.

CHAP. IX. Worship proper and due to the true God, belongs to Christ.
NOW Christ appropriateth to himself all these and many more works that belong
only to the true God, to the end that all men knowing him to be one with the
Father, may honor the Son even as they honor the Father, whereby he
demonstrates himself to be God, for divine honor belongs to none else, for
thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. We must
love, honor and worship one person of the Godhead as well as the other, as we
love God in the person of the Father, so we must love God in the person of the
Son and of the Holy Ghost, for if any man loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, let
him be an Athema, 1 Cor. 16.22.
Maran-atha: He who loves not the Son loves not the Father, and he who loves
not the Holy Ghost, loves not the Father nor the Son: Here I bring, in point
of worship, the instance of love, because without it no true worship. We ought
not to worship God otherwise than he has declared in his word, he that
woshipeth not God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, does not worship God as he
ought, it is not enough to worship God as God essentially, but also he must be
in the three persons, for all three are the object of worship, or else our
Religion is vain; and we are to look not only to the object, but also to the
order of worship, the Father through the Son, John 16.
and by the Son to go to the Father, and so by the means of the Holy Ghost we
go to both, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, Romans ^.26. 1
Cor. 12.3.
but the spirit helps our infirmities and makes intercession for us. Neither
can one say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. And in giving glory
to God, it is not enough to glorify him, except it be in the three persons,
Father, Son and Holy Ghost: And the consideration of this Mystery of one God in
three persons, which ought to be our guide in worshipping that eternal and
infinite Being, ought to teach us modesty and humility, which is so essential
in our serving God, to adore the incomprehensibility of these high things, the
Majesty of God, and the Mystery of his Son's being made Flesh, and be made
sensible of our weakness, and then endeavor to bring into captivity every
thought to the obedience of Christ: 2 Cor. 10.5.
Here I cannot forbear inserting the words of two eminent Doctors of the
Primitive Church. Ambros. de fid. ad gratian. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Mihi impossible est, says one, generationis scire secretum, men's deficit,
voxsilet, non mea tantum sed and Angelorum licet scire quod natus fit, non
licet discutere quomodo natus sit; illud negare mihi non licet, hoc quaerere
metus. It Is impossible for me to know the secret of that Generation, my
understanding fails me, my mouth is stopped, it is lawful not only for me but
also for Angels to know He is born, but it is not lawful to enquire how he is
born, that I cannot deny, but I am afraid to search into this. The other says,
filium esse a deo patre immortali genitum novi, sed quemadmodum ignoro,
spiritum ex co procedere scio, Chrisost. hom. de incomprehens. dei natura.
sed quemadmodum nescio; I know the Son to be begotten of the immortal Father,
but in what manner I cannot tell, I know the Holy Ghost to proceed from him,
but how, I know not. These being just come into my thoughts, though they
exactly are not belonging to the present part of our discourse, yet being much
to the purpose of the whole, I here have set them down: Indeed in things of
that nature men ought to yield an obedience of Faith, and believe unity of
Nature and Trinity of Persons, for numero deus impare gaudet, so we must
worship one God in three persons.

Our present purpose is to prove Christ to be true Essential Eternal God,
because the same worship due, only to the true Eternal God is rendered unto him,
as anon we shall by the grace of God make it appear: But now somethings must be
premised, which can contribute toward the better understanding of the point;
first Christ's enemies are not agreed in this particular, one Valentinus
Gentilis, by us named in the beginning of this Discourse and some others do
flatly deny Christ this Divine Worship, because they disown him essentially to
be God, and no divine worship is to be rendered to the Creature, which to do is
Idolatry; but Socinus said, he is to be worshipped, but with such restrictions
as such a worship is all most no better than none at all: They would have him
to be worshipped only after his resurrection, and that the resurection was the
standing sign, and true reason why one, whom God raised from the dead should be
worshipped; but if this be true, then the Son of the Widow of Sarepta, of the
Shunamite, 1 Kings 17.22. 2 Kings 4.34. etc. Chap. 13.21.
and of the dead man that having touched the bones of Elisha was revived, under
the Old Testament, and the Son of the Woman of Naim, and the daughter of
Jairus, Lazarus, Dorcas and Eutichus under the New, are to be worshipped
according to this rule of theirs. Wherefore some other cause than this must be
assigned why Christ must be worshipped? they say he ought to be so as he is
Mediator: we own that Christ Mediator is to be worshipped, but that honor
belongs to him in relation to his Deity, for when God brings in the first
born into the world, Heb. 1.6.
he says and let all the Angels of God worship him, he is called first
begotten, not in relation to his humanity, for many were Children of God before
his Birth, but in respect to his eternal generation: He is to be adored by
Angels, though he be not their Mediator; when we adore Christ as Mediator, it is
not in relation to his Office abstracted from his Deity, but as he is true God:
In this sense the Lamb that was slain is worthy to receive (as he did by the
Angels, Rev. 5.12.
the Beasts and the Elders) honor and glory and blessing, because in his
humane nature dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. Colos. 2.9.
The Ark was not worshipped, but God in the Ark, as, not the Bush, but God in
the Bush, not the ground which Moses stood upon, but God in that place
sanctified by his special presence; and so in several other places of the Old
Testament: Indeed Christ is to be worshipped, Phil. 2.7.
though in the form of a Servant, and made a little lower than the Angels,
though not as a Servant, or as lower than the Angels, by which all, God would
have him to be adored for no other cause, but for his divine nature, V. 6.
the form of God, whereby he shall remained equal with the Father in his state
of humiliation: As Angels are commanded to worship Christ, so is the Church,
under the name of his Spouse, Psalm. 45.11.
worship thou him.

As Christ is not God, upon the account of any Office and Dignity, so he is not
to be worshipped by reason of any Office and Dignity, here that which is cause
for one, is cause for the other, no Office can make any one God, who is not so,
so none ought to be adored, but because he is God, that is, of the same nature
and substance, and not by communication of divine Power, Dignity or Office, for
to give the Creature that which is due only to the Creator, is mere Idolatry,
which the Apostle fathereth upon the Galatians, Gal. 4.8.
when ye knew not God, ye did service unto them which by nature are no Gods,
which they might have excused thus: Though we did so to those that were not
such by nature, yet they were Gods by Office, Dignity and Power, but the
Apostle, as I said before, blames them for doing so unto those which by nature
are not Gods: Wherefore religious worship is due only to such as is God by
nature, seeing then divine worship is due to Christ, as by and by I hope to
prove, it implies that Christ is God by his nature; and certainly where the
name of God and Son of God is absolutely attributed as it is to Christ, it
designs Nature more than Office or Dignity, so that the word Lord so often, and
specially in the New Testament attributed unto Christ, signifies in the strict
sense, the infinite and independent Dominion of the Lord Jesus over all, his
being from the Father is by generation, not in relation to his Essence, but to
his person, not absolutely, but relatively as he is Son, and if he be begotten,
it necessarily follows to be of the Essence or Nature of the Father, which also
shows the Eternity of that Generation: These things I here repeat, because when
once that persuasion of Christ's being true Essential God is once settled in our
minds, then without any scruple or difficulty, we may worship him, else men are
at a stand, under fear of worshipping the Creature instead of the Creator, who
is God blessed for ever.

Before we prove that Christ is and ought to be worshipped with a religious
worship, for we speak of no other, we intend to show how the true essential God
is alone to be worshipped, and though to that effect several arguments might be
drawn out of Scripture, we shall in order thereunto examine only two, one is
this, Isa. 42.8.
I am the Lord, that is my name, and my glory will I not give to another. This
is a solemn declaration of the unchangeable God of Truth, who having given that
same glory unto Christ must infallibly conclude Christ to be the same Lord
Jehovah with him, Chap. 48.11.
here the name and the glory of God do signify the same, for sometimes in
Scripture, the Name of God signifies his Nature, when essentially taken, and
the Attributes of the person when personally taken, never to be understood
barely of a name; when we love, fear and serve God, it is not the Letters, or a
sound in the Air, but either the nature or some of the persons of the Trinity.
But the truth of this here asserted, that the name and glory of God signify
the same, Isai. 42.8. compared with Exodus 33.18, 19.
is elsewhere confirmed positively and absolutely, how his glory, God will not
give to another, whosoever he be. But as Socinus does not use to take the words
of God, as, and in the sense he says them, so here he would make God speak
otherwise than he does, for he never wants his limitations, and therewith he
limiteth the holy One the God of Israel: God, says he, does not say, I will
not give my glory to another, that is, dependent upon, and subordinate unto me,
such he makes the Lord Jesus, but to graven Images: But do not Images of God,
of Christ, of Angels, Apostles, depend upon and are subordinate to God as to
the Matter, the form or making of them, the designs of men and all upon the
will of God? Surely they do, for every Creature whatsoever is subordinate to,
and depends upon his Maker, and suppose God would choose one Creature, as may be
an Angel, or any Man or Woman, and heap all the Treasures of his Glory upon
such a one, which he yet declares he will not do, yet according to them he
might do it, and not act against his solemn protestation that he will not do it,
after this no Creature, as a Creature can differ from God, for they make God
say he does not intend to exclude any other wholly dependant upon, and
subordinate to him, as is every Creature whatsoever, thus after this, the
Effect shall be the same with the Cause, because it depends upon it, this new
signification of the word another, deserved well to have been confirmed by some
example: in that other place already mentioned, which confirms this, there is
no mention of Images or any thing else, barely, I will not give my glory unto
another, which leaves no ground to Cavil about Images: Thus they would make the
strength of these words of God to vanish away, and be resolved into this, God
will not give his Glory to Images, but will give it to Angels and Men, even to
Satan and Antichrist the worst of them.

Then by the word to give, they understand only to permit, so if he gives
Money, Bread, Clothes, etc. he only permits, if to the word give, leave had
been joined, they might have pretended to something, though there had been no
sense; thus with their altering the sense of words, they would overthrow the
use of languages, and so coin one of their own, which none but themselves shall
understand, and by those means teach all that went before, to speak; then here
according to their interpretation, contrary to what God declares, he will
permit or give graven Images something of his glory, if they do not believe it
themselves, others who did worship those Images will, for they thought God had
communicated to them something of his glory, or else would not have looked upon
them as worthy to be Religiously worshipped. But to come to the thing, since God
in this place denies the permission for any one to have his glory, much more
does he deny to give it himself to another, and if from the beginning of the
world he has suffered the Devil to usurp Divine Honor to himself, and
several Nations religiously to worship Images, as it is known he has, yet to
neither he gave that glory of his, and out of this appears the true sense of
the Text, that he will, not permit, for he has permitted, but, not give his
glory, which he has never given: V. 6, 7,
But to come to the scope of the place, it is this, God said it, when he spoke
of Christ, as it appears by the two foregoing and following verses, which may
be perused, therein he is spoken of in such a way, and to him are such things
attributed as belong not to one of a different nature, but to him that is one
and the same with him; what is added about graven Images is to condemn
Idolatry, and to take away all manner of excuse from Idolaters, not only in
those times when all Nations were Idolaters and also that abominable sin was
gotten in the Land of Judah, but in relation to other Countries after the
coming in the flesh of the Son of God.

The other Text of Scripture is this, Matthew. 4.10. Deuter. 6.13.
thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: Which our
Savior quoted out of another place, hence the Conclusion for the essential
divinity of Christ is clear, he that is religiously to be worshipped is the true
God, but Christ is religiously to be worshipped, therefore he is the true God,
no command can be more positive, absolute and plain than this, to worship the
Lord thy God, that is, the God of Israel, for the words were directed to
Israel, whom Jews and Socinians do allow to be the only true God, the latter
part of the verse does contain a general Negative, him only shall thou serve,
the word only, gives the exclusion to any thing else or person whatsoever, to
say as they do, to worship and serve him as God of himself, will not serve
their turn, for they say God the Father is only such, but Christ is a made God,
and by Grace, by this God of himself, they mean the first Author of all things,
but did they ever hear of a second Author of all things? Is there a first
Creator and a Second one? Wherefore this restriction is idle and superfluous,
whereby all manner of Idolatry may be excused, for both the Heathens, and the
Jewish Idolaters worshipped many things, which they never took to be the first
Authors and Causes of all, the Devil himself desired not to be worshipped by
Christ as if he had been the Author of all things, for he owned the power and
glory of the Kingdom of the world were delivered unto him. Luke 4.5, 6.
But if the Lord thy God is only to be worshipped and served, and Christ be not
that Lord God, why should he be adored? O! say they, when we adore Christ, we
adore in him the Father that has given him so much glory and power, by the
same reason the Jews might have worshipped Moses, who was so full of glory when
he came down from the Mountain, that they could not behold his face. If they
had a right notion of Christ's person it would be well to say, that he that
honors the Son, does also honor the Father; but according to their impious
opinion they adore a Man of a quite different nature from the Father, the
Father is God by Nature, the Son by Grace; the Father is from Eternity, the Son
only since the fullness of time; one Creator, the other Creature; one the
Highest, the other Subordinate; one God, the other Man, and both to be adored;
such a Son, as does differ from his Father more than any other Son in the world
does from his: whereby they quite overthrow God's nature, and confound the
Creator with the Creature: Let Christ be owned either to be true God, or no God
at all, for there is no middle between these two: We know God made Men, but now
we find, Men, Socinians, as well as Papists, take upon them to make Gods; and
worship them as such, whether Wafer or Metaphorical, it is all one, as long as
they will not own them to be such by nature. To talk of a Secondary and
Subordinate God is a mere contradictio in adjecto, a perfect nonsense; the Jews
would not deny him to be what he was, being convinced by his works, when Christ
comes will he do more miracles than these which this man has done, (...)
7.31. Whence they concluded, This is of a (...) that prophet that should come
into the world, John 6.14. Therefore they would come and take him by force to
make him a King, v. 15. and at another time, They that were in the ship
worshipped him, saying, of a truth thou art the Son of God. Matthew. 14.33. Yet
for all this, they still retained a prejudice, Shall Christ come out of
Galilee: John 7.41. Is not this Jesus the Son of Joseph, whose Father and
Mother we know? chap. 6.42. Is not this the Carpenters Son? is not his Mother
called Mary; and his brethren James and Joses, Simon and Judas? Matthew. 13.55.
Thus Socinians cannot deny him to be God but must have him a made God. Does
this hold any proportion, or is there any reason in the case? To come off with
this, the Heresiarch says, that the commandment of worshipping God alone, does
properly relate to the time under the Old Testament, a wide Door open to let in
Idolatry, 1 John 5.21.
but certainly that precept does oblige Christians, as much as ever it did the
Jews, and I think that of all moral Commandments, none belongs to the times
of the Gospel, more than that of worshipping God alone, and we are as much bound
to avoid all Idolatry as ever they were: They say when this precept was given,
they mean in the time of Moses, then Christ was not, but when it was made use
of by Christ, Christ was, and also endued with Divine Power and Authority,
though they say the contrary, for before he was tempted in the Wilderness, he
had been haptized, and proclaimed from Heaven the Son of God, the Spirit had
descended upon him, and when he returned from Jordan he was full of the Holy
Ghost. Luke 4.1.
He was God worthy of divine worship, when he made use of that Text against the
Tempter. Two frivolous things more they say; first, the word only, is not
joined to worship, but to serve, as if a religious worship was not meant by
this last, as well as by the first; though it had been joined with the former,
they had never wanted a pretense to Cavil; but if in the thing there be any
difference, Acts 10.25, 26.
I think it is more binding with to serve than to worship, for to serve may seem
of a larger extent than to worship. The other Cavil is, we are forbidden to
worship others, that is, say they, after our own Fancy and Pleasure; but Christ
you are commanded to worship, but here is no ground for such an interpretation,
for it is simply said to worship and serve only the Lord thy God, we own that
here not only the thing, but also the manner of it was forbidden, but here is
nothing to show by what authority and name we are to worship others, only the
thing, to do it, is forbidden.

To the proofs I have given to show how God alone is to be worshipped, I now
shall by the grace of God join some examples out of the New Testament, to
confirm it with a demonstration of the practice: The first is that of Peter,
Act. 10.25, 26.
whom Cornelius the Centurion met, and fell down at his feet and worshipped him,
but he, though he had excellent gifts, and great authority by his office, yet
he refused it, and this he gave for a reason, I my self also am a man, that is,
such a thing is not to be offered any man, yet we must not believe Cornelius to
have been so besotted as to have taken him for God, but he thought he might do
so to such an extraordinary man: Chap. 14.13, 14, 1^.
Paul and Barnabas seeing how the people of Lystra would have done Sacrifice,
they presently rent their clothes, running and crying, Sirs, why do you do
these things? Their reason was, we are also men; Rev. 19.10.
hence we conclude how no man ought to be worshipped. Now we shall speak of
Angels John, a person of no mean gifts, fell at the Angels feet, who was a
Minister of God and of Christ, to worship him, surely he took him not to be
God, for he could not but know the contrary, but may be, he thought he might
pay him that respect, but whatsoever he thought, he did amiss, therefore the
Angel highly rejected it, when he said, see thou do it not, Chap. 2^.9.
and gave his reason for it, for I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren,
that have the testimony of Jesus, and not satisfied with this, directed him to
the object of worship and adoration, worship God; and this not only once but
twice, for it happened a second time.

We have demonstrated how the true God is alone to be worshipped, now we must
show how Christ is religiously to be worshipped, and consequently he is the true
God; which last expressions, now when I remember, put me in mind of that
excellent place, wherein he is called the true God, which, but in few words, I
will take notice of, 1 John 5.20.
we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ: this is the true God
and oternal Life: The Relative this, is refered to Jesus Christ, not only as
the nearest, but also as the Subject Orationis, spoken of, besides that with
St. John, it is usual by Eternal Life to signify the Lord Jesus, and here the
true God and Eternal Life are spoken of one and the same Subject: Now when the
Lord is here called true God, it cannot be said metaphorically, or improperly,
but as to his nature, the reason it this, none is ever called, the true God,
specially with the Article, but in relation to his Essence.

Now to prove that the religious worship belonging to the only true God, is
appropriated to christ, we have several places out of Scripture, some do it in
general, and others in the particulars, whereof there are several branclies: Of
the first Order is this, let all the Angels of God worship him, quoted out of
the Psalm: Upon these two unshaken pillars, Heb. 1.6. Psalm. 37.7.
I mean, the testimonies of a Prophet and of an Apostle, stand these two great
Truths, First, how the person whom the Angels here called God's for so the
Apostle does explain the word, are commanded to worship, is the true Essential
God: or, to make use of the name which the Adversaries do commonly bring in,
namely the God of Israel; Secondly, that the person to be worshipped by Angels,
is the Lord Jesus Christ; the first assertion is the Prophet's, the second is
the Apostle's, out of which both we may surely conclude how the Lord Jesus is
the true Essential God of Israel: To examine well this, we shall first begin
with the words of the Original, that is, the Psalm, whence they are drawn, and
afterward the Application made of them in the Gospel.

To remove the weight of this argument which lie's so heavy upon them, and
finding they cannot deny the Application to belong to Christ, the Adversaries
would not have the words to be understood of the true God of Israel; but
certainly they ought to be related to him that is named in the next verse but
one before, namely the Lord of the whole earth, for indeed, in this Psalm
wherein is described the Majesty of God's Kingdom, no other person is spoken
of, but that God whose Kingdom it is. Now that the God of the whole Earth is
Jehovah, the God of Israel, it appears out of Scripture wherein the attribute
of Lord of the whole Earth is given to the true God by nature; amongst others
take these few, Josh 3.11. Zechar. 14, and 6, 5.
Behold the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord of all the earth, passes over
before you into Jordan: And these are the two anointed ones that stand by the
Lord of the whole earth: Again, these are the four spirits of the Heavens,
which go forth from standing before the Lord of all the earth. Micah. 4.12.
The very same expression is found in another Prophet. I will consecrate their
gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth. I
shall add that considerable place where the Prophet for the comfort of the
Gentiles prophesied of what a large extent their Church should be, and speaks
of their deliverance, heaping several glorious titles upon him that was to be
the Author thereof, which no doubt had a relation to the Messiah, who was to
effect it. Among other names therein given, that of God of the whole earth is
one, Isa. 3^.^.
For thy maker is thine husband, the Lord of hosts is his name, and thy
redeemer the holy one of Israel, the God of the whole ^arth shall he be casted,
all these glorious names belong to one and the same: I need not to show that
the Prophecies about the deliverance, and calling of the Gentiles do relate to
Christ, Psalm. 2.8.
who was to have the heathen for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the
earth for his possession. And this Title of Lord of the whole earth, is by the
Psalmist in another place rendered by a great King over all the earth, Psalm.
47.2.7.
and the King of all the earth, all to signify tho same thing and person, the
Kingdom of Christ the Messiah. I think this is enough to prove how the God of
Israel and the Lord of the whole Earth is the same; as Israel made a part of
the Earth, so he that was God of the whole Earth, must need be the God of
Israel; so it is the same in this Text, for no where in Scripture that title is
given to any but the true God: Yet they are so obstinate in their opinions,
that Socinus himself, who though he will not have Christ to be the King of
Israel, yet being forced by the strength of this reason, he seems content that
the Lord Jesus should be here called the Lord of the whole Earth, but if the
argument should lie upon this, he would want no Cavils to elude the force of
it; for that wretch is so damnably bent against the glory and honor of our
Savior, that in whatsoever he writes about him, Acts 8.23.
there appears a gall of bitterness, as well as the bond of iniquity, with a
slight and contempt of his person, the Man, that Man, this Man, Man in every
case, and all this to lose no occasion of robbing him of his Divinity; 2 Kings
49.27. and Isai. 3.28.
this calls to my mind God's words, against Sennacherib, another great
Blasphemer, which by the Lord, might have been applied to Socinus: I know thy
abode, and thy going out and thy coming in, and thy rage against me. And let
all his Sectators remember what the Apostle says, Jud. 14.15.
behold the Lord comes to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that
are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly
committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken
against him, that is Christ, when he comes to judge the world.

Another thing here to be taken notice of, is this, that in verse 5. where the
Lord Jehovah is called the Lord of the whole Earth, it must be spoken of one
and the same person, for if they had been two different, the copulative
particle and, had not been omitted after the words, Psalm. 37.5.
the hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord, there should have been,
and, at the presence of the Lord of the whole Earth, the first words of the
verse, do sufficiently denote the Lord of the whole Earth, to be the God of
Israel, Jehovah named just before, at whose presence only, and of none else,
the hills melted like wax, hereunto answers that place; psalm. 11.7.
tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of
Jacob, whereby the interpretation of this now in hand is confirmed, and the God
of Jacob is put instead of the Lord of the whole earth, in both which places,
the repetition of the word, Presence, is very Emphatical, which joined with
what I observed before, and with the words, the scope and the thing it self do
all together fully show, here is but one person spoken of, which is confirmed
more and more, because in what follows, the Prophet speaks but of one as in the
singular number, verse. 6.7, 8.
as thus the Heavens declare his righteousness, and the people see his glory,
and worship him all ye Gods: Also because of thy judgments, whereby it appears
it is spoken of one and not of two; but rather than to yield, they will sooner
give Christ whom otherwise they would rob of any thing he has but his humane
nature, which they cannot do, because they must have an Historical Faith, or
else may be they would, and reduce him to nothing. I say, they choose rather to
give Christ that title and exclude God Jehovah from being the Lord of the whole
earth, than to own Christ to be Jehovah, so what they do, is not out of
kindness, they only give him that which they think the least, to rob him of
what they account to be the chief, though indeed it be the same. Again, the
words of verse 7. do farther confirm this, Confounded be all they that serve
graven images, that boast themselves of Idols, therefore worship him all ye
Gods. For who is opposed to graven Images and Idols, but he that is by nature
the true God? And who is religiously to be worshipped, but the true God Jehovah?
And who but he who is the God of Gods, is to be adored by all Gods? verse. 9.
This is confirmed out of verse 9. Thou Lord art high above all the earth: thou
art exalted far above all Gods. The first part contained a proper attribute of
the true God, namely, the highest or most high God, for says, David, Psalm.
33.18.
that men may know that thou whose name alone is Jehovah, art the most high
over all the earth. Is not this the same as to be Lord over all the earth? So
that both to be Jehovah and Lord over all the earth are attributed only to one,
and if he be the only most high upon the earth, none but he, is Lord over all
the earth. The latter part of the verse does afford a reason and a very good
one, why all Gods and Angels ought to worship him, because he is for exalted
above all Gods: No less than six times he is in this Psalm called Jehovah,
which cannot well be denied to be the same with God of Israel.

One thing more I shall say as to this Psalm, which with the foregoing and
following, contain an exhortation to all Creatures, with and without life, to
sing and rejoice before the Lord, and why? for he comes, he comes to judge
the earth, he shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his
truth: which none that has any sense can deny to be a Prophecy of Christ's
coming to judge the world, which he speaks of himself: When the Son of man,
shall come in his glory, Matthew. 25.31.
and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his
glory. Then indeed, in that divine and glorious State, being attended and
worshipped by all millions of Angels, he shall reign, fill with joy the hearts
of his people, and perform the other things contained in this Psalm. He that is
to do all this, if we believe the Psalmist, is the Lord Jehovah, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, if we must give faith to the Apostle.

Now we must draw nearer to the words of the Apostle, who is to be believed as
well as the Prophet, preferably to Socinians, who being not able to deny it,
own that Angels ought to worship Christ: One would think they at last would
yield to the Truth, and give glory to God; Phil. 2.7, 8, etc.
but no such thing, for they say, they may worship him as a man, and not upon
the consideration of any divinity in him, only upon the account of his
Humiliation and Obedience unto Death, even the Death of the Cross, upon which
account he was highly exalted. But pray, whence does arise the value and merit
of that Humiliation and Obedience, but from the divinity of the person, which
underwent it: If he had been a mere man, it had been no very great matter, no
more than what many more could have done: A King's only Son, sacrifices himself
for the safety of a whole Kingdom, some among the ordinary people might have
done the like, but that which raises the merit of the thing, is, not his being
a man, for any man else therein is equal with him, but it is the Royal Blood
running in the Veins of the young Prince, which does make the act so
meritorious, and so considerable; so if I may continue a lame comparison, so
defectuous, to represent what I have a mind, the Blood which our Savior shed
upon the Cross does not receive its unexpressible value for coming out of the
Veins of a Man, but because it is the blood of God, wherewith he has purchased
his Church. Acts 20.28.
Neither was the Obedience yielded by our Savior, belonging only to his Humane
Nature, which may be due and necessary from one in nature and quality inferior
to another, but it was also an undue and merely voluntary obedience, which may
be rendered by an Equal, and some times by a Superior, as we read when Joshua
said, Josn. 10.12, 13.
Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valey of Ajalon, so the
Sun stood; he was obeyed, but there is in it more than this, the Sun of himself
could not stand nor alter or stop his Course; a Superior power to do it was
required; and indeed we find that in the beginning of the verse, it is said,
then spook Joshua unto the Lord in the day when, etc. Sun, stand thou still;
so, let it be spoken with that awful reverence and to an infinite Majesty, in
some kind we may see how in this case the Superior was pleased to obey the
Inferior; so we may say, a sort of obedience may belong to Divine Nature, as
when God commanded the World should be created, and it was performed by his
Son; of this nature is Christ's obedience, as spoken of by the Apostle
concerning Christ, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.
who being in the form of God thought it not robbery to be equal with God, he
humbled himself. This was a voluntary obedience, for he was not humbled, but
humbled himself, he was not made, but made himself of no reputation, thus the
obedience is valued according to the dignity of the person which obeys: To be
in the form of God is to be God, for, forma dat esse rei, the form is the
nature of the thing, and makes it to be what it is.

But what this man granted before, he is now willing to take away, when he
would have this worship not to be terminated in Christ, but from him to pass
unto God, so this is but a relative worship. Thus Papists say, they worship
images; but they are mistaken, for though God has exalted him, it does not
follow that Adoration should be only Transitory and not fixed; So God has
exalted the Kings of the Earth, but the Civil Worship or respect rendered unto
the King is rendered unto a Man, but not in the capacity of a Man, but is
terminated in him as he is a King, so when Christ Man is adored, he is not so
under the notion of Man, but as he is God of the same nature with the Father,
and that he is in the Father and the Father in him; the Father may well be
worshipped in him and he in the Father, but making them, as they do, to be of
different natures, I see no cause why they may not be worshipped asunder one
from another, which yet does but rend and divide the object of our worship,
with this new, as they call it, way of worship to adore God in a Man. But they
must say what they understand by him, for both the Prophet and the Apostle make
use of the word, Is it one or a different person named by them? if the same,
then Christ is the one God; if not the same, then the Apostle has not well
explained the Prophet: If in the Psalm, Christ be not spoken of, but only the
God of Israel, of a nature altogether different; then in the Epistle the words
are made use of to no purpose, for therein the design is to prove how Christ
must be worshipped by all Angels: Now he does not answer his purpose, when to
prove one who is not the God Israel ought to be adored, he brings a Text which
commands the Angels to adore him only who is the God of Israel, a great
disparagement indeed, not only to the Author of the Epistle, but to the Spirit
of God which directed him; he says, in that worship exhibited unto Christ, the
Lord Jesus represents the person of God the Father, how? as an Actor upon the
Stage does represent a King? After this rate Christ with all the worship given
him, would be (without blasphemy let it be spoken) but a Stage God. If to reign
does signify the Kingdom of Christ, why shall not also the name Jehovah who
reigns, belong to his person? If he has the thing, why should he not have
the name also, Christ's Kingdom is therein described, Jehovah is the King, why
should not Christ be Jehovah? which if he be, it must be properly, for Christ
nor no one else was ever figuratively called Jehovah, and the Kingdom of Christ
under the name of God is described; then if Christ be not God Jehovah, then
it is Jehovah that indeed does represent Christ, so he must be the Type of
Christ, thus they unavoidably run into absurdities; but in very deed Christ
does not act the part of the Father, but his own: He does act the part of three
persons upon the account of his three several offices, of a Prophet, of a
Priest, and of a King, he therein exercises his own office and not that of the
Father, he does what belongs to him and not to others, Joh. 17.10.
and as all things the Father has, are his; so the Kingdom, Throne, Scepter,
Power, Majesty, Ministry and Subjects are all his; if he received the Kingdom
from the Father, he received it as only begotten Son and Heir of all things,
not as of another but as his own, wherefore he does not reign as a Servant or
a Minister of the Farther, so then, when he reigns, he does not represent the
Father's person but his own, not as his Vicar or Lieutenant, but as God equal
with him. The first part of the verse, Matthew. 1.20. Luke 2.9, 13. Matthew. 28.2,
5.
and again when he brings in the first begotten into the world, shows how
at his first coming into the world he was worshipped and served by Angels for
his Conception, Birth and Resurrection were published by Angels, and then it
demonstrates there are two persons, one that brings, the other that is
brought in; the one is the Father, the other the Son; the first commanding the
last to be adored, for he says not worship me, but him: There is an Emphasis
in the word first begotten, simply spoken, to be understood of every Creature;
Col. 1.15.
for it is very just he should be worshipped by Angels as his Creatures; and
indeed in Scripture I cannot find any truth more clearly and fully proved than
this is, he was worshipped not only by Angels but also by Devils, Mark 5.6, 7.
the Legion in the Body of the man possessed.

But as we proved the Lord Jesus ought to be worshipped by Angels, so we now
must show he ought to be by men; and the place is this, That all men should
honor the Son even as they honor the Father, he that honors not the Son,
John 5.23.
honors not the Father that sent him. To understand the place well, we must
go up higher, and take notice how from verse 17. to 23. our Savior speaks of
his equality with the Father (as well understood by the Jews) in his Nature and
Power, with making a parallel between the Father and himself, the more because
he uses not a pronoun relative, but possessive, not the Father, but my Father;
my father works hitherto and I work, not the Father that is a Common Father
as God is to all, but my Father, in a most special and true manner, who has
communicated his nature unto me: Now that equality with the Father, he on
another account does insist upon, but he does not in the least go about to show
that he made not himself equal with the Father, which certainly he would have
done, if it had not been true and only a mistake in them, and thereby he could
have calmed their rage: on the contrary he speaks to confirm this equality of
his with the Father, upon the account of his divine power, manifested in his
works, one whereof upon occasion was the restoring the impotent Man that had
the infirmity for 38 years, to the use of his Limbs and perfect Health, which
none could deny to have been done by a divine Power: Now none but God can have
a power equal with God, for God's power is infinite, but that of any Creature
is finite, and so there is no equality between finite and infinite, this
equality of Power and Working is here clearly demonstrated, For what things
soever the Father does, these also does the Son likewise: That is, the Father
does nothing but what the Son does also; and this he instanceth in the case of
raising the dead, which none but a Divine and Infinite Power can Effect, For as
the Father raises up the dead and quickens them, even so the Son quickens
whom he will: That is, without exception he can do what he will, now it is an
Attribute of God, Psalm. 115.3. and 135.6.
to do what it pleases him in Heaven, in Earth, and in the Sea. Because the
Jews believed not our Savior to be more than a Man, he in the exercise of his
Prophetical Office, went often about, both in his Discourses and Works, to
insinuate into them that he was God, and in this place he presses it much upon
them, both by what I already said, and by what he adds in v. 22. The Father
judges no man: but has committed all judgment unto the Son, and the end which
in so doing, the Father, and he in declaring it, proposed unto themselves, is
this, that all men should honor the Son even as they honor the Father, as the
Son in Nature and Power is equal with the Father, so he ought equally to be
honored or worshipped as the Father is, and this Divine Honor is so equally
due to both, that he which honors not the Son, honors not the Father, for
the Father cannot and will not be honored, that is, worshipped without him, for
honor rendered unto God is the same as religious worship: The Son must be
honored in the same nature, manner and degree as the Father is.

One would think this to be plain and clear enough beyond all exception, yet
they Cavil thus, the word as does not import an equal honor, but only a
likeness, and this they go about to confirm out of two places, the first, is
every man that has this hope in him, 1 John 3.3. 1 Pet. 1.15.
purifieth himself, even as he is pure, the other is, but as he which has
called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation: We answer
first in the Text of Peter, the word as is not sicut, (...), but secundum
(...), it is a Preposition not an Adverb; The word as does not always signify a
similitude, but some times is a Particle of Causality thus in the Gospel (...),
Joh. 1.14
the glory as of the only begotten, That is, because he is the only begotten of
the Father: So in another place, 2 Cor. 3.18.
We all are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the
same spirit of the Lord. Sometimes the word like signifies equality; 2 Pet. 1.1
thus, the like precious faith, not only of similitude, but of the same nature
equally precious.

In the two objected places, and in our Text, there are indeed duties expressed
but different, in that of John here, it is in relation to God, in the others as
to our selves, the first does regard the worship of God, the other holiness in
our selves; in our Text a parity and equality is implied, which is not in the
others, the difference of the sense is grounded upon two things; First, of the
scope of the spirit of God in those places; Secondly, of the Analogy of Faith:
To know the scope of the Text we now are upon, one must go back to verse 18.
the cause of the Jews hatred and seeking to kill our Savior, was because he
made himself equal with God, which he to show they had no cause to take
exceptions against it, as we said before, proves it by an equality of power, in
raising the Dead, and of judging the world. As to this last he goes further,
for he says the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto
him; but what does all this aim at? The scope is, to the end that all men
should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father, God the Father will have
all men to honor his Son, as they honor him, without any difference, because
his Son is equal with him, and this affirmative is strengthened with a negative,
for he that honors not the Son, Josn 14.1.
honors not the Father, so that to honor one is to honor the other, and
one cannot well honor the Father, except he equally honors the Son: this is
the true sense of the place. We ought to honor the Son in the same sense and
manner as we must believe in him, that is, as much and as well as we are to
believe in the Father, that is, to put our whole trust and confidence in the
Son as in the Father, so all the honor both in quantity and quality, which we
render to the Father must be given to the Son.

Now as to the Analogy of Faith, that is, that this sense does not contradict,
but well agree with other Scriptures, it appears out of this: the Great
Commandment and Duty of Man, is, as our Savior says, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God, Matthew. 22.37. Mark 10.27.
with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy mind, and with all
thy strength: None but the true God the God of Israel is so to be loved, obeyed
and honored: And is not our Blessed Savior thus to be beloved and honored?
Love is the true Ground of honor: We ought to love Christ before all things
that are near and dear unto us: Matthew. 10.37, 38, 39.
He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me, and he that
loves son or daughter more than me^ is not worthy of me, he that finds his
life shall lose it, and he that loses his life for my sake shall find it. Luke
14.26.
Nay, If any man come to me and hate not his father and mother, and wife and
children, and brethren yea and his own life, he cannot be my disciple: Is not
this the manner of love which God requires of us, and does not this lay upon
us a duty to love Christ, with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our
mind, and with all our strength, thus this honor is proper for, and ought
equally to be rendered to the Father and to the Son, for all men ought to
honor the Son as they honor the Father: I hope the sense we give the Text is
sufficiently proved, how all men without distinction or exceptionare bound to
honor the Son as they honor the Father, and the manner is by our Savior
prescribed, in spirit and truth. Joh. 4.24.


Now I must show how the Texts they bring against us cannot admit of the sense
which ours does, because it is contrary to the Scope of the Apostles and to the
Analogy of Faith: First, to the scope, for the end of both Apostles, 1 These.
4.7. Luke 1.74, 75. Psalm. 93.5. Heb. 11.6. Heb. 12.14.
is to exhort Christians to study and labor after Purity and Holiness, which
they are called unto: All that are adopted Children ought to walk in holiness,
because holiness becomes the house of God, and as without faith it is impossible
to please God, so without holiness no man shall see the Lord. This great and
necessary duty, I say, the two Apostles in these Texts, do exhort men to strive
and labor after, not as to attain to such a perfection of holiness as is in
God, which is impossible for any Man; for all that we can desire, is that we
may be partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12.10. Mat. 5.48.
and receive some degrees of it. In the same sense is to be understood that
other place, Be ye therefore perfect, as your father which is in heaven is
perfect; a duty we ought to study after, because as much as we can we must be
conformable unto God.

Secondly, Such an interpretation would destroy the Analogy of Faith, as
contrary to the truth set down in other places of Scripture: For though
holiness be a communicable Attribute of God, yet there cannot be so much as
thought to be an equality between Purity and Holiness in God, and those small
portions he is graciously pleased to impart unto us. Holiness is Essentially,
and Originatively in God; nay, Holiness is God infinitely and most simply holy,
and we are naturally unclean, transgressors from the Womb, conceived in Sin,
brought forth in Iniquity, wallowing in our own Blood, till God be pleased to
wash and cleanse us, to derive from himself, and by his holy spirit to work
some small degree of holiness in us; God is most holy, Luke 6.36.
thrice Holy: In the same sense, we are commanded to be merciful, as our Father
also is merciful, that is, as far as God will be pleased to enable us: we ought
to follow and imitate that Pattern, but not pretend or hope to arrive to the
perfection of it, which, in both Mercy and Holiness, were no less than
Blasphemy; wherefore such interpretations God's word does abhor; and in that
place St. John says not, Every man that has this hope has purified in the
Praetertense, but in the Present purifieth himself, to show how he does but aim
at it and by degrees: And St. Peter in the 16. v. explains the sense of the
foregoing verse, because it is written, says he, be ye holy, for I am holy, he
shows no equality or parity of holiness. The word as, which he used before, he
now renders by for, as a motive and a cause, why we ought to be holy? Because
God is holy.

To what I said before, I shall now add at last how the word as does in other
places denote an equality, as the Father knows me, even so know I the Father,
John 10.15.
which in the Greek word is taken for to love; he equally knows and loves the
Father, with an Eternal and perfect Love, as the Father knows and loves him:
The words (...) and (...), when spoken of the Father and the Son, denote an
equality, not a similitude; as the Father has life in himself, so has the Son
life in himself (...) in the Original: Now to understand the foregoing places
of an equality, Chap 5. 26.
is not contrary to other Scriptures, nor to the Analogy of Faith, but does
tend to the glory of both Father and Son; for the rule is most true in the Text
now in question, he that honors not the Son, honors not the Father that
sent him; but he that honors the Son, honors the Father also, which is a
natural inference out of the place. But that people who pretend to honor the
Father, have taken a quite contrary way to do it, which is dishonouring the Son,
Joh. 8.49.
as he said to the Jews, I honor my Father, and ye dishonor me, with robbing
him, if they could, of his divine Nature and Attributes, when it is most true
that he that honors not the Son, Chap. 5.23. Chap. 12. We are baptized in
Christ's name.
honors not the Father, and the Father bears witness from Heaven that he
is glorified in the Son.

Having thus proved in general that divine worship belongs to Christ, we must
now come to the places which demonstrate it in the particulars: As first, we
are baptized in his name: Baptism is a divine ordinance, whereby being admitted
to be members of Christ's mystical body, we take an Oath of Allegiance to him,
whereby we own him to be our God and Redeemer, this is the seal of the
Covenant. Now no Covenant is in force till it be passed the Seal; this Seal in
Baptism is not only instituted by Christ, but also administered in his name and
authority, whereby it does appear that this is his Right, which Right of his,
Matthew. 28.19.
he would make use of when he commanded all Nations to be baptized in his name.
None but God can institute Sacraments, for none but he can bestow the grace
therein represented; none but the Lord of the House has right to make Laws in
his House; now the Church is God's House, and seeing the preaching of the Word,
and administration of both Sacraments therein, is done by Christ's authority
and in his name, he is thereby not only owned, but also worshipped as God and
Lord of it, wherefore the Church is called Christ's own house. Heb. 3.6.
I find indeed there was a subordination between God and Moses, this being but
a Servant, but the same subordination between God and Moses was between the Son
of God and Moses, as is now of all Ministers of the Gospel under Christ, Mal.
3.^.
for he is the Lord of the Temple, who by the Prophet was foretold should come
to his Temple: how the Temple is the place for Adoration, and the Lord of the
Temple is to be adored, and the worship proper for God is due to him. We are
equally baptized in the name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost; for in the words
of the Institution and form of Administration, there is no other difference but
of order, the names are jointly used, without any sign of distinction, as to
Nature or Power, all three are therein called upon, there being in them an
equal Majesty and Authority. I read how in the heavenly Jerusalem, Rev. 21.22.
the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it, yet but one Temple,
as they are but one God.

But that men were in the practice, as by the institution they ought to be,
baptized in the name of Christ, it appears out of what Peter said to the new
Converts, be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, Acts 2.38.
where we see he takes notice only of Jesus Christ, not to exclude either
Father or Holy Ghost, but strongly to insinuate into their minds and hearts,
how Christ was their God, Lord and Savior, which to Preach and persuade was
his great end, and this he would have them to make open profession of in their
being baptized in his name, whereby he shows the necessity and
comprehensiveness of Christ's name used in the administration of that holy
Sacrament, and the end thereof is for the remission of sins, that is to obtain
pardon of sins, yea, and to receive the gift of the holy ghost. So when the
Centurion's family was baptized, Acts 10.43. chap. 19.5. 1 Cor. 1.13.
it is said only they were baptized in the name of the Lord. The name signifies
the authority of the Lord, which in this case Paul was so much concerned for
upon the occasion of the contentions that were among the Corinthians, which
makes him so sharply expostulate with them, were ye baptized in the name of
Paul? This point must needs be one of the highest importance in our Religion,
seeing, he is so earnestly concerned as to say, I thank God I baptized none of
you, etc. and he gives his reason for it, lest any should say, I baptized in my
name. Whence we may conclude that to baptize in the name of Christ is one of
the most fundamental points of Christian Religion, and I think it a rule and
practice highly commendable in those Churches where in baptism, the word name
is prefixed before every one of the three persons thus, I baptize thee in the
name of the Father, in the name of the Son, and in the name of the Holy Ghost,
distinctly pronounced, to prevent the abuse of some wretched Socinians, which
by reason of the affinity which in some Languages, the words name and none or
not, have, do confound them, and to baptize in the name of the Father, not of
the Son, not of the Holy Ghost: Then it is Essential in baptism to have it
administered in the name of the Son, as well as of the Father, wherefore John
who by reason of this office is called Baptist, did it, not in his own name, on
the contrary declared himself but a Minister when he pointed at Christ and
said, I indeed baptize you with water, but he that comes after me and is
mighter than I, he shall baptize you with the holy ghost and with fire; as if
he had said, his Servant can administer only the outward sign, but the thing
and grace signified, he alone can give. Hence I conclude that Christ in our
being baptized in his name, is by us therein worshipped as our God equally with
the Father: Here they make a difficulty, because it is said the Fathers were
baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, but that signifies not to be baptized in the
name and authority of Moses, but to be settled in the faith to be given to Gods
word spoken by the Ministry of Moses, Exodus 14.31. Joh. 5.45, 46.
so they are said to have believed the Lord and his Servant Moses: Thus our
Savior says, Moses in whom ye trust and believe; so they have Moses and the
Prophets, that is, the Law and Doctrine of Moses: When God says a thing, tho
but once, we ought to believe him, as if he had confirmed it many times,
because in some places things are said which seemed to have been left out in
others.

Another particular is, we hope and trust in Christ, Matthew. 12.21. We hope in
Christ. Isa. 11.10. Romans 15.12. Ephs. 1.12, 13. 1 Cor. 15.19.
in his name; and in his name shall the gentiles trust, as it had been
Prophesied of long before, in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which
shall stand for an ensign of the people, to it shall the Gentiles seck, hope
and trust in him for mercy. As it is by St. Paul explained, in him shall the
gentiles trust; among others such were the Ephesians, for says the Apostle to
them, That we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted in
Christ; if we must believe the same Apostle not only in this life, but also in
another to come, we must and do hope in Christ, or else we are of all men most
miserable, that is, we cannot he happy except we hope in Christ, for indeed
that hope is the ground of all our Comforts, and in that hope whereby we
manifest our dependency upon him, we own him to be he from whom we expect all
manner of help and relief in our necessities, for in him are all our Springs,
we hope in him for all, and from him we expect all manner of good, and therein
we worship him as the Author and Fountain of all the good we receive and hope
for: now to trust in him is not only our duty, but also our blessedness and
happiness; Psalm. 2.12.
for blessed are all they that put their trust in him, which is spoken of
Christ the Messiah: Now if he was a mere man, far from being Blessed, they
would be Cursed, for a dreadful Curse is thundered against any that trusts in
man, Thus says the Lord, cursed be the man that trusts in man, Jerem. 17.6.
and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord. These three
several expressions signify the same, and go together, for to depend upon the
Arm of Flesh for Wisdom, Strength and Help, is to must in Man, and whosoever
trusts in Man, his heart departs from the Lord; it is incompatible to trust
in God and in Man, and the heart is not to be divided, one of the two it must
adhere to, for to both it is impossible: Wherefore in this same place, as we
see a Curse against Man-Trusters, so there is a blessing for those who trust in
God; Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is.
Here again we meet with detestable Socinus and his jugglings; God, says, he
proclaims a Curse against Man that trusts in Man, not in every Man, or upon
every account, but against him that trusts in Man not appointed by God to
give help and relief, that is, which is not endued with divine gifts: but if to
be endued with divine gifts, had been a sufficient ground to secure men from
this Curse, then we might have trusted in Moses, Elias, Daniel, etc. persons
endued with divine and extraordinary gifts; but God here makes it a general
rule which admits of no exception, for he simply says in man: it is a most
abominable presumption for a man so often to attempt to make the spirit of God
to speak in his own Language, but suppose there be a man appointed of God to
help, yet we are not to trust in him, for though a man has divine Gifts and
Power, yet cease not to be, but still remains a man, and if God speaks
truth, whoever trusts in man departs from God: though we should happen to
know a man endued with divine power, and appointed of God to the end he should
help us, yet we might not trust in him, which if we do, we become liable
altogether to this Sentence of the Curse of God.

In the third place we do and must believe in him, which not to do is sin, We
believe in Christ. Joh. 16.8, 9. 1 John 3.23. Chap. 5.1, 5, 10.
yet such an one as the Holy Ghost reproves the world for: It is our duty, for
there is a precept for it, and this is his commandment, that we should believe
on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, which is a sign we are born of God, and
whereby we overcome the world, and have the witness in our selves, for this end
God sent him into the world, 1 John 3.16, 17, 18, 36.
that we should believe in him, that we should not be condemned nor perish, but
be saved and have everlasting life, now to believe is to do the work of God,
for this is the work of God that ye believe on him whom he has sent: Chap.
6.29.
all our hope for glory is grounded upon the promise which is not perfectly
made sure to us, till it be sealed; now the Seal is the Holy Spirit of Promise
which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased
possession, but we cannot be sealed in Christ with the spirit till we have
believed, Ephesians. 1.13, 14.
for so says the Apostle, in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed,
etc. after and not before. No man is the true proper object of our faith, for
to believe in one, is to put in him his whole trust and confidence, which we
may not in any mere man whatsoever, so though we believe in Christ, except we
believe him to be God, our faith is vain, and not true. This makes the Apostle
write his Epistles, to whom? and unto you that believe on the name of the Son
of God, Joh. 5 13.
but for what end does he write those things? that ye may believe on the name
of the Son of God, reduplicative, as he is Son of God, true natural Son of God,
by whom all things were created, in him ought our faith to be terminated, for
if he was only a medium and not the Object of it, then we should believe in him
only Ministerially, not Principally, but in Faith there is no subordination,
for it is a Theological Virtue which as it comes only from God, so it has God
alone for its object; it cannot have two such different and infinitely distant
Objects as are the Creator and the Creature: To believe in Christ, was the
chief thing which the Apostles ever exhorted men to do: For indeed it is the
whole end and substance of the Gospel, but not as an imperfect Christ, a mere
man, but as the true Son of God, of the same nature, this thing he always
commanded men to do, namely to believe in him; about the time of his leaving
this world, he charged his Disciples to do it, whereby they should find a
present remedy and comfort to those troubles of heart that might happen to
befall them; this he does with a great Emphasis, he does not barely say,
believe in me, Joh. 17.1.
but he goes higher, to show what manner of Faith they ought to repose in him:
Ye believe in God believe also in me, have in me the same Faith as you have in
God, if here the word God be taken for the person of the Father, the Lord Jesus
makes himself equal with him, seeing he will have us to believe in him no less
than in the Father, if the word God be Essentially taken, then he does affirm
himself to be God while he attributes unto himself the same faith which all
Believers have and repose in God alone, for this fiducial honor God does not
communicate to another; no other reason can be assigned why the Son would have
us to believe in him as in the Father, but because in Nature, Power and Honor
he is equal with the Father, and consequently the primary object of Faith, that
in matter of worship he owned himself such, it does clearly appear in some
instances, the first of the man in the Gospel, whose eyes he had opened, whom
our Savior far from forbidding him to worship him, he encouraged to it, not
under the notion of Son of Man, but of Son of God, for he asked, do thou
believe on the Son of God? Chap. 9.35, 36, 37, 38.
The man answered, who is he, Lord? Christ replied, thou have both seen him,
and it is he that talks with thee, and the man said, Lord, I believe; and he
worshipped him: If he had not been the true Son of ^od by nature, I maintain
this had been Idolatry, which he was no savourer to: The other instance is of
Thomas, who for calling Christ my Lord and my God, in the Sense he did, after
his conviction that he was actually raised from the dead, had spoken blasphemy
in case he had not truly been Lord and God, which far from being reproved for
it, what our Savior after said unto him, and the manner how he said it import
an approbation of what Thomas had said and done, and at another time all the
Disciples together did perform the same, for they came and held him by the
feet, Matthew. 28.9. Luke 24.52. Act. 10.43. Luke 24.47. We pray to Christ.
and worshipped him: In few words, whosoever believes on Christ shall have
remission of his sins, and he commanded his Disciples, that repentance and
remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations.

Now we come to the fourth part of that religious worship which is due and paid
unto him: Namely Prayer, this flows from the foregoing, for every Prayer
should be made in Faith, according to what the Apostle says, Romans 10.10.
how shall they call on him in whom they have not believed. That to call upon
and pray to God is a duty by men to be performed, is expressed in Scripture,
the omission whereof is looked upon as a most heinous sin, deserving the
heaviest judgments, see what character is given of those who neglect it. The
workers of iniquity have not called upon God. Psalm. 53.4.
It Is such a sin as deserves no less than the wrath of God. Pour out thy wrath
upon the Kingdoms that have not called upon thy name. And as for me, Psalm. 79.6.
says David in another place, and all that truly fear God with him, I give my
self unto prayer: Psalm. 109.4.
So that the best commendation under the Old and New Testaments, that can be
given of a man, is what the Lord said to Ananias of Paul, Acts 9.11.
Behold he prays, and how good a success Cornclius his prayers were crowned
withal, the Angel declared it unto him, thy prayers are come up for a memorial
before God. Chap. 10.4.
And it would prove a long work for one to demonstrate the necessity and
excellency of that duty, which, I may say, does in some respect include every
other thing which men owe God, and hence we may conclude what a transcendent
Eminency there is in Christ, no less than his divinity, seeing he is the proper
object of a duty to be rendered to the only true God: Unto the Lord Jesus as
his due, it is ascribed in the two branches thereof, namely Prayer and Praise,
by Prayer we ask of Christ or of God through Christ the things we want, and by
Praise or Thanksgiving we return him thanks for what we received, Call upon me
in time of trouble, Psalm. 50.15.
I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, wherein both parts are
contained, how many Prayers does that chosen Vessel Paul put up to God and to
Christ? and how often in his Epistles does he give thanks.

With us Prayer and Adoration differ not formaly only as to the Manner, Order
and like Circumstances; but are the same in Nature, diversified only according
to occasion; but still remaining the same as to the Essence, Eyes, Hands, and
Hearts, not being lifted up upon any thing under Heaven, where Christ sits
at the right hand of the Father: Socinians do thus distinguish between
Adoration and Invocation, the first signifies only a reverent bowing to any
one, the last includes a religious suing for help, that is to be performed
even by all Angels, as being commanded and necessary; but this only by men
voluntarily, yet lawful and expedient, the ground of the first in Christ, is
Majesty, as Power is of the last: Thus they always clip one thing or other of
his Prerogatives, as if Men and Angels were not equally bound to adore and
worship him, for where we find, let all the Angels of God worship him, there
it is also written, let all men honor the Son even as they honor the Father,
and men are as well commanded to act their part as Angels are to do theirs. The
word (...) in the original, to worship, is in the New Testament no where used,
but for the Religious Worship due to God alone, and when it is mentioned as done
unto any but God, it is remembered as their Idolatry, as Rev. 13.12, 15. or to
forbid it; as chap. 19.10. and 22.9. So the worship which God commanded Angels
to render his Son, is Religious by Virtue of his Authority which alone can make
(...) worship Religious. Christ at his very first coming into the world, and
not only after his Assension, was a fit object of adoration.

Now out of Scripture we prove how Christ was called upon and prayed to, Acts
7.59.
they stoned Stephen, calling upon God and saying, Lord Jesus receive my
spirit. He calls him Lord and God, he was not the only one that called upon
him, though the circumstance of his being a dying, when no help in men, makes
it very considerable: many others called upon him, for this description is made
of Christians and Believers, Acts 9.13.14.
that they called upon him: Thus Ananias, Lord he has authority, Saul, from
the chief Priests to bind all that call on thy name, all that made a profession
of the Gospel. Most of his Epistles Paul begins with wishing Grace, Peace and
Mercy, not only from God the Father, but also from the Lord Jesus Christ, and
often the same Epistles he concludes thus: the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
be with you all, which is nothing else but to call upon him for Favor and
Mercy; for whosoever wishes any one Grace and Peace from Christ, thereby
prays to Christ to bestow grace and favor upon such an one; 2 Cor. 12.8, 9.
and in plain and clear terms he called upon and prayed to Christ; For this
thing I besought the Lord thrice, and he said unto me, my grace is sufficient
for thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness: This is to speak as God
does, not only Paul called upon the Lord Jesus, but says there were some in
every place that call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 Cor. 1.2.
to whom all as to the Church in Corinth he directed his Epistle: And no wonder
if they who are desirous of their spiritual welfare, do call upon the name of
the Lord, for he is so rich unto all that call upon him, that he has entailed
Salvation upon the performance of that duty, which I speak not as of my self,
Romans 10.12, 13. Acts 2.21.
but two Apostles will be bound for it; For whosoever shall call upon the name
of the Lord, shall be saved; says one. And it shall come to pass that
whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, says another:
Joel. 2.32.
and both have a Prophet for security of what they say. Now Prayer is a
religious duty to be directed to none but to God; all this is example: But the
reason is this, he without whom we cannot call upon the Father, must also be
called upon, but the Father we cannot call upon without Christ, John 14.6.
because none can come unto the Father but by him, and he is the way: But here
is a command besides; Chap. 16.24.
hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name, ask and ye shall receive. There is
a place in Scripture where three parts of worship due to Christ, Acts 22.16.
are contained: and now, says Ananias unto Paul, why tarriest thou, be
baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord, in all three
is the name of the Lord, the first and last are plain, but Faith is meant by
washing away sins, which are washed when forgiven, now our sins are forgiven
when we are justified through faith in Christ, Chap. 26.18.
or when we are sanctified by faith that is in him.

Against this it is argued out of the Preface of the Lord's Prayer, our Father,
that there it is spoken of the Father exclusively to the Son: But in that place
as in several others, the word Father is not taken Personally, but Essentially,
exclusively not to Son and Holy Ghost, but to Idols and Creatures; the word
Father is here taken for God, as it is when said, one God and Father of all, and
Abba-Father: Ephesians. 4.6. Romans 8.15.
Also the Father of Spirits: The words our Father are often taken for our God
and Lord: In those places the word Father is said relatively not to the Son,
Heb. 12.9. Matthew. 10.21, 29. Luke 30.32. John 14.13. Chap. 3.13
but to men whose Father God is. The things in the Lord's Prayer asked and
prayed for, are asked of the Son as well as of the Father, as the coming of his
Kingdom, the forgiveness of our Sins, whence says our Lord, Whatsoever ye
shall ask in my name, that I will do: And the words, which are in Heaven, do
belong to the Son as to the Father, and the Holy Ghost too, as appears out of
Psalm. 139.7, 8. and Matthew. 3.16. Nay as we said before, the Son is called the
everlasting Father: And if we consider the Etymology of the word, which in the
Original signifies, to preserve all things, we shall find he is a Father
indeed, by whom all things are upheld and preserved, which the Holy Spirit
within us bears witness unto, when our heart laying under the sense of some
trouble or mercy, does on a sudden by means of an Ejaculatory Prayer, either in
thoughts, words or both, pour it self before him, begging for help or giving
thanks, breaking out upon occasion into these or the like expressions, Lord
Jesus have pity on me, or, Lord Jesus make me thankful.

Thus I, through the grace of God, have under those several heads brought in
proofs for our blessed Lord and Savior's divinity: of many more which
Scripture affords, I shall take notice but of few, wherein he is properly and
truly called God, which to assert is the main drift of the word, as it is the
foundation of the whole Gospel; for it was absolutely necessary he should be
God by nature, or else any man might have preached, taught, prayed, given good
example, and made intercession as well as Christ, and if he came into the world
and dyed only to teach us good doctrine and give us good example, he had done
for us no more than the Apostles and Martyrs, who taught good doctrine and gave
good example, so might as well be called our Mediators and Saviors. If this
had, as they say, been the whole work of the Mediator, our redemption had been
no hard matter to be performed: But I say that his threefold office of
Mediatorship, Prophecy, Kingship, and Priesthood, demonstrate him to be true
Essential God, for none of the three could perfectly have been performed but by
a God himself: As to the Prophetical, to enlighten the understanding, and
effectually to turn the heart; as to the Regal, to defend Believers against the
Power of Satan; and as to the Priestly to obtain forgiveness of Sins, favor of
God and glory, none of these could be obtained, but by him who is infinite as
in Power so in Nature, there is an infinite distance between God who is
infinite and every finite Creature, no proportion between Infinite and Finite.
Scripture owneth nothing but God to be higher than Angels; now Christ is higher
and above all Angels. Besides, that the necessity of satisfaction to be given
to Divine Justice does argue a necessity for Christ to be God, for the
satisfaction could not have been adequate, as it ought to be, except he was
God, and this divinity in him, does prove the plurality of persons in the
Godhead, which is the whole of the difficulty alleged against the most holy
Trinity. Certainly the great design of the Apostles and others, was to preach
Christ to be truly and really God, Son of God whereby their Ministry was
exalted, this was the foundation they were to build upon: Acts 8.37.
The Eunuch must make this Confession, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son
of God, before he could be baptized, so did every one else being converted to
the Faith, this in our Religion is the first thing to be known and preached,
thus Paul, after his Conversion, Chap. 9.20.
the first thing he did, was to preach that Christ is the Son of God, for that
was the great question; the Jews denied him not to be Man, Son of Man, but he
went about to convince them how also he was God, Son of God, and he was by
Nature God, as certainly as by nature he was Man: Wherefore he would raise the
thoughts of the Corinthians from the consideration of Christ's humanity to that
of his Deity, when he says, 2 Cor. 5.16.
though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no
more after the flesh, but according to the spirit, not in the humane but in the
divine nature: according to which he is called by the glorious names of the
holy one, Act. 3.14, 15. 1 Cor. 2.8.
and the just, the prince of life, and the Lord of glory, our Blessed Savior,
who when he was in the world had so often declared himself to be the Son of God
in a proper sense, after his Ascension, when he had a full possession of that
glory, as it were to confirm from Heaven what he had declared upon Earth, in
the Revelation he made to that disciple of his, who does so eminently bear
witness of his divinity, 1 John 4.14, 15.
when he says, we have seen and do testify, that the Father sent the Son to
be the Savior of the world; and whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son
of God, God dwells in him, and he in God, and not otherwise; I say, on that
occasion, the Lord Jesus from Heaven proclaims himself to be Son of God in the
letter to the Angel of the Church in Thiatira, with this glorious description,
Rev. 2.18. compared with chap. 1.14, 15.
These things says the Son of God, who has his eyes like unto a flame of
fire, and his feet like unto fine brass. Tho his enemies would not hear him
upon earth, during the time of his humiliation, when through his Passive
Obedience he was about performing the first part of his Priestly Office, to
satisfy divine Justice, and make expiation for our sins, I think now they
should when he speaks from Heaven whence he exercises his Royal Office: I know
well enough how what I say about his satisfying Divine Justice through his
death, does not affect his enemies, who deny he has given satisfaction for us,
but what can his intercession on in Heaven which is the second part of his
Priesthood be grounded upon, but his own merits, through his Sufferings and
Death, he thereby has paid our Debts, and by virtue of that payment, he asks
we should be released: but that point I intend not to meddle with in this place.

In the New Testament, the name Savior is as proper to him as that of Christ,
as indeed that of Jesus, the same with Savior, was given him by the Angel; and
by St. Paul, the name Savior is often joined with that of God, Tit. 1.3.
according to the commandment of God our Savior, both names belong to one and
the same person, as truly, really, and actually God, as he is Savior, and in
another place all these names God, Savior, and Lord are given to Jesus Christ,
by the commandment of God our Savior, and Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Timothy 1.1.
As he is Jesus Christ, so as certainly he is God, Lord and Savior, not only
his Offices but also his divine Nature is therein contained, and in the same
Chapter he calls him the Blessed God, God Blessed for ever. That Christ is
thereby meant it appears by his saying, the glorious Gospel of the Blessed God.
Now it is in several places called the Gospel of Christ, wherefore in almost
every Epistle of his, he calls himself an Apostle of Jesus Christ, Mark 1.1.
Romans 1.16 1 Cor. 9.12 18. Gal. 1.7. Romans 8.9.
sent by him to preach the Gospel. So elsewhere, he says, if so be that the
spirit of God dwell in you, now if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is
none of his. That which in the beginning of the verse, Paul calls the spirit of
God in the latter end he calls the Spirit of Christ, whereby he makes God and
Christ to be but one and the same person.

Under another Head our Blessed Savior does in many places afford us an
argument for his divinity, consisting in a certain divine manner of speaking
with Authority, not as subordinate or delegate, but original in him as the Head
and Spring, not as by Favor and Courtesy derived upon him, but out of his own
natural Right, which is above what any Man ever did or could pretend to; as
when in his Sermon upon the Mount, he reformeth the abuses crept in against the
Law, wherein he asserteth his Legislative Power at several times, Matthew. 5.20,
22, 28, 32, 34, 39, 44. Chap. 7.29.
but I say unto you: And the people that heard him could take notice how he
taught them as one having authority; and not as the Scribes. And he said unto
his Disciples when he sent them, recive ye the holy ghost, whosesoever sins ye
remit, they are remitted, and whosesoever sins ye retain they are retained, and
to Peter, Feed my Sheep: go and teach all Nations. All these are words of
Command. Further let us observe how no Man's Will is absolutely the rule of
another's: one Man's Will is free and independent from that of another; no Man
is bound absolutely to follow the will of another, because every Man's Will is
fallible, and so may led us into error, but the will of God alone is
infallible, and so alone to be followed; wherefore in our Prayer simply we say,
thy will be done, and when Man's Will is to be obeyed, it is relatively and only
in conformity to that of God. But Christ's Will is the Law, without Dispute or
Exception, thus when he calls those that are heavy laden, Matthew. 11.27, 28.
he positively says, I will give you rest, having in the foregoing verse
affirmed how none knows the Father, but he to whom the Son will reveal him:
Thus when he cured the Leper, he said, I will, be thou clean; so he says, The
Son quickens whom he will, and him that believes on me I will raise up at
the last day. Joh. 6.40, 44.
Herein is his own Power set forth. So it is when speaking with the Samaritan
Woman, that the water he will give shall be in him that receives it a Well of
water springing up into everlasting life: and in that other place, If any man
thirst let him come unto me and drink. He does not say, I will pray the Father,
that he may have everlasting life, or that out of his belly may flow rivers of
living water, but let him come to me, and without going for this farther to
any, he shall certainly drink and be satisfied, for that I will do for him;
this is to speak like Lord, Master and God. But it may be said, Men he may
speak to after that rate, being so graciously exalted above them all: well but
I will go higher and say something more than has been hitherto: when the Lord
Jesus speaks to the Father, Joh. 17.24.
he sometimes says, I will, as in the Prayer which before his leaving the
World in the capacity of Mediator, he puts up to him for the Elect, Father, I
will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am to behold my
glory, thus according to his own will he disposes of Glory: Did any Man merely
such, ever speak to God in that way? Elijah and John Baptist were the two most
fervent Men in spirit that we read of in Scripture, but can we ever find any
thing like this, that ever they did or said? No, none but God the Son can be so
familiar with God the Father, and we must believe that he well knew both God
the Father and himself when he spoke thus, and except he had been sure he
might, he would not have done it; but it had been as a most unsufferable
Presumption, nay Blasphemy in any Man to have said so, we must conclude he was
more than a Man, and that he thus spoke upon another account, even upon the
same he had said before, I and the Father are one, and had made himself equal
with God.

We read how our Savior took on him, Heb. 2.16.
not the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham, the
reduplication, took not, and took denotes the voluntary Act of a person who
made a choice, which he had not been in a capacity to do, except he had
praeexisted before he took the Seed of Abraham, so that before he was made of
the Seed of Abraham, he must need have had another Being, and before he was
made he must really have been God, he could not have been an Angel, because he
took not upon him the nature of Angels. Again, our Savior says, I ascend unto
my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God; why not to our Father,
as he said, when he taught them to pray for themselves? For if they had been
brethren upon the same bottom of Grace, though in different degrees, he would
have spoken of him as of their common Father, but speaking disjunctively and in
different numbers, seeing he said, and did nothing without good cause, there
must be a particular reason for it, which is naturally and easily insinuated to
be this, That God was their Father and His, not upon a common, one and the
same, but upon a much different account their Father by Grace, and his by
Nature. Furthermore, Christ so often speaks of his being sent by the Father,
as I seek not my own will, John 5.3 and 6 38. Chap. 7.16. Mark 9.37.
but the will of him that sent me, I came down from Heaven, not to do mine own
will, but the will of him that sent me; my Doctrine in not mine, but his that
sent me; he that receives me, receives not me, but him that sent me; he that
believes in me, believes not in me, but in him that sent me; all this to
condescend to the Hypotheses of the Jews, and the opinion they had of him;
namely, that he was a mere man, but seeing he was not come of himself, but was
sent by the Father, he thereby would intimate unto them how they ought to look
upon him to be more than a man, since he had a being before he was born amongst
them, and was sent by the Father, whereby they all understood well enough how
he meant, and so called himself the Son of God; This Argument did his Apostles
after his ascension, so strongly and so often prosecute, to prove him to be the
true, proper and natural Son of God: Thus we see that as the first Person the
Father is in relation to the second the Son, called (...), so also the second
Person is called (...), Joh. 5.18. Romans 8.32.
proper or own Son, as the other is proper and own Father: and to show this is
not a Physical, but Superphysical, or Supernatural Generation, not a partial
communication of corporeal Substance, but a spiritual one of an indivisible
Essence, therefore it is called wisdom and understanding, Prove. 8.1. Joh. 1.14.
Col. 1.15. Heb. 1.6.
and the word: So this second Person is called the image of the first, of the
same Essence and Essential perfection; in relation to this eternal generation,
called not only the first born of every Creature, so no Creature himself, but
also absolutely the first born: And he being also called the only begotten, it
shows that to him alone does belong the generation we speak of; he is the
only begotten of the Substance of the Father, and the first begotten, not as if
the Father begat any after, but because he begat none before: He is also called
the Image and the Brightness of his Fathers Glory, because the glory of the
Father is expressed in the Son.

Another weighty Text about this matter is of the same Apostle who says
Looking for that blessed hope and the glorious appearing of the great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ: Tit. 2.13.
Not only God, but the great God, the Infinite Being; that is, of Infinite
Nature and Power, for as life when attributed to God signifies Immortality,
Wealth and Riches all Sufficiency, Age, Eternity, and Strength Omnipotency, so
does greatness Immensity. This Text all Expositors whether Greek or Latin,
Ambrosius excepted did unanimously quote as formal and clear against Arrians.
The word Epiphany or glorious appearing, is in no place of the New Testament
attributed to any but to the Son, and this glory is not in respect of Christ,
for he has it already, but in relation to the manifestation thereof unto us.
These expressions the great God and our Savior is referred not to two persons,
but only to one, as that wherein it is said, Ephesians. 1.3.
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is the idiom of the Greek
Tongue, seeing here is but one article, (...), the great God and Savior, it
does clearly demonstrate it to be spoken only of one person, for both
predicates are referred to the same Subject, as we have it so in other places;
as first, by the commandment of God our Savior and Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy
1.1.
the same person Jesus Christ, is our Lord, Savior and God, who verse 11. is
called the Blessed God, Tim. 1.3. and 3.4.
so he is called God our Savior. Now here the same person is spoken of, as in
these other places, so he that is our Savior the proper title of the Lord
Jesus, is the great God: Besides that as I already observed what is said of his
glorious appearing gives a true Character of his person, for thereby is meant
his coming to judge the world at the last day, and that this glorious appearing
is meant of Jesus Christ, it is clearly demonstrated out of 2 These. 2.8.1 Tim.
6.14. and 2 Timothy 4.1, 8. To what I have said already, how the Apostle by the
great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, speaks only of one person. I shall add,
that this is the style of Scripture in other Texts as well as in this; as for
instance, this, To the acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of the Father,
Celos. 2.2
and of Christ, after their way of interpreting, here the Father is one person,
and God another; so the Father is not God no more than Christ, and the Father
must differ from God as much as Christ does from the Father: So here three
different persons must be asserted Take notice how in this place the copulative
particle and, which they would have to denote different things or persons is
here after the word God, and in the other, after the great God, so that I see
no reason, if in that of Titus the great God and Savior Jesus Christ be
different persons, why in this, God and the Father should not be so too? This
and many other difficulties might easily be removed if men would but give God
glory to the acknowledgment of the truth, how Christ is the great God and
Savior, and the Father is God, which name in this place to the Colos. is taken
essentially, but the persons of Father and Son are named, to the end that the
hearts of Believers might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto
all riches of the full assurance of understanding to the acknowledgment of the
mystery: For all these are the words of the Text, for certainly it is a matter
of unspeakable comfort when we are to come to God, whereof the Father is the
Spring and first Person, to hear Christ the Mediator named, thorough whom in
our approaches to the Throne of Grace we hope to obtain Mercy and find Grace to
help in time of need.

These deduced out of Scriptures and the reasons thereupon grounded, to avoid
Prolixity I have only pointed at, though they might admit of great
enlargements: Some thing more there is remaining, which must not be omitted, as
being very material, I mean the Texts wherein our Savior speaks of his coming
down from and going up again to Heaven; whereupon we must observe how the
coming or sending of God's own Son, does not signify any local motion from
Heaven to Earth, but a manifestation of him in the flesh: God sent his own Son
out of his Bosom, without our Counsel, we desired it not, we inquired not after
it, much less deserved it.

I must not omit to take notice of a false inference they make out of the Text
quoted just before, wherein our Savior is called the first born of every
Creature, whence they would conclude him to be a Creature when the true
inference is this, that he was born before any thing was created, seeing he was
the Creator of all, which is the reason given in the next verse, why he calls
him the first born of every Creature: For by him were all things created that
are in heaven and that are in carth. And which is more, at the later end of the
verse, all things were created by him, and for him. He created all things for
himself, which may not be said of any Creature, for if he were a Creature, he
had been before himself: And if we desire a farther explanation we have it in
the following verse, heb. 1.2.6.
and he is before all things. And if we compare this place with another, we
shall find a sweet harmony, in both, he is called God's Son, Col. 1.13.
yea his dear Son in the first, in both Creator or maker of the World, says
the last, by whom also God made the worlds. As to Creation so as to
preservation, for one says, by him all things consist; and the other, by him
all things are upheld, and the phrase in the Colossians, the first born of
every Creature, is in the Epistle to the Heb. interpreted by this, appointed
heir of all things, That is, to be Lord of every Creature or whole Creation;
the first born is the Heir and Lord: The Elder Brother or First Born is loco
parentis, Heb. 12.13.
as a Father, and so in the same Epistle, behold I and the children which God
has given me: Now the reason is clear, and the consequence obvious, Christ is
before all things, because all things were created by him, upon which account
he calls himself the beginning of the Creation of God, That is the efficient
cause, which expressions are both joined together, as being of the same
importance, the beginning and first born from the dead; Rev. 3.14 Col. 1.13.
that is the efficient cause of the Resurection from the Dead: These two places
out of Colos. and Heb. ought to be looked upon as parallel one with another. Now
by the Son of Gods or the word's making the worlds, we have an eminent
Testimony of his Eternal Godhead and Power, for says the Apostle, he that made
all things is God. Heb. 3.4.
So since all things were made by the Son, he must be God: Here I must take
notice of their cavil against the place, where it is said God made the world by
his Son, they would have (...), by whom, to be taken for (...), for whom, as if
God had made them for his Son, for his sake, which is a downright corruption
of the Text, (...) is not with an accusative, to signify propter, but in the
Genitive, which never denotes a final but always an efficient cause: In the
New Testament (...) by, is used about 600 times with a Genitive Cafe, and in no
one may be rendered propter, for, and so cannot be here; and suppose it could,
yet it would be against the constant use of the word, for which some particular
reason ought to be given why such a sense should be admitted, for which there
is none in this place; it also must be taken notice of, how the case is not the
same, where Things as where Persons are spoken of.

What now I am by the grace of God entering upon, is to show how our Blessed
Savior had a real being, before he was conceived in the Womb of the Virgin,
and my reasons shall be drawn out of the 6. chap. of St. John's Gospel, where
the matter conducing to our purpose, is spoken of at large, ^^r Christ does in
several places thereof, speak of his being come from Heaven, and shall begin
with the last verse, wherein he discourses upon the point, because it will by
degrees lead us back to the rest, Joh. 6.6.
What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? which
words he spoke of himself, to remove the offense which what he said about the
eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood had given many of his disciples,
for he says, his words are not literally or corporally but spiritually to be
understood, for he was to leave the Earth, and go up into Heaven where he was
before, out of which words we may easily conclude how Christ was in Heaven
before he was upon earth, this seems to be clear.

But however they will not agree to it, Verse. 32.33, 38, 50.51. Ver. 41.42.
first they cavil about the place, saying that by where he was before, Heaven
is not meant, when in this very chapter no less than five times, he says he
came down from Heaven, which the Jews took special notice of and murmured at:
which truth our Savior had before declared to Nicodemns, and No man has
ascended up to Heaven but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of Man,
Joh. 3.13.
which is in Heaven; so that although in this verse, the word Heaven be not
named, yet is so plainly described, that there is not the least ground left for
any one to doubt of it, either for his Disciples or others, for what need of
his naming again, that which he named so many times before. There is a Text
parallel with this, Joh. 16.28.
which does explain it. I came forth from the father, and am come into the
world; again I leave the world and go to the Father. To say he shall ascend up
where he was before, and to return to the place whence he came, is it not the
same? and had he not declared at several times that his Father is in Heaven?
And if any doubt should remain, it is wholly cleared by the execution, and when
the thing was fulfilled at his ascension, for, while they beheld, he was taken
up, Acts 1.9.
and a cloud received him out of their sight.

But this not serving their turn, but by these Texts being pincht to the quick,
to hold out they take another way, which is figuratively to explain the words
where he was before, and wrest their proper signification into a Metaphor, that
is, Christ in his mind and thoughts conversed in Heaven, being taken up in
Meditation with those heavenly mysteries that are there; which were so present
unto him, that although he was upon Earth, yet he might be said to be in
Heaven; this indeed is a way of perverting the sense of Scriptures, but not a
fair one: But if so, our Savior would have spoken in the present is, and not
in time past was, for as they say, he continually was taken up with such
thoughts; if continually, then not discontinued when at that time he discoursed
with them: But the word before, does import a relative opposition between the
time wherein our Savior was in Heaven, and that when he spoke upon Earth,
besides that actually and really he was upon Earth when they make him to have
been in Heaven, merely in Thoughts and Meditation, which holds no proportion
between his being in Heaven and upon Earth, so then Christ was really in
Heaven, before he came down upon Earth; and as he really and actually ascended
up into it, so he really and actually descended from thence upon Earth, here
are two terms a quo and ad quem, as he could not go up to Heaven but from the
Earth, so he could not come down upon the Earth but from Heaven: and is there
the least ground in the whole Chapter to think Christ's intention was to
entertain them with his having been in Heaven in Idea and Meditation? when his
design was to show, how, what he had said of being the Author of Resurrection
and Life, and the manner of it by means of eating his flesh was a thing not to
give them offense, nor impossible: Considering what he was, originally from
Heaven, therefore not to be considered as a mere man, but such a one as was far
more divine and powerful than any man.

They finding this will not do, yet to dispute the ground as long as they can,
they forged in a Dream, for otherwise it cannot be, a very strange adventure;
that Christ was in Heaven before he was upon Earth, seems undeniable;
therefore because they dare not give him the lie, they would mince the matter
thus; how Christ between his Birth and Death, and before he preached went up
into Heaven, where for a while he remained to be better instructed by the
Father, in the things which he was to teach mankind, after which he came down
again; but there is not the least ground but only fancy for it: The Evangelists
do give us an account of most passages of Christ's Life, and how could they all
four have forgotten this which is one of the most important that might have
befallen him in that kind. The Evangelists Matthew and Luke, in their four
first Chapters, relate many things belonging to that time, as not only his
birth, but also his Circumcision on the eighth day, and his being carried to
the Temple to be presented to the Lord, received by Simeon, spoken of by Anna a
Prophetess, adored by the Wise Men, carried into Egypt, his return to Nazareth,
his being found in the Temple sitting in the midst of the Doctors, asking them
questions; his being subject to Joseph and Mary; baptized of John; tempted in
the Wilderness, etc. and not one word about this pretended ascension. How came
it that he was not missed by any? This they would to have been in imitation of
Moses, whom God called up to the Mount: That it was so with Moses, we read in
the word, but nothing like it of our Savior: And when God is silent our mouth
should be stopped, and nothing allowed to fancy or imagination: besides when
Moses was called up, the people had public notice given them of it, and by
God's command, he took Aaron's Sons and Seventy of the Elders, all the people
saw the glory of God upon the Mount; and when Moses came back, all Israel saw
him with his face shining, none of which things can be said of this pretended
Ascension of christ's, whereof there are no witnesses, not so much as any of
his Disciples, as he had in his Trassiguration, which three Evangelists give an
exact account of. Which though important, yet not so considerable as this which
could not be performed without a great Miracle whether he had been carried up
only in Soul, for then his Soul had been separated from the Body, so death must
have followed, or whether in Body and Soul, the Body could not have been
sustained in the Air without a Miracle: And during that time, where were his
Disciples? This certainly should have made a great Gap in the History of his
Life; which we cannot perceive in any of the Evangelists, no, nor in those that
have written his Life, from his Birth to his Death, Resurrection, and
Ascension. St. Luke says of the Gospel he had written, how he had made a
Treatise of all that Jesus begun both to do and to teach: Yet not a word of
this, Acts 1.1.
as indeed there was no necessity for Christ to go up to Know, as they say, his
Father's Will, which might have been communicated unto him, as to Moses, John
Baptist, without going up to Heaven, in case he had not known it; but he knew
it before: At his Baptism the Heavens were opened unto him; the Father had
highly owned him; the Holy Ghost was descended upon him, so that he returned
from, Jordan full of the Holy Ghost; Luke 4.1.
wherefore there was no need of his going, and so the Cause ceasing, so must
the Effect; so that also it had been preposterous, after what happened in his
Baptism, for him to have gone up into Heaven upon such an Errand: Besides that,
we are assured he entered but once into the holy place, Heb. 9.12.
Hereby we see how, if we were willing to take it, that sort of Men would be
ready to put upon us every Suggestion of theirs for an Argument, every Argument
for a Law, yea, and every Dream for a Revelation. Though our Savior here calls
himself Son of Man, and not Son of God, it does not in the least prejudice what
we say; for if he had called himself Son of God, it had been a begging of the
Question, for they would not own him to be such: And this shows the better
the Oneness of the Person, when there is a Communication of the Idioms, when in
the Person, that which is proper to one Nature is spoken of the other. Christ,
according to the Flesh, was never in Heaven before his Ascension, but according
to the Spirit, that is his Divine Nature, he was. Here our blessed Savior
calling himself Son of Man, may allude to, with intent to make Men take notice
of what is spoken of himself by the Prophet; Dan. 7.13, 14.
I saw in the night Visions; and behold, one like the Son of Man came with the
Clouds of Heaven, and came to the ancient of days, and they brought him near
before him. And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that
all people, nations, and languages should serve him: his dominion is an
everlasting dominion, etc. This is an exact Prophecy of his Ascension.

One thing more they have to say, and it is the Example of Paul's having been
caught up to the third Heaven; but must it, from what has happened to Paul, 2
Cor. 12.2.
follow, that the same must needs have befaln the Lord Jesus? That indeed we
read of Paul, therefore we ought to believe; but of Christ we read no such
thing: Yet for all that we never read that either Paul was from Heaven, or came
down, as we read it of Christ very often. Paul speaks of that with the greatest
modesty in the World, for fear he should seem to exalt himself; but our Lord,
without any ambiguity or fear that Men would think, he takes too much upon
himself, does speak loud, highly declares and often proclaims himself to be the
Son of God, equal with him, sent by the Father, descended from Heaven, where he
is again to return, etc. This he owned openly, and when he had said to the man
sick of the Palsy, Thy sins are forgiven thee, some of the Scribes having,
said within themselves, This man blasphemeth. Christ called evil these Thoughts
of theirs; Mat. 9.4.
Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts?

Another place in this same Chapter already mentioned, Joh. 6.38.
and to our purpose, is this: I came down from Heaven not to do mine own will,
but the will of him that sent me. The words, taken in their natural
signification, are plain enough, and admit of no difficulty. Christ speaks of
himself; what Heaven is we know it is as his natural place, whence he came down
into a state of Humiliation, in taking upon him our human Nature; the End of
his coming down was to do his Father's Will, not his; though we must not think
that when he did his Father's Will, he acted any thing against his own, for
whatsoever he did and suffered was voluntarily, as he had said long before by
the Prophet, I delight to do thy will: Psalm. 40.5, 6, 7.
Sacrifice and Offering thou did not desire. Then said I, Lo, I come. And
when the Will of his Father was executed, and the Work he gave him to do
finished, he went back, if we may so say, home again, into Heaven. The
Difficulty then lies not in the words, but about the sense: Christ, who spoke
the words, is true; though every sense that is attempted to be given to the words
be not true, yet a true sense there is. He makes mention of his Person, and of
his Flesh; his Person is that which came down from Heaven; his Flesh is that
which was formed in the Virgins Womb, that indeed did not come from Heaven;
however he speaks of his Flesh and Blood to intimate his Death, and that Life
which he promises to those that eat his Flesh: He procures it in two ways, by
Merit or Impetration, and by Efficacy or Application: The Merit by his Death
consists in the Dignity of the Person which suffered it; the Application and
Efficacy, in the Spirit which is in the Person. By the Opposition he makes
between himself and the Manna, he sufficiently declares, that he really came
down from Heaven.

The Adversaries would have the coming down from Heaven to signify no more
than to proceed from God, which to confirm they make use of some Texts, as when
our Savior asked the Chief Priests, whence was the Baptism of John, Matthew.
21.25.
was it from Heaven, or of Men? Thus every good and perfect Gift is said to be
from above, and to come down from the Father of light. Again, This Wisdom
descends not from above. Thus John says, Jam. 1.17. and 3.15. Rev. 21.2.
he saw the new Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven: But none of these
places is to the purpose, for they are about Things, and the Question is about
Persons: Scripture makes no dissiculty to say, that Things whereof God is
immediate Author come down from Heaven, there being no danger to say so, but it
never says it of Persons. In the Word of God, none besides Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and Angels, none, though never created or born, in so eminent a
manner, is said to be come down from Heaven; neither Adam, nor Eve, nor Isaac
the Son of a Special promise, and whose Birth, considering the age of Abraham
and of sarah, was very extraordinary. But that Christ came down from Heaven in
a manner different from what is expressed in those places, it appears out of
the fore-quoted place, What and if ye shall see the Son ascend up where he was
before? whereby is implied, that he was in Heaven before he came down from it;
which he confirms in that other place, No Man has ascended up to Heaven but
he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of Man, which is in Heaven; whereof
the sense is made known by the design of Christ, who speaking to Nicodemus
about being born again and Regeneration, says, If I have told you earthly
things, and of such as are done in earth, which by your own experience you may
see and know, yet ye believe me not, how shall ye believe if I tell you of
heavenly things, that is, such as are or be done in Heaven, which ye neither
can know of your selves nor by any one else? but by me, for I have been in
Heaven, and none else? Besides that, if what the Adversaries say in their sense
were true, it would follow, that Christ is said to be come down from Heaven
either in relation to his Person or to his Office. As to the first, it cannot
well be said, I mean as to his miraculous Conception, or else the same might
have been said of John Baptist, who only by a Divine Power was born of an old
and barren Mother, an Angel having foretold his Birth, and given his Name
beforehand; yet he, far from saying he came or descended from Heaven, speaks
quite the contrary of himself, when he affirms this of Christ, John 3.31.
He that comes from above is above all: he that is of the earth is tarthly,
and speaks of the earth; he that comes from Heaven is above all. And
further; Christ may not be said to be come down from I seven upon the account
of his miraculous Conception; no, neither by reason of his being born without
the help of Man; for this may also be said of Adam, born not only without the
help of Man, but of Woman also, yet for all that, he is never said to be come
down from Heaven, on the contrary he is said to be of the Earth, in opposition
to Christ; 1 Cor. 15.47.
The first man is of the earth, ca^thy; the second man is the Lord, from
Heaven. As to the Office of Christ, it is certainly from Heaven in that sense,
but it follows not that because the Office is, the Person must be so; for
neither (...), whose Baptism was from Heaven, nor none of the Prophets or
Apostles, were ever said to be descended from Heaven. Now; according to this
Opinion of theirs, Christ would have had no Advantage over the Manna, which was
every day miraculously created and rained upon the People; yet our Savior
takes this Preference over the Manna, John 4.31, 33.
that he was come down from Heaven, the Manna not so. Why does our Lord deny
that Manna was come down from Heaven, but that himself was the Bread of God,
which came down from Heaven?

Our Lord's words, I came down from Heaven to do the will of him that sent me,
do certainly contain more than barely, I am created by the wonderful Counsel
and Power of God; herein he speaks as would an Ambassador sent by his Prince,
wherefore the words imply, first, that Christ was in Heaven; 2dly. That he was
sent from thence; 3dly, To do the Will and perform the Work of him that sent
him. And if it had not been in this sense, the Jews would not have murmured as
they did; as indeed there had been no cause for it: And we do not in the least
perceive he goes about to show they were mistaken to give his words such as
sense, but on the contrary he goes on to confirm what he had said, according
to the sense they gave it, and that without any ambiguity, but plainly and
downright, though he knew he thereby did run into a great danger, Matthew. 13.55,
56, and John 6.42.
for the Jews did not know how to reconcile what they knew of him: Is not this
the Carpenter's Son? Is not his Mother called Mary, and his Brothers, James,
and Joses, and Simon, and Judas? and his Sisters, are they not all with us? How
then can he say I am descended from Heaven? To have his Extraction from thence,
and be equal with God, this made them look upon him as a Blasphemer, who,
according to their Laws, was to be stoned: They allowed him to be a very
extraordinary man, who had done such things as had never been done before among
them; but to hear him say he was come down from Heaven, as his natural place,
that they could not endure: Yet we must take it to be true, since neither he
nor the Evangelist ever denied it.

They were so pleased with the Miracle of the five Barley Loaves and two small
Fishes, that they would have taken him by force, and made him a King; and after
he was gone, they could not be at rest till they again had found him out, and
then he said, they followed him only out of love to their Belly, because they
had eaten and were filled; whereupon out of his earnest desire for their good,
he takes occasion to exhort them, to mind not that Meat that perishes, but
that which endures unto everlasting life, which the Son of man, said he, shall
give unto you: And then he presses the Argument, and shows how he, and none
else can give it; and in order to it, declares first who he is, namely, the Son
of God, whom he calls his Father four times, then adds, V. 40.44, 45, 45.
he is from God, afterward he attributes unto himself a quickening Power, and
to give everlasting Life, for he does not say, he that believes in God, but on
me; neither does he say God. V. 47.
but I will raise him up at the last day. Could the Father have more highly and
stately spoken of himself, V. 40.
or assumed a greater Power than he does? whereby we see, this he says to draw
Men, not to the Father, but to himself, as the Spring of Eternal Life, whereby
he insinuates himself to be such a one as is far more potent and excellent than
Man, upon which account he is truly and properly said to be come down from
Heaven, or else he had not answered the Jews Objection to the purpose: Which
it is very unworthy for any one to say.

This matter we shall conclude with one Argument more out of these words: I
came forth from the Father, and am come into the world: John 16.28.
again I leave the world, and go to the Father. Where is the Father? In Heaven.
Where is the World? On Earth. So then Christ was with the Father in Heaven
before he was in the World on Earth. This last Text I join with the two
foregoing, being to the same purpose, because a threefold Knot is not easily
untied. The words are so clear, V. 29.
that thereupon his Disciples said, Lo, now speak thou plainly. It Is to be
wished every one was of their opinion, as there is cause for it: V. 30.
By this we believe (said they) that thou came forth from God. This they said
themselves, and the Lord says so of them, They have known surely that I came
out from thee, and that thou did send me: But neither Socinus, nor none of
his Kidney, can say and prove that they believed not there was a Divine Nature
in Christ: They explain the words, I came forth from the Father, only to
signify that Christ was a Man sent from God upon some special Errand, just as
he sent his Disciples into the World, 1 John 4.1
or as false Prophets are said to be gone into the world. We know the Faith of
his Apostles was weak, but true, and was increased by degrees; they sometimes
doubted of things, as may be Christ's Resurrection, but this does not argue
that there was no Faith in them, for there was, though staggering and imperfect,
which our Savior strengthened and themselves were sensible of, when they said
unto him, Lord, increase our Faith; which we read so actually effected in
Thomas, who more than any one else doubted of this Resurrection, that at last
he gave an authentic Testimony of his Faith concerning it when he called him,
my Lord, and my God; and before that time, Peter, in their name, had given
eminent evidence of their Faith about him, when he said, John 6.68, 69.
Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hest the words of eternal life: and we believe
and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God. After so
solemn a Declaration, how dare any man say his Disciples did not believe any
thing of Divine Nature in him? As to his Disciples, he sent them into the
World, but he dwelt upon Earth, but his Father sent him upon Earth when himself
was in Heaven: And this we may say, that as the Disciples were with Christ
before he sent them, so he was with the Father before he sent him. As to the
false Prophets, they were gone out into the World, but whence? Out of the
Charch; John 2.15.
of whom it is said before, They went out from us, but they were not of us.

One thing more I shall observe upon this Text, that if Christ really ascended
up into Heaven, as he did unquestionably after his Resurrection, so he really
descended from thence before his Incarnation; and if he descended, then he was
before he descended; this, as said just before, his Disciples believed
literally, not in a Metaphor or Figure; and that they well understood his
meaning, our Savior confirms, when he says, v. 31, Do ye now believe, and
what? That I came from the Father, and must return to him; and that I know all
thing, which none but God can. Here I must give a general and necessary Warning
against Socinian far-fetched, and false glosses. Indeed, if admittance be given
to all their Allegories, there can be no room left for literal and proper
sense: So the deliverance out of Egypt, possession of Canaan, carrying into
Captivity, shall not be Matters of Fact, and we may doubt whether there was
ever a Noah, a Flood, or an Ark, such men as Aaron, Moses, Joshua, for it is
possible to turn all these into Allegories. We know in Scripture there are
some, but to turn every thing into it is a great Abuse: When a Text expresses
plainly a literal sense, we must not trouble our heads to screw it up into an
Allegory; nor when the Discourse is doctrinal, and the words in it usual,
proper, and suited to the things intended to be expressed, this indeed is what
Peter calls a resting the Scriptures to their own destruction.

The later part of the Verse does explain the first, for the words signify
Christ's Ascension into Heaven; they were spoken upon the occasion of Christ's
instructing, encouraging, and disposing his Disciples to that Separation which
was suddenly to happen by his Death; after which, though he showed himself alive
by many infallible Proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the
things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, yet he conversed not with them in the
same manner as before his Passion. Acts 1.2
Now this occasion which they were spoken upon, shows how he discoursed about
leaving the World, going to his Father, and ascending into Heaven, which reaily
and visibly happened forty days after his Resurrection. By these Expressions,
which were familiar with him, of going up or ascending to the Father, he
signified the same thing; and though the Father does fill up Heaven, which is his
Throne, and Earth his Footstool, yet in Scripture he is said to sit and dwell
in Heaven, as in his home; Joh. 14.2.
wherefore our Savior calls Heaven his Father's House. Now, as this later part
of the verse signifies Christ's Ascension from the Earth to the Father, so the
first signifies his coming down from Heaven upon Earth. Again, the Opposition
which is seen between both parts, as, I came forth from the Father, with, and
go to the Father; and, I am come into the World, with, again I leave the World;
do show, that if to come from the Father does denote to be sent from Heaven to
Earth by the Father; so to go to the Father signifies the contrary to that,
namely, to go from Earth up to Heaven to the Father. Christ leaving the World,
is gone to the Father; and going to the Father, he has left the World:
wherefore to go to the Father, and leave the World, are the same. So likewise,
Christ coming forth from the Father, came into the World, and coming into the
World, he came forth from the Father: And these two kinds of Expressions
signify the same thing; Chap. 13.3.
and as he was come from God, so he went to God.

This coming from the Father, and coming into the World, do imply, first, a
sending, as the Lord declares it; John 8.42.
I proceeded forth, and came from God: neither came I of my self, but he sent
me. And then something posterior to the Mission, and as it were belonging to
the execution thereof, for if one should ask, Wherefore came Christ into the
World? it would be well answered to say, Because the Father sent him: So that
he who is sent, must come from him that sent him, to the place whereunto he is
sent. Then the words, I came from the Father, must be understood of the
execution of the sending, rather than the sending itself. It is a wrong sense
given, as to apply them to a divine production; I came from the Father, that
is, I am miraculously produced by the Father: This Exposition does confound
things that are different, for none can be sent before he has a Being, but
that is produced which has no Being; Production is before Sending: Thus the
words must signify, that Christ returned to the place whence he came, and
ascended into that whence he descended before. This he went about to inculcate
into the Mind of the Jews, in the opposition he makes of his Origin with
theirs; Ye are from benedth, V. 23.
I am from above: ye are of this world, I am not of this world, but from the
Father, not from Earth, but from Heaven: He was not in the World by a natural
necessity, but voluntarily, and by a determined counsel, he came into it as
Ambassador from his Father, to reveal unto Men the Doctrine and Means of
Salvation, and for Judgment; Chap. 9.39.
For judgment am I come into this world; and all the while he was here, even
very betimes, he minded what he came about: Unto his Mother, after she found
him in the Temple, and asking him, Why have thou thus dealt with us? he
answered, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my
Father's business? Luke 2.48, 49.
So that he continued upon Earth till that was over, before which time he would
not go back; John 17.4.
but before his departure he declared, I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do; whereupon he returned back to his Father, from whom he was
come before, leaving Earth, a place so disproportionate and inferior to
Heaven, whence he had his extraction, and consequently unworthy to contain him
any longer: This Reason he gives his Disciples, whose Heart, upon his declaring
he was about leaving of them, had been filled with Sorrow, how it was not just
he should always be among those that had used him so unworthily; and withal, it
was expedient for them that he should go away, or else the Comforter, Chap.
16.^, 7.
who was to be with them after his departure, would not come.

After all that hither to has been said, may not I ask concerning the method
and carriage of the Adversaries. Is it fair, about these fundamental points, to
turn the whole Scripture into an Allegory, and make, the Spirit of God never to
speak properly? to force upon and wrest out of the Word of God such Senses and
Expositions as are contrary to the scope of the Spirit, to the Deigns of the
holy Writers, and to the Analogy of Faith; and if this cannot serve the turn,
to screw up and work their B^^ing, how to contrive and forge an imaginary After
son of Christ into Heaven, about the (...) of his Ministry, and consequently a
ceasing ^^wn from thence after it; yet at the same time deny that true and real
descending of ^is upon Earth, which is so much and so often assorted in
Scripture; which is as good as to say, Though Truth and Scripture do not bear it,
yet we I now how to supply it of our own: Flectere si nequco saperos, Ae eroma
movebo.

Now, to strengthen what I have said to prove our Lords Divinity, before I
proceed to answer Objecting, I shall add what follows upon the forementioned
Head of the Angel in the Old Testament, I mean, the increated Angel, whose
Person in appearance is Man, in office Angel, in nature God, the second Person
of the most holy Trinity. I shall somewhat insist upon a most notable place,
and much to our purpose, though I already said something about it, for I can
not willing to lay aside a strong and very useful weapon because I made use of
it before, for when once it has been tried, we are the surer of, and may
better depend upon it. On the occasion of the abominable Idolatry of the golden
Calf, God refused to go up with the People, but being appeased by Moses,
promised to send an Angel before them, which Moses and the People were fully
satisfied with. Who and what this Angel was, Chap. 23.20, 21, 22.
we have it in the Book of Exodus, with the End for which he was to go before,
namely, to guide them; and it is thus expressed: Behold, I send an Angel before
thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have
prepared. But hear the Charge he gives them concerning this Angel; Beware of
him, and obey his voice: provoke him not, for he will not pardon your
transgressions: for my name is in him. Such terms does the God of Israel use
when he speaks, of himself. Two things here we must observe; first, what is
here spoken belongs only to the true essential God of Israel; the second is,
the Angel or Person here spoken of, is the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
out of which Premises we may well conclude, he is the true God of Israel.

The Caution here given to take heed, have a care and beware of him, as if he
had said, take heed to thy self in thy Carriage before him; this, I say, joined
with the Command to obey his Voice, is very remarkable: The absolute Obedience
which God requires them to yield unto the Angel, is due to God alone, and is
never related to the Creature, only to himself, for his Voice is God's Voice,
and when he speaks, God speaks, as the words of v. 22. do intimate; If thou
shall indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak, then I will be an enemy
unto thine enemies. The Angels Voice, and all that God speaks, is the fa^^e,
and upon their obedience to his Voice depended the performance of the Promises.
The Lord never so expressly charged any People or Person not to provoke any
created Angel or Man as here he does, Provoke him not, offend and displease him
not; why? For he will not pardon your Transgressions, Rebellions or Sins in
Scripture Phrase, for Sin is the transgression of the law. So then, to disobey
and to provoke this Angel, is to sin; and this very same Angel has right and
power, if he will, to pardon Sin, which none but the true God has power to
take upon him to do, and it is Blasphemy for any Creature whatsoever to pretend
to it. Another great and unanswerable reason is, For my Name is in him; a more
excellent Name than any of the Angels do enjoy: Heb. 1.4.
The Name is that appellation by which one thing is distinctly known from
another; so Gods Name signifies God himself, as to call upon Gods name, Genesis
4.26. Exodus 33.19. 2 Chronicles. 7.20.
it is his Titles, God, Jehovah, Elohim, Lord. I will proclaim the name of the
Lord before thee, said God to Moses, compared with Chap. 34.3, 6. in the former
Verse it is called, to proclaim the name of the Lord, and in the later, to
proclaim the Lord, the Lord. And in Scripture Phrase the Name of the Lord is
taken for God himself, that is, all in him, Majesty, Almightiness, Psalm. 29.2.
and 33.21. and 34.3. and 61.5. This house, says God, which I have sanctified
for my name, for my self, my honor and worship: So here, when God says of
that Angel, my name is in him, he means his Nature, Titles, Attributes,
Authority, Power, and Glory. In a word, I my self am in him; which afterward
was well interpreted by the Lord Jesus, The Father is in me, and I in the
Father: Now this by the God of Israel being attributed unto another, it must be
to another himself, for his Name is his Glory, and he has solemnly declared,
my glory will I not give to another. Isa. 42.8. Exodus 3.2.


The Angel spoken of in this place is, as already observed, the same as before
had appeared unto Moses in a flame of Fire, out of the midst of a Bush, who, v.
4, is called Lord and God; who out of the same place called unto and required
of him divine Honor; Draw not nigh hither, but put off thy shoes from off thy
feet, for the place whereon thou stand is holy ground. And if any doubt
should remain, it is cleared v. 6, Moreover be, the same Angel, said, I am the
God of thy Father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.
This very same Angel or Person, upon the Peoples entering into the Land of
Promise, under the shape of a Man appeared unto Joshua, under the name of
Captain of the host of the Lord, and in the posture, for it was with a drawn
Sword, Josh. 5.13, 14, 15.
to execute his Office of General, as God had promised, to bring them into the
place he had prepared, for then the People were just entering upon the Siege of
Jericho, and this same Angel or Son of God, under the shape of a Man, exacted
of Joshua the same Worship as he before had required of Moses; and of him
afterward Joshua said to the People, He is a holy God, he is a jealous God:
Josh. 24.19.
he will not forgive your transgressions, nor your sins. These last words are
the same which God said to Moses in the fore-quoted place, and so belong to one
and the same.

Now, I say, this Angel, who appeared unto Moses out of the Bush, who through
the Wilderness went before the People into the Land of Promise, and appeared
unto Joshua, is the Son of God, the second Person of the most holy Trinity, the
same who afterward took on him our human Nature, and was born of the Virgin
Mary; and, among other reasons, this I take to be a very good one, Acts 7.30,
35.
because Stephen the first Martyr for this glorious Cause, and a good
Interpreter of the place, makes mention of the Angel of the Lord, which
appeared unto Moses, and this Moses God sent to be a ruler and a deliverer by
the hands or power of the Angel which appeared to him in the bush. Moses was
the Minister or Servant, Heb. 3.6.
but Christ, as a Son over his own house, says the Apostle. So things were
done by the power of the Angel. Moses was in the Church in the Wilderness, but
the Angel was with him: Stephen's mentioning the Church and the Angel, does
relate to Christ our Lord, the Son of God, who is the only Head thereof, and by
whose Directions Moses took care of it, as also Moses spoke of him under the
name of a Prophet whom God would raise up unto them: Acts 3.22, 23.
and It shall come to pass, that every soul which will not hear that Prophet
shall be destroyed from among the people, says Peter. And though from the
beginning the Son of God was not made Flesh, yet as Head of the Church he took
care of his People, exercised his Mediatorship, and administered his spiritual
Kingdom of Grace, which the bringing out of Egypt, and introducing into Canaan
was a Figure of; and we may easily perceive the sweet harmony between the Old
and New Testaments, about Christ's governing his Church under both, as to Names
as well as to Things, for he is called Captain of the Lord's Host, as in the
fore-quoted place; and God is a man of war, and Lord of hosts is one of God's
Titles, not only 1 Samuel 1.1, but in a hundred places more: So Christ is in the
New Testament called the Captain of our salvation, Exodus 15.3 Heb. 2.10.
to be completed in Heaven, whereof the Promised Land was a Type.

This Angel the People were commanded to take care not to provoke him, yet they
did. In this case the Question may be put to our Socinian Rabshakehs, which in
another, God did concerning Sennacherib, 2 Kin. 19.22.
Whom have thou reproached and blasphemed? and the same Answer returned, Even
against the holy one of Israel. So here, if it be asked, Whom did the Children
of Israel provoke, tempt, and limit in the Wilderness? the Psalmist will say,
Psalm. ^8.40, 41, 56.
God, the holy one of Israel, and the most high God: compared with Psalm. 95. c.
And if of St. paul we ask, Whom did the People tempt in the Wilderness? he will
answer, They tempted Christ; 1 Cor. 10 9. compared with Heb. 3.9, for there he
speaks of Christ as Son of God: it may not be understood that Christ was
tempted after he was born of the Virgin Mary, though after his Baptism he was, by
the Devil in the Wilderness; which indeed may point at the Temptation by the
People in the Wilderdess, which we read of in the old Testament. However, I
say, that Temptation after the coming out of Egypt, which was so long before he
was born, cannot be meaned of any thing after his Birth; yet, if Scripture
says truth, Christ was by the People tempted in the Wilderness, the same
Person, though not in the same Nature which he took afterward. Now, the Person
of the Word, in his divine nature, existed before he was made Flesh, or else
how was it possible it should be tempted at that time? So I can see nothing to
the contrary, but that we may well conclude the Lord Jesus, Son of God, to be
the Angel that went before them, whom they were forbidden to provoke, and the
most high God, the holy one of Israel, whom they tempted and provoked; he is
called the Angel of God's Presence, or of God's Face, for the Lord said to
Moses, Mypresence shall go: Exodus 33.14.
It donoteth a distinct Person in the Godhead, from him whose Angel and whose
Face he is. We must understand, where the Angel was, God was present, because
that same Angel and Person was God; and what in v. ^^ is named Presence, in v.
18 it is called Glory, to be compared with what John says, And we beheld his
glory, Chap. 1.14.
as the glory of the only begotten of the Father. He also is called, the Angel
of the Covenant, for it is plain how the Covenant of Grace between God and man
is grounded only in Christ, and none else; Isa 63.9.
for Scripture says, in him we are chosen and adopted, and only by him we
shall be saved.

This Truth, that the Angel who went before the People was the true God, the
Spirit of God has judged so important and necessary to be known, that at
several times and in many places he declared it. Among others, the following is
very considerable, if we mind time, place, and the very words compared
together; I send an Angel before thee, says the Lord; Psalm. 68.7, 8.
and David, O God, when thou wentest before thy people, when thou did march
through the wilderness; compared with that before quoted of the Church in the
Wilderness: and the same who went before the People, is by the Psalmist in the
same place called God, the God of Israel, of whom, v. 18, it is said, Thou have
ascended on high: thou have led captivity captive, etc. for here is certainly a
Prophecy of Christ's Ascension, as to that purpose this place is quoted by St.
Paul, Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10.
for indeed here mention is made of the Figure and Type, namely, the Ark; as we
see in the words of v. 1, and 2, taken out of Numb. 10.35, when the Ark was
setting forward, and of the Antitype, the truth and body of the Type, Jesus
Christ; and upon good ground, namely, that of Ephesians. 4, many are of opinion,
that this is a triumphant Psalm of our Savior's Resurrection and Ascension
into Heaven; for David, who was a Prophet, as a King, and knew himself in some
things to be a Type of the Messiah, among things relating to his Kingdom, used
to mix and comprehend some belonging to Christ, which is the chief scope of the
Psalm: So Jah, Jehovah, God and Lord, are to be understood of the Angel or
Christ; for, as a little before we observed the Deliverance out of Egypt,
leading through the Wilderness, and bringing into the Land of Promise, was a
Figure of the great Salvation of God's People, and of the deliverance of the
Church, which is the proper work committed unto the Son of God the Lord Jesus,
as King, Head, and Preserver of it. When David speaks of ascending, he acts not
the Part of an Historian, but of a Prophet, and this is of an Ascension joined
with a Triumph, and leading of Captives, which does not belong to that of
Sinai: Neither do we read any where that God ascended into Heaven from Sinai;
but Christ having obtained victory over Death, the Grave, and all his and our
Enemies, went up to Heaven; which cannot be said of the Ark: But the Ascension
here spoken of, as Paul to the Ephesians does interpret it, relates to him who
descended first into the lower parts of the earth, that is, to Christ, who
ascended far above all Heavens, that he might fit all things, if we may take an
Apostle's Interpretation of a Prophet; and it was Christ's or the Son of God's
Voice that shook the Earth or Mount Sinai, as we may read it, Heb. 12.26.

Before I leave this matter, to what I said upon another Text, which is much to
our purpose about this Angel, concerning Jacob, I shall farther add, how the
same person that appeared unto him was in the shape of a man; There wrestled a
man with him, Genesis 32.24. 2ly, That same when Jacob was about blessing Joseph's
Children, Genesis 48.16.
he called an Angel. The 3d thing is, That he is expressly said to be God Lord
of Hosts, by Hosea, for the Prophet speaking of Jacob, said, He had power with
God, upon the occasion of his wrestleing, and added, Yea, he had power over the
Angel, and prevailed; he wept and made supplication unto him; he found him in
Bethel, and there he spoke with us, even the Lord God of hosts: the Lord is his
memorial, Hos. 12.3, 4, 5. So hence it appears how the Person who at Bethel
appeared to him, when he fled from the Face of his Brother Esau, Genesis 28.13,
compared with Chap. 35.1, and wrestled with him, when coming from Lanban he had
passed over the Ford Jabbock; that same, I say, was God, the Angel, and the
Lord of Hosts. This happened when Jacob and his Family were going into Canaan,
whereof the possession had been promised him and his Posterity; upon the very
borders he is met by his Adversary his Brother Esau, who had a pretense to that
Inheritance, and therefore came against him with a power which of himself he
was not able to resist, which made him afraid, as we read v. 11, wherefore upon
such a trial, to strengthen his Faith, and make him lay hold the faster on the
Promise, 2 Cor. 1.20.
he in whom all the promises are yea and Amen, the Son of God, Jesus Christ,
appeared unto him in the shape of a man, because in his Seed were the Promises
made; but this man in appearance, was God in effect and nature, therefore Jacob
did solemnly pray to him for his Blessing in the time of the wrestling, and
would not rest till he had blessed him, which he obtained v. 29, and in
remembrance of this, Jacob called the name of the place Peniel, because he had
seen God face to face. This solemn meeting with much Comfort and Thankfulness
Jacob remembered when he blessed Joseph and his two Sons, in these most
remarkable words, God, before whom my Fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, the
God which fed me all my life long unto this day, the Angel which redeemed me
from all evil, bless the Lads. The God of his Fathers the God that sed him all
his lifetime, and the Angel which redeemed him from all evil, is but one and
the same: And the Name Redeemer is proper to Christ, the second Person of the
holy Trinity. All these are irrefragable Truths, which Socinians can
effectually say nothing against, though out of the Rabbis or Jewish Doctors
Writings they have been screwing up whatsoever they thought might serve their
turn; thus they were not ashamed to borrow Weapons from Christ's sworn Enemies.

But before I leave off this Point about Angels, whether the Creator or created
ones, for the glory of the Son of God, I must say how, though these be called
Sons of God, mighty in Power, and excellent in created Glory, yet when compared
with God, Job 15.15. and 4.18. Isa. 6.3. John 12.40.
it is said, they are not pure in his sight, and he charge them with folly,
and they cover their faces at the brightness of his glory, as not being able
nor worthy to look upon t. And that place about Divine Glory, as I already
observed, we know to belong to our Savior, who is called Lord and King of
Glory, because all Glory is in and from him, as its true Spring and proper
Center; Psalm. 24, compared with 1 Cor. 2.8. Hence it is that at his coming into
the World all Angels were commanded to worship him, which was performed in
their attendance on his Birth, proclamation of his Nativity, and celebrating
the Glory of God on that account, and afterward declaring his Resurrection,
and confirming his Ascension, even ministering unto him after the Temptation,
and when he was in his Agony: And whilst Angels are called God's Ministers, who
ought to worship Christ the Son as their Maker, Unto the Son he says, Thy
throne, O God, is for ever and ever; to show that there is as much and as great
a difference between the Son and Angels as there is between God and Angels,
between the Creator and the Creature; for indeed, in that same place the
Heavens are said to be the work of his hands; so no comparison to be made
between the Son and Angels, the noblest of all Creatures. The Name Elohim,
absolutely used, is never in Scripture given to any singular Angel or Man,
which is the same as (...) with the Article by the Apostle given the Son; so he
is denoted by that Name as the true God by Nature:; And this same has a
Kingdom, signified by the Royal Marks of a Scepter and a Throne, whereunto
Eternity is annexed, for it is for ever and ever, whereby its duration or
lasting is expressed; so is his manner of administration with righteousness,
His scepter is a scepter of righteousness; and, to show his preparation for
that administration of his, it is said, He loved righteousness and hated
iniquity. Now the Throne is not for the Servants, but for the Son, because the
Kingdom thereby denoted is not theirs but his, who indeed is graciously pleased
to promise his Apostles, that at the last day they shall sit on twelve thrones,
judging the twelve tribes of Israel; that is, they shall participate only at
the last day with him in his Kingly Power, Mat. 19.28.
and in some degree be made partakers of his Glory, with an Interest in his
Kingdom, which he is pleased to give them: in the mean time the Throne is not
theirs, but his.

Here I must take notice how, for preventing many Errors, rash and false
Opinions, it is to be wished men would follow the Apostles Practice in this
place, who abounding in quotations, gives us a Rule and an Example to do so,
for with comparing Scriptures one with another, we come to be acquainted with
God's Mind and Will in them, for by what is spoken of Angels in one place, and
of the Son in another, we are taught what to believe of him and of them: They
who follow not this Rule, are apt to frame in their Heads hasty, wrong, and
false notions about God's Mind, especially in the matters we are now upon. And
what is it that gives the Throne of the Lord Jesus Unchangeableness and
Eternity, but his divine Nature? The words of the Psalmist, whence the Apostle
draws his Argument, do not belong to Solomon, for the words, O God, do not
relate to him, nor these, Thy throne is for ever and ever, for he reigned but
forty years; nor to his Successors, who went off the Stage at or about the time
of the Babylonian Captivity. We know how in some things Solomon was a Type of
Christ, but it does not follow that every thing relating to the Antitype should
belong unto the Type, for it is enough for the Type so to represent and shadow
out the Lord Jesus, that what the Prophet would teach concerning him should be
spoken of the Type, whereby he was represented; for the Antitype is what the
Spirit of God ever chiefly aimed at: So, tho the Type and Antitype agreed in
some things, in others there was a vast difference between them. But, that in
this place the Apostle does interpret those words of the Son of God Jesus
Christ, it appears out of v. 8, but unto the Son he says, Thy throne, O God,
etc. And it is in that Party but vain and idle words, to go about to persuade
us, that the Apostle did not say what he said, and which is written for our
instruction: And with us they should take notice how it is said, When he
brings in his firstborn into the world, let all the Angels of God worship
him; before he was set upon his Throne after his Ascension: So the Command was
antecedent to that Session of his upon the Throne in Heaven. And this sitting
at the right hand of God, puts me in mind now to add something to what I said
upon that Text, and it is this, how we and our Adversaries ought to consider
the usefulness and importance of that Testimony, Psalm. 110.1.
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand; for the confirmation of
the Dignity and Authority of Christ the Messiah is evidenced by the frequent
quotations of it in the New Testament, as by our Savior himself, Matthew. 22.42;
by Peter, in Acts 2.34, 35; and by Paul, in 1 Cor. 55.28. And Heb. 1.13, David
was the Penman of the Psalm, not about himself, for him whom he therein does
treat of, he calls my Lord; as indeed, the things therein spoken of belong not
to him. God did never swear unto David, that he should be a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedek; and the Jews knew well how David had nothing to
do with the Priesthood, as being not of the Tribe of Levi, but of Judah. We
read, That David was a King and a Prophet, Jeremiah a Priest and a Prophet; but
the three Offices, Prophet, Priest, and King, never met in one Person, but in
the Lord Jesus.

CHAP. X. Objections Answered.
THough now and then, on our way, we refuted some of their Cavils, yet now we
must, by the Grace of God, come to the last part but one of our Discourse, hear
what they say against these Divine Truths, and answer their chief Objections
against the most holy Trinity, the Divinity of Christ, his eternal Generation,
etc. As, first, They would have this Doctrine of the Trinity to be contrary to
Reason, Because it gives Turks and Jews an aversion against the Christian
Religion: But it must not be concluded, that a Doctrine is contrary to Reason,
because some men, by reason of the corruption of their Nature, do not receive
it. When the Gospel was preached by our blessed Savior, and by his Apostles,
many refused to receive and believe it, though it was very good, and not
contrary to Reason: They that are Servants to their carnal Reason, do not
receive that which is above it; and in this matter there are other Causes of
the blindness and hatred of Jews and Turks. Heretics ought to be ashamed to
join with Infidels, to overthrow a Doctrine which in all Ages has by general
Consent been looked upon as the Foundation of our Religion. In four things they
would have it to be contrary to Reason; the first, One is not Three, yet, say
they, we affirm God to be One, yet Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be God, and
yet the Person of the Son not to be that of the Father, nor of the Holy Ghost.
The second, A thing is or is not: But, say they, you say the Paternity or
Fatherhood really to be the same with the Essence, and the Essence really with
the Filiation; therefore the Paternity is the same with the Filiation or
Sonship, and is not the same. Thirdly, By the Rule of the Tertium, the things
that are the same in another, or in a third, are the same among themselves.
Fourthly, It Is contrary to the Principle of the expository Syllogism, which is
this; The Essence is the Father, the Essence is the Son, therefore the Father
is the Son. In these four things, say they, your Doctrine is contrary to Reason.

In answer to this, First, in general we say, that such things as gainsay the
Principles of true Reason are contrary to it, but not those which exceed and
are far above Reason. Now things objected against by Antitrinitarians do
neither fight against nor contradict Reason, only are above it; then these
Principles or Rules are ill applied, because they compare God, the Author of
Nature, with natural things. Now we answer in particular, as to the First
Axiom, It is not overthrown, inasmuch as there is no opposition according to
the same thing; nothing that is one, as it is one, and in the same respect may
be called three, but God is one in Nature and three in Persons; the manner of
subsisting does distinguish the Persons, but multiplieth not the Essence. In
the Second there is no Contradiction, for the Paternity and Filiation are
distinguished among themselves in one way, and from the Essence in another; it
is only a modal distinction between Paternity and Filiation, the least degree
of distinction is between the thing and the manner of it, between the Essence
and the Paternity or Filiation, wherefore Essence, Paternity and Filiation are
distinct, but not different things: We never said it is the same, but it is of
the same, and because they are of the same, they differ not as thing and thing.
And if the Adversaries would argue thus, the Father is the same with the
Essence, the Essence is the same with the Son, therefore the Father is the same
with the Son, they would thereby conclude nothing against us; for we affirm the
Father and Son not at all to differ as to the Essence: but the self-being of
the Essence does not conclude for the self-being of the Person; wherefore we
say it is and it is not in a different respect, upon a different account. As to
the Third, the Paternity and the Filiation are not the same with the Essence,
but Father and Son have the same Essence. Now their Rule does not here fit
their Purpose; for, if they say Pa^^^ity and Filiation are the same with or in
the Essence, it is incongruous; for Paternity and Filiation are modes or
manners of the thing, that is, in the Essence are not the same with the
Essence, because the thing and manner of it are not altogether the same: But if
they say Father and Son are the same in uno tortio in^^ third, we agree they
are the same in this third, the Essence, though not altogether. As to the
Fourth, they are mistaken, for this is no expository Syllogism, for in that way
of a^guing the middle term must be singular and incommunicable: But here the
term Essence is not simply, but instead of an universal, and is communicable;
so then the strength of the major Proposition lies in this, Some who is or has
divine Essence, is the Father; Some that has divine Essence, is the Son: Ergo,
if it be universally construed, the proposition is false, as thus, Every one
that has the divine Essence is the Father; or else they are mere particulars:
Besides that there are four terms, for in the major the word Essence is
un^erstood in relation to an active generation; in the minor, to a passive.
They would forge Contradictions where are none at all, and the ground of their
Error is, that they would judge of an infinite Nature by a finite one, when the
reason of both is very different: here the infinite Essence is individual,
because infinite, communicable without being multiplied in many persons.

To the same purpose they object in another manner; God is One, therefore
cannot be Three: so there is none but the Father. The Answer is easy, and we
already have said something to it; that which is one cannot be two or three in
the same respect, it cannot be one and many in the same sense: What Christ
says, John. 10.30.
I and my Father are one, is most true; so that One is related to the Nature,
and I and Father to the Persons; so then God is one as to the Nature, and three
as to the Persons. Seeing the Nature or Godhead cannot be multiplied, it
follows, that the Persons and Subsistences only are multiplied. They say
farther, A simple Essence cannot be of three Persons, otherwise it will be
divided or multiplied: But though this be true of finite, it is not so of an
infinite Essence; neither does it follow, that because the Essence is common to
three Persons, it may be common to more, for it were contrary to divine
Revelation, which only mentions one Father, one Son, and one Holy ghost; the
Father God, the Son God, the Holy Ghost God, yet not three Gods, but only one
God. Neither does it follow, that because divine Essence is common to three
Persons, therefore every Person shall be common, and because the Persons are
not common, therefore the Nature must not be. This is the cause of their
Mistake, that they do not mind the distinction of the Person from the Essence;
for tho they differ not really, yet rationally they be distinguished: It does
follow to say, if the Essence be common to three Persons, therefore the Persons
are common, no more than to say, if Abel has his Nature from Adam, and is a
Man, therefore he has his Posterity, and is a Father from him. The things, say
they, that are separately numbered are not one in number and essence; but the
Father and the Son are separately numbered, and are by themselves called one,
as one God, one Mediator, one God and Father, one Lord; wherefore Father and
Son are not one only God or one Essence. But I say, Numeration does not import
a distinction of Essence; for in finite things Essences being multiplied, they
are reckoned individual, not in relation to the Essence, but to the Persons;
that which is numbered is one, neither is it one without the Essence, yet for
all that it is not one essentially, or by his own Essence separated from any
other whatsoever: so then, when the Father and Son are numbered, they are not
so essentially, but personally; also they are the same in number and essence,
(contrary to what is objected) whereof one is said to be with the other, as the
word was with God, for in God to be one with another, is only an hypostatical
or personal distinction; for as to be one with another does import a
distinction, so the same Evangelist shows the Essence of both to be but one
and the same, when he adds, the word was God.

Furthermore they argue thus; The Father and the Son are really distinguished,
for the Father is absolutely God, that is the divine Essence; for, say they,
the words Father and God are synonimous, or the same, because the word God is
explained by the word Father, 1 These. 1.3.
therefore the Essence of the Son is distinct from that of the Father. Our
Answer is, Though the Persons of the Father and of the Son be really distinct, it
does not follow that their Essences are so, as if the Essence of one was not
that of another, seeing the names of Father and Son are relatives, which indeed
signify different Persons in the same Nature, but rationally distinguished
from the same. If Father and Essence be synonimous, what remains for the Son
besides a shadow of the Deity? For as the Paternity and Innascibility, or not
being begotten, which are proper only to the Father, are incommunicable, that
Essence, if it be the same thing as is the Father, cannot be communicated unto
the Son: It does not follow neither that the Names God and Father are the same,
because the first is sometimes used for the last, seeing it is attributed unto
the Father, in his Person to constitute the Deity, by reason of the Spring, and
in the comparison and order of Persons, and not because the Person of the
Father is in no wise distinguished from the divine Essence. Paul does
congratulate with the Thessalonians, for their Work of Faith, Labor of Love,
and Patience of Hope; and because their Hope was in the Coming of the Lord
Jesus, these three he refers in God, whom he calls Father, because he
already had made mention of the Mediator: But if the Names God and Father be
the same, by reason that Paul had to the word God joined Father, by way of
explication, Tit. 2.13. 2 Pet. 1.2.
then the Names Great God and our Savior Jesus Christ are also the same,
because two Apostles explain the name of Christ by that of God our Savior.
Besides, the Argument is faulty, for it has four terms: to the end that both
Propositions be true, in the major the Person of the Father, in the minor his
Essence, are to be understood. To this Argument answers another, The eternal
Father is not the Son, whom John calls the Word, but the Essence of the
Divinity, or that one God of Israel, is the eternal Father of the only begotten
Son, therefore the Essence, or the God of Israel, is not the Son called the
Word: The major is false, for to have it true the sense ought to be this; That
Essence, or that God, which is the Father is not the Son, that is, the Person
of the Father is not the Person of the Son. This farther they say, The Essence
and one God are convertible, but according to us, in the Unity of God there is
Trinity, therefore in the Essence there is also Trinity. But we say, God, who
is one in Nature, is three in Persons; so in that only Essence there is a
Trinity, that is, wholly and indivisibly subsisteth in three Persons; there are
not three Essences: The minor Proposition must be understood of a Trinity of
Persons, and not of Essences.

I observed before how they quarrel much with several expressions used in this
matter, as Trinity, Essence, Person, etc. which are neither profane nor
unworthy of God, seeing in Scripture there are words which answer to them; Romans
1.20 Col. 2.9. Phil. 2.6. 2 Pet. 1.4.
as, (...) and (...), both signifying Godhead, and (...), the Form of God, and
(...), Divine Nature. Also the word (...), which in Latin is translated
sometimes Substance, sometimes Essence, shows the quiddity or nature of the
thing. As for the word Person, Clastical Authors, as well as Divines, in this
holy Mystery, take it for a rational Subsistence, or Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; however out of these they take matter of Argument against us, for they
say thus; The Doctrine of God ought to be taught according to Scripture, but
those Names are not to be found therein, therefore not to be used. I answer the
major Proposition, with a distinction; If they mean it of the sense of
Scripture, we own we ought not to depart from it; but if of the letter and bare
words, we deny it, for in the Church is the gift of Prophecy, and of explaining
the word: And whereas Heretics are apt to wrest the sense, and under variety
of words to involve and disguise the Truth, it is sometimes necessary to make
use of new words to hit and refute their false glosses and interpretations, in
defense of the Truth. As to the minor, about the several words we say Scripture
speaks of one God, whence comes Oneness or Unity, and Divinity is attributed
to three, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; hence is Trinity. Jah and Jehovah
signify (...), him that is; so from Esse we derive Essence: all which words we
are not Authors of, but received them from the Primitive Church, which by a
public consent used them almost from the Apostles time to these, which they
reject when themselves would bring in barbarian words to signify their
erroneous notions, as, God Essentiating and Essentiated, Apostolical God,
Emphatical and articulated, God Author, and God Executor, and the like. Thus
they make themselves really guilty of such things as unreasonably they would
charge us with: They must needs have a very great opinion of their own
abilities, seeing they would make us forbear the expressions used by the Church
for so many Ages, and impose their newfangled words upon the World: It Is in
them a blasphemous Impiety, and a damnable Slander, to charge us with bringing
in new Gods under such words as are made use of to explain Scripture; and they
know well enough our meaning thereof, as we so often explained it: these
different words do not change the sense, so may not be called erroneous; and
though sometimes there be Variety in words and expressions, the sense still
remains the same, so we do not consider them as Popish or Antichristian
Forgeries. Indeed they make a ridiculous Objection, Jehovah the Essentiator
Father, is of the masculine Gender, but Essence is of the feminine, therefore
not to be used. But to say something to the purpose, they must prove, that in
the nature of things, according to the Rules of Grammar, there is a difference
of Sex: Of the like nature is this, no abstract Name signifies a Substance;
but Trinity is an abstract Name, therefore, etc. But the first proposition is
false; for when we call Deity or Divine Nature, we understand a Substance,
seeing in God all things are Substance and no Accident: So by the word Trinity
we understand three Persons really subsisting. 2 Samuel 23.
We find David's mighty Men of Valor to be distinguished by three and three.
But as to their exception against the forenamed words, once for all I say to
them, Though every Truth asserted be not in Scripture, in so many Letters, yet if
it be therein implied, and by a good and necessary consequence thence derived,
it is to be esteemed the Word of God as if expressed, because in it contained.
Thus Preaching is the Word of God, because deduced out of it, not as to the
words, but as to the sense: hence it is that Preaching produces the effects
attributed to the the Word, as to quicken, convert, regenerate, and sanctify,
when sometimes in a whole Sermon few Sentences are repeated word by word. And
in several places of the New Testament the Evangelists and Apostles do quote
out of the Old, not in the very words, but accoding to the sense and scope of
the place: upon such a ground our Translators do render the word Hypostasis by
that of Person; and so 'twas among the Primitive Church; which word we find
used in the New Testament only four times, thrice in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, Chap. 1.3, Chap. 3.14, Chap. 11.1, and 2 Cor. 9.4. yet every where in
a different sense.

Some few words more I shall add, to answer some other Objections; in order
thereunto, I say, In the Deity there is an Essence which is but one; in that
Essence do subsist three Persons really distinguished one from another, but
only modally from the Essence, which does not make any fourth thing in the
Godhead. As there is but one Essence, so these three Persons are but one God,
which Name God is spoken not only of the Essence, but also of every one of the
three Persons, Unity in relation to the Nature, and Trinity in respect to the
Persons. One Essence there is, without which there is no God, but the three
Persons are this one God in Essence, who subsist in that Essence, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. The Adversaries are in an Error when they think there is no
real difference, except there be some difference in number and Essence; they
would have a Thing and a Substance to be the same, when that which differs by
reason of the definition from another, does also really differ from it: God in
one number and essence, admits of no renting or division, and they are not
three bare Names; the Essence does not, as the Genus, contain three Species,
but it does subsist in three Persons, in which all and in every one is the same
Nature and Godhead: To own three Essences, were to assert three Gods; and we
say that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as to the Nature, are of themselves, though
not as to the Personality, for on this last account we own the Son to be from
the Father, and the Holy Ghost from both. I say again, how the Essence makes
no fourth thing in the Godhead, as if the three Persons were derived from it as
from a thing pre-existing, or as if it being common to the three, was really
distinguished from the three; these we never said, but are against: The Essence
is wholly and entirely common to every Person; these Persons do not proceed
from the Essence, but we say, they from all Eternity subsist in the Essence:
and though we own a distinction between Essence and Persons, yet they are not as
a thing abstracted from the Essence.

The great difficulty arising about this, is in the case of the Incarnation,
which is justly called, The wisdom of God in a mystery, 1 Cor. 2.7.
even the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world unto our glory. The
Son was incarnated or made Flesh, took upon him our human Nature; now the
Father and Holy Ghost having the same Essence with the Son, how were not they
both incarnated? We know the Person and not the Nature was incarnated, but how
the Nature, which is wholly in the Son, as wholly in the Father and in the Holy
Ghost, was not made Flesh, it is a Mystery that passes all understanding: This
is one of the secret things that belong to God, which we must never attempt to
pry into; this is a Mystery which most humbly and with an awful reverence we
ought to adore and believe, without any farther enquiry into it; because God
has revealed it, it is so, namely, that the Son, not the Father, nor the Holy
Ghost, was made Flesh. In Religion there are several other things which we do
simply believe, tho it be impossible for our Reason to comprehend them, as, the
Infiniteness, Immensity, and Eternity of God, whereof the former is every
where, within and without, the greatest and least things: So is that union of
both Natures in one Person incomprehensible. Thus that which is spoken of the
divine Essence may be attributed to the three Persons, but to be understood of
things which of themselves are competent to the nature of the Creator,
Almightiness, Eternity, and suchlike Attributes; but not so in the things
which belong to the Essence only upon the account of one Person, for such
things belong only to that Person for whose sake they are spoken of the
Essence, as the Incarnation of the Son, the Voice of the Father from Heaven,
and the appearing of the Holy Ghost under the shape of a Dove. We know how the
Works ad extra, or outward, are undivided and common to the three Persons,
always excepting that wherein they destroy the proper Attributes of the
Persons: Thus the Son and Holy Ghost, not the Father, are sent; the Son, not
the Father nor Holy Ghost, was made Flesh, though the Father and Holy Ghost had a
hand in the Incarnation, for the Angel said, Luke 1.35.
The power of the highest shall overshadow thee, and the Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee: Prove. 9.1. Rev. 21.3.
and Wisdom, whereby the Son is represented, has builded her House, otherwise
called the Tabernacle of God. So then the work of the Incarnation is common to
the three Persons, but in the effect is terminatively only in the Son.

When the Apostle speaks of the Mystery of our Salvation in the adorable and
incomprehensible Incarnation of the Son of God, or his taking ^ur human Nature,
he says, 1 Pet. 1.12 Exodus 25.20.22.
which things the Angels desire to look into, alluding to the two Cherubims on
the Mercy Seat, toward which their Faces were, as desirous to see into it. In
th Tabernacle was the Ark, and above upon the Art was the Mercy Seat, as the
most holy part of he whole, for there God met with Moses, and from thence he
communed with him, all which was disposed according to God's own appointment,
for the Mercy Seat was a Type of Jesus Christ, in whom and by whom alone God
does neet and commune with Men in the way of Mercy: and as the Ceremonial Law
was as a Schoolmaster, to bring us to Christ, as to him that was the end of
the Law, so all Figures and Prophecies aimed at him. After God had sent all his
Servants, and he would have no more Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices, then he
sent his only Son to offer up himself a Sacrifice unto him for Sin. This most
holy and blessed Son, by the Mouth of the Prophet David long before his coming,
said, Lo, I come to do thy will, Psalm. 40.6, 7. Heb. 10.7, 9.
O God: He knew the Will of God, and declared he would come to do it. The words
contain a particular emphasis, different from any thing of that nature
expressed in Scripture. When the Prophets foretold Josiah's Birth, 1 Kin. 13 2.
Isa. 44. and 45.
and Cyrus's Empire, they are not introduced as saying any thing themselves,
only one was to be born, the other to be holden and supported, because at that
time they were not. But here the Son of God speaks as one who then was in
being, and as a person who delighted to execute his Father's Will, as he
effectually did, both actively and passively, and this he declared when come,
Joh. 6.38.
I came down from Heaven not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent
me: and when upon the approach of the Hour wherein that Will was to be, Joh.
12.27.
his Soul was troubled, he said, For this cause came I unto this hour; and when
the bitter Cup, which caused in him some Horror, was put into his hand, Luke
22.42.
he said, Not my will. but thine be done. Let these words in the Evangelists,
with those in the Psalm, be compared, an^ there will appear such a divine
harmony, as wi^ convince they both came out of the same Pers^^ only with this
difference, that in the Psalmis seen a steady resolution, such as became a
divine Person, and in the Gospel something of human Frailty; the reason is,
because the first is expressed by a Prophet inspired by his Spirit and the last
by himself, in the days of his Flesh: However coming is meant of a Person who
preexisted before that coming, and in the time of the Prophecy: And the
circumstances o^ God's having no more pleasure in Sacrifices and
Burnt-offerings, and his saying, Lo, I come, which preceeded his coming, do
demonstrate in him a Choice and Resolution, which is the act of a Person; as
the quoted place out of St. Peter's does denote Christ's coming into the World
to be such a Mystery as the Angels, so excellent and knowing Creatures desire
to know and look into. But I return to my Answer to their Objections.

These things being seriously considered, will afford matter enough to answer
and refute the Cavils of the Enemies to this Truth: Before I proceed farther in
answering some more Objections of theirs, I think it will not be amiss for me,
because they make a scandalous Exception against that common place of the
Apostle, which proves the most holy Trinity, There are three that bear record
in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost. To add something more to
what in the beginning I said about it; They say it is wanting in some Greek
Copies, and in the Syriack, but through the Fraud of the Arrians, as says
Jerome, and Erasmus, Praefat. in Epist. Can.
whom Socinians would seem to appeal unto, confesses it to be in the most
ancient Manuscripts of Brittany, Spain, and Rhodes; and it is clear, out of the
Connection of the Text, V. 4, 5, 6.
that it cannot be taken away without making a palpable breach and interruption
of the sense, for he has just before spoken of God the Father, of Christ, and
of the Spirit; and to agree with what he says v. 8, there are three that bear
witness in Earth, there must also be three that bear record in Heaven; there
must be Witnesses in Heaven, as there are in Earth; the three in Earth agree in
one; the three in Heaven are one: We read it quoted by Ad Theoph. lib. 1. and
in disp. contra A^rium in Conc. Nic.
Athanasius, so does Contra Varimadum.
Idacius, so Contra Arrian.
Fulgentius; also it is quoted before the times of Athanasius, in the
Controversy against the Arrians, by De Unit. Eccles.
Cyprian, and also by Tertullian, Ignatius, etc. This Text does so well agree
with that of the Evangelist, to baptize all Nations in the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, which it does allude unto, that none may doubt but it was
suggested by the same Spirit; and the name word particular to St. John does
sufficiently witness, how those lines, together with the rest, came out of his
Pen; Non unus, sed unum, says one of the fore-quoted Fathers, Not one Person,
sed unum, etc. one Nature; not only the unity of Testimony, as they are three
distinct Witnesses, not only the unity of Consent and Will, but also of Nature,
as, I and the Father are one; Joh 10.30
which the Jews understood very well, for thereupon they accused him of
Blasphemy, and took up Stones to have cast at him; the reason they give for it
is this; Because thou being a man, V. 33.
make thy self God. In few words, we cannot be baptized in the name of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, except the names of these three, equal in
Authority, Dignity, and Essence, be called upon on our behalf; and, as I
observed before, it is unlawful to be baptized in the name of any man: The
Israelites were baptized by the Wor^^ or Ministry, or, as the Syriack has it,
in the Hand of Moses, but not in his Name.

Before we leave off these Objections against the most adorable Trinity, for
the better understanding of the matter, I shall speak some few words more, for
indeed the point is of so high a concernment, and affords such a plenty and
variety of Discourse, that we can never say enough of what is to be known in
the case: Though, as we said, they be the same in Essence, yet they differ,
first, in personal Names, as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: Secondly, in their
Order, Father first as the Spring, then Son, thirdly, Holy Ghost. Thirdly, In
their manner of Operation; the Father does act of himself, the Son from the
Father, and the Holy Ghost from both: Gal. 4.4. John 14.26. and 15.26.
so the Son is sent by the Father, the Holy Ghost from both Father and Son, but
we never read the Father was sent. So there is a difference in the outward
Works, for though they be common to the three Persons, yet Creation is properly
attributed to the Father, Redemption to the Son, and Sanctification to the Holy
Ghost: Thus these three Persons have every one their personal unity, in number
they are distinguished, yet are but one God in number, of Essential and natural
unity; wherefore in God are not three Beings, three Infinites, or three Things.

Yet they object, the names of Trinity, Personality, and Essence were not heard
of before the Apostles time, nor the Doctrine of the Trinity. I answer to the
first, that though the Names were not, yet the Things were, and Words are to
signify Things; that there is one God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit, as it appears out of the places quoted to prove the Divinity of the Son
and Holy Ghost, which here I need not to repeat; and if the things be true, why
should Men dispute about words which do not in the least prejudice the Analogy
of Faith, on the contrary do explain and confirm it? As to the Second, I say,
that the Doctrine of the Trinity was mentioned of old, as I proved it already
out of several places of Scripture, the Question is not about the Father, but
the Son, concerning whom is the clear Testimony of Psalm. 2, whose coming as
Jehovah, and God of Israel, for the Prophet speaks to Israel when he calls him
your God, was foretold, Behold, Isa. 35 4 5. Mat. 11.4, 5. Psalm. 51.10, 11.
your God will come with vengeance; even God with a recompense, he will come
and save you: which is applied unto Christ. Of the Holy Ghost mention is made
by David, and in other places, but that which under the Old Testament was under
a Vail, is clearly revealed under the New, for the Persons are plainly named,
and their number expressed, as in the places already made use of, not only in
the Baptism of our Savior, but in his Commission given his Apostles to
baptize, etc. which, as I showed, is unlawful to be done in any man's name: As
there is truth in Jesus, so this is the truth of his Gospel, which also has,
in conformity thereunto, been the sense of the general Orthodox Councils, and
of the Doctors of the Primitive Church; however this must be said, that though
this Mystery of the holy Trinity be expressed in Scripture, yet it is such a one
as exceeds our understanding and capacity.

Again they say, In most places of Scripture it is said there is but one God,
and that this God is the Father of Jesus Christ. I answer, The Name God, when
properly spoken, and of the true God, is taken either essentially for Divine
Nature, or personalty for some of the Persons: when taken in the first sense,
it does not exclude but include the Persons, only it is set down in opposition
to Idols and false Gods, which by Nature are not Gods; the things absolutely
spoken of the Oneness of God do not at all prejudice the Persons which are that
only God: hence it is that not only the Father, but also Son and Holy Ghost
are called God. In this Essential sense are taken the places they quote out of
the Old and New Testament; as for instance, Mark 2.7. Luke 5.21.
that of Mark and of Luke, which among others they make use of, Who can forgive
sins but God only? The word God belongs to the Essence, yet that power does
belong to the Son as to the Father, for there Christ assumeth it to himself;
which same power is also attributed unto the Holy Ghost; Receive ye the Holy
Ghost; John 20.21, 22.
whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them. When the word God is to
be understood personally, then there is a note of distinction joined, to know
what Person is spoken of, whether Father, Son, or Holy Ghost. What we say of
the word God, the same we affirm of the name Father; which does not always
signify the first Person, but also the Nature and three Persons. Thus when God
is said to be Father of all, and in the Lord's Prayer we call him Our Father,
when we cry Abba Father, etc. in all Texts of that nature, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost are understood. As to the Particle besides me, sometimes used, it
excepts nothing within, though every thing without the Deity, or that has not
the Divine Nature.

But one of the Arguments which most of all they ground themselves upon is
this; Joh. 17.3.
And this is eternal life, to know thee the only true God, and whom thou have
sent, Jesus Christ. They would have Christ to be excluded from being the only
true God, which they restrain only to the Father; but herein they are much
mistaken, for the word alone, or only, which they lay the stress upon, does
not belong to the Subject thee, but to the Predicate; not to thee, but to true
God; not to that which goes before, but to that which follows after: It Is not
said to know only thee to be, but know thee to be the only true God. This we
may look upon as one of their usual pieces of Sophistry: our Savior makes it
appear, that this is the true God whom Scriptures mention, namely, the Father
who sent, and the Son that was sent; for the true sense of the place we cannot
have a better Interpreter of than the Evangelist himself; 1 John 5.20.
here the true God and eternal Life are joined in the same; the same that is
eternal Life is also the true God, only eternal Life, and only true God. Now
Christ is called true God and eternal Life; His Son Jesus Christ, John 10.28.
this is the true God and eternal life: And if here we consider eternal Life as
the Gift of the only true God, does not Scripture say in several places how
eternal Life is the gift of Christ? Let of many this one serve for all, I give
unto them, his Sheep, eternal life: If the Son was not that only true God, why
should he join himself with the Father? And whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ,
to know thee, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ, to be the only true God.
This is the true order of the words, whereof the true sense is resolved into
this, The Father is the only true God, and not the only or Father alone is
the true God. The words in the original are not thus; (...), to know thee only
the true God; but thus, (...), to know thee the only true God: where any one
may see how the Particle (...) does not belong to the Pronoun thee, but to the
true God; and though the Particle was removed, yet thereby Christ would not be
excluded, for the true God is said, as I already observed, not in opposition to
Christ, but to false Gods; according to the style of Scripture, the word alone
or only does not always give a general exclusion, as we see it under the Old
Testament, when Jacob said unto Reuben, My Son shall not go down with you, Genesis
42.38.
for his brother is dead, and he is left alone; he means by the Mothers side,
and not by the Father's, for all the rest were his Brethren: And in the New, in
the Transfiguration, Luke 9.36.
it is said, And when the voice was past Jesus was left alone: Certainly Peter,
James, and John were not excluded, for they were with him, but Moses and Elias.
In the same sense are taken Martha's words to our Savior, Lord, do thou not
care that my sister has left me to serve alone? Luke 10.40
only meant of Mary, and not of the Servants of the House. And to the matter
now in hand, let it be known that Scripture never says the Father only is the
true God, though it says the Father is the only true God; so is the Son, and so
is the Holy Ghost: Here Christ would not deny himself the honor of being the
true God, which in other places he attributes unto himself, for the two words,
alone and true, go with God, not with thee; and his meaning is, how true
eternal Life consists in this, Gal. 4.8. 1 These. 1.9. 1 Cor. 8.6.
that men may detest Idols and false Gods, and be converted to thee, O Father,
who art the only true God by nature, which Idols are not. Thus when the name
One Lord is given the Son, it is not to exclude the Father, who also is Lord;
and the name Spirit given the third Person does not exclude Father or Son, who
also are Spirit: so this Text does admit of the same construction as this, when
Paul says, 1 Cor. 9.6.
I only, and Barnabas, have we not power to forbear working? where it is plain,
that Barnabas, far from being excluded, is joined and included in the same
power with Paul: And here the thing requires it, seeing eternal Life is made
to consist in the knowledge of Christ, as of the Father, wherefore both are
equally said to be the true God.

Those men who pretend to know better than God himself what becomes his glory,
are very apt to lay hold upon any thing like to favor their notions; wherefore
because it is said, God has appointed his Son heir of all things, Heb. 1.2.
John 5.22.
and has committed all judgment unto him, with other things to the same
purpose, they with the Jews do therewith entangle themselves, and form this
Argument: It cannot consist with the Majesty of the God of Israel, of the most
high God, to be appointed Heir by any one, but God has appointed his Son Heir
of all things, therefore his Son is not the God of Israel, nor the most high
God. In answer to this Objection, I say, first, that the Person of the God of
Israel, etc. is not the Person of his Father, but the same Dignity, Nature and
Authority he has, as already demonstrated, common with the Father: he is not
made Heir of all things in reference to his Nature, for he is such of himself
by his own right and inheritance, not by favor, but in relation to his Office
of Mediator; in which sense he is not only God, but God and Man, and upon this
account is all Judgment committed unto him by the Father, but otherwise he is
the God of Israel, and the most high. But, secondly, this Argument contains two
branches, which before I have spoken about, yet to what has already been said
this I shall add, to the first part, That the Son of God, the Lord Jesus, above
3400 years before his being manifested in the Flesh, Numb. 24.17. Micah 5.2.
Luke 2.32. John 1.49. Acts 5.31.
was called the Star of Jacob, and the Scepter of Israel, and long after the
ruler in Israel; after his birth, the glory of Israel; and after his Baptism,
the King of Israel, which in that sense and place is as good as God of Israel;
as indeed in the same Verse he is called the Son of God, that is, of the God of
Israel; a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and
forgiveness of sins.

As to the other part, That he is not the most high God, we must in the first
place take notice how they set up a high God, that is, Christ; and a most high
God, the Father, which is by such a comparative difference to make two Gods;
and they would have the Son of the highest not to be highest himself, as to
Essence and Power: The word most high or highest is an Hebraism, for in that
Language God is called Helion, (...).
that is, Supreme; whence the Greeks borrowed the Name they call the Sun by,
because the chief of all Stars and Planets in the Firmament. But to show the
falsehood of their Assertion, that the Son is not the most high God, let us
consider the following things: The Angel said to the Virgin, He shall be great,
Luke 1.32.
upon every account, and absolutely so, according to the Character long before
given of him by the Prophet, and Son of the highest, that is, of the true God;
v. 35, compared with v. 76: Isa. 9.6.
and so according to that Divine Nature the highest himself, it ought to be
observed how the word of the Angel, he shall be called the Son of the Highest,
is the same as used by the Prophet, His name shall be called wonderful
Counselor, the mighty God, etc. As in the Prophet, by being called is
understood, ^e shall really be: so it must be in the Evangelist, he shall be
manifested, owned, and really be. Thus Zecharias said of John, And thou child
shall be called, really and truly be the Prophet of the highest: and when he
spoke thus he was filled with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied, v. 67, as
Elizabeth was when she said of the blessed Virgin, Whence is this to me, that
the Mother of my Lord should come to me? v. 41, 43. How could he, according to
the flesh, be her Lord before he was born? In the second place, seeing I
already proved Jesus Christ to be Jehovah, it necessarily follows, he is the
most high God, Psalm. 33.18
for he whose name alone is Jehovah, is the most high over all the earth. Also
I proved him to be he whom the People provoked in the Wilderness; and Scripture
calls him the most high, whom they provoked in the wilderness. The proper Son
of God is God, the Son of the Highest is the Highest: And the words of Psalm.
107.11, Psalm. 78.17, 56.
do belong to the People in the Wilderness, who rebelled against the word of
God, and contemned the counsel of the most high. They would make use against us
of that place where when Melchisedes blessed Abraham God is called the most
high God, whereby they would confine that Title only to the Person of the
Father, which before I refute, I must by the by take notice how the word most
high is thrice mentioned in three Verses, Genesis 14.18, 19, 20.
to show how the Blessing upon Abraham was the Work of the three Persons in the
Godhead, as all three meet in the Conception of Christ, in the blessed Virgin's
Womb, and in his Baptism. The same high God, in whose name Melchisedec blessed
Abraham, is the same who called Abraham, received him into favor, and at that
time had given him Victory over four Kings, as it appears out of the place.
Now, that most high God who called Abraham is the same as made a Covenant with
him, who afterward commanded him to sacrifice his Son to himself; who is that
same Angel, as before we have taken notice of, who is called the Lord himself,
and upon that occasion said to him, Genesis 22.
By my self have I sworn, says the Lord, that in blessing I will bless thee,
and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed. Now the Apostle teaches that not
only the Father, but also the Son, is Author of that Covenant, when he says,
The Testament, or Covenant, Heb. 9.16:
was confirmed by the death of the Testator: And I would have them to tell me,
who besides Christ has with his Death and Blood sealed and confirmed that
Covenant; certainly none but that God that was manifest in the flesh, Act. 20
28.
that same God who has purchased his Church with his own blood: So that
Melchisedec, by the name of most high, meant the Son as well as the Father, who
cannot be separated; for, as Scriptures bear witness, the Son is always in the
Father; therefore every where in the Word of God, the name most high is spoken
of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which with that of God of Gods and Lord of
Lords is essentially taken, and excludes indeed Creatures, but never Son and
Holy Ghost, whom it does truly and properly belong to.

Now we are come to the Objections that are directly against the Divinity of
the Person of Christ, which must be answered; and in order to it we must here
premise something which before we gave a hint of, how the word God is taken in
two senses, first, properly, then metaphorically, and the name God does
properly signify the true God. Now he is the only true God, who essentially
and by nature is such, for every thing is called true by its nature, as true
Man, true Gold, true Silver, etc. as said before, from the nature of Man, of
Gold, and of Silver, so that if only it be like a Man, and like Gold, then it is
neither true Man nor true Gold, for simile non est idem, the thing like is not
the same. If the true God be he that has Gods Nature and Essence, certainly he
is the high and independent God, seeing Divine Essence is in itself Chief and
Independent. Now secondly and improperly, or metaphorically, are they called
Gods that in something are like God by participation and likeness, as Moses was
to Pharaoh, so Angels and Men; but these metaphorical Gods may not be called
true God, nor worshipped as such: that which is somewhat like a thing may never
be called the same thing. Thus I do premise in opposition to Socinus's Notion,
how in Scripture the word God is taken for the high God, independent from any
other, and for him who by the chief God is in some manner made partaker of the
Divinity. In the first sense God is God the Father, called one; in the second
is Christ, and some other Men; he, because of his Sanctification, and being
sent into the World, where Christ, as he would have it, does not affirm himself
to be God, but with dependency, that is, a titular, a made and coined God, as
by virtue of that Sanctification and Mission: when that very Sanctification and
sending into the World show him to be true God, Joh 10.36
for in the place is meant that Sanctification which preceded his coming into
the World, for the Father sanctified first, and then sent him, which belonged
to him, not as a Man, but had it before he was Man, and before he came into the
World; for he says, first he was sanctified by the Father, and then afterward
sent into the World; that is, he became Man; for before he was made flesh he
had been sanctified by the Father, that is, appointed and constituted Mediator
and Head of the Church, but Mediator he could not be, except he were true
eternal God: As to his being sent into the World, that also shows, that his
Being is not of this World, but from above, from Heaven, whence he was sent
into the World from the Bosom of the Father; which argues him to be above Man,
and to have had a Being before he was made Man, for he was the Son of God; in
Heaven he was not Man, but was made so upon Earth. We speak of the rising of
the Sun, which has a Being before he rises on our Hemisphere, but only at
such a time he appears unto us, like the Star that guided the Wisemen to the
place where he was born; and of Christ it is said, Thou have the dew of thy
youth from the womb of the morning. As to what Socinus says, That Christ is
said to be God, but not that only God, we answer, how Christ is not upon every
account said to be God, but only he is said to be such a God as true divine
Worship is due unto, who alone is to be worshipped and served, as he says:
Mat. 4.10.
So he is no other but the only God in Scripture, called the true God.

They object the place where the Holy Ghost says, 1 Cor. 8.6.
But to us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things; who is
distinguished from Christ, who is one Lord, by whom are all things: But the
Adversaries Prejudice makes, that they either will not or cannot see how in the
place St. Paul does not separate one God from Christ, nor one Lord from the
Father, for his scope is to teach us Christians, how there are not many Gods
nor many Lords, but only one God and one Lord: Now if the Father was one God
and one Lord separately from Christ, then there would be two Gods and two
Lords, which wholly overturns the Apostle's design; so that of necessity we
must say the Father and Christ are one God and one Lord, consequently that God
and the Lord are the same, for there is no doubt but that God is the Lord, and
he who by Divine Reason is Lord, and opposed to Idols, as it is the true sense
of the place, he also for certain must needs be God: So then when Paul says
that only God to be the Father, he also owns him to be the only Lord; and
when he says the one Lord is Christ, he owns him to be one God; and as he
excludes not the Father from being Lord, so he excludes not Christ from being
God. It Is a weak notion grounded upon these Particles of whom and by whom are
all things, for both the same in Scripture are attributed to God, Romans 11.36.
Of him, and through him, and to him are all things: so there is in them
nothing to exclude Christ from being God, for both belong to Father and Christ,
only one is chiefly attributed to one, the other chiefly to the other. It Is an
Error in the Adversaries to say the words by whom to signify a second Cause,
seeing that very same Particle is elsewhere attributed unto God, which in the
same place we must also believe to be attributed unto Christ, seeing the
Apostle's mind is to show there is only one God and one Lord: But in Socinus's
sense there would be two Gods, and two Lords, one, of whom are all things; the
other, by whom are all things; though the same Apostle does without any such
Particles absolutely affirm, There is one Lord, one God and Father of all:
Ephesians. 4 5, 6.
wherefore Men must conceive no Mystery to be in those Particles, to make a
distinction between God and Lord; one and the same Nature or Person is
certainly God and Lord. Thus David says, Psalm. 85.8.
I will hear what God the Lord will speak. And if two be so, one is no
prejudice to the other. Hence I conclude, how no stress is to be laid upon
these Particles of and by, as if there were two different Natures and
Principles; as also in another place already quoted, they would upon the
Particle and, where it is said, To know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ, where they would have the copulative Particle to join different Natures
and Persons to exclude him from being the true God: but after this manner of
interpreting, the words God and Father must import two different Subjects and
Natures; so that God shall be one, and Father the other; for it is said, Gal.
1.4.
according to the will of God and our Father; which contradicts their Opinion
of one only God, namely, the Father; but in that place the words God and
Father are essentially taken for Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one only God.

Farther they argue thus; If Christ be the Son of that only God, he is not the
only God himself, or else he would be his own Son; but he is not his own Son,
therefore he is not the only God. But I answer, the Son is distinguished from
that one God, not as to the Nature, but as to the Person, for the Essence
cannot be distinguished, because the Son has not part of the Nature, but
wholly, together with the Father, the Person must be distinguished, for he is
not Son of himself, but of another, though he be God of himself. Hence follows,
that as to the Nature the Son is that one God, not as to the Person, seeing in
Nature it does agree, but must be distinguished as to the Person.

Another Objection is this; If Christ be the Son of that only God, then that
one is not God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but only the Father, so that
only God is not in three Persons. We answer, When Christ is called the Son of
one God, one God is there taken for the Person of the Father, or as it
subsisteth in the Person of the Father, for Christ is the Son only of God the
Father; but when Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are said to be one God, then one
God is taken essentially. They need not say, where are one and three there are
four, as if the Essence and three Persons were four things really distinct. But
we answer, Where are one Being and three Beings, there indeed are four, but not
where are one Being and three manners of being. This may be illustrated by an
Example of Metaphysick, where is one Ens or Being, and three as properties or
qualities unum, verum, and bonum, one must not conclude there are four, but
unum, verum, bonum to be simply one Being: Wherefore seeing in this most simple
Essence the Persons are Subsistences, or Manners of subsisting, it follows that
three Persons and one Nature do not make four in God. As to the Rule of the
tertium, which I have taken notice of before, it fails here, because the
Essence is communicable, for Divine Nature being infinite, is so.

Now we come to some Objections relating to the Son of God's eternal
generation; The Father alone, say they, is not begotten, but the Son and Holy
Ghost are begotten and made, so cannot be the true God. We know how the
relative Property of the Father is to beget, of the Son to be begotten, and of
the Holy Ghost to proceed, so the word God is attributed to Son and Holy Ghost;
that the Son is called only begotten, because he is the natural Son and the
first born as Mediator, because he has many Brethren; he is called the
brightness of the Father's glory, to show that as from a lightful Body proceeds
Light, so the Son as naturally comes from the Father: and it is one thing to be
called (...), the Image of God, Col. 1.15. Heb. 1.3.
and another (...), the express Image of the Father, but Christ is called both.
He who is called the Image of God, is thereby distinguished from God, but he
which is called the Character of the Father, is distinguished from the Father,
not from God; wherefore we say Christ, as Mediator, may be and is called the
Image of God. But this comes short of what is intended, to express the eternal
generation of the Son of God; though our Adversaries would have that Filiation to
be grounded upon his Mediatorship. These few things, which may have a place in
our Discourse, being premised, I now directly answer the Objection: To be
begotten is to be understood, as becomes God; to be begotten in God, does not
imply to have a beginning, or to be made in time. Secondly, they say, Divine
Nature admits of no renting or division, wherefore nothing does proceed that
is different in number from it. I answer, There is no Comparison between the
Finite and Infinite Essence, for this last is communicated to the Persons
without multiplication, separation, or division. Thirdly, they go on, That
which is begotten has a beginning. I answer; It Is true in the Creatures, but
not in God. Fourthly, Nothing, say they, is wanting in the Father, so it is
superfluous to give him a Son. I answer; The Father is perfect, therefore he
has a Son, God's fecundity makes the Persons, but borrows nothing from
without. 5thly, Whatsoever comes from unity to plurality cannot be perfect,
except the substance be multiplied. I answer; God does not come nor go, with
God there is no terminus a quo, not ad quem, no place from which and to which,
but God is always God, is not divided, but begets indivisibly. 6thly, If the
Son be from the Father, it follows that all the Father has is divided,
because it passes into the Son; so the Father has given the Son part of
himself, and so the Son has deprived the Father of something. The Answer is,
The Son is not asunder from the Father, for the Essence is the same: There is
no renting, the Father with giving loses nothing, but retains all, the Nature
is whole in the Father, and whole in the Son, as one Candle lights another
without any dimunition of its own light. 7thly, They say, a man has no Son
before he has begotten. I answer, Nor God neither; but this I must say, it is a
gross mistake to draw Consequences from human things to divine, which is to
measure God by Men: God always begets, as the Sun does produce its
brightness. 8thly, If God begets, it is either according to his Nature or to his
Will; not the first, for then he would beget without consideration; if
according to his Will, then the Father's Will was before the generation of the
Son. I answer; He begets according to his Nature, and that freely. 9thly, If
the Son be born he had a beginning, so is not from Eternity. I answer; The
Father is eternal, the Son eternal, and the Generation eternal: in things
created, to beget, is indeed to produce that which is not; but in divine and
uncreated it is otherwise. 10thly, A spiritual Nature does not beget. We say, a
Spirit created does not, but the Creator exceeds the Reason of the Spiritual
Creature. 11thly, If the Father has begotten the Word, either he has begotten
Himself, or another, but neither of these, therefore He has not begotten;
Himself He has not begotten as granted, nor another neither, because there is
no other God, and so not begotten at all. I answer the word, he has begotten,
alium non aliud, another Person, but not another thing; He has begotten
another, who is God, but not another God. 12ly, If God has begotten the Word,
either the whole Divine Essence has begotten, or only the Father's Person; if
the Essence, then it has begotten Himself, or another; both which be absurd,
if the Father's Person has begotten, either he is the only true God, or else
the word is not that Son of the only true God, wherefore the Father has not
begotten the Son from Eternity: We answer, the Father has of Himself begotten
from Eternity, there is no necessity for the Father only, to be the true God,
it is enough he is the only true God, therefore the Son is the Son of the only
true God, not of two Persons, but of the Father.

These Objections which I have set down in short, and answered as briefly, I
look not upon as material, because not taken out of the word of God, the only
Judge of those Controversies, but herein they show how they affect Sophistry,
to impose upon some sort of People; but however, some Advantage we get by it,
for out of all these it appears, how this true Heavenly Doctrine is not
contrary to the Principles of Reason. They have three or four Cavils or
Questions more, which, by the Grace of God, we shall answer in few words:
First, Whether the Father begat the Son when he was already a Son, or before he
was the Son? I answer, the Father is Eternal, the Son Eternal, and begotten
from all Eternity, which has no Parts; the Father could no more be without the
Son, than the Sun without Light, or Light without Brightness: Their 2d Questie
on is, Whether the Father, after the Generation of the Son, has begotten any
other, because he is called the only Begotten; if he has Begotten none other,
then he has lost the Power of Begetting: But I answer, that Generation is
without time, always perfect, not successive, without beginning or end. The 3d
is, the Father has begotten, either unwilling or willing; if unwilling, then
he has suffered something which he would not; if willing, then his Will was
before the Generation of the Son; I say, part of this Argument was answered a
little before, whereunto I shall add: The Will of God was indeed before all
Creatures, for he has done whatsoever he pleased; Psalm. 115.3.
but it is not so of the Son, for of him we read in Scripture, he was, and is
with the Father; so the Son is no Creature, neither is he made by the Will as
Creatures are; he is born of the Father, and is Coeternal with the Person of
the Father; the Father's Will is in Him; for in HIm he wills, and by Him He
does all things: In those things which proceeded from Nature, there is no
Fore-counsel or Predeliberation; yet the Father has not begotten, being
unwilling; for He begat with a Will, not Antecedent, but Concomitant; thus the
Father's Person is, not because He was willing to be, but because He is, and
wills not Himself not to be; so the Son is not born against the Father's
Will, neither does the Fathers Will go before His Generation. A 4th
presumptuous and unbecoming this adorable Mystery, Vain and Sophistical Cavil
of theirs is this, Did the Father cease to beget? If so, that Discontinuation
has the beginning of the Son. The Answer is this, The Substance and Generation
of God are without, and above time, and Divine Nature is not deprived of a
begetting faculty, because it is without time; it is an Impiety to say the Father
discontinued, for then thereby would be introduced three Parts and Spaces,
before, now, and after, it were a Change, which God is incapable of, He is
above those things which import a Duration; Fire produces Heat, yet is not
heated by that Heat; it shall never cease to heat, and the heat is ever
perfect: But these Comparisons out of natural things, are very defective to
represent those high and incomprehensible Mysteries.

Out of these I leave the Reader to consider the manner of Spirit, which that
People are acted by; how familiar, how bold, how saucy they would be with God:
These holy things lay before them as Pearls before Swine; they speak of, and
handle them as they would in Schools the meanest Subjects of all, only to try
their Wits, which therein are very Profane, and to make a Show of their Parts,
when Men, that have a true Sense of Piety, instead of going about to play with,
and ridicule them, will ever think and speak of them with a Religious Fear, and
Awful Reverence: There is a danger for those, who dare to approach to God with
a strange Fire, only to think on it, should make Men fear and tremble. However,
let them wander and blaspheme never so much concerning that Eternal Generation;
the (...) that the thing is, Scripture has revealed it, but the (...): the
manner how, it has not, neither could we comprehend or express it, however it
has declared as much as is convenient and necessary for us to know. Solomon,
whose glorious Kingdom was a Figure of that of Christ, and his Renowned Wisdom
was a Type and a Shadow of that of the Son of God, who alludeth to it when he
says, that the Queen of the South came to hear the Wisdom of Solomon, Matthew.
12.22. Prove. 3.
and behold a greater than Solomon is here. That King, I lay, in that Chapter,
already mentioned more than once, has under the name of Wisdom, made a notable
mention of Christ, the Wisdom of the Father, the Wisdom he therein speaks of,
is not an Attribute of God, or a quality of Wisdom, infused into, and inherent
in Man, but is a Person, self-subsisting; for he is said to cry, to call and
invite Men to come; which Actions are proper for Persons, and not for things;
and to this place of Solomon does John regard and ^llude, when he says, in the
beginning was the word; the Meaning of which Word, beginning, is by that King
at large explained in that place. And when the question was put, who Christ
was, Peter in his Confession says, not Moses nor Elias, nor none of the
Prophets, nor John Baptist, the greatest among them that were born of Women,
but the Son of the living God, by an Eternal Generation, whereunto belongs what
our Savior says of himself; As the Father has Life in himself, so has he
given to the Son to have Life in himself; John 5.26.
here as the Father has Life in himself, so the Son has it in the same manner
that is in himself, that he may properly be as the Father, Chapter 6.57.
the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father: Socinians would have
him to be the Son of God in their Sense, after his Resurrection; but after it,
he can be the Son of God no more than David was more the Son of Jesse, after he
came to be King; but Christ being the Son of God, he by his Resurrection
declared his Deity, which he had before; for as St. Paul says, was declared to
be, not made, the Son of God by the Resurrection from the Dead.

They continue Sophistically to argue thus: Divine Essence is the Father,
Divine Essence is the Son; therefore the Son is the Father; after the fame
manner they say, the Father is the true God, but the Son is not the Father,
wherefore the Son is not the true God; and again, the true God is the Father of
Christ, but the Three Persons are not the Father of Christ, therefore the Three
Persons are not the true God: But these and the like must not be reckoned among
the Expositorious, and Categorical Syllogisms, because these Terms, Divine
Essence, and True God, are not incommunicable, but common to the Three Persons,
consequently they conclude no more than do particular Affirmatives; for in a
true Syllogism, according to the Rules, the major Proposition is not to be
particular nor equivalent to it; for from such a Proposition, when any thing
communicable to more, is the subject of it, and is restrained unto one
Particular, out of it nothing can be concluded; and this Proposition being made
particular, the terms of the Subject or Predicate are supposed to be
Reciprocal, as if God and the Father be the same, which is false; we grant the
Father to be the only true God, so we say of the Son; but thence it does not
follow, that the Son is the Father; for in saying the Father is the true God,
we do not relate to his Paternity, in respect to his Son, but to his Being and
Nature, as the Scripture never said, that the Father only is the true God, so
we do not say, that he that is the true God is the Father only; but to affirm,
that because each Person is God, therefore one Person must be another, is just
without giving any reason at all to dis-believe what God has declared. The
Father, say they, is the only true God; but the Particle alone, or only is
restrictive of the Predicate, not of the Subject; for Son and Holy Ghost are
the same God, the Person is not formally Person by the Essence, but by the
manner of having that Essence, and thus there are Three Persons of the same
Essence; as to the Generation we do not say that the Father has sometimes
begotten, and sometimes not, nor that the Generative Faculty is an Attribute of
that Nature, but a personal Propriety of the first Person; who in a peculiar
manner has the Essence; wherefore it is no wonder if the other Persons have it
not.

But we must proceed upon other Objections of theirs; they say, every where
Scripture distinguishes Father and Son one from another and never confounds
them together; for it teaches that there is but one God the Father, of whom are
all things, and we in Him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things,
and we by Him, and one Holy Ghost, by whom we cry Abba Father; they are
distinguished by the Manifestation of the Trinity in the Lord's Baptism, and in
the form of Baptism, etc. We answer, They are Names Relatives, which assert the
Distinction of Persons; but because they are distinct Persons, it does not
follow that there is not one and the same Essence of the three Persons, and
that they are not one only God, Father, Maker and Preserver of all; and out of
the Texts they produce, they cannot make out what they intend; how the Father
and the Son are never contained together under the Name of God; for the Persons
are distinguished where Scripture speaks Relatively of God, and does oppose
or compare them, or describe their Proprieties. Further they object, they have
distinct Essences, whose workings are distinct, but Father's and Son's workings
are distinct, therefore their Essences are so: But we say, the major
Preposition is to be understood of Operations ad extra, or outward; for if
whilst one does work; the other cease, then the Essences are distinct, but as
to the inward workings there is no distinction or difference of Essences; far
from it, that the Generation of the Son, and the Procession of the Holy Ghost,
do confirm the unity of Essence; for by the Generation, one and the same whole
Essence of the Father is communicated unto the Son, and by this same reason
there is but one and the Essence of both: Now the Minor Proposition speaks of
inward Operations, and this Omonimy or Ambiguity of Terms brings in four
Termini in the Argument, contrary to Rules; but if one and the same kind of
Operations be understood, then one of the Propositions is false; the major is
understood of those, ad imra, the minor of those ad extra, and in the case of
the Incarnation, there are two terms to be considered; a quo from whom, and ad
quem to or in whom, though as thus it be terminatively in the Son, yet a quo, or
originatively, it is the work of the whole Trinity.

Another Argument of theirs is this, the Essence unbegotten and begetting is
not the same with the Essence begotten and not begetting, but the Essence of
the Father is unbegotten, yet has begotten the Son, but the Son's is begotten
yet nor begetting, therefore the Essence of the Father is not the same with
that of the Son: This Argument is borrowed from the Arrians, whereof the minor
Preposition is false; namely, that the Essence of the Son is begotten, the
Names begotten, or not begotten, do not belong to the Essence, but show an
Hypostatical or Personal Difference: Should the Essence beget, it would either
beget it self; and so should be begotten of it self, so it would make many
different Essences of the Godhead, whence would follow many Gods. Moreover, as
in natural things, not the Essence but the compositum does beget, so in divine
things the Person begets, and is begotten, which yet is not a vain Relation,
seeing it is not constituted without the Essence. Now, if it were true, that
the Divine Essence does beget, one could say, either the Son does beget, or
deny the Son to have the Divine Essence. Again, They say, Two or three distinct
Persons have so many distinct Essences, for the distinction of Essences does
follow that of Persons; so then Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, being three
distinct Persons, they have three distinct Essences; but the first Preposition
is true, only in natural, not in Divine things; besides, they are in a mistake,
when they think there is no real Distinction, except the things do differ in an
Essential Number, when there are several things that differ in the thing and
definition, which yet in Essence and Number are but one: Here by the by, I say,
the words like and likeness, when a Comparison is made between the Persons, is
not convenient to be used, but equal and equality, which indeed contains a
likeness, but something above: Another thing I shall add here, how some things
are properly spoken of the Essence, which also are properly spoken of the
Persons, for it is properly said of the Essence and of the Persons, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, that they are Spirit and Holy; for the word Spirit is spoken of
as common and essential, John 4.24.
God is a Spirit; properly and personally of the Son, Christ declared to be the
Son of God, according to the Spirit of Holiness, Romans 1.4. Heb. 9.14. ^Pet. 3
18.
and who thorough the Eternal Spirit offers himself; and elsewhere, Christ
was put to death in the flesh, but quickened in the spirit. So of the Father and
Holy Ghost; also to be holy is an Attribute of the Essence, yet in particular
and properly in Scripture, attributed to the Father, to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost: Upon this Matter one thing more I shall take notice of, how
Adjectives in the Plural may be attributed to God, by reason of the Number of
Persons, and Substantives in the Singular, only upon account of the Essence.

Further they object, Christ has a Father, who is the God of Christ, but the
Father has no God called his, therefore Father and Son are distinguished in
Essence, the major they prove out of our Savior's Word, I ascend unto my
Father, and to your Father, unto my God, and to your God, and my God my God why
have thou forsaken me? I answer, Christ has a common Father and God with us,
in as much as the word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us and in as much as the
Man Jesus Christ is Mediator, between God and Man, yet so, as in his
Mediatorship he is true Man, so he is true God: This Discourse being intended
for his Brethren, he begins with the Profession he makes to own them as his
Brothers, Go to my Brethren; all which to be understood of the Nature, which
the Brotherhood does relate to; and though the Father continues such in relation
to what the Son was, when the Word was with God, yet in the Birth and
Incarnation the Father remains what he was; God is the Father of all Flesh,
but not in the same manner and sense as he is the Father of the word; in
Scripture it is declared in what sense, and on what side they are Brethren to
the only begotten Son of God, Colos. 1.18.
I will declare thy Name unto my Brethren, but he said before, I am a Worm, and
no Man; Psalm. 22.6.
Christ is by the Apostle called the Firstborn amongst many Brethren, also
because the Firstborn from the Dead. Furthermore they say, if Christ, when he
speaks of God, stould mean also himself, he would include himself in the
mention he makes of God, but he does not, but makes a difference between
himself and God, whom he calls the true God; so in the Apostolical Writings,
God and Christ are spoken of asunder, which places I quote in the Margin, c.
John 3.16. and 17.3. d. Romans 16.23. 1 Timothy 6.13, 14, 15, 16. 1 Cor. 15.24. Col.
1.3. Ephesians. 4.5. 1 These. 1.2, 3, 9, 10.
to show we omit none of them: So, say they, he not joining himself with God,
shows he is not the same with God; thus the name God absolutely taken,
belongs only to the Father: I answer, the name of God is taken either
personally, namely, as he begets, and as he is begotten; and thus the Son is
distinguished from the Father, and upon this account the Apostle speaks of them
separately, Christ is distinguished from God, both in Person and Office, not in
the Godhead or Essence, or else the name is absolutely, simply, Romans 8.31, 32.
1 Timothy 1.1. 1 John 5.20. Joh. 14.1.
and essentially taken, when the Question is about the Godhead; then as to the
Deity, the Son is not distinguished from the Father, as when Christ says,
there is none good but God, he does not exclude himself from being good, it is
as if he had said unto the Man, if thou believe me to be good, for so thou
call me, thou must also believe me to be God, for none is good but God; and
this was to have the Man to look upon him to be God: Again, When our Savior
says, Unto God all things are possible, and that God is able out of Stones to
rise Children unto Abraham, when the Apostles in their Salutations name first
God, and our Father, and then the Lord Jesus Christ; it is no good Consequence
to say that the Son is not of the same Nature with the Father, for the Name of
God is therein attributed unto the Father, as the Spring, and first in order of
the Deity, then the Son is proposed as Mediator, to lead us unto God, for we
are led by Christ unto the Father to worship and adore him together with the
Father; for he says, Ye believe in God, believe also in me, thereby showing we
ought to render unto him the same things we render to the Father; wherefore in
several places we read how when the Name Father is added, yet that of God is
immediately put before; when generally something is taught, which belongs to
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, then having named the Father, the Mediator is
mentioned, to breed in us Hope and Comfort; thus the same Apostle opposes one
God to Idols, where Christ is not excluded; for immediately in the same Verse
he declares who that one God is, namely, the Father of whom are all things,
and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, 1 Cor. 8.6.
Ephesians. 4.5, 6.
and we by him; thus in another place he says, there is one God, as there is
one Baptism, Christ, in whose Name we are baptized, is not excluded from that
oneness of Godhead; Joh. 14.6.
and because he would come to the Mediator, he very fitly names the Father,
to whom, as the Head of the Deity, there is no approach without the Mediator;
so by the Name Father is represented God, essentially offended by Mankind, and
by the Son and Christ that Person of the adorable Trinity, who has undertaken
to make our Peace, and reconcile us unto God, he is the way, the truth, and the
life, and none can come to the father but by him: So when we read the word God,
we must not separate the Father nor the Son, because the Divinity of the
Father, and of the Son, is but one and the same.

Moreover they object the Father is (...) God of himself, has all of himself,
and acts of himself, but the Son is not God of himself, he is from the Father,
himself he says he came from the Father, and the Father sent him; to this I
answer, They go upou a wrong Principle for they would have this to be of one
self, or of another, to import a different Essence or Nature, for even in
created things, that which is begotten is ever of the same Nature with that
which has begotten; but by reason of Imperfection these are one only in
Species; but God, the Father, and the Son, may not be said to be one in Species
or Kind, because thus they would make two Gods: What they add how in Divine
things, he that begets, and he that is begotten, are not one, either in
Essence or Species, because Men and Angels are called Sons of God, which are
not one with God, either in Nature or Kind, is very frivolous; for it is certain
they are called Sons of God upon a very different account from that on which
Christ is so called: None is ever called God's own and proper Son, only
begotten, come from the Bosom of the Father; for unto which of the Angels, or
Men, said he at any time thou art my Son, Heb. 1.5.
this day have I begotten thee; and again, I will be to him a Father, and he
shall be to me a Son. Moreover, they are mistaken, to think that to be of
another, is to be of a different and inferior Nature; indeed, he who receives
not all, but out of favor only part of what another has, may be said to be
inferior to him of whom he receives, but he not so who has all that another
has; not by favor, but by Nature and Generation: They are farther much
mistaken, when they deny Christ, simply and absolutely to be God of himself;
for he must need be (...), who is (...). That is a being or Essence of himself,
Life of himself, Holy of himself, Power of himself, is good of himself, Light
of himself, Truth of himself, Wisdom of himself, Righteousness of himself,
Perfect of himself, and Glory of himself, which all are Attributes of the
Deity, and to whom they belong: So does also Divine Nature; all which
Attributes were by the ancient Orthodox Doctors of the Church, and after them
by the eminent Instruments of Reformation, owned to be the Right and Property
of the Son of God, grounding themselves upon the Authority of Scripture in
several Places, especially that of 1 John 5.20. by me already quoted; we are in
him that is true, even in his son Jesus Christ: This is the true God, and
eternal life.

If we look upon the Son of God, as he is from Eternity begotten of the Father,
and as he is the second Person, on such an account we own the Son to be from
the Father, seeing he is true Son; but if we consider him as God, he is
altogether self God, and God of himself; for the Divinity is wholly unbegotten,
and of her self, knows of no beginning, and needs not to borrow of others
what it has of it self; and if to the Son one would attribute a Begotten, and
formed Essence, this is from the Father to make a second God. Lastly, Many of
the Places which the Adversaries do heap up, do speak of Christ's Office of
Mediator, which they improperly misapply to his Divine Nature, for though
Christ's Humane Nature has no Personality, but is upheld by the Divine Person,
yet that upholding does not confound the Natures, otherwise Passion and Death
might be attributed to Divine Nature. On this Matter they form other Arguments,
grounded upon false Suppositions, as sometimes they would have Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, to be three Spirits, and the words unbegotten, begotten, and
proceeding to be Essential Differences; when to speak of three Spirits in the
Godhead, is as good as to say there are three Gods, 1 Cor. 8.4.
whilst Scripture says there is none other God but one, who has his Being
from himself, and from none else, for we must say of every God so called, which
is not such by Nature, Hosea 8.6.
what the Prophet says of the Calf of Samaria; the workman made it, therefore
it is not God; and it is a right Consequence, for nothing can be God that is
made by another: So then to talk of three Spirits in the Godhead, is to set up
three Gods; for God, as our Savior says, absolutely is a Spirit; and when we
say Spirit, we understand his Nature, for a Spirit is a Spiritual Substance and
being; thus, they go on still upon their Suppositions, they would have the
words unbegotten, begotten and proceeding, to be essential Differences, and not
personal as they are, so other times they would have the Son, because he is of
the Father, not to be one God with the Father, who existeth of himself, and so
not to be the one true God, because he has a Being from another, but we must
distinguish between the being of Essence, and that of the Person, the first the
Son has of it self, and the second of the Father.

They farther object, he that is Mediator with the God of Israel, is not the
God of Israel himself; for if it were so, three Absurdities say they would
follow; the first, God would be inferior to himself; 2dly, God would pray to
himself; 3dly, the Party offended shall be Mediator with himself; but to the
first we answer, Though God be Mediator, it follows not he is inferior to
himself; for though upon the account of the Office, he that is a Mediator be
inferior to him whom he intercedeth with, yet he is not thereby inferior in
Nature; for even among Men one Equal does intercede with his Equals. As to the
second, the Son prays to God for us, according to his Humane Nature, though we
exclude not the Divine from interceding, for it belongs to it, in as much as it
is the Eternal Will of the Son that the Father would, by reason of his
Sacrifice, receive us into Favor, the Prayers and Submission belong to Humane
Nature, but the Divine makes them effectual, both Natures being united in one
Person. The Divine was united with the Humane mediately in the Person of the
Son; but the same Person was immediately united to Humane Nature. As to the
third it were absurd indeed, if the Party offended was Mediator when there is
but one Person offended; but where several Persons are offended, there is no
Absurdity, if by their common Consent one of those offended Persons offers
satisfaction for the Offender, and to reconcile, and in this Case it could not
be otherwise; for it was required that the Reconciler should be God; and it is
but a Cavil to say that he, with whom the Son is not Mediator, could not be
reconciled, and that the Son was not Mediator with himself, or with the Holy
Ghost, but only with the Father; for first, not only he is reconciled and
appeased by the Mediator, with whom the Son performs the Office of Mediator,
but also they that are joined, and about it agreed with him; wherefore, seeing
in every thing, the Will of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be agreed, it
follows, that through the Merit and Satisfaction of the Mediator, the Father
being fully satisfied, the Son and Holy Ghost are so too. I add as to the
second, it is not absurd as they think, that the Son should be Mediator with
himself, for the Son of God does the Office of Mediator in both Capacities;
for, as God being one with the Father, he receives us into Favor; and as he
is Mediator according to both Natures, so as he is God, manifested in the
Flesh, by reason of his Merit and Satisfaction, we are received into favor;
and although this being received into favor be common to Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, yet the Mediator is said to intercede for us with the Father, who is
considered as the Spring of all Divine Counsels and Operations; who being
willing that the Son should satisfy for our Sins, and that by virtue of that
satisfaction, our Sins should be forgiven, it is not possible for the Son to
will and do otherwise; to this purpose makes what the Apostle says about our
being reconciled to God by Jesus Christ, and what the Evangelist writes, he
that has my commandments, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20, 21,
and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he that loves me, shall be
loved of my father, and I will love him, and manifest my self unto him; John
14.21, 23.
to the same effect does tend what is said in another place of Christ, who,
when he had by himself purged our Sins, sat down on the right hand of the
majesty on high: So then the Son is appeased, Heb. 3.3.
and forgiveth our sins, receives us into favor, and gives us Eternal Life,
upon the account of his own satisfaction. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost do
the same, by reason of the satisfaction given by the Son: In the mean while, in
relation to the Son, who for his own sake receives us, it is called his Will, in
relation to the Father, it is called Mediation or Intercession; therein the Will
of the Son, in order of the Person and Divine Working, does follow the Will of
the Father. Hence it appears, how they do ill, to confound the Divine Nature
of Christ under his Office of Mediator, as such; according to his Humane
Nature, he prayed to the Father, and taught us a form of Prayer, that we should
call upon the Father through the Mediator, yet he thereby never intended to
exclude or deprive himself of his own Due or Right, there is no Contradiction
to worship the Father in the Face, and thorough the Intercession of the
Mediator, for we worship the Father not in his Person only, but of the whole
Nature; and Christ in John 5.22. as in the form of Baptism, proposes himself
to be worshipped; for Adoration is not confined in the Person of the Father
only.

They say, If the Father be greater than Christ, then he is not God equal with
the Father; but Christ says, John 14.28.
the father is greater than I: Therefore, is not God equal with the Father? in
this place Christ speaks not of his Divine Nature, but of his Office; the
Father does send, and the Son is sent; and though he be less as to his
Humanity, he is equal in relation to his Divinity. Wherefore, I answer, Christ
is less than his Father in respect to his Humane Nature, which he assumed with
the Infirmity thereof, Sin excepted; for he was hungry, weary, sorrowful, and
the like, and we read he wept, though never that he laughed; but before that
Assumption of the Flesh, he had a Being of another Nature, which can be no
other but Divine, as it appears of what Scripture says, sacrifice and
offering thou would not, Heb. 10.5.
but a body has thou prepared me. He certainly need have had a Being before
this natural Body was prepared for him; me then he was a Person before the
Body. This Inferiority must be understood of his Person, in that voluntary
humiliation of his in his state of exinanition, yet this his being inferior to
the Father in respect of his Humanity, does not at all take away the equality
between him and the Father, in relation to his divine Nature, for he is the
Word, Son of God; though when he was made Flesh, he was made that which he was
not before with assuming human and mortal Nature, yet he still remained that
which he was before, namely, God blessed for ever; there was no addition,
diminution, or alteration in his divine Nature, but continued the same Person
of the most holy Trinity, begotten of the Father from all Eternity. Christ is
less than the Father, in respect to his Office of Mediator: We are in Covenant
with God, not upon our account, but upon that of C^^^st, who is thus become the
Head of all Men that are in covenant with God; and in relation to this, he is
called the Mediator of the New Testament: Heb. 9.15.
wherefore we must observe how in Scripture the Lord Jesus is said to be made
Lord and Christ, Acts 2.36.
but never said to be made God; which things are very different, for by Nature
God is Lord, but Christ by Will and Appointment, in respect of his Personal
Dominion, and of the Oeconomical Kingdom belonging to his Mediatorship; He is
God absolutely, but Lord and Christ relatively unto us, God essentially and
Christ accidentally: In this last sense he was anointed with that Oil and Gifts
of the Holy Ghost, for in the other sense he wanted no such thing; he was not
anointed simply as God, but as Christ a Prophet, a Priest and a King, for our
sake, and for our good: And all places in Scripture wherein the Father is said
to be greater than Christ, to be the Head of Christ, to have made Christ Lord,
to have exalted and anointed him, and the like, ought to be ta^^en in this
sense, that is, in regard of his human Nature and Mediatorship, and not as to
the divine, for when this is spoken of our Savior, himself says, I and my
Father are one, John 10.30.
there is no difference either in Nature or Power. After this manner also is to
be understood that place, John 5.22, 27.
wherein the Father is said to have committed all judgment unto the Son, and
given him authority to execute judgment, because he is the Son of man: which
has a relation to his Office of Mediatorship in the Government of the Church,
and Judgment over the Enemies thereof: His essential Kingdom he has of
himself, but this dispensatory one from the Father, not because he is the Son
of God, but because he is the Son of Man: which reason tends to breed in us
Comfort and Assurance, in that we are to be judged by a Man, one who having
taken our Nature, with its Infirmities, Sin excepted, will compassionate us,
for he was tempted as we are; and in human Judgments it is a Privilege to be
^ry'd by his Peers and Equals, that is of the same ^ank and condition with us.
In this sense ought also to be taken the place where it is said, The Son also
shall be subject unto him that put all things ander him, 1 Cor. 15.28.
and deliver up the Kingdom into his hands, the Kingdom of ruling, governing,
and preserving of the Church: This giving or dellvering up of the Kingdom is no
sign of inequality, for as the Son is to give it up to the Father, so the
Father gave it up to him without any diminution of his Power; neither shall the
Son receive any diminution of his, he shall deliver it in a perfect Oeconomical
administration, having overcome all Enemies, and brought all his Elect to be
crowned with Glory; so there will be no more to do, no need of being a King in
that respect. By the words, Then shall the Son himself be subicel, is to be
understood the account he is to give of his administration thereof; and this is
a kind of subjection which shall be swallowed up in that perfect Happiness
wherein God will be all in all, no more Enemies to fight, no more need of a
Mediator.

But for their last gasp they reserve a frivolous and insignificant Exception;
for some of them say, our Arguments are not coherent, sometimes we plead for
Unity, at other times for a Trinity; but we form our Arguments according to the
nature of the Matters, and the Principles of those whom we do dispute against.
Against the Gentiles and Heathens we prove, That there is but one true God;
against the Jews, That besides God the Father, there is also another Person,
namely, the Son of God, who is also true God: We are to deal against several
Adversaries to this truth, Arrians, Sabellians, Samosatenians, Socinians,
Tritheists, etc. and accordingly we frame our Arguments suitably with the
Principles of those whom we dispute against. If I deal against Gentiles, my
Arguments must not be drawn out of Scripture, which they receive not, but from
natural Reason, and out of the Writings of their Philosophers and other
Authors, as St. Paul did in Athens, Acts 17.28: So if against Samaritans, I
must argue only out of the Pentatench or five Books of Moses: If against Jews,
only out of the Old Testament, because they own not the New; and so of the rest.

This is the substance of what they say in opposition to these Heavenly Truths,
which to compass they are not ashamed to wrest Scriptures, to force upon them a
sense contrary to the Design of the Spirit of God, and to the Analogy of Faith;
and in order to form a detestable System, whereby they do what they can to
overthrow the whole foundation of our holy Religion, not only they for many
Years racked their own Brains to extract all the Poison which Satan could
infuse and (...) ^own natural Corruption suggest, but also called for Help upon
the most infamous and abominable Heretics that ever were in the Christian
World, and out of all made a Quintessence of all that erroneously, impiously,
or blasphemously can be forged or said against the Divine Nature, Attributes,
Persons, and Grace of God: Yet not wholly trusting to this, they have set up a
Diana, a God-Idol of their own, even their own natural Reason, that where
abusing Scripture cannot serve the turn, their unreasonable Imaginations may
do it, wherein they seem to scorn being guided by the Word of God, where it does
not answer their Ends; but divine things must not be measured by our shallow
Capacity. And if we believe Scripture to be the Word of God, then we must
receive that which God teaches us therein; and we must not to the prejudice of
this be guided by our own Reason, which in such matters is but an ignis fatuus,
a false and deceitful Guide, that will lead us to Rocks and Precipices; that
only must be our Rule which God has revealed in his Word. For an Instance;
Will not Human Reason suggest, that if our Savior, instead of poor Fishermen,
unlearned, and of no account in the World, had called the Joseph's of Arimathea,
the Nicodemus, and men of good parts and of quality in the World, the Gospel
would hove gotten more ground and been more spread abroad in the World; yet
this is contrary to God's Method, who has hidden these things from the wise
and prudent, Mat. 11.25.26. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29,
and revealed them unto Babes, who has chosen and called the foolish the weak
and base things of the world to confound the wise and the mighty: And why so?
first, because so it seemed good in his sight; secondly, to the end that no
flesh should glory in his presence: Joh. 7.48.
This confirmed by Experience, for Have any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees
believed on him? So then to insist on this reason is no less than to arraign
the Wisdom of God, which no Man may or ought to do. Farther, some things there
are taught by Philosophy of the Soul of the World, of several things therein,
and of Man's Soul, which to human Understanding appear to have no Truth in
them; yet in those things, if upon the account of the Learning and Wit of those
great Men, we have a kind of esteem and reverence for their Opinions, much more
ought we to have a reverence for the Truth contained in God's Word, and
received by so many great and good Christians, and suffered for by them in all
Ages, for never was any Divine Truth more universally, and in all places and
times, received, notwithstanding the opposition of some wicked men, than the
Mystery of the most holy Trinity.

As indeed not only the Offering and Preaching, but also the whole Application
of Salvation to be obtained in this and another Life, do depend upon the truth
of the holy Trinity, because everywhere the Father works by his Son, and this
with the Father by the Holy Ghost, which if we believe not, we cannot have
either the use or comfort of things relating to Salvation; but God has
revealed them unto us by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.10, 12.
and we have received the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things
that are freely given to us of God. It Is then our Duty and Comfort to know the
Father in the Son, and both through the Holy Ghost, for the Spirit searches
all things, yea, the deep things of God: as Christ says, none knows the
Father but the Son, and to whom the Son will reveal him, so John testifies,
that he that has not the Son has not the Father; and Paul, Mat. 11.27 1 John
2.23. Ephesians. 2.12.
that those that are without Christ are also without Hope, and without God in
the world: It Is said indeed how God at sundry times, and in several manners,
spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, but the knowledge of him,
and of Salvation, then was in the dark till the last days, when he spoke unto
Men by his Son: When we hear of the salvation which God sent into the World,
then at the same time the Son and Holy Ghost are mentioned, because without
them there is none. Among several other places in Scripture, wherein this great
work is spoken of, and wherein we find the three Persons mentioned, that is
remarkable wherein the Apostle joyneth them together; Heb. 10.29.
Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant,
wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the
spirit of grace? All three are concerned, so they were before salvation was
actually effected, long before when all was under Types and Figures, 1 Pet.
1.11, 12 compared with 2 Pet. 1.21.
for by the spirit of Christ the Prophets prophesied of old: so now in this
great business the Son has his part, and the Holy Ghost his also. As much as
God has been pleased to reveal unto us about this adorable Mystery, we must
study and enquire after, but no farther; where God is silent we must be so too;
and we ought to curb our Curiosity and Presumption, and not to stretch our
Brains to find out Proofs out of Comparisons with Sun, Soul, Rainbow, Trees,
Triangle, etc. which are all lame and defective. This I speak as to us who
believe that high and incomprehensible Mystery upon God's Word, wherein he has
revealed it unto us; for as to the abominable wretches, which out of Hell are
broken loofe against it, and not only make a Jest of and despise and hate it,
we must leave them to God, if peradventure he will give them repentance, 2 Timothy
2.^^.
to the acknowledging of the Truth.

As to our blessed Savior, whom they go about to rob of that Glory and Honor
which Scripture declares do belong to him, and which therein he assumeth unto
himself, and whom they would make a mere Man, a Creature, and if I dare speak
it without blasphemy, an imaginary and a mock God, acting the part of a God as
an Actor does upon a stage that of a Prince, when he is not such. In Scripture
the Names of God absolutely attributed to none but unto the true God; and that
also in so many places of Scripture, whereof many we already quoted, and others
not: We have given instances of all the incommunicable Names of Divine Nature
appropriated unto him; also we made it appear how all Attributes proper to the
true God, and never communicated to the Creature, do belong to Christ, as do
all divine works truly such; why then should not all own him to be true God by
Nature, seeing essential Attributes are inseparable from the Essence? The
Oneness of which Essence with the Father he does attribute unto himself,
explaining in what sense he calls God his Father, not by Adoption or Grace,
or merely by reason of his assumption of our human Nature, John 10.30, 38.
or by virtue of any Office and Dignity, but because of his eternal Generation
and Co-essentiality with the Father, in which sense he says, I and the Father
are one; Chap. 1.14 and 3.16. Romans 8.3, 32. Mar. 14.33.
and upon the account of this oneness of Nature he says, The Father is in me,
and I in him. And this eternal Generation in one Essence is denoted in
Scripture, when called only begotten of the Father, Gods own and proper Son,
the true Son of God, yea, such a Son as is Heir of all things, and in
opposition to Angels, as the Son is to the Servants; which Sonship and
Generation is more clearly expressed when he is called the Brightness and
express Image of the Father's Person, because in him, through that eternal
Generation, is expressed the whole Person and Glory of the Father; for which
Image of God he is called the Firstborn of every Creature, that is, begotten
before there was any Creature, and so from Eternity; as in the Form and Nature
of God, to be equal with God, who otherwise has not, and owneth none equal to
himself. 2 Samuel 7.1^.


In these high and divine matters Men must not presume beyond what is written
and revealed in Gods Word, nor wrest the Delign of the Spirit of God, or force
an unusual and contrary sense to the words of the Text, but we ought to keep
our selves within the bounds of that holy reverence which becomes us in the
contemplation of the Majesty of God. In these very things Hierom, as said
before, was very cautions about acknowledging three Hypostases in the Deity,
because he thought the word to denote substance. When God was upon withdrawing
the Spirit of Prophecy from among his People, Chap. 4.4.
he, by Mal^c^y, the last of the Prophets, commands them to remember the law of
Moses his servant: So now, when the Apostles, immediately inspired by the Holy
Ghost, ceased so long since, men should wholly acquiesce to the sound Doctrine
which those Servants of his Son Jesus, left for our use and instruction,
wherein we learn how God has revealed himself, and communicated his own
infinite fullness unto his Creatures, in all of them, immediately by his own
Son, first, in the creation of all things; secondly, in their providential
disposal and rule; thirdly, in the revelation of his Will and Ordinances;
fourthly, in the communication of his Spirit and Grace, in none of which is the
Person of the Father otherwise represented unto us than in and by the Person of
the Son, for the whole end of the Gospel is, 2 Cor. 4.6. 1 Timothy 6.10. 1 ^o^n
4.12.
to give knowledge of the glory of God in the (...) of Jesus Christ, that is,
the glory of the (...) visible God, whom no man has seen. Now in that
forenamed Prophecy of Malachy, the same Chapter, and two last Verses, the
coming of the (...), which had often been prophesied of before, is again
promised, yea, of the Lord himself, who then was and had been from all
Eternity, but was to come only at such a time, which is called the great and
dreadful day of the Lord, for against the appearing, and long before, of that
Sun of Righteousness, all those Stars the Prophets were to disappear, one only
excepted, like the Morning Star before the rising of the Sun; Behold, I will
send you Elijah the Prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of
the Lord: By whom the Lord Jesus is meant, as John Baptist is by Elijah, so
called because he came in the spirit and power of Elias, for both were endowed
with a fervency of Spirit, which made them spare neither Kings nor People: And
the Evangelist makes use of the words of the Prophet, He shall turn the hearts
of the Fathers to the Children, Luke 1.17, compared with Matt. 11.14, Mark
9.11, 12, 13. That same Lord, whose coming with such Concomitants, as great and
dreadful, was Jehovah himself, the God of Israel, whose words, though in his
state of humiliation, were so conspicuous, glorious, and great, as he in one
particular said himself to the man out of whom he had cast a Legion of Devils,
Return to thine own house, Luke 8.39.
and show what great things God has done unto thee: And the Evangelist, who in
the beginning of the Verse relates Christ's words to the man, does in the
latter end of the same declare what the man did; And he went his way, and
published throughout the whole City how great things Jesus had done unto him;
he did it in the same words, how great things, only instead of God he said
Jesus, so that Jesus was the God that had done great things unto him. This was
in the Land of Judah, where no other God but the true God of Israel was owned
and worshipped; so the Lord Jesus was that same God, whom the Father from
Heaven calls his Son, which is the Name mentioned, Phil. 2.9.
that is above every name, and this name, more excellent than any given the
Angels, Heb. 1.4.
he has obtained by inheritance, not by favor, according to what says the
Apostle, for the name by him designed is that of Son of God, Thou art my Son,
with the exegetical adjunct of his generation, This day have I begotten thee;
Acts 13.33.
which words Paul does apply to the Lord Jesus: This day of Eternity, after the
manner of time spoken in relation to God, with whom are no parts of time, as
with Men, past, present, and to come: With God are not days, but only one day,
which had no beginning, and shall have no end: It was never said to any Angel
personally upon his own account, Thou art the Son of God, much less with the
reason of the appellation, This day have I begotten thee: so in that place the
Apostle does not speak of the general Name of a Son, but of the particular
appropriation thereof unto the Lord Jesus, upon his own account. When the
Apostle says, he is the firstborn, the thing it self is not meant of being
the first begotten, but the Dignity and Privilege that attended it. Psalm. 89.27
Thus God says of David, I will make him my firstborn, explained in the later
part of the Verse, higher than the Kings of the carth. Thus among Men one may
say, I will make such a one my Firstborn, or my Heir; which is the Privilege
attending the Birthright. This is Christ's Title by Nature and not by Office;
anointing was a Ceremony used to make and declare a King, but that anointing
made him not a Man, for he was so before: So the Lord Jesus was God before he
was Christ.

CHAP. XI. Some Animadversions upon a Book called, Christianity not Mysterious.
WHAT I said somewhat before concerning Reason, puts me in mind of a thing I
promised about the middle of my Discourse, namely, to take notice of a Book
with the Title of Christianity not mysterious; wherein the Author undertakes to
show, there is nothing in the Gospel, or in our Religion, against or above
Reason: And though I have hardly any room left, yet to be as good as my word, I
must briefly say something to it.

We agree with him against all human Authority, contrary to the Word, and own
Scripture to be the only competent Judge, and allow of our Reason, as long as
it draws out of that Spring, and not otherwise. Let us be sincere, and avoid
Ambiguities, there is true and sound Reason, whereof the Word of God is the
right and standing infallible Rule, for the Will of God is the measure of all
Truth and Equity, and our Reason, to be Reason indeed, must be guided by that,
or else it does deviate from the Rule. There is also that which is called
Reason, but is not really so, merely human, subject to Error, a mere Chimera
and Fancy of Man's shallow Brains, according to this natural Reason Men willing
thereby to judge of spiritual things, to speak in Paul's words, professing
themselves to be wise, become sools; far from being rational, are unreasonable,
and have forfeited their reason; for Scripture opposes human Reason to divine,
Man's Wisdom to God's, as may be seen in the places quoted in the margin, 1
Cor. 1.18, 19, to 30. and Chap. 2.4, 5, 6, 13, 14. Jam. 3.15.
which I desire the Reader to peruse, and a little lower I shall have occasion
to mention. And another Apostle speaks of this human Wisdom or Reason (for the
rational man is the wise man) in opposition to the divine with a witness, when
he says, This wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual,
devilish; but true Wisdom the Lord gives; Prove. 2.6. Jam. 1.5.
and If any lack wisdom, let him ask of God.

We do not destroy our Reason when we submit and make it subordinate to
Scripture, for human must depend upon divine Reason, or else it is blasphemously
to deny there is more of and better Reason in God than in Man; so we must own
there is in God more of good Reason than in us: wherefore Reason is not
independently to be lodged in our weak Brains, but in the Wisdom of God, in his
Word. Thus our Reason is not to be the Rule of Faith, for it is so apt to fail,
to be misled and imposed upon; but the Spirit of God speaking in Scripture, and
to our Spirits, is not so, we are said to be the Epistle of God, 1 Cor. 3.3.
written not with Ink, or any human and natural thing, but with the Spirit of
the living God. It is strange, that whilst this man does so much plead for
Reason he is so unreasonable in some things he says; as, par. 4.5. that after
he has justly taken away an infallible Authority, from a Council or a Pope,
that is, from a collective Body and a company of Men, yet he would lodge it in
every single man, in his shallow Brain, mine, and any ones else. We own, it is
every man's Duty and Concern to enquire and exercise his Reason about Faith and
Religion, but to make either depend upon his Reason, is to build upon the Sand,
to make the infallible depend upon the fallible, and confound matters of Faith
with those of Fact.

But to the end we may know what we speak of, it is necessary to say something
about Reason, the thing most excellent in Man, for he thereby is made to differ
from merely sensitive and vegetable Creatures, and it gives him a denomination,
for from Reason he is called reasonable, from his noblest part reasonable Soul,
which, as Schoolmen say, is Man's forma informans, and makes him to be what he
is. Now Reason is seated in the Understanding, which is the superior part of
the Soul, and the Judgment Seat of all things offered to her consideration,
there to be examined, whether true or false, which is the Object of the
Operation of the Understanding, as Good or Evil is that of the determination of
the Will. But how these Objects come into the Mind, Intellect, or
Understanding, which are the same, this is the usual order about it, which God
has settled in Nature: First, The Objects that are outward are offered to the
Organ of the Sense, as may be the Eye of seeing, the Ear of hearing, etc. which
communicates it to the Sense, whence they pass into the Imagination, and thence
are conveyed into the Mind, which is the Receiver and Looking-glass of all
Forms; for, as the Hand is called the Instrument of Instruments, so is the
Intellect the Form of Forms, and can understand all things intelligible, by
means of the Brain, the Organ of it.

Though upon the present occasion this matter ought to be handled more
Theologically than Philosophically, however something must be said in relation
to this: as the Organs of Sense, for instance that of Seeing, receive Objects,
either by emission or intromission of visual beams, a Dispute in Philosophy,
not proper here to be meddled with, but it is certain it receives them; so does
the Understanding Objects conveyed into it, whether by means of intelligible or
intentional Species, it is not to our purpose, no more than whether they be
there objectively or subjectively as an Ens rationis, or real, as are Sciences.
But this must be known, that in Man are the Intellect, a Faculty of the Soul;
Science, an Habit of that Faculty, and Knowledge, an Act proceeding from the
Faculty through the Habit. The working of the Understanding is done
successively, and through many Acts, which some Philosophers reckon to be eight
in number, that may well be reduced under three; the first is, the receiving
and apprehending of the Objects; the second is, the working of the Mind to
reduce into order, and dispose those Objects into a good form, and this is
properly (...) or (...), Reason; the third is, (...), a ratiocinative
Discourse, or a working and motion of the Mind from one to another, whence
arises the right Understanding, and as it were the Decree and Sentence about
the thing. This is the natural order in these matters: Now hence let us
conclude some things.

Reason is Knowledge upon true grounds, and herein we must see how far we may
trust our Reason; according to the Rule in Philosophy, Nihil cadit sub
intellectu quod non fucrit prius sub sensu; Nothing comes under the Intellect
but what before has been under the Sense. And since the Organs are often
deceived by the Objects, the Senses by the Organs, the Imagination by Senses,
it is a rational consequence to say, that the Mind may also thereby happen to
be imposed upon from the very first step. In the case of Seeing three things
are necessary, the thing that sees, the thing seen, and the medium or help,
without which no seeing; the Eye is the seer, but if blind it cannot see,
neither can it see except there be something to be seen; then the medium is the
light which helps us to see, for in the dark, Objects cannot be discerned; also
there ought to be a proportionable distance between Organ and Object; a Man
cannot from the Street see a Pin upon the top of a Steeple, because it is too
remote: Our Mind is the Eye of the Soul, and though Reason feated in it has
Objects offered, it cannot rightly judge without the medium, even about natural
things, else how could there among Men, who all have a rational Soul, be so
many different and contrary Judgments about the same things? The reason of our
Mind must be grounded upon the reason of the thing, which is that whereby the
thing is so: We say, why is it day? The reason is good, because the Sun is up,
for that is the cause of the day: so that Certainty is not grounded upon the
clearness of our perceiving, as upon the mainness of the Evidence confirmed by
a continual Experience. Now natural Reason is fitted for natural Things, but
for supernatural it must be supernaturally endowed: And besides Ideas, a due
temper and application of the Mind are required. But about divine things,
besides what is in us, there ought to be a Rule in them, which is Revelation;
this is the medium or middle between Eye and Object, without which in spiritual
things we can see nothing till the Lord opens our Eyes. When an Army of
Syrians had compassed Dothan, to take Elisha, his Servant seeing so many Horses
and Chariots, was afraid, till at the Prayer of the Prophet the Lord opened the
Eyes of the young man, 2 Kings 6.15, 16, 17.
then and not before, he saw the mountain full of Lorses and chariots of fire
round about Elisha. These Heavenly Armies cannot be seen by a mere natural Eye,
it must be enlightened from above: As we cannot know a thing of which we have no
Idea, so we must have a true one, to make a right Judgment of it, or else we go
upon a wrong bottom, and it still remains a Mystery to us. The true Notion we
ought to have of a Mystery is this, namely, something that is hidden from our
Knowledge and above our Reason: see what a false Idea a learned and rational
man, a Master of Israel, Nicodemus, had of Regeneration, as we shall see
somewhat lower; it was a very necessary and truly rational thing to believe in
Christ, Joh. 7.48.
yet Have any of the Rubers and Pharisees believed on him? Those men in their
way wanted not Reason; God, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.27.
has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise. The greatest
commendation of Man's Reason is, to call it Wisdom; yet it is confounded about
spiritual things: for this very thing our Savior rejoiced in spirit, and gave
his Father Thanks for revealing the Mysteries of salvation unto Babes, which
the wise and prudent of the World could not understand for want of this
Revelation, Luke 10.21. Wherefore when God will have his People to know him, he
says not, their Reason and Mind shall know me, but I will give them an heart
to know me, that I am the Lord, Jer. 15.7. This Knowledge is not an effect of
their Reason, but the Gift of God. The right Judgment of a thing does sometimes
depend upon so many different circumstances, that a mistake in one of them does
much alter the thing, and so pervert the Judgment; besides that, our
Understanding being often disturbed through Passion and Prejudice, it thereby
lies under great mistakes: If so in natural and temporal things, how much more
in spiritual and eternal, wherein the disproportion between the Understanding
and Object is infinitely greater! Yet that sort of People make no difference in
reasoning about the Word of God and human Writings, with them it is all one to
judge of God or of Men, and their Reason they make the Judge of both: This is
to set up a Tribunal, which God will never allow of, to inquire after, and
examine his ways and works, Job 33.13.
when he gives no account of any of his Matters; that is, he is not bound,
though sometimes out of his gracious Condescension, he be pleased to do it. But
once for all, I must warn those Men, who so much dote upon their own reason, to
have a care, lest that very same, thorough a just Judgment of God, does to them
as to others, prove fatal; for they glory too much in it. Absalom's Hair was
his Pride, and it became his Halter; Jezebel delighted in painting her Face,
which, as she thought, made her full of Charms; but a while after it was washed
off with her own Blood: Herod's Robes were glorious when he sat upon his Throne
to make a Speech to the People, but very soon after they were full of Worms,
whereby he was eaten up. They who trust to, and glory in their Reason, have
cause to fear some such end or other will befall them: But we rely on the word
of God, and depend upon the Gospel, as it is a promise of Grace, and must
endeavor to conform to it, as it is the rule of Life.

All he says, Sect. 2. and Chap 1. does not concern us, who hold the Doctrines
of the Gospel not to be contrary to true and sound Reason; in his Philosophical
Notions he consounds himself that is in the whole first-Section, and 4th
Chapter thereof.

As to his Ideas, or Evidences, Experience, which is a good reason, though not
always, for it falls sometimes, shows how every Man has not the same Idea or
Notion of this or that thing, and that which is Evidence to one, is not to
another; then he goes upon a false Supposition, as if the Devil; thorough his
Suggeitions, and the Corruptions of our Hear, did not sometimes darken our
Light, deceive our Mind, pervert our Judgment, and overruled our Affections;
it is so in worldly things, much more in Spiritual; thus, thorough their vain
Sophistry, they would set up this Reason as an independent and infallible Judge
in Man, and so overthrow whatsoever Scripture in so many places declares of
the Blindness, Darkness, and Ignorance of our Understanding, and of the
Perverseness, Corruption, and Stubbornness of our Heart.

The Texts he quoteth, Page 47, 48. are true and good, but he should go
further, and own Christ to be true God, not only in his Works, but also in his
Nature; he sometimes has some good and true things like Grains, to make Chaff
Current, thus, Page 49, 50. he condemns those that say the New Testament to be
written without any Order or Scope, but only as Matters came into the Heads of
the Apostles, which is a Socinian Tenet, yet he there seems to be against it.

The Physical Impotency to understand the Mysteries of Religion, is not
absolute, but it is all one as if it was so, without the Help of Grace, as a
blind Man cannot see, a dumb speak, a dead Man perform any Vital Action, as of
himself, but if God pleases he shall be restored to his Sight, Speech and Life.
There is a moral Impotency to understand Matters and Mysteries of Religion; we
have a Mind, but dark, blind, and ignorant; can a blind Man see, tho he has
Eyes? a deaf hear, tho he has Ears? a dumb speak, tho he has a Tongue, a dead
Man act, tho he has Organs, as Hands and Feet; no, if he had but a
Dead-Palsie: Men, by Revelations, are not endued with new Faculties, but these
old Faculties are enabled to act, which they could not before; God gives a new
Heart, a new Spirit, new Thoughts, new Affections.

His Discourse of Sect. 3. Chap. 2. is all out of the Purpose; the things he
speaks of are Natural, and unnecessary, as how Rain is formed in the Air, but
Matters of Religion are Spiritual and necessary; Matters of Election, manner of
Conversion, without a revelation in the Word, are incomprehensible, as our
Savior says to Nicodemus, in point of Regeneration, The wind blows where it
lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, John 3.8.
but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes; so is every one
that is born of the spirit, observe the blockishness of a Doctor, and Master of
Israel, in Spiritual things; Can a Man enter the second time into his mothers
womb, and be born? v. 4. Where was his reason all this while? several such
things we read of the Disciples, whereof I shall give but one Instance about
the Resurrection, Mark 9.10.
They questioned one with another what the rising from the dead should mean?
Nay, they were in that gross Ignorance, till after our Savior's Resurrection;
Joh. 20.9.
yet they knew not the Scripture, that he must rise again from the dead;
wherefore he upbraided them with their unbelief, Mark 16.14.
and hardness of heart; and indeed they were no better, till he opened their
understanding, Luke 24.45.
that they might understand the Scriptures.

In his Page 81. his Conclusion is false, that neither God nor his Attributes,
nor Eternity, are Mysteries to us: But certainly the smite cannot know the
Infinite, but as much, and in such a degree, as the Infinite is pleased to
communicate himself; as no Day light but what the Sun does communicate, and
that more or less, according as it is done, in a dark Room one sees only
proportionably to the Light that is brought in, so in a Spiritual Light and Life
it is only as God is pleased to reveal, and as Man is capable to receive; the
word alone is a dead Letter, but the Spirit does quicken it, as it was in the
Apostles; the word they had heard from Christ was quickened by the Holy Ghost
when he came upon them, which in them caused a wonderful Alteration, and made
them quire another sort of Men: Divine things cannot be comprehended for want
of an Adequate Notion, there is to be a Proportion between the Knower and the
thing known, so our Reason, without Revelation applied by the Inward Teaching
of the Spirit, can no more know the Nature of God and his Attributes, than a
little Bottle hold in all the Water of the Sea. To know things, we must know
their Essence and Nature; as to God, we, by the Light of Nature, may know there
is one, but what he is, must be revealed; and it is usual, when we speak of any
thing, to have a Definition or Description of it: What is a Man? a rational
Animal? What is God? an infinite Being, described by his Attributes, Almighty,
Eternal, Independent, etc. Concerning the Infiniteness, and some other
Attribute of God's, David owneth his Ignorance, when he says, Such knowledge
is too wonderful for me, Psa. 139.6.
it is high, I cannot attain to it: And no wonder, seeing in the same Psalm he
so much admires the formation of his Body in the Womb, when he says, he was
fearfully and wonderfully made. v. 14, 15, 16.
If any one pretends he can know more than the Prophet David, let him speak and
stretch his Reason further than he could; his Son Solomon was of the same Mind,
both as to Bodily and Spiritual things, when he says, As thou know not what
is the way of the spirit, nor how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is
with child: Prove. 11.5.
even so thou know not the works of God, who makes all: These times of
Ignorance are over now, say Socinians, we have Men, more knowing and wiser than
David and Solomon: But, if it be so of the formation of our natural Body, how
much more of the work of Regeneration within us, which our Savior, as said
before, compared to the blowing of the Wind; that such things are, we know and
feel, but understand not the manner: Thus we know that Gold, Silver, and other
Metals, are formed under Ground; for we draw them out of the Earth's Bowels;
but the manner and how they are formed we cannot tell, so these are hidden,
secret and mysterious things unto us, much more are supernatural.

He goes upon a Mistake, as if we thought Matters of Religion to be Mysteries
after the Revelation, which makes them cease to be Mysteries, which they were
before: so it is in him labor in vain, Page 91. When a Prophecy is fulfilled it
cease to be a Prophecy, and becomes a History. The strength of his Argument
lays herein, that those things once revealed are no longer Mysteries. But we
must know how some things are wholly revealed, and others but in part; it is
true, we must yield an Obedience of Faith, that the thing is so, as that the
Son of God was made Man, that there are three Persons in the Godhead, God
having revealed it, we are fully persuaded it is so; but the manner and how, we
are in the dark about, it is incomprehensible by, and unconceivable to us; and
beyond the power of our Nature to know it, yet as much as is necessary, it is
revealed; here I cannot avoid taking notice how the Man unworthily compares the
Mysteries of our holy Religion, with the Tricks and Cheats of the Heathens,
Page 99. and what? If what in their false Worship they called Mysteries, there
were Cheats, as we own, does it follow it must be so in our Religion? Theirs
was Idolatry and Superstition, but ours is Holy and Divine, then after this
Rule, because they had false Gods, we must have none at all, and so must be as
bad as they; the Devil, who is God's Ape, and in imitation of God's Church,
has set up a Synagogue for himself, has his Drudges and Bondslaves to serve
him, must not God's People adore him? and because there is a false Worship,
must there be no true one? Thus for Men, who so much pretend to Reason; it is a
very unreasonable Inference to say, that because the Heathens in their Matters
of Idolatry had Tricks, which they called Mysteries, therefore the Mysteries of
our Holy Religion must be Cheats and Tricks: Such comparisons are odious, and
unworthy to be used by any who call themselves Christians.

Then, if Mystery does relate sometimes to the Matter, and sometimes to the
Manner, certain Points of our Religion, as the Trinity, Eternal Generation of
the Son, Procession of the Holy Ghost, were a Mystery before they were
revealed, it follows, That the Revelation was necessary to make them known unto
us, and that it was not in the Power of our Reason to know them without
Revelation, so they were above it; and thus, though the thing be re-reveal'd, so
that we must believe it, yet still there are some things that be unreveal'd,
and above our Capacity. He would have every thing after the Revelation to cease
to be a Mystery in Religion; but as I said, some things are not wholly
revealed, because (...) full Revelation is not necessary to our Salvation, and
within this Limitation is to be understood what St. Paul says, Act. 20.27.
how he had not shunned to declare, unto the Elders of the Church of Ephesus,
all the counsel of God, that is as much as 'twas necessary for them to know;
for certainly he was not acquainted with all the Counsels of God. What the
Author says, Page 108. is false; for the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God were
incomprehensible, except by means of a Divine Revelation, so that none
understood them but they to whom God revealed them, and those whom they were
not revealed unto, could not know, much less comprehend them; therefore they in
themselves were above the Capacity of those who needed a Revelation to
understand them, and of those who understood them not for want of a Revelation,
yet some had their Reason, but to no purpose; a Divine Mystery is such a
Secret, as all the wits of Men cannot of themselves find out it is the glory of
God to conceal a thing. Prove. 25.2.
The Doctor's Dialogue between the Doctor and his Parishioner, P. 113, 114. is
but an insipid thing.

We do not say every thing in our Religion is a Mystery, but only some things
are as the manner of the Lord Jesus's Union with the Members of his Mystical
Body, which the Apostle calls a great mystery: Certainly the whole Matter of
Salvation before it was revealed, was a Mystery, but still some things therein
remain a Mystery; for alas! what a vast difference there is between that we
know, and that which we are ignorant of; for says the Apostle, Now we see
thorough a glass darkly, and we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 12.
but when that which is perfect is come, then we shall see face to face, then
shall I know, even as I am known. They brag of Reason, which with them is
commonly Sophistry, which Paul exhorts to beware of; The true reason is that
which is grounded upon and consonant with God's word, Colos. 2.8
the true Rule of it; but our Reason is naturally perverted, unsound, misled,
overruled by Sense, Lust and Passion. I must take notice of something the Man
says, which I cannot avoid calling by the name of Impudence, among other
places in his Page 130. of the first Edition, the Orthodox he calls Ignorant
and Perverse Men, Cavillers and Deceivers, which are his own and Gangs proper
Attribute. 4^o. Modo, Proprium Propriissimum. (...).

These Huffs and Hectoring Champions, for Reason against Faith and Revelation,
are like those whom the Prophet speaks of, that walk in the light of their own
sire, and in the sparks that they have kindled. But says God, Isa. 50.1^
This shall ye have of mine hand ye shall lie down in sorrow; for that very
same thing, Socinians will believe of God no more than the Works of Nature, and
their Reason will teach them, but we must know more, or else our Reason must be
subject to, and depend upon Creatures, even in those things, which do far
exceed Sense and Reason; thus also they make their Reason the standing Rule of
their Faith, yet Scripture calling Faith the Gift of God, does thereby imply
it, not to be grounded upon Humane Reason or any thing in Man; we know Reason
to depend upon the Information of Sense; so what we hear, feel, smell and
taste, we reasonably believe to be; and our Senses being convinced, our Reason
is easily persuaded; now this Opinion of theirs makes our Religion to depend
upon Senses, not upon Faith; thus against Scripture it must be said we live and
walk by Sight and Sense, and not by Faith; so what our blessed Savior said to
Thomas, were in vain, John. 20.29.
Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed; for indeed Faith
is a steadfast and firm Persuasion of what God has promised, be it almost
unpossible to be thought by Humane Reason: But the Socinian does as good as
say, what he has not seen he will not believe, which Infidelity of his might
as well extend it self to the sensible and visible World, as to the Invisible,
and that which is to come, which all his Reason cannot see; thus he might not
believe there are such Cities as Constantinople and Rome, because he has not
seen them; for what Revelation is in Religion and Spiritual Things, that same
Relation is in Temporal and Worldly; thus he will not believe that Asia
produces very delicious Fruit, Africa Monsters, the Sea, Whales, because he
has not been an Eyewitness: After this rate he must not believe the former
Ages of the World, nor take any thing upon the relation of others, much less
must he believe the Spiritual World, which is of another Condition and Nature,
nor the Influences of Heaven; which being not sensible, do exceed his Reason.

They profess not to believe the Mysteries in Religion, because their Reason
cannot understand them, but there are such things as we cannot comprehend, yet
must believe them, even for that same reason that we cannot comprehend them;
Infiniteness is an essential Attribute of God, yet that Infiniteness which is
God infinite, is every way incomprehensible to me, and my very Reason and
Philosophy must acquiesce unto this; for the very Heathens would erect an Altar
to the unknown, Act. 17.23.
or incomprehensible God, whom them worshipped: In Humane and Civil Things
Reason is the guide, which God has given Man for his Direction, even in those
that relate to his Salvation, but in a subordinate way to Religion, which as as
far above Reason, as Heaven is above the Earth, it is not contrary to, but
serves to enlighten and sanctify it, after which Reason is of a great Use,
for then it can out of Scripture draw Inferences and Conclusions; but if Reason
be the standing Rule of Faith, whereby we are saved, what will become of so
many in the World, who are quite deprived of the Use of Reason? Is there no way
out of Bedlam into Heaven? or is there no Salvation for those who have no
natural Reason to ground Faith upon? Again, if we should know no more of God
than natural Reason can suggest, that Knowledge would be confined within very
narrow bounds, we believe a Trinity of Persons in an Unity of the Godhead,
because God himself has revealed it; and whatsoever is in God, is Infinite and
Incomprehensible, in all these Matters, without the Light of Revelation, though
with the whole help of Reason, to speak in the Prophet's Words, Ise. 59.10.
We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as if we had no eyes: we
stumble at noonday as in the night; for indeed our own Light is but Darkness:
But Socinians will admit of no such things in God, because their Reason cannot
conceive it, but their Reason is natural, and the Revelation thereof
supernatural; their Reason is finite, and the Godhead infinite: Can a
Quart-Bottle hold all the Water of the Sea, or the Blind see the Sun? That
People begin with undermining God's Altar, no doubt with an Intent to pull it
down if they can, and so to set up an Idol of their own, that is, their Reason
against Revelation or Scripture, and thus to go a whoring after their own
Inventions, without any Measure and Bounds; all our Understanding and Reason,
in Religious Matters, should be guided by Revelation; for says David, Psalm.
119.1 9.
Give me understanding according to thy word, not according to my Reason,
except that word be a Lamp unto our Feet, and a Light unto our Path, we are
sure to go astray, and deviate from the Rule, and miss the Mark; hence spring
those seeming Contradictions, which arise from the shallow ness of Man's
Brains, and not from the Repugnancy of things, which sometimes makes them fight
against the Man in the Moon, as their fancy suggests to them to go out of the
Road, so by Attempts to explain things, they entangle them the more; and so
what themselves call Strength of Wit and Reason, others upon better Grounds
look upon it as effects of a distempered Imagination, for they think to have
engrossed and monopolized to themselves all Wit and Learning; as for us, about
these Controversies we follow the Method of Aopollor, who showed not by the
strength of his own Reason, Act. 1^.28.
but by the Scriptures that Jesus was Christ, and thereby mightily convinced
the Jews, for he was mighty in Scriptures.

Socinians would seem to refer themselves to be judged by Scripture and Reason,
as Papists by Scripture and Tradition; but the reason of one, as the Tradition
of the other, is a devourer; for Reason of one side, as Tradition on the other,
do swallow up Scripture; which, though first named, is with them last minded, and
signifies least, as indeed they both would make of it a stalking Horse, and
subservient, one to his Tradition, and the other to his Reason; and these would
set up for the only Rational Men in the World, and whatsoever does no come up
to them, they hastily call Nonsense and Contradiction, after which Rate the
Holy Spirit of God in Scripture is liable to their Censure, and shall be as he
is by some of them, charged with Contradiction, yet we know Truth does not
gainsay it self, the Spirit of God is the Spirit of Truth; his word, the word
of Truth, for so says he who is Truth it self. These Imaginary Contradictions
arise not out of the things themselves, but out of the Perverseness of Man's
Heart, and Blindness of their Judgment, which as the Apostle says, prompts them
to wrest Scripture unto their own Destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16.
such are not the learned and steady in the Truth, as some Men in the World
account themselves to be, but the unlearned and unstable, as the Apostle calls
them, so we may in the Prophet's Words, say, they are not valiant for the
truth. Jerem. 9.3.
There is a great Difference between gross Contradictions to our Reason, and
barely being above it, that is, not having any distinct Conception of the
Nature of things in a clear Idea, which is a full and evident Perception of it.

Of two contrary Propositions, if one be true, the other must necessarily be
false, according to the rule of Contraries, but no such thing as this is to be
found in any part of Scripture, consequently we may conclude how the great
Mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation therein contained are true, not to be
cavilled at by Humane Reason; for what is infinite is above our Comprehension,
no Duration without Succession, which is not to be found in an infinite and
Eternal Being, that existeth of himself, yet that Eternity we cannot
understand, only by parts of time, as past, present, and to come, which imply
Duration and Succession, the reason is, because it exceeds our Capacity. The
way to obviate and prevent any seeming Contradictions in Scripture, is first to
observe the Analogy of Faith; in some places, God, to condescend to our weak
Capacity, does attribute unto himself Humane Passions, as Anger, Wrath, Fury,
to repent, and Members of Man's Body; as the Eye, Hand, Arm, etc. yet thereupon
we must not say, God is subject to our Passions, like the Antropopathites, or
has a Body like the Antropomorphites, because we are taught in Scripture God
is a Spirit and unchangeable; so the second thing to be observed is the Scope
of the place, of many Instances, I shall bring but this, the blind and dumb
both spoke and saw, Matthew. 12.22. Here is a seeming Contradiction; if the Blind
sees, then he is not blind; if the Dumb speaks, he is not dumb; but let the
Scope of the place be consulted, and it will set things at right, and therein
we find how a Man, blind and deaf, was miraculously cured by our Savior, so
that he who before was blind and deaf, both spoke and saw, having recovered his
Sight and Hearing.

What he says, Page 138, does not belong to us, for we are not for an
implicit Faith, we are not against, but searching into, and examining the
Grounds of our Religion, but withal say, all that Examination will signify
nothing, except it be given us from above to understand, therefore it is beyond
our Reason: Our Religion is not of Works, but of Faith; which this Opinion of
theirs about Reason, destroys: Faith is a strong Persuasion, grounded and
built not upon Reason, but upon God's gracious and special Promise, infused
into us by the Holy Ghost; wherefore, in several places of Scripture it is
called the immediate Gift of God; for though Faith comes by the Word, yet the
Application thereof, wherein it does chiefly consist, is the immediate and
effectual working of the Spirit. The several Objections as brought in by him,
Page 142, 143, 45, 46, have but little in them, as I could easily demonstrate,
if I had but time and room enough, I shall take notice of what he says about
the latter end of Page 146. Now Reason is from God as well as Revelation, but
he must know that Reason is corrupt, but Revelation not so, when Reason was
whole, yet it deviated, but Revelation is always the same; the Light of Reason
thorough Sin is become Darkness, and a Guide, that has and does commonly, if
not constantly, err. Here he would give us a sound reason, which is so no more
than a sound Nature, Page 148.

How often does God in the Old Testament, and Christ in the New, complain, that
People could not hear and understand what was said to them? and what he says
to them in the last quoted Page, how slowly must the Gospel have moved at the
beginning, if those that were to preach it had been obliged to qualify
themselves, is insignificant, it is known they were immediately inspired by the
Holy Ghost and Heaven qualified them, not they themselves; for if Humane Reason
be fallible in natural, much more in supernatural things.

There are many dark and mysterious Passages of God's Providence, which our
Reason nor any Humane thing can understand, whereof Scripture affords many
Instances, and of these we may say as of a Watch, the several pieces of which
being asunder, seem to be insignificant; but put them together in their due
place, they are of good use, and commend the Art of the Maker, when he has
showed us what it is good for, which before we could not know of our selves.
Thus one or few acts of divine Providence are Mysteries to us, which we cannot
dive into, nor understand, till God has manifested them to us: What would all
the Humane Reason in the World say of the Command which Abraham received, to
sacrifice his own Son; in all appearance it was a murder, and a barbarous and
unnatural one too, for a Father to destroy his own Son, God's Will, to try his
Faith and Obedience, was a Secret. As Job's Afflictions for a trial of his
Patience, and to make him in Ages to come an Example of it. Joseph's being cast
in Prison for so good an Act, as to refuse committing Adultery with his
Master's Wife, would puzzle the Brains and Reason of any Man who believes God
to be just and pure; if by the several things, which the same wife Providence
brought to pass, God had not made his design known, which David says was to
try him, Ps. 105.19.
the word of the Lord tried him: So God's command, to the Prophet Hosea, to
take unto him a Wife of Whoredoms, when the Lord is a most holy God: That the
Son of God, who is just, harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners, should by
Blasphemers be accused of, condemned, and executed for Blasphemy, and this by
the determinate Counsel and foreknowledge of God, is that which does transcend
the poor, weak, frail Understanding of Man, though never so much screwed up, or
his Reason put to the rack: I am sure David a Prophet, as well as a King,
speaks of himself to that purpose about the Prosperity of the Wicked in this
World; so foolish was I, Psalm. 73.22, 16, 17.
and ignorant, I was as a beast before thee; and when I thought to know this,
it was too painful for me, too hard for me to understand, until I went into the
sanctuary of God. No Humane Reason, only Divine Revelation, could make it
intelligible; Whosoever is wise, and will observe those things, even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord; that is, Psalm. 107.43. from 40.
the Wisdom from above, not the Humane, can teach us to understand God's
Gracious Dispensations, especially in the wise Government of his Church, which
to Humane Reason is passed understanding, as concerning God's Works and
Thoughts, of which David says, O Lord how great are thy works, and thy
thoughts are very deep: which, if we may believe him, Ps. 92 5, 6.
a brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand this. With Admiration
and Exclamation he says it, and so deep, that Humane Reason cannot fathom it
without Revelation; Heavenly Light makes some know and understand, but the
Brutish, the Fool and Wicked does not, and cannot, for want of this Divine
Grace; and when they would find to measure Divine Mysteries with the Line of
this Reason, then they become Fools; so to them these things still continue to
be Mysteries. This Author is one of those whom the Prophet speaks of, Psalm.
64.5.
They encourage themselves in an evil matter; for at first he concealed his
Name, whether out of Fear or Modesty he knows best, but now in his second
Edition he pulled off the Vizzard, and has his Name at length, how he came by
that Encouragement, deserves, as I think, to be inquired into by those that are
more than I, immediately concerned.

I agree with him when he speaks the Truth as thus, how the Converted Jews
would still retain some of the Levitical Ceremonies, as may be seen, Act. 15.
and therein might happen to be too much Compliance, as with the Gentiles, who
brought in some of the Heathenish Rites, and that Remisness in some, afterward
made those things a part of Christianity it self; thus they degenerated from
the Simplicity of the Gospel, by means of self and worldly ends: Hence we see
how from Page 165, till 172, he takes Advantage upon account of Ceremonies, and
such foolish or selffish Priestcraft as he calls it. But after all, do this
Socinian People think to monopolize to themselves, and be sole Masters of all
good Sense and Reason; surely others among the Ancients, and now, are as
rational as they, why should not their Wisdom and Reason, seeing they make it
to be natural, differ from Wisdom and Reason, that is Spiritual? From hence I
am sure St. Panl makes not only a difference, but also a great Opposition
between them; for says he, We speak not in the words of humane wisdom, but
which the Holy Ghost teaches, and God has revealed them, that is, the
Doctrines of the Gospel unto us by his Spirit; and as it is not the Wisdom or
Reason of Man (which the same Apostle in the same Epistle, Chapter 3.19. calls
foolishness with God) but the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden
wisdom, 1 Cor. the whole Chapter
etc. And where this Spirit of God is not pleased to teach the Truth of the
Gospel, that remains hidden, all the Reason in the World cannot understand it;
2 Cor. 4.33.
and we know it is hid to some, to them that are lost; among whom are some of
the most learned and wise in the World, endued with as much Natural Reason, and
great Parts, as any of our Adversaries; yet this natural Reason cannot
comprehend it; I go farther, and say, that some of these things of God remain
still Mysteries; and if not wholly yet in part, are hidden, even to those who
have the Spirit of God, because, by reason of the weakness of their Nature,
they are not capable, and it is above their reach to understand it; first, as to
God's Nature, to us it is incomprehensible, because infinite; behold the
heaven, 1 Kings 8.27. Compared with Job 11.7, 8, 9.
and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee, nor Reason comprehend: So in his
Attributes, his greatness is unsearchable, and his understanding is infinite;
so are his Works both of Power and Providence, Wisdom, Mercy and Justice, far
above the reach of Humane Reason, as to be seen in Job, in the Psalms, and
other parts of Scripture, and let one Text of Job serve for all; great things
does he, God, Psalm. 145.3. Ps. 147.5. Job 37.5.
which we cannot comprehend; and to apply this to our present purpose, we own
that the Doctrines of the Gospel, necessary to be known, both as to the
Substance, and to the Declaration, are clear and perspicuous, but still there
are some, as to the Difficulties, which learned Men and Doctors do study to
understand, which they can never rightly do, without a special Assistance of
the Spirit of God; for it is he, and he alone, that can lead us into all Truth;
for if of our selves we cannot understand the plainest, much less the hardest;
wherefore, to the end we may know the Truths of God, we must be taught them of
God; now, as all Promises are Yea and Amen in Jesus Christ, so are all and
every Truth of the Gospel in him; which to understand, we must be taught by
him, and by the Holy Ghost; Ephesians. 4.21. 2 Cor. 3.6.
for the letter alone kills, but the spirit gives life.

It is very strange, yet true, that Socinians will trust and depend upon their
own Reason, notwithstanding the Advice of wise Solomon given them long ago,
Lean not unto thine own understanding, Prove. 3.5.
which is the Seat and Center of Reason; for if Men have any thing of Reason,
there it lays, as to natural things, but as to supernatural, it is derived out
of Scriptures, whereupon our Holy Religion is grounded; therein is nothing
useless and needless, yet still something is mysterious, either as to Matter,
or in the Manner wherein it is spoken; and it is this which God has given us
for our continual Exercise in this World, therefore he requires we should
inquire into^t with all possible Diligence and utmost Endeavors; and they who
fall into that course, do, and will, by Experience, upon frequent reading of
the Word, daily find new Lights, new Discoveries, and new cause of Admiration,
which thorough Grace from above, are the Fruits of their Obedience and
Industry; as there is nothing unnecessary, superfluous and useless, and that
for all sorts of Christians, whether weak or strong, so the the right
consideration of the Matter, the Words, Order, Contexture, the Design of the
Holy Ghost in them, do instruct us of and guide us in our Duty toward God,
whereof the parts are various, large, great and wonderful; upon this account,
says David, Ps. 119.96.
Thy commandment is exceeding broad, because it contains the whole Revelation
of God unto us, which is full of infinite Wisdom in the whole Frame and Order
of it; and as the Revelation in the Word is from God, so is the Understanding
of that Revelation; that is the reasn why Men should not, as some do, perplex
themselves, to find out the Grounds and Suitableness of some things in the
New Testament, with others in the Old, when they should know how it is not in
their Power to know the height, depth, length and breadth of God's Infinite
Wisdom therein contained, when, may be, the Holy Ghost aims at such things as
they cannot dive into, who by degrees opens Man's Eyes more and more, to know
things necessary for them; for as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 3.2.
He feeds us first with milk, then with meat, when we are able, and strong
enough to bear it; for, as another Apostle says, Newborn Babes desire the
sincere milk of the word, 1 Pet. 2.2.
that they may grow thereby; and thus, till we come unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ. Ephesians. 4.13.
And those Men, who in these things rely upon the Strength of their own Reason;
I may well compare to these little Babes, who being not able to feed
themselves, lay Hand into their Milk, wherewith they do not feed, but only
slubber themselves; or to that Child that would not have the Nurse to hold him,
though he wants strength of himself to go; if the Hand that bears him up does but
hold off, then he is gone, and sure to fall: So it is of any one that trusts
to his Understanding, and leans upon his own Reason; it is a bruised Reed that
will go into his Hand, and pierce it: Wherefore God's sends us to the law, Isa.
8.20.
and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because
there is no light in them; for their Light does come from the word, yet not all
at once, but by degrees, and in their several Kinds; all which, as the Apostle
says, works that one and the self-same spirit, 1 Cor. 12.
dividing to every man severally as he will: and let us know never so much out
of Scripture, there is still more to be learned: Ought not this to convince
Men, that it does contain Mysteries? The Apostle directs us to think soberly,
Romans 12.3.
not to allow our Fancy and curious Speculations to go beyond the bounds of a
becoming Sobriety in things above us, which Scripture does both command and
commend and is very much suitable unto right Reason: Now the rule of that
Sobriety is positively, fully, and unalterably given thus, Secret things belong
unto the Lord our God, but those which are revealed unto us, Deur. 29.2^.
and to our children. In those things Divine Revelation must be the measure and
rule of our Knowledge, the contrary is an effect of Pride, Vanity, and
Presumptuousness forbidden in Scripture, not to (...) above that which is
written; which if M^n obey, 1 Cor. 4.6.
it will bring them to Certainty and Truth, whereof the contrary leads them
into all kinds of Error.

But to conclude this, for I must no longer insist upon it, as I never intended
fully to answer it, only to take notice of it on my way; as to the point of
Reason, see how foolish in these things Man is, and how confounded his ^eason,
by the Example of Peter, an Elect of God, a Disciple dear unto Christ: The Lord
Jesus comes to him to wash his Feet, but he presently said, John 13.5, 6, 7.
Thou shall never wash my feet; but our Savior answering, If I wash thee not,
thou host no part in me. Peter soon goes to another Extreme; first, he would
not have Christ to wash him at all, but now he would be washed every where, not
only the feet, but also hand and head too; but our Savior shows him Reason,
why he ought to suffer himself to be guided, and not to take upon him to direct
his Lord and Master in what he was to do, he that is washed needs not save to
wash his feet. Now the cause of this wandering and error of Peter, is expressed,
v. 7. namely, his Ignorance, What I do thou know not now? Where was his
Reason at that time? For certainly he was unreasonable to be of a different
Mind from his Savior, and till he submitted unto his Will; the like we may say
about these things unto those who fancy themselves so rational, and would set
up their blind and lame Reason for a competent Judge; Reason is always
striving, and always at a loss; all our Reason has to do is to be guided by
Scripture, and to own it to be the infallible word of God; all beyond this is
the work of Faith; for Christ is an object not to be known naturally, or by
natural Reason, and the obligation to know Christ, and believe in him, springs
and arises only from a positive Command, superadded unto the Law of Nature: If
St. Paul speaks Truth, Col. 1.27.
Christ in us is a mystery, considering the manner whereby he is in us,
therefore the Image of the new Man in us is called the hidden and inner Man, 1
Pet. 3.4.
which in the following Verse is explained of Christ's dwelling in us by faith;
and elsewhere the same Apostle calls Union and Relation between Christ and the
Church, a great Mystery, Ephesians. 5.32.
which our Reason cannot comprehend without a Revelation: This made David say,
Psalm. 119.169.
O Lord give me understanding according to thy word, and not according to my
Reason, or natural Capacity; and, blessed is he whom thou teach out of thy
law; Psa. 94.12
not out of his shallow Brains. Our blessed Savior's saying, he that eats my
flesh, Joh. 6.16.
and drinks my blood, contains Doctrines, not obvious to Reason; that eating
and drinking with Christ's dwelling in us is so true, that we may not doubt of
it; for the word says it, but how, and the manner of it, as well as our
dwelling in Christ, and he in us, is above Reason to understand, wherefore
Scripture has revealed it to be by Faith; but that People will believe nothing
but what they can give Reason for, when Paul wrote his Epistle to the
Colossians, the Gospel and Doctrine of Salvation were certainly revealed, yet
still he calls it a Mystery, the mystery of God, Col. 2.2, 3.
and of the Father, and of Christ, and in the following Verse he gives an
instance of it, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. That
thing is so, he gives it as Matter of Faith by us to be believed; but how it
is, and how all these Treasures are hid in him, it is for us a mysterious thing.

Every Nation, whether Jews or Gentiles, in matter of Religion, had Mysteries,
so Christians have theirs, and in particular that of the Incarnation, which the
Apostle calls a great one beyond all Dispute and Comparison, and besides all
this, surely there are great Mysteries in Religion, God, whose infinite Nature
and Attributes are the Ground of all Religion, is the greatest Mystery of all,
and most incomprehensible; for this Reason the Trinity and Incarnation are
great Mysteries, and above Reason, though not contrary to it: These Doctrines
indeed contain great Difficulties, but no Contradictions which theirs do, as to
set up a Metaphorical and Figurative God, secondary, subordinate, a Creature to
be God by Office, not by Nature a God, but of 1700 standing, and this Creature
God to be worshipped, is not this downright Idolatry? Herein we must go no
farther than Scripture leads us, for fear of going out of our Depth, and losing
our selves in the deep things of God; many more things to our purpose, I could
say upon this Matter; but for the present have no time nor place left to do it.

But to come to a Conclusion of the whole and main Subject, to all that has
been said, I shall add this out of the Prophet, where the Husband of the Church
of the Gentiles that were to be called to communion with Christ, is said to be
the Lord of hosts, Isa. 54.5.
the holy one of Israel, the redeemer, and the Lord of the whole earth: In the
whole Bible the true God of Israel, never assumed unto himself higher names
than these are, nor ever did effect a greater outward work, than to redeem his
Spouse. Now out of several places in the New Testament it does appear how
Christ is the Husband and Redeemer of the Church, which he is said to have
purchased with his own blood, Act. 20.28. Ephesians. 5.25.
and to have loved it, and have given himself for it. Thus this Prophecy is
plainly fulfilled in Christ, who is the Person therein described with those
glorious Names and Attributes altogether incommunicable, even the Enemies
themselves being the Judges, to any mere Man or Creature whatsoever. Moreover,
every house is builded by some man, Heb. 3.4.
but he that built all things is God: Nay, the World and the Church were built
by Christ, and by whom also all things were created in the beginning, and made
of nothing; and though we would grant, which we do not, to Socinians, that that
which is spoken of the Creation of the World, is to be understood of the new
Creation, or Regeneration, yet this very same does import and require as Divine
and Infinite a Power, as does the Creation of the World; and if we may so say
something more than to make something out of nothing, here is no opposition,
nothing to hinder, but to bring Light out of Darkness, Good of Evil, to drive
away Darkness, Blindness, and Ignorance out of the Mind, to remove perverse and
corrupt Affections out of the Will, and incline it to Good, to change the
stubborn and violent Passions of a Heart desperately wicked and deceitful above
all things: I say, to create a new Heart, and renew a right Spirit, is every
jot as great, if not a greater Work, than the Creation of the World, which
Christ by his own Power having done, and doing it every day Day, is an
illustrious, and ought to be an undisputable Proof of his Deity, which is
confirmed as by his Names and Attributes, so by his other works, and by that
divine and glorious worship, due, and rendered unto him, not on Earth only, but
chiefly in Heaven equally with the Father, by the four Beasts, the Elders and
Millions of Angels, who upon their Knees, if I may so say, for it is written,
They fell down; saying with a loud voice, worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to
receive power and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, Rev. ^.11, 12,
13, 14.
and glory; and every creature which is in Heaven, and on the earth, and under
the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I,
saying, blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that sits
upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever, Amen.

But if after all, these Enemies of Christ do refuse to join their Voice in
this Heavenly Concert, to give him Glory, one day when they shall appear before
him, who is to judge the Quick and the Dead, and he puts Questions to them
concerning their impious disowning of him, like the Man that came in without
the Wedding Garment, Mat. 22.12
they shall be speechless, they shall have nothing to say for themselves, no
more than the Sadduces and Pharisees; for as then in the time of his
humiliation, no man was able to answer him a word, v. 46.
much more when he does appear in his Glory, shall his Enemies Mouths be
stopped, Luke 13.17.
and all his adversaries ashamed, as we read they were, though now they be never
so shameless and brazen-faced, yet at last they certainly shall be confounded.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Rich. Wellington, at the Lute, in St. Paul 's-Church-yard.
1. THE Works of that Excellent Practical Physician, Dr. Thomas Sydenham,
wherein the List of acute Diseases are treated of, after a new Method; but also
the safest and shortest way of Curing most Chronical Diseases: Translated by
John Pechey, of the College of Physicians.

2. A Discourse upon the Nature and Faculties of Man, in several Essays; with
some Considerations upon the Occurrences of Humane Life. By Tim. Nurse, Gent.

3. A general History of the Diseases of Children: Collected by the most
eminent Practical Authors; by John Pechey, of the College of Phsitians.

4. The Family Physician; being a choice Collection of Approved and Experienced
Remedies to cure all Diseases, incident to Humane Bodies, useful in Families,
and serviceable to Country People. By George Hartman, Phylo Chymi^t, Author of
the Preserver and Restorer of Health, Servant to Sir Kenelm Digby, till he died.


