A SERMON PREACHED at BISHOPS-STORTFORD, August 29. MDCLXXVII.

BEFORE The Right Reverend Father in God, HENRY, Lord Bishop of LONDON, etc. At
his Lordships primary Visitation.

By JO. GOODMAN, D. D. Rector of Hadham.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty, at the
Angel in Amen-Corner, 1678.

TO The Right Reverend Father in God, HENRY, Lord Bishop of LONDON, One of the
Lords of His MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council.
My LORD,
WHen I composed the following Sermon, at your Lordship's command, I propounded
no other thing to my self, but the doing service to the Souls of men, by
inviting them into the Communion of the Church of Christ; and the animating and
encouraging my Brethren of the Clergy, that labor in the same good and holy
Work. Than which two things I knew nothing more seasonable and necessary for
the Age we live in, or more compliant with your Lordship's Design in your
Visitation. And therefore though I had a just Reverence of the Auditory, and a
due sense of my own Imperfections; yet the aforesaid Consideration, together
with that of your Lordship's Candor, would not suffer me much to doubt, but
that the Sermon would be approved by your Lordship, and accepted by all good
and wise men that heard it.

For I called to mind, that as the Greeks say of their Goddess (...), Dea, Bona
valetudo, placatur quacunque re quis velit ei litare: so, however weak and
sickly Minds (like cachectick Bodies) may be nice, fantastic and captious;
yet those that are sound and strong are benign and generous; and with such,
every thing that is sober, and well-intended, is well taken.

Nevertheless I must acknowledge, that when afterward your Lordship declared
your pleasure that I should print my Sermon, methought the case was altered:
for being sensible before, how difficult a matter it was to contrive so copious
a Subject (as I had before me) within the limits of an hour's Discourse, I was
easily aware how much harder it would be (in so narrow a compass) to satisfy
all the scruples and curiosities of those that should not only have a
transient glimpse, but a leisurely perusal. And besides, I was not ignorant how
different the condition of a Sermon was, when presented in dead letters, from
it self, when inlivened by the voice and passion of a very mean Orator.

But after all I considered it was my duty, not to dispute, but to obey, and
that your Lordship's Judgment was sufficient for my security. And therefore
(all excuses set aside) I here humbly present to your hand, what before I
preached in your hearing.

And now, my Lord, having this opportunity, I crave leave, not only to make
acknowledgment of my own peculiar Obligations to your Lordship, (which I do
with a just sense of Duty and Gratitude,) but to report the Apprehensions of
your Clergy in these parts of your Diocese, and the great Contentment they take
under your Lordship's Government. They are greatly comforted by your Zeal for
the Protestant Religiom; encouraged by your Lordship's vigilant Care of their
Interests and Concerns; directed in their Studies, Ministry and Conversation,
by your prudent Counsels; animated by so great an Example; and especially
obliged by the Benignity of your Presence and Condescension to them at your
Visitation. All which they cannot forbear to express such a sense of, that they
look upon it as a great Blessing of Almighty God, in committing this part of
his Church to your Lordship's Care and Government.

For, my Lord, we cannot doubt but Piety and Devotion will commend it self to
all that are serious: that Paternal Mildness and Clemency will work upon the
ingenuous: that well-tempered Severity is the way to reclaim the vicious: and
that Charity and Generosity will oblige all humane Nature. And therefore, where
there is such a conjunction of real and powerful Causes, we are able easily to
calculate happy and signal Effects; as, that the Church shall recover its
native and ancient Glory, and the Genius of this great People be marvellously
improved. Which Successes that it will please the Great and True Ecumenical
Bishop to crown your Lordship's Endeavors with, is the ardent desire of,

My LORD, Your Lordships J. Goodman.
Hadham, Sept. 7. 1677.
A SERMON PREACHED At Bishops-Stortford, August 29. 1677. BEFORE The Right
Reverend Father in GOD, HENRY, Lord Bishop of LONDON.
S. MATTHEW XVI. 18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church;
and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.
AMongst the manifold infirmities of humane Nature, there is scarcely any
either more Epidemical and common in Experience, or more mischievous in its
Effects and Consequences, than that which the Greeks very elegantly express by
the name of (...), and which I know not how more fitly to render, than by
calling it an Humor of running from one Extreme to another: when men
apprehending the evil and unreasonableness of some Opinion or Practice, are so
far transported with zeal in detestation of it, as that, passing by the Mean of
Truth and Sobriety, they rest not till they have fixed upon something else
quite contrary thereto, though it be every whit as bad as that which they
studiously seek to decline. As if the utmost distance from what they are
confident is false, were the only security that what they embrace is true.

And perhaps, if we well observe, we shall find that most of those Evils which
have deformed Religion, and troubled the Peace of the Church of God, have
entered at this door. For evidence of which, amongst very many observations
which I have at hand to this purpose, I will specify these two or three, which
(I persuade my self) will neither be unacceptable to this Learned Auditory, nor
remote from the business in hand.

The first Instance shall be the rise of Arrianism: touching which, it has
been the opinion of sundry wise men, and of the Learned Lord Bacon in
particular, that that most unhappy Controversy sprang at first from an
Antipathy to the Polytheism of the Pagans. Some men, it seems, being highly
sensible of the intolerable prostitution of the Divine Majesty, when the
Honors peculiar to him were communicated with and shared amongst so many petty
pretended Deities, out of zeal against this evil, outran the mark, and, that
they might be sure to worship but one God, acknowledged but one Person; and so,
whilst they went about to subvert Idolatry, denied the Trinity.

My second Instance shall be the observation of our Learned Hooker, to this
effect: When some German Divines had strained their form of Presbyterian
Government Hooker in Pref. to Eccl. Polit.
to a mighty height, had railed in the Communion with such strict Cautions and
Conditions, that (the most part of Christians being secluded from it) it became
more like a private Mass than the solemn Worship of the Church; and, to carry
on this design the better, had brought in Lay Elders, as a new kind of Censores
morum; up starts Erastus, and provoked by this Extreme, runs a risk, and falls
into another as bad: for not content to disprove that new form of Discipline,
and especially to degrade that novel Office, he proceeds to the denial of all
Church-Censure and Ecclesiastical Government. As if from such time as the Civil
State became Christian, the Rights of the Church were escheated to the Prince
or State. And thus, as that Judicious person modestly expresses it, the Truth
was divided between the contending parties, but overseen and outran by both.

But the last Instance I will now make use of comes more home to my present
business. When the Church of Rome, arrogating to it self an Infallibility, and
asserting to the Pope an universal Pastorship, had under these pretenses
notoriously usurped upon all Christendom; there were not wanting those, who,
seeing through this cheat, and desirous to reform all, bent things so far
toward the other Extreme, that they endangered the breaking of all in pieces.

For whereas the Roman Church had claimed and exercised an exorbitant power of
making and imposing what Articles of Faith she pleased; These were so far from
that, as that they would scarcely allow the Church authority to define matters
of Order and Decorum. Because the Governors in the Roman Communion were
arrived at too great a height, the Bishops becoming (like the Ephori among the
Spartans) able to check and control Sovereign Princes; therefore, to avoid
this danger, all shall be levelled to a Plebeian Parity. Before the interest of
the Church was so great, as that it drew (under one pretense or other) almost
all Causes from the Civil Tribunals to Ecclesiastical cognizance: but now to
prevent this for the future, all Jurisdiction shall be taken from it. In short,
the Church was thought to be too rich before, Religio peperer at Divitias, and
filia devoraverat matrem: now therefore the only way to revive the Primitive
Purity, is to reduce the Primitive Poverty. And so upon the whole matter, from
an abhorrence of the Encroachments and Exorbitancies of the Roman Church, there
arose a danger whether there should be any Church at all.

Now considering with my self how to obviate these and several other mischiefs
of like nature, and to do the best service I can to this Solemnity, I have
made choice of these words of our Savior for my subject, Thou art Peter, and
upon, etc.

Wherein I observe these three things.

1. A Resolution or Decree of our Savior, he will build him a Church. 2. The
Foundation of this Structure, Upon this Rock will I, etc. 3. His Prediction of
the Success and Duration of this Building, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it.
I design to open these three things with the greatest plainness and
perspicuity I can, because of the importance and usefulness of the matter; and
yet with as much brevity as is possible, for I consider I speak to wise men.

PART I. Touching the First, (to avoid all impertinence,) that which I conceive
our Savior means when he says he will build him a Church, is no more nor less
than this, that he will incorporate all those that profess his Name and
Religion into a Society. And that he will not content himself to have Disciples
and Followers dividedly straggling after him, (how numerous soever they may
be,) but he will have them united into a Body, formed into a regular Society,
make up a Divine Polity, having Unity, Order and Government amongst themselves.
That as there are several forms of Civil Society of Humane Institution; so our
Savior would by his Divine Authority institute a Religious Society by the name
of a Church, whereof He himself would be the Head, and which should be ruled
and governed by Laws and Officers peculiar to it self. Or, as in the Old
Testament the whole Nation of the Jews (though distinguished otherwise by their
respective Tribes and Families) made up one People and Church of Israel; so
should all Nations upon Earth and every individual person that was a Christian,
conspire and make up together one Christian Church.

For the more distinct and satisfactory apprehension whereof, let us consider,
that every regular Society requires these four things; namely, 1. A Body, 2. An
Head, 3. Union, 4. Order and Government: and all these conspicuously concur
to the making up the Church, or such a Society as we have described.

1. For the Body of the Christian Church, that consists of all those who from
time to time in all Ages and Countries are enrolled in Albo Christianorum, and
have given up their names to Christ, or are Christians by profession. So the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 27. Now are ye the Body of Christ, and Members in
particular; that is, the whole number of Christians Vid. Theophyl. in loc.
makes up the mystical Body of Christ, every individual person being a
particular Member thereof. And then he adds, verse. 28. God has set some in
the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, etc. By which it is evident that
he speaks of the whole Church as one: for he supposes the Apostles to be
Officers of the whole Christian Church, which could not be, if every little
parcel of Christians convened together made up a Church in the notion the
Apostle intends; and consequently therefore the whole number of Christians (as
I said) must make up the one Church or Body of Christ.

To this purpose, those that are curious observers of the propriety of phrase
in the Greek tongue do note, that at Athens, (from whose Assemblies this name
(...) was first taken) when only the Heads or chief Magistrates were
assembled, they called this distinctly (...) when the Colluvies ex agris or
whole Rabble of People was called together, this they termed (...) but (...)
was only used when the whole Body of Citizens within the Pale or Liberties of
the City were assembled.

2. Christ Jesus is undoubtedly the Head and Supreme of this Body. He is the
Founder of this Order, he gave command for the forming this Society, prescribes
Laws and affords protection to it. Ephesians. 5. 23. He is the Head of the Church,
and the Savior of the Body. And herein that which Divines call the Mediatorian
Kingdom of our Savior properly consists: namely, that not only in respect of
his Divine Nature he has a Sovereignty over the world; but especially that as
(...), or God incarnate, he is Sovereign of the Church, and has power of
Legislation, authority to constitute Officers under him, jus vitae and necis,
has all Judgment committed to him, can sentence to life or to utter
destruction. Whether de facto he has appointed any Lieutenant or Vicar General
under him over the whole Church, as some pretend, will not be necessary now to
inquire; and besides, will be sufficiently clear in the Negative by what I
shall say by and by.

3. It is not sufficient to an orderly Society, that there be Head and Members,
but there must be some Ligaments, to the end that there may be Union; that is,
that all those Members of this Society, which lie otherwise scattered through
so many Ages and Countries, may both become united together, to make up one
Body, and also joined to their common Head Christ Jesus.

Now as in the natural Body the Nerves which perform this office proceed from
the Head, so it is here; Christ Jesus has delivered an Institution of
Religion, the open profession of which is the Sinew of this Society, the
Church: namely, all those that hold and maintain the Doctrine of the Holy
Scriptures, and especially of the New Testament, are united to the Church as
Members, and to Christ as their spiritual Head. For this is the Charter of our
Corporation, and contains the Laws of our Society: he that adds to this,
distracts and divides the Church; and he that abates or diminishes it,
incroaches upon the Prerogative of Christ the Head. The Church of Christ, and
the profession of the Religion of Christ are of equal extent, and the Holy
Scripture is the Standard of both.

But as a symbolical representation of this Union (we are speaking of,) or
rather as a standing federal Rite of this Society, our Lord Christ has also
appointed the frequent participation of the holy Sacrament, wherein we solemnly
recognize him our Head, and our Fellow Christians as Members of the same Body:
which therefore is properly called the Synaxis or Communion. To which purpose
the Apostle, allusively to the New Testament, speaks of the Church of the Jews,
1 Cor. 10. 2, etc. they were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the
Sea, and did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same
spiritual drink, etc. But more clearly and expressly of the Christian Church,
verse. 17. For we being many are one Body; for we are all partakers of that one
bread. The sense of which place, and the sum of what I have been saying, is
this, That as by holding and professing the Religion of Christ Jesus contained
in the Holy Scripture we are united to him, and Members of his Church,
materially; so it is our duty that this be solemnly and formally executed by
those holy Rites of his institution.

4. But in the fourth and last place, it is not sufficient that there be an
Union of the Head and Members, but there must be Order also amongst the Members
themselves, otherwise it would be a Multitude, but not a Church. Wherefore in
this Society, though, as we have said, all that profess and acknowledge the
Doctrine of the Scriptures are Members, yet some of those are of an higher
quality, and more public use and influence, than others, namely such as bear
Office in this Society. So says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 11. He gave some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, (...), i.
e. for the orderly knitting of the Saints together into a Body, and for the
edifying that Body of Christ. These and their Successors are the Governors and
Officers of the Church as a Church, or as it is such a peculiar, distinct and
spiritual Society. To these the Head of this Society has promised his presence
to the end of the world; to these he has given the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, saying, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in Heaven,
etc. and, He that receives you receives me; and he that refuses you refuses
him that sent me. These, as I said, are the Governors of the Church as a
Church. But because (as it was well observed by Optatus Milevitanus) Respublica
non est in Ecclesia, sed Ecclesia in Republica; and it was not the design of
our Savior, in constituting this Society of a Church, to revoke or abrogate
the Powers and Authority of the Civil State: therefore Kings and Princes
(though as such they are not properly Officers of the Church in its peculiar
consideration, yet) have and retain their ancient right of Legislation, and
prescribing to the external management of this Society. In which respect it was
said by the great and famous Constantine, that he was (...), that is, a Civil
Bishop, or, as we commonly speak, supreme Governor or Moderator of the Church.

And now, having showed what our Savior meant, when he said he would build him
a Church, it will neither be difficult nor unusefull to show the Reasons of
this Institution, i. e. Why our Savior would not leave every single Believer
upon his own score, but would have them associated and incorporated as
aforesaid. The great usefulness of this Institution might easily be made appear
in very many Instances: but I will mention but these three.

1. It pleased our Savior Christ to require such a conjunction and combination
of Christians, to the intent that by that means they might be the better able
to hold up his Truth and Religion in the world. For if this had been left to
the care of particular Christians singly and separately, such is the diversity
of their Capacities and apprehensions, so different have been their Educations,
are their Interests, and would be their Expressions, and so great would be the
difficulty of holding intelligence and correspondence with each other, that it
is not imaginable how the mind of Christ should have been uniformly and
entirely represented to all those that would have been concerned in it:
therefore in regard this sum was too great to be laid out upon private
security, it pleased him to deliver this great Depositum to the Society of the
Church.

This is that which I take to be meant in that famous passage of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. 15. where the Church is called (...), the pillar and ground of Truth. I
know well what perverse use they of the Church of Rome make of this Text, and
what pitiful shifts some on the other side make to avoid that danger; and
therefore I thought it worth my labor, in a former Discourse of this nature,
and at a like Solemnity, to vindicate the Text from the hands of those that
abuse it, and the world by it. But at present it is sufficient to intimate,
that though it be evidently true, that the truth of Christianity neither
depends upon the Authority, nor needs the Warranty of men, yet was the Society
of the Church a wise Expedient of our Savior, for the holding forth and
holding up his Religion in the world.

Nor let any one suspect that this will give any countenance to the unwritten
Traditions of the Church of Rome, or evacuate the just Dignity and Authority of
the Holy Scriptures: for it is and must be acknowledged, that the written Word
is the immediate Conservatory of the Truth of the Gospel; yet the Society of
the Church does the same thing remotely and generally, which the other does
particularly and immediately: that is to say, this holds up the Holy Scripture,
preserves and assures that as the Sum and Code of our Religion; as on the
other hand the Holy Scripture rules to us the particular Doctrines and Laws
thereof. To which sense both S. Austin and S. Ierom agree, when they affirm,
that as the Jewish Church was Columna Nubis, the Pillar of a Cloud, or was
incorporated by God to hold up that Ceremonial form of Religion in the Old
Testament; so the Society of the Christian Church is Columna Lucis, or was
instituted to hold up that Truth whereof the former was a shadow, namely the
Doctrine of the Gospel, in the times of the New Testament. And Saint Austin
more particularly expresses himself in his 42. Epistle, Radix Christianae
Societatis, per Seeds Apostolorum and Successiones Episcoporum, certa per orbem
propagatione diffunditur: i. e. Christian Religion is preserved and propagated
by the advantage of established Order and successive Government of the Church.

2. Christ Jesus would have a Church, and his Disciples imbodied and formed
into a Society, that, by means of such conjunction and relation, they might be
more useful to one another, by instruction, admonition, counsel, reproof, and
example; and so not only hold up the Doctrine jointly, but hold one another
mutually to the practice of Christianity, as having a common care and concern
for the good of each other, for the sake of the whole.

To which purpose it is observed by the generaliy of Learned men, that Genesis 4.
26. and 6. 1. in the Infancy of the World, there was a distinction between the
Sons of God and the Sons of men: by the latter of which they understand that
profane part of mankind that cast off all care of God and Religion; but by the
former, such as retained a sense of God and care of his Worship; and that these
formed themselves into a Body, and became a distinct Society, for the better
practice and prosecution of that great affair of Religion.

But the influence which this Provision has upon the practice of Religion is
so notoriously evident, that the Apostle, Heb. 10. 23, etc. discourses after
this manner to those Jewish Christians that seemed to stagger in their
Devotion; Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering: Let us
consider one another, to provoke unto love and to good works: Not forsaking the
assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is. For, says he, if
we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, etc. The
plain sense of which remarkable passage is this, that keeping Church-Society is
the way to keep upright in our Profession, and warm in our practice; and the
forsaking of that, the ready way to Apostasy: and no other tolerable sense can
be made of the Discourse of the Apostle but this. To which I think it not amiss
to add a worthy Observation of that Learned man Mr. H. Thorndyke. He Thorndyke
Service of God in Religious Assemblies.
inquires, What should be the reason, that the People of the Jews before their
Captivity were upon all occasions prone to lapse into Idolatry, whenas after
their Return from that Captivity they never seemed inclinable that way; and yet
notwithstanding, before the Captivity they were never destitute of the
extraordinary Admonitions of Prophets, sent from God on purpose to warn them of
that sin and danger, and after the Captivity they were deprived of this
singular advantage: And at last gives this ingenious and probable account; viz.
Before the Captivity, though they had the frequent Admonitions of the Prophets,
as aforesaid; yet they had few or no Synagogues, insomuch as we never hear of
any Synagogue-worship during all that time: but after the Captivity Synagogues
were very numerous, and by means of the frequency of those Assemblies he thinks
it might come to pass, that they were kept from an evil they were so prone to,
that Prophecy it self could not cure them of it.

3. Church Order was appointed to fit and train men up for the Kingdom of
Heaven; to teach and inure men to live in Love and Peace and Order here in a
Church Militant, that so they might be fit for eternal Society in the Church
Triumphant.

It seems to be one reason, (amongst many others) why those that are designed
for the Service of the Church are usually bred up in Colleges and Universities;
namely, that Collegiate life accustoming them to Order and Obedience, disposes
them to be subject to the Government of the Church. And as a College is an
Emblem of the Church, so is the Church below of that above; and the Education
in the one makes men fit Candidates of the other. For it is not to be imagined
that any mere Ornaments of Knowledge and Eloquence, or any other Gift or Grace,
how eximious soever, can qualify a man for the celestial Mansions, and make
him fit to live in eternal Love and Peace and Concord with holy Spirits, that
could not be brought to be peaceable, humble and obedient, and submit to the
Culture and Discipline of the Church. There were therefore (upon the whole
matter) great Considerations why our Savior should build a Church. And so much
for the First part of my Text.

PART II. I proceed now to the Second, the Foundation of this Fabric, Upon
this Rock will I build my Church.

I am sure it can be no new thing to Learned men, to note what triumphs they of
the Church of Rome make upon this passage. Tu es Petrus is urged upon all
occasions; as if not only S. Peter, but the whole Succession of Popes were
hereby made infallible Oracles of Truth, and universal Pastors over the whole
Church of Christ.

If we object that Petrus and Petra are two things, they will answer, that our
Savior spoke in the Syriack tongue, and that there Cepha answers to both. But
if we enquire why Rock must needs signify Head of the Church, or why to be
built upon as a Rock must signify to govern; especially if we inquire why S.
Peter might not have a Privilege conferred upon him, that such a man as
Hildebrand, Boniface, Innocent, or some other either ignorant, lewd or enormous
Bishops of Rome were not fit for: we should receive but slender satisfaction
from them.

However I will not insist upon those Subtilties, but deliver my self plainly,
for the unfolding this part of my Text, in these two Points.

1. It is notoriously evident to any man that consults the Scriptures
impartially, that the whole number of Apostles have that said of them which is
tantamount to this in the Text: I mean, the Church is said to be built upon
them as well as upon S. Peter. For example, Ephesians. 2. 20. the Church is said to
be built upon the foundation of the Apostles, Christ himself being the chief
Cornerstone: that is, Christ Jesus first set on foot the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and gave them, his Apostles, both commission and abilities to preach
it, and gather Disciples, and form them into the Society of a Church; and they
accordingly did so. Again, Rev. 12. 1. the Christian Church is described by a
Woman clothed with the Sun, having the Moon under her feet, and upon her head
a Crown of twelve Stars, i. e. shining and glorying in the Doctrine of the
Twelve Apostles. But more plainly Rev. 21. 19. the New Jerusalem, that is, the
Christian Church, is said to have twelve foundations, answerable to the number
of the Apostles.

To which purpose it is farther considerable, that the generality of the
Fathers either make the Petra, or Foundation here in the Text, to be the Faith
and Profession of S. Peter, which was the Belief of all the rest, (though,
according to the usual zeal and promptness of S. Peter, first uttered by him:)
or else they conceive this dignity to have been conferred upon S. Peter in the
name of all the rest. According to the former of these go S. S. Chrysostom. in
Matt. Hom. 55. Theophyl. in Ioc. Epiph. c. Cathar. Aug. trac. 10. in 1. Joannis.
Chrysostom, Theophylact, Epiphanius, S. Austin, and several others: but Orig.
tr. 1. in Matt. Cypr. Ep. 27. Tert. de Pudic. c. 21.
Origin, S. Cyprian, Tertullian, and some others, the latter way.

2. But we will not stick to grant that S. Peter had something peculiar
conferred upon him here by our Savior, namely this, that he should have the
honor first to plant the Christian Faith, and so lay the first foundations of
Christian Churches, both amongst Jews and Gentiles. Which is not only the very
account which S. Ambrose gives of the meaning S. Ambros. sermon. 47.
of this Text, but that which appears eventually true in the History of the
Acts. For accordingly, Chap. 2. by a Sermon of his on the day of Pentecost he
converted 3000 Souls to the Faith of Christ, all which verse. 41. were baptized,
and formed into the order of a Church, and were the First Fruits of the Jews.
Again, Chap. 10. he is sent to Cornelius, and converts and baptizes him and his
Family; and so laid the foundation of the first Church of the Gentiles.

So that the meaning of this part of my Text is no more but this, that S.
Peter, in reward of his forwardness in confessing Christ Jesus, should have the
honor to lay the first Foundation of his Church, as aforesaid. And of the
truth of this interpretation I persuade my self any indifferent person will be
abundantly satisfied, that will take the pains to consult the Learned Camero
upon the place. Camer. Myrothec.


PART III. I now hasten to the Third and last Part of my Text, namely, the
Prediction of our Savior touching the event of this business, the Success and
Duration of this Structure, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.

And here we have great variety amongst Interpreters. Some, considering that
Gates use to be the greatest Strengths and most fortified places, think that by
the Gates of Hell is meant the Force and Power of the Devil and infernal
Spirits; and that consequently the meaning of our Savior is, that all the
Persecutions which the Devil and his Agents raise against the Church shall
never be able to destroy or extinguish it. Others, remembering that of old time
the Gates of Cities used to be the places of Counsel and Judicature, therefore
think that by Gates of Hell is meant the Cunning, Craft and Policy of the
Devil; and that the meaning of the Prediction is, that neither the Plots and
Machinations of the Devil and his Instruments shall take place against the
Church, nor particularly those Heresies and wicked Opinions which he suggests
and foments against it shall ever be able to corrupt and deprave it.

I do not quarrel with either of these interpretations, but I observe they both
proceed upon a mistake of the notion of (...), which I will endeavor briefly
to rectify, and then all will be easy.

Now it has been made plain by several Learned men, (particularly by the
Learned Dr. Windet of late,) that (...), which we render Holl, does not
signify the place or the state of Hell Torments, or the punishment of the
damned, either in the ancient Greek Authors, or with Hellenistical Writers,
either the Septuagint, or the Writers of the New Testament. There is indeed one
only passage in the New Testament that looks toward such a sense, and that is
Luke 16. 23. where, as we render it, the rich man is said to be in Hell: but
that is reconcilable enough with the rest, if it be duly considered.

But the general signification of (...) imports only the state of death, or of
the dead, without relation to reward or punishment, misery or happiness; which
these instances (amongst many that might with like ease be assigned) will make
evident. Acts 2. 24. that passage of the Psalmist is applied to our Savior, It
was not possible for him to be held by the bands of death; and verse. 27. the
phrase is varied, and there it is said, in the same sense, Thou will not leave
my soul in hell, that is, thou will not leave me under the power of death, or
in the condition of separate souls, but wilt raise me up again. And more
plainly Rev. 20. 14. (...) and (...) Death and Hell are cast into the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone; that is, Mortality is destroyed, the
state of Corruption and Death are dissolved, or, as the Apostle elsewhere
expresses it, Mortality is swallowed up of Life.

For the confirmation of both which interpretations, I will add the Observation
of See Bish. Usher de Symbol. Bishop Pearson on the Creed, Artic. 5.
Learned men upon that Article of our Creed, where Christ is said to have
descended (...) into Hell. They note, that in very few of the ancient Creeds
those words [(...)] are to be found; and especially that wherever they are to
be found, there those other words [dead and buried] are left out, save only in
the Aquileian Creed, where indeed both the phrases are used. Whereupon it
follows, that in the sense of Antiquity Death and (...), or to be in (...),
(which we render Hell,) and to be in the state of death, were tantamount
expressions.

So then the meaning of our Savior in my whole Text is this; I will, by the
Ministry of my Apostles, and by thy especial agency, (Peter) gather Disciples
to my Name and Doctrine, and I will have these formed into the orderly Society
of a Church, united to Me their Head, and to each other as in a common Body,
having Laws, Officers and Government peculiar: And this my Church shall
continue in the World as long as the World it self lasts, subject to no Fate,
Mortality or Intercision; nothing shall ever supplant or supersede it.

And thus I have, according to my promise, with all possible brevity explained
the Doctrine of my Text. Let me now crave leave to press the Consequences of
this Doctrine (upon your Practice) suitably to the present occasion, and I will
conclude. I will confine my self to these three Inferences.

First, Since our Savior took care to found a Church, let us be of this
Society, and value the Privilege of being of Christ's Church.

Secondly, Since there is such a mighty Usefulness of this Foundation and
Society, let us especially that are Officers thereof endeavor to uphold it,
and do it all the Honor and Service we can.

Lastly, Since our Savior has prophesied, that all the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it, let us all, that love God's Church, bear up our selves
against all Discouragements and Despondencies on the truth and infallibility of
his Prediction.

I. APPLIC. Touching the first; To be of the Christian Church is to be of the
most honorable Society in the whole world. It is to be of an Order whereof the
Lord Christ is Founder and Protector, and whereof all the holy Angels are
admirers: to be incorporate into the Fellowship of Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs,
and all holy men: to be of that mystical Body of which the Son of God is Head:
to be Citizens of the new Jerusalem, Fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of
the Household of God.

Observe what glorious things the Apostle speaks Hebr. 12. 22, 23, 24. Ye are
come to mount Sion, to the City of the living God, to the heavenly Jerusalem,
to an innumerable company of Angels, to the general Assembly and Church of the
Firstborn whose names are written in Heaven, to God the Judge of all, to Jesus
the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the spirits of just men made perfect.
And all this means nothing else but, You Jews are translated from Moses to
Christ, from your old Synagogue to the Christian Church.

God's Church is his Family, which he especially takes care of and provides
for. He that is of it, is under the Shechinah, the wing of the Divine Majesty,
and his special Providence.

His Church is his Vineyard, and he not only sets a hedge about it, but builds
a watchtower in it. No Nation under heaven had such signal instances of God's
presence and blessing as the people of the Jews, whilst they continued to be
his Church: but when they ceased to be a Church, they ceased to be a People,
were the most abject and contemptible rabble upon earth.

Above all, to be of God's Church is to be under the means of Grace, the Dew of
Heaven, the motions of the good Spirit, and the hopes of Glory. For to the
Church has he promised his presence and assistance; there are dispensed the
lively Oracles of God, there has he provided a constant succession of
Dispensers of the bread of life, to fit it to all needs and all Capacities.

Is it a small security to our minds, or satisfaction to our Consciences, that
we are not left to the deceits and whispers of a private spirit, to personal
conjectures or secret insinuations, but have the public Doctrine of the Church?

Is it not a great encouragement of our Prayers, when we are fortified against
the just reflections upon our own meanness and demerits, by the concurrent
Prayers of all God's people, and mingle our devotions with theirs, that so they
may together come up a sweet odor before God?

Is it a small advantage to join in that holy Leaguer, and besiege Heaven by
conjoined and ardent importunities? Coimus in coetum, (says Tertullian) ut ad
Deum quasi manu facta precationibus ambiamus orantes.

Can it choose but be a great animation and encouragement to us, to have before
our eyes all the great Examples in God's Church?

Is it not a mighty matter, to have our Faith strengthened and enlivened, our
Love inflamed, our Comforts raised by the holy Communion? Will not the flame of
others kindle our Zeal and Affections? And shall it not put us into an ecstasie
of Devotion, to see as it were Christ crucified before our eyes, opening his
Arms to us, and pouring out his Blood for us?

Socrates is said to have given solemn thanks to God, (amongst other things)
that by his Providence he was a Philosopher, and not a Barbarian: and shall the
twilight or dawnings of naturallight be more ravishing than the bright beams of
the Sun of righteousness?

Shall Tully break out in a kind of ecstasie, O philosophia, unus dies ex
praeceptis tuis actus peccanti immortalitati est anteponendus? and shall not we
much rather break out with the Psalmist, A day in thy courts is better than a
thousand; and, I had rather be a doorkeeper in the House of God, than dwell in
the tents of wickedness?

The Chief Captain, Acts 22. 28. gloried that he was a free Citizen of Rome,
and thought it worth the purchase of a great sum of money; But, says S.
Paul, I was freeborn: and is it a small thing to us, that we are born and
brought up in the Church of God?

The Romans generally had such an opinion of the Augustness of their City, that
to be proscribed or banished was counted a capital punishment, and a civil
death thought equal to a natural.

The Pythagoreans, when any one forsook their School, were wont to carry out a
Coffin for him attended with a funeral pomp. And shall we esteem those alive
that forsake the Church, the School of Christ?

The Primitive Christians had such an esteem of the dignity and Privilege of
the Church, that Coetu arceri, to be Excommunicate, was so dreadful a doom, as
that those that pronounced the Sentence were wont to do it with weeping and
lamentation. Ye ought to have mourned, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. 2. and, 2
Cor. 12. 21. I shall bewail many. And to be cast out of the Church, and to be
delivered up to Satan, were accounted equivalent. Nam judicatur magno cum
pondere, ut apud certos de Dei conspectu, summumque futuri Judicii praejudicium
est, si quis it a deliquerit, ut a communione or ationis and omnis sacri
commercii relegetur, says Tertullian in his Apology for Christianity.

And who is there that has been conversant in Church-Antiquity, that has not
observed what repentance and tears, what solicitations and intercessions, what
humble prostration of themselves were used by those that were fallen under the
Censures of the Church, to obtain restitution to Peace and Pardon? And who that
remembers this would ever have thought there should have come a time, when it
should be esteemed a matter of glory, and a point of Saintship, to cut off
one's self voluntarily, and become a Separatist from the Church?

The Church of Christ is the same it was, and the blessings and advantages of
it are still the same: let us endeavor therefore to raise up its Glory, to
recover the ancient Zeal, and to restore its Veneration. And let us all say
with those in the Psalm, Come let us go up to the House of the Lord: Our feet
shall stand within thy Gates, O Jerusalem.

II. APPLIC. And this leads me to my Second Application, and to address my self
to the Clergy. You, my Reverend Brethren, are not only Members, but Officers of
this Society: give me leave (being in this place) to recommend to you very
earnestly the doing all the honor and service you can to the Church of Christ.
Put the case we have but slender Encouragements, and live in an ungrateful
Age, that men will misinterpret our Zeal, blaze our Infirmities, resist our
Endeavors, and oppose their own good: yet we are in an honorable Employment,
we serve a good Master, and shall not lose our reward. Therefore let me take
the confidence to press upon you the following particulars.

First, Let us be sure, for the sake of the Church, to pay such Reverence to
our Superiors in it, as may render them Venerable in the eyes of all others.
For assure our selves, that if we slight their Persons, and dispute their
Injunctions, we teach other men to despise them and our selves too, and tuine
the whole.

It is a memorable passage of our Savior, Matt. 3. 13, etc. He comes to John
the Baptist to be baptized of him: John forbids him, saying, I have need to be
baptized of thee, etc. And it is certain our Savior had no need of Baptism,
having no stain of Sin upon him: notwithstanding says our Savior, Suffer it
to be so now, for it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness; that is, says
Hugo Grotius, it became the Son of God and Savior of the World, to give
public honor and veneration to the Ministry of John the Baptist. And most
certainly, what became our Savior toward him, who (as he acknowledges) was
not worthy to unloose his shoe-latchet, must needs become us toward those that
God and man have made our Superiors.

In the next place let us take care to submit our private Sentiments to the
Judgment of the Church, and not oppose our private Opinions to the public
Doctrine. It was a memorable discourse of S. Paul to the Corinthians, Ep. 1.
Chap. 11. When he had been delivering his judgment about Long hair, and such
other matters of decency, to the reasons he gives of his judgment in those
affairs he subjoyns these words, verse. 16. But if any man seem to be
contentious, we have no such Custom, neither the Churches of God. As if he had
said, If the reasons I give prevail not with you, yet the Practice of the
Church is with me, and the Custom of the Church ought to be sufficient to rule
such a Case.

Thirdly, Let us remember it is Church-work we are employed about, and that
work is to be done in peace: we must therefore gain upon men by love and
gentleness, oblige them by condescension and goodness, not exasperate and drive
them from the Church by passion and frowardness. Especially we must be sure,
that we represent not the terms of our Communion narrower than needs must, lest
we depopulate by such Enclosures, and make the Church become a Conventicle: but
consider well the importance of those words of our Savior, He that is not
against us is with us.

It is recorded by several Historians, that when the Persians had wasted
Greece, and amongst other instances of Barbarity had also burnt down the
Temples of their Gods; the Greeks, when they emerged from the Calamity, and
recovered their own Territories, would never after re-build the ruins of those
Temples, but left them as they were, that they might be Monuments of the
Persians Barbarism, and keep up in the Greeks an everlasting odium and
detestation of them.

But Pausanias, on the other side, observes it to have been the wisdom of the
Macedonians, that in Pausan. in Boeot.
none of their Conquests they ever erected any Trophies, lest whilst they
perpetuated the memory of their Victories, they perpetuated also the Quarrel,
and provoked their Enemies to an immortal shame and hatred, and to watch an
advantage by some fatal revenge to blot out their own infamy.

I need not in this Auditory make any Application of these two Stories: yet
because I would be understood by all, I express my meaning thus. We of this
Church have several sorts of Enemies. There are some we can never have peace
with, nor security from; we must cheat our selves, if we think of any
syncretism or coalescency with them: with such therefore the terms of
distinction must be maintained, we must stand upon our guard, and quit our
selves like men; there can be no accommodation, nor peace, nor truce, but what
is fallacious. But there are others of whom there is hope that they may be
gained: and all that I say is this, in such a case let us rather endeavor to
make them good, than exasperate them by remembering that they have been evil, or
reproaching them for what they have done amiss.

But above all let us not forget to honor and adorn the Church by true Piety
and Virtue. A very bad Opinion recommends it self with great advantage, if the
promoters of it seem pious and devout: but Profaneness and Immorality, if it
will not confute, yet will shame and baffle the best Profession in the world.
Therefore, my Brethren, let not us only have our Loins girt, but our Lamps
burning: That if any shall have the folly to reproach our way as a cold formal
Devotion, we may effectually convince and shame them by the Holiness of our
Lives, the Heavenliness of our Minds, by a great and quick sense of God, and a
remarkable Devotion. That it may be said of us as of the Ministers of Religion
in Origen's time, Hi sunt qui vivunt ut loquuntur, and loquuntur ut vivunt.

S. Hierome observes of the Platonists and Stoics, that they were wont to hold
their Conferences and Disputes commonly in the Porches of the Temples: of which
he imagines this to have been the reason, Ut admoniti augustioris habitaculi
sanctitate, nil aliud nisi de virtute cogitarent. Let the Sanctity of God's
House, wherein we daily minister, and the Majesty of the living God we serve,
awaken and keep alive in us a constant Gravity, and quick sense of Piety. And
then the most Skeptical men will be ashamed to blaspheme Religion, and call it
a mere Juggle of the Priests, when they see us live under the Power of it. And
then shall the Divine Glory descend upon us and our Church, as it was wont to
do upon the Ark of God.

III. APPLIC. But to come to a Conclusion: Let us encourage our selves touching
the estate and prosperity of the Church by the Prediction of our Savior, that
all the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Let us not be disquieted
with rumors of the strength and number of its Enemies. Though Ammon and
Amalek, the Philistines and Inhabitants of Tire, I mean, though Atheist,
Sceptick, Papist, Fanatic, all combine against it, the Prediction of our
Savior shall stand.

Josephus reports of the Jewish Priests, that when Pompey's Army rushed rudely
into the Temple of Jerusalem, when the Priests were busy about the Sacrifice,
and filled all with amazement and consternation, the Priests went on with their
business, neither laid aside the Sacrifice, nor performed any part of it
tumultuarily or timorously. They, it seems, considered they were doing their
duty, and employed in God's work, and therefore did not doubt but he would
defend them and bear them out. So let us do our work undauntedly and
courageously, that neither the Scoffs of Atheists abash us, nor the rude
Follies of Ignorant persons move us, nor the Conspiracy of all together tempt
us to such meanness of spirit, or weakness of Faith and Courage, as to grow
despondent, and say with David at a low ebb of mind, We shall one day fall by
the hand of Saul: but rather imitate that 1 Samuel 27. 1.
bravery of his with which he dismayed and conquered Goliath; The Lord delivered
me from the mouth of the Lion, and from the paw of the Bear, and shall deliver
me from this uncircumcised Philistine. To which purpose let us call to mind the
miraculous Providence by which this Church was reared in King Edward the Sixth
and Queen Elizabeth's days; and withal consider by what admirable Providence
it was restored and revived in our days: and then surely we shall conclude it a
fabric of God's building, and which he will ever protect.

But if any shall be so diffident as to say, It may be true of the whole
Church, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against that, but this part of
it, or this particular Church may perish: for answer, I appeal to whosoever
impartially reads the Scriptures, and has perused Ecclesiastical History, to
say, if he can, whether any Church in the whole world is more truly Evangelical
than this, or comes nearer, either for Doctrine or Government, to those founded
by the Apostles themselves. And if this be so, why should we doubt of the
continuance of the Divine Providence over it?

To which I add, for a Conclusion of all; Look over the History of all Times
and Countries, of all States and Kingdoms, and consider if ever any orderly and
considerable Society in the world was dissolved otherwise, than by being broken
and divided in it self. And let the consideration hereof oblige us to the
truest Love and firmest Union amongst our selves. Our Savior has told us,
that a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand; and the very Kingdom of
Satan requires Order, and subsists by Unity. Let it not be true in every
instance, especially in this fatal one, that the children of this world (much
less the subjects of the Kingdom of Darkness) are wiser than the children of
light. But let us (as I have said) sincerely practice our Religion,
courageously own our Profession, and maintain the Unity of the Spirit in the
bond of Peace and Love amongst our selves: And then all the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against us. Which God of his mercy grant through Jesus Christ our
Lord: To whom, etc.

FINIS.

