Good Deeds ill Requited: OR, AN ANSWER TO INNOCENCE UNVEILED. BEING A POEM In
Vindication of Dr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe.
WIse Solomon has said, It Is sometimes fit
To answer one, that has nor Sense, nor Wit,
Lest the vain Fop grow wise, in's own Conceit.
A Poem! Bless us, Muses! railing Rhimes,
Where Discord only, and no Music chimes:
Where Malice, and no Wit or Sense is shown,
And Puddle-dirt at worthy men is thrown.
That mortal man in paltry Rhyme should prate,
Like a she- Orator of Billingsgate;
Who, if she ever did at Crambo play,
Might rail in Rhyme, and better things would say.
Poor quibling Fool did lack some Oaten drink,
To help inspire his wooden Wit, I think,
Who his fine Poem ushered (out upon it!)
With a most silly Quibble in the Front.
Those very Men his Worship terms Fools
Handle edge, better than he rhiming, tools:
And tho these men he Saviors calls in scorn,
And does with Coxcombs, Fools, and Knaves, adorn
His railing Verse; they shall in Story dwell
In Heavenly Fame, like Angels that never fell,
Whilst such as he lie in Oblivions Hell.
What Stuff he is made of, all the world may see;
But Jesuit's Heart will not with Fool's Brain agree.
We can his Spleen however well detect;
Their Evidence he would make of no effect.
At that alone his squinting Verses look,
A safer way indeed than Reading took:
But 'twill not do; his Rhymes do Reason lack,
For all the Law, of which you so much crack;
The Foiled may rise, and lay some on their back.
Touch the galled back of any furious Beast,
He Will bite and kick, or wince and fling at least;
And he that meddles, when the Beast does feel,
Had need be guarded well, against iron heel.
I am no Surgeon, and shall not rake in Sore;
The World have Eyes, and I shall say no more.
If some say Black is White, I am content,
Or call a running Sore an Ornament.
The Romans did not cackling Geese despise,
Who kept their Capitol from a Surprise:
But we fling Dirt at men, like unwise Sots,
Who have the Nation saved from Jesuits Plots.
Since Jesuits cannot the Nation now trepan,
They Will do it all the Mischief that they can,
And with foul Mouths, worse Pens, and lying Notes,
Rail with full Cry, at Bedloe, and at Oats.
Who will hereafter Traitors Plots make known,
If no Encouragement to these are shown?
When scurrilous Pamphleteers shall daily try
To make their Evidence to seem a Lie;
To make them Juglers, wicked, perjured Knaves,
Inventors of strange Plots, the worst of Slaves;
Men who of right by us should honored be,
Their Names made great to all Posterity;
And for Encouragement, and greater Grace,
Their Statues set up in some public place.
Whatever that scribbling Poetaster writes,
Those very Commons which his Worship slights,
May in good time make Truth and Justice known;
And who the Knaves are then, will best be shown.
Then Oats and Bedloe's Story will be told,
And 'twill appear they have not been too bold,
But that both Truth and Justice once was fold.
FINIS.

